MAN'S  PROGRESS 

Here  is  an  exciting  intellectual  adventure  conducted 
by  Alfred  North  Whitehead,  the  philosopher  who 
has  been  called  one  of  the  greatest  minds  of  the 
20th  century.  Beautifully  written  and  lucidly  ex¬ 
pressed,  this  book  interprets  the  history  of  civiliza¬ 
tion  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  great  ideas  which 
have  advanced  humanity. 

Professor  Whitehead  points  out  how  vital  and 
revolutionary  changes  in  ideas  alter  the  actual  basic 
conditions  of  society.  He  cites,  as  an  example, 
human  slavery  which  the  ancients  considered  an 
inescapable  premise  of  civilization  and  which  has 
now  been  rejected  by  modem  man.  In  the  four  main 
sections  of  this  book,  he  explains  how  the  leaven 
of  ideas  works  on  society,  in  religion  and  philosophy, 
and  finally  with  the  human  spirit  desiring  perfection. 

Unusual  in  scope  and  bold  in  its  presentation, 
Adventures  of  Ideas  is  a  book  of  tremendous  im¬ 
portance  to  everyone  interested  in  man’s  future. 

“It  is  one  of  the  most  refreshing  adventures  I 
know.” — N.Y.  World  Telegram 

“Not  only  a  masterpiece  of  survey  and  observa¬ 
tion,  but  a  treatise  which  may  herald  a  new  era 
in  philosophic  thought.”  — Milwaukee  Journal 

“Stimulating  ideas  and  brilliant  prose  .  •  .  im¬ 
portant  and  elevating  book.” — Commonweal 


THIS  IS  A  REPRINT  OF  THE  ORIGINAL  HARDCOVER  EDI¬ 
TION  PUBLISHED  BY  THE  MACMILLAN  COMPANY. 


Other  MENTOR  Books  You  Will  Enjoy 

The  Aims  of  Education  by  Alfred  North  Whitehead 
One  of  the  great  modern  philosophers  explains  his 
theory  that  education  should  stimulate  inquiry  into 
parallel  fields.  (#M41— 350) 

Science  and  the  Modern  World  by  Alfred  North 
Whitehead 

A  penetrating  study  of  the  influence  of  four  centuries 
of  scientific  thought  on  civilization.  (#M28— 350) 

The  Ace  of  Analysis:  20th  Century  Philosophers 
Selected  and  Edited  by  Morton  White 
The  philosophy  of  our  day,  in  all  its  complexity  and 
diversity,  embodied  in  the  writings  of  leading  20th 
Century  philosophers  in  the  fields  of  logic,  existen¬ 
tialism,  philosophical  and  linguistic  analysis,  and 
clearly  interpreted  by  Morton  White  of  the  Depart¬ 
ment  of  Philosophy,  Harvard.  (#MD142 — 500) 

Reconstruction  in  Philosophy  by  John  Dewey 
An  outstanding  American  thinker  outlines  his  phi¬ 
losophy  of  experience  and  how  it  can  be  integrated 
with  contemporary  life.  (#M53 — 350) 

Philosophy  in  a  New  Key  by  Susanne  K.  Longer 
A  study  of  the  symbolism  of  reason,  rite  and  art,  in 
clear,  readable  style.  (#M25 — 350) 

To  Our  Readers 

We  welcome  your  comments  about  Signet,  Signet  Key, 
and  Mentor  books,  as  well  as  your  suggestions  for  new 
reprints.  If  your  dealer  does  not  have  the  books  you  want, 
you  may  order  them  by  mail,  enclosing  the  list  price  plus 
50  a  copy  to  cover  mailing  costs.  Send  for  a  copy  of  our 
complete  catalog.  The  New  American  Library  of  World 
Literature,  Inc.,  501  Madison  Ave.,  New  York  22,  N.  Y. 


Alfred  North  Whitehead 


A  MENTOR  BOOK 

Published  by  THE  NEW  AMERICAN  LIBRARY 


Copyright,  1933,  by  the  Macmillan  Company 

All  rights  reserved.  No  part  of  this  book  may 
be  reproduced  in  any  form  without  permission 
in  writing  from  the  publisher,  except  by  a 
reviewer  who  wishes  to  quote  brief  passages 
in  connection  with  a  review  written  for 
inclusion  in  magazine  or  newspaper. 


Published  as  a  MENTOR  BOOK 
By  Arrangement  with  the  Macmillan  Company 


First  Printing,  August,  1955 


MENTOR  BOOKS  are  published  by 
The  New  American  Library  of  World  Literature,  Inc, 
501  Madison  Avenue ,  New  York  22,  New  York 


PRINTED  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  OF  AMERICA 


TO 


JULIA  ISHAM  TAYLOR 

AND 

HENRY  OSBORN  TAYLOR 
To  whose  friendship 
I  owe 

So  many  happy  hours 


Preface 

The  title  of  this  book,  Adventures  of  Ideas,  bears  two 
meanings,  both  applicable  to  the  subject-matter.  One  mean¬ 
ing  is  the  effect  of  certain  ideas  in  promoting  the  slow  drift 
of  mankind  towards  civilization.  This  is  the  Adventure  of 
Ideas  in  the  history  of  mankind.  The  other  meaning  is  the 
author’s  adventure  in  framing  a  speculative  scheme  of  ideas 
which  shall  be  explanatory  of  the  historical  adventure. 

The  book  is  in  fact  a  study  of  the  concept  of  civiliza¬ 
tion,  and  an  endeavour  to  understand  how  it  is  that  civil¬ 
ized  beings  arise.  One  point,  emphasized  throughout,  is  the 
importance  of  Adventure  for  the  promotion  and  preserva¬ 
tion  of  civilization. 

The  three  books — Science  and  The  Modem  World, 
Process  and  Reality,  Adventures  of  Ideas — are  an  en¬ 
deavour  to  express  a  way  of  understanding  the  nature  of 
things,  and  to  point  out  how  that  way  of  understanding  is 
illustrated  by  a  survey  of  the  mutations  of  human  experi¬ 
ence.  Each  book  can  be  read  separately;  but  they  supple¬ 
ment  each  other’s  omissions  or  compressions. 

The  books  that  have  chiefly  influenced  my  general  way 
of  looking  at  this  historical  topic  are  Gibbon’s  Decline  and 
Fall,  Cardinal  Newman’s  Essay  on  the  Development  of 
Christian  Doctrine,  Paul  Sarpi’s  History  of  the  Council  of 
Trent,  Henry  Osborn  Taylor’s  The  Mediaeval  Mind,  Leslie 
Stephen’s  English  Thought  in  the  Eighteenth  Century,  and 
various  well-known  collections  of  letters.  While  on  the 
subject  of  literature,  I  venture  to  commend  to  the  notice 
of  those  interested  in  an  earlier  development  of  English 
Thought,  and  also  in  good  literature,  the  sermons  of  the 
Elizabethan  and  Jacobean  divines.  Also  H.  O.  Taylor’s 
Thought  and  Expression  in  the  Sixteenth  Century  presents 
the  currents  and  cross-currents  of  thought  in  those  times. 
The  twentieth  century,  so  far  as  it  has  yet  advanced,  bears 
some  analogy  to  that  predecessor  in  European  history,  both 
in  clash  of  thought  and  in  clash  of  political  interest. 

In  Part  Two,  dealing  with  Cosmology,  I  have  made 
constant  use  of  two  books  published  by  the  Oxford  Uni¬ 
versity  Press  in  1928,  namely,  A  Commentary  on  Plato's 
Timaeus ,  by  Professor  A.  E.  Taylor  of  the  University  of 


Edinburgh,  and  The  Greek  Atomists  and  Epicurus,  by 
Dr.  Cyril  Bailey,  Tutor  of  Balliol  College,  Oxford. 

Use  has  already  been  made  of  some  parts  of  the  book  in 
response  to  invitations  which  I  had  the  honour  to  receive. 
The  main  substance  of  Chapters  1,  2,  3,  7,  8  was  delivered 
as  the  four  Mary  Flexner  Lectures  at  Bryn  Mawr  College, 
during  the  session  1929-30:  they  have  not  been  hitherto 
published.  Also  Chapter  9,  Science  and  Philosophy — 
not  previously  published — was  delivered  as  the  Davies 
Lecture  in  Philosophy,  at  the  Institute  of  Arts  and  Sciences, 
Columbia  University,  March,  1932.  Chapter  6,  Foresight, 
was  delivered  as  a  lecture  at  the  Harvard  Business  School, 
and  by  the  request  of  Dean  W.  B.  Donham  was  published 
as  a  preface  to  his  book,  Business  Adrift,  McGraw-Hill 
Book  Company,  Inc.,  New  York,  1931.  Also  Chapter  16, 
Objects  and  Subjects,  was  delivered  as  the  presidential 
address  to  the  eastern  division  of  the  American  Philosoph¬ 
ical  Association,  at  New  Haven,  December,  1931;  and  has 
since  been  published  in  The  Philosophical  Review,  Vol. 
XLI,  1932,  Longmans,  Green,  and  Company,  New  York. 

Some  unpublished  lectures,  delivered  at  Dartmouth 
College,  New  Hampshire,  in  1926,  embodied  a  preliminary 
sketch  of  the  topic  of  this  book.  They  were  concerned  with 
the  two  levels  of  ideas  which  are  required  for  successful 
civilization,  namely,  particularized  ideas  of  low  generality, 
and  philosophic  ideas  of  high  generality.  The  former  set 
are  required  to  reap  the  fruit  of  the  type  of  civilization 
immediately  attained;  the  latter  set  are  required  to  guide 
the  adventure  toward  novelty,  and  to  secure  the  immediate 
realization  of  the  worth  of  such  ideal  aim. 

I  am  indebted  to  my  wife  for  many  ideas  fundamental 
to  the  discussion;  and  also  for  the  great  labour  of  revision 
of  the  successive  drafts  of  the  various  chapters. 

Alfred  North  Whitehead. 

Harvard  University 
September,  1932 


Contents 


Preface,  vh 

Part  One:  SOCIOLOGICAL  } 

1 .  Introduction,  1 1 

2.  The  Human  Soul,  17 

3.  The  Humanitarian  Ideal,  33 

4.  Aspects  of  Freedom,  50 

5.  From  Force  to  Persuasion,  75 

6.  Foresight,  93 
Epilogue,  106 

Part  Two :  COSMOLOGICAL 

7.  Laws  of  Nature,  107 

8.  Cosmologies,  123 

9.  Science  and  Philosophy,  143 

10.  The  New  Reformation,  163 

Part  Three :  PHILOSOPHICAL 

11.  Objects  and  Subjects,  177 

12.  Past,  Present,  Future,  193 

13.  The  Grouping  of  Occasions,  202 

14.  Appearance  and  Reality,  210 

15.  Philosophic  Method,  221 

Part  Four :  CIVILIZATION 

16.  Truth,  240 

17.  Beauty,  251 


part  one  Sociological 


1.  Introduction 

Section  I.  In  its  widest  possible  extension  the  title  of  this 
book — Adventure  of  Ideas — might  be  taken  as  a  syno¬ 
nym  for  The  History  of  The  Human  Race,  in  respect  to  its 
wide  variety  of  mental  experiences.  In  this  sense  of  the 
title,  the  Human  Race  must  experience  its  own  history.  It 
cannot  be  written  in  its  total  variety.  .  ... 

Throughout  this  book  I  propose  to  consider  critically 
the  sort  of  history  which  ideas  can  have  in  the  life  of  hu¬ 
manity,  and  to  illustrate  my  thesis  by  an  appeal  to  some 
well-known  examples.  The  particular  topics  chosen  for  il¬ 
lustration  will  be  dictated  by  the  arbitrary  limitations  of 
my  own  knowledge,  and  by  the  consideration  of  their  gen¬ 
eral  interest  and  importance  in  our  modem  life.  Also  for 
our  purpose  in  the  book  the  notion  of  History  includes  the 
present  and  the  future  together  with  the  past,  affording 
a  mutual  elucidation  and  wrapped  in  common  interest. 
For  the  facts  in  detail  we  shall  be  dependent  upon  that 
great  band  of  critical  scholars  whose  labours  today,  and 
for  the  past  three  centuries,  lay  upon  mankind  the  obliga¬ 
tion  to  deepest  reverence. 

Theories  are  built  upon  facts;  and  conversely  the  re¬ 
ports  upon  facts  are  shot  through  and  through  with  theo¬ 
retical  interpretation.  Direct  visual  observation  is  concerned 
with  the  vision  of  coloured  shapes  in  motion —  question¬ 
able  shapes.’  Direct  aural  observation  is  concerned  with 
auditions  of  sounds.  But  some  contemporary  observer  of 
such  shapes  and  noises,  for  example,  some  envoy  resident 
at  a  foreign  Court,  interpreting  the  so-called  bare  facts, 
states  that  ‘he  interviewed  the  minister  of  state,  who  mani- 

11 


12  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

fested  considerable  emotion  and  explained  with  great  clear¬ 
ness  the  measures  with  which  he  would  meet  the  impending 
crisis.’  In  such  ways  contemporary  evidence  is  contempo¬ 
rary  interpretation,  including  the  assumption  of  data  other 
than  these  bare  sensa. 

In  some  subsequent  age  the  critical  scholar  in  accord¬ 
ance  with  his  own  theoretical  judgments  selects  from 
bygone  contemporary  observations:  he  criticizes  the  con¬ 
temporary  observers,  and  gives  his  own  interpretations  of 
the  contemporary  evidence.  We  thus  arrive  as  ‘pure  his¬ 
tory,’  according  to  the  faith  of  the  school  of  history  preva¬ 
lent  in  the  latter  part  of  the  nineteenth  century.  This 
notion  of  historians,  of  history  devoid  of  Esthetic  prejudice, 
of  history  devoid  of  any  reliance  on  metaphysical  princi¬ 
ples  and  cosmological  generalizations,  is  a  figment  of  the 
imagination.  The  belief  in  it  can  only  occur  to  minds 
steeped  in  provinciality— the  provinciality  of  an  epoch  of 
a  race,  of  a  school  of  learning,  of  a  trend  of  interest— 
minds  unable  to  divine  their  own  unspoken  limitations. 

The  historian  in  his  description  of  the  past  depends  on 
his  own  judgment  as  to  what  constitutes  the  importance 
of  human  life.  Even  when  he  has  rigorously  confined  him¬ 
self  to  one  selected  aspect,  political  or  cultural,  he  still 
depends  on  some  decision  as  to  what  constitutes  the  cul¬ 
mination  of  that  phase  of  human  experience  and  as  to 
what  constitutes  its  degradation.  For  example,  consider¬ 
ing  the  political  history  of  mankind,  Hegel  saw  in  the 
Prussian  State  of  his  date  its  culmination:  a  generation 
later  Macaulay  saw  that  culmination  in  the  English  con¬ 
stitutional  system  of  his  date.  The  whole  judgment  on 
thoughts  and  actions  depends  upon  such  implicit  presup¬ 
positions.  You  cannot  consider  wisdom  or  folly,  progress 
or  decadence,  except  in  relation  to  some  standard  of  judg- 
ment,  some  end  in  view.  Such  standards,  such  ends,  when 
widely  diffused,  constitute  the  driving  force  of  ideas  in  the 
history  of  mankind.  They  also  guide  the  composition  of 
historical  narrative. 

In  considering  the  history  of  ideas,  I  maintain  that  the 
notion  of  ‘mere  knowledge’  is  a  high  abstraction  which  we 
should  dismiss  from  our  minds.  Knowledge  is  always  ac¬ 
companied  with  accessories  of  emotion  and  purpose.  Also 
w»e.*Pus*  rernember  that  there  are  grades  in  the  generality 
of  ideas.  Thus  a  general  idea  occurs  in  history  in  special 


Introduction  13 


forms  determined  by  peculiar  circumstances  of  race  and  of 
stage  of  civilization.  The  higher  generalities  rarely  receive 
any  accurate  verbal  expression.  They  are  hinted  at  through 
their  special  forms  appropriate  to  the  age  in  question.  Also 
the  emotional  accompaniments  are  partly  due  to  the  vague 
feeling  of  importance  derived  from  the  superior  generality, 
and  partly  due  to  the  special  interest  of  special  forms  in 
which  generalities  make  their  appearance.  Some  people  are 
stirred  by  a  flag,  a  national  anthem;  others  by  the  vague 
feeling  of  the  form  of  civilization  which  their  country 
stands  for.  In  most  people  the  two  origins  of  emotion  are 
fused  together. 

Gibbon’s  history  demonstrates  a  twofold  tale.  It  tells  of 
the  Decline  and  Fall  of  the  Roman  Empire  through  a  thou¬ 
sand  years.  We  see  the  greatness  of  that  Empire  at  its 
height,  its  military  organization,  its  provincial  administra¬ 
tion,  its  welter  of  races,  the  rise  and  clash  of  two  religions, 
the  passage  of  Greek  philosophy  into  Christian  theology. 
Gibbon  displays  before  us  the  greatness  and  the  littleness 
of  soldiers  and  of  statesmen,  of  philosophers  and  of  priests, 
the  pathos,  the  heroism,  the  grossness  of  the  general  multi¬ 
tude  of  humanity.  He  shows  us  the  happiness  of  mankind 
and  the  horrors  which  it  has  endured. 

But  throughout  this  history,  it  is  Gibbon  who  speaks. 
He  was  the  incarnation  of  the  dominant  spirit  of  his  own 
times.  In  this  way  his  volumes  also  tell  another  tale.  They 
are  a  record  of  the  mentality  of  the  eighteenth  century. 
They  are  at  once  a  detailed  history  of  the  Roman  Empire, 
and  a  demonstration  of  the  general  ideas  of  the  silver  age 
of  the  modem  European  Renaissance.  This  silver  age,  like 
its  Roman  counterpart  seventeen  hundred  years  earlier, 
was  oblivious  of  its  own  imminent  destruction  by  the  im¬ 
pact  of  the  Age  of  Steam  and  of  Democracy,  the  counter¬ 
parts  of  the  Barbarians  and  of  the  Christians.  Thus  Gibbon 
narrates  the  Decline  and  Fall  of  the  Roman  Empire  and 
exemplifies  the  prelude  to  the  Decline  and  Fall  of  his  own 
type  of  culture. 

Section  II.  The  history  of  ideas  is  dominated  by  a  di¬ 
chotomy  which  is  illustrated  by  this  comparison  of  Steam 
and  Democracy  in  recent  times  to  Barbarians  and  Chris¬ 
tians  in  the  classical  civilization.  Steam  and  Barbarians, 
each  in  their  own  age,  were  the  senseless  agencies  driving 
their  respective  civilizations  away  from  inherited  modes 


14  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

of  order.  These  senseless  agencies  are  what  Greek  writers 
sometimes  [  e.g.  in  the  Timceus  of  Plato,  and  passim 
throughout  general  literature]  call  ‘compulsion’  [dvayx^], 
and  sometimes  ‘violence’  [Bta].  They  are  apt  to  speak  of 
‘compulsion’  when  these  agencies  appear  with  a  general 
coordination  among  themselves,  and  of  Violence’  when 
they  appear  as  a  welter  of  sporadic  outbursts.  It  is  one 
task  of  history  to  display  the  types  of  compulsion  and  of 
violence  characteristic  of  each  age.  On  the  other  hand, 
Democracy  in  modern  times,  and  Christianity  in  the  Ro¬ 
man  Empire,  exemplify  articulated  beliefs  issuing  from 
aspirations,  and  issuing  into  aspirations.  Their  force  was 
that  of  consciously  formulated  ideals  at  odds  with  the  an¬ 
cestral  pieties  which  had  preserved  and  modulated  exist¬ 
ing  social  institutions.  For  example,  we  find  the  Christian 
theologian,  Clement  of  Alexandria,  exhorting  his  con¬ 
temporaries  to  shun  custom  [c rvvrjveia ].  These  Christian 
ideals  were  among  the  persuasive  agencies  refashioning 
their  respective  ages. 

The  well-marked  transition  from  one  age  into  another 
can  always  be  traced  to  some  analogues  to  Steam  and 
Democracy,  or — if  you  prefer  it — to  some  analogues  to 
Barbarians  and  Christians.  Senseless  agencies  and  formu¬ 
lated  aspirations  cooperate  in  the  work  of  driving  mankind 
from  its  old  anchorage.  Sometimes  the  period  of  change  is 
an  age  of  hope,  sometimes  it  is  an  age  of  despair.  When 
mankind  has  slipped  its  cables,  sometimes  it  is  bent  on  the 
discovery  of  a  New  World,  and  sometimes  it  is  haunted  by 
the  dim  sound  of  the  breakers  dashing  on  the  rocks  ahead. 
The  Fall  of  the  Roman  Empire  occurred  in  a  prolonged 
age  of  despair:  Steam  and  Democracy  belong  to  an  age 
of  hope. 

It  is  easy  to  exaggerate  the  contrast  between  these  two 
kinds  of  ages  of  transition.  It  all  depends  upon  the  sur¬ 
viving  records.  Whose  feelings  do  they  express?  After  all, 
even  during  the  worst  period  of  the  decline  of  Rome  the 
barbarians  were  enjoying  themselves.  To  Attila  and  his 
hordes  their  incursion  into  Europe  was  an  enjoyable  epi¬ 
sode  diversifying  the  monotonous  round  of  a  pastoral  life. 
But  we  have  preserved  for  us  hymns  and  ejaculations  of 
sentinels  in  North  Italian  towns  as  they  paced  the  walls 
amid  the  gathering  gloom  of  a  winter’s  night: — ‘From  the 
fury  of  the  Huns,  Good  Lord  deliver  us.’  In  this  instance 


Introduction  15 


it  seems  easy  to  discriminate;  barbarism  and  civilization 
were  at  odds  with  each  other,  and  we  stand  for  civilization. 
I  waive  the  point  that  we  now  know  something  about  the 
social  state  of  central  Asia  at  that  epoch,  and  that  the 
imagination  of  a  sentinel  on  the  walls  of  Padua  or  Aquileia 
was  not  quite  adequate  in  its  presentation  of  the  Huns. 

In  every  age  of  well-marked  transition  there  is  the  pat¬ 
tern  of  habitual  dumb  practice  and  emotion  which  is  pass¬ 
ing,  and  there  is  oncoming  of  a  new  complex  of  habit. 
Between  the  two  lies  a  zone  of  anarchy,  either  a  passing 
danger  or  a  prolonged  welter  involving  misery  of  decay 
and  zest  of  young  life.  In  our  estimate  of  these  agencies 
everything  depends  upon  our  standpoint  of  criticism.  In 
other  words,  our  history  of  ideas  is  derivative  from  our 
ideas  of  history,  that  is  to  say,  upon  our  own  intellectual 
standpoint. 

Mankind  is  not  wholly  dumb,  and  in  this  respect  it  dif¬ 
fers  from  other  races  of  animals.  Yet  in  the  history  of  the 
world  of  animals  even  among  the  ancestors  of  men,  there 
have  been  transitions  of  patterns  of  habit  which  exemplify 
a  history  of  forms  of  behaviour  devoid  of  any  contempo¬ 
rary  intellectual  expression,  either  in  the  form  of  ante¬ 
cedently  expressed  purpose  or  in  the  form  of  subsequently 
expressed  reflection.  For  example,  at  a  remote  period 
urged  by  the  growth  of  forests  some  mammals  ascended 
trees  and  became  apes;  and  then  later,  after  the  lapse  of 
some  vast  period,  urged  by  the  decay  of  forests,  the  same 
race  descended  from  trees  and  became  men. 

We  have  here  history  on  its  senseless  side,  with  its  tran¬ 
sitions  pushed  forward  either  by  rainfall  and  trees,  or  by 
brute  barbarians,  or  by  coal,  steam,  electricity  and  oil.  Yet 
even  the  senseless  side  of  history  refuses  to  accept  its  own 
proper  category  of  sheer  senselessness.  The  rainfall  and  the 
trees  are  items  in  a  majestic  order  of  nature:  Attila’s  Huns 
had  their  own  intellectual  point  of  view  in  some  respects 
surprisingly  preferable  to  that  of  the  degenerate  Romans: 
the  age  of  coal  and  steam  was  pierced  through  and  through 
by  the  intellectual  abilities  of  particular  men  who  urged 
forward  the  transition.  But  finally,  with  all  this  qualifica¬ 
tion,  rainfall  and  Huns  and  steam-engines  represent  brute 
necessity,  as  conceived  in  Greek  thought,  urging  forward 
mankind  apart  from  any  human  conception  of  an  end  in¬ 
tellectually  expressed.  Fragmentary  intellectual  agencies 


16  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

cooperated  blindly  to  turn  apes  into  men,  to  turn  the 
classic  civilization  into  mediaeval  Europe,  to  overwhelm 
the  Renaissance  by  the  Industrial  Revolution.  Men  knew 
not  what  they  did. 

Section  III.  The  fragment  of  human  history,  upon  which 
this  book  is  concentrated,  is  concerned  with  the  trans¬ 
mission  of  civilization  from  the  Near  East  to  Western 
Europe.  The  topic  is  limited  to  the  story  of  the  energizing 
of  two  or  three  main  ideas,  whose  effective  entertainment 
constitutes  civilization.  These  ideas  are  traced  in  outline 
from  their  status  in  the  ancient  world  of  the  Near  East 
up  to  the  present  time.  The  boundaries  of  a  civilization  are 
indefinite,  whether  we  are  speaking  of  geography  or  of 
time,  or  of  essential  character.  This  vagueness  more  espe¬ 
cially  characterizes  the  eastern  boundaries  of  Western 
Europe,  and  the  boundaries  of  the  Near  East.  Also  these 
boundaries  fluctuate  as  the  centuries  pass.  In  its  latest 
phase  of  brilliance  the  Near  East  touched  the  Atlantic 
Ocean.  But  during  its  earlier  period  of  greatness,  before 
the  age  of  the  Greeks,  it  stretched  from  the  Nile  Valley  to 
Mesopotamia,  and  from  the  Indian  Ocean  to  the  Euxine 
and  the  Caspian  Seas.  It  also  penetrated  into  the  -Egean 
Basin,  and  later  into  the  Western  Mediterranean.  But  the 
Near  East  is  only  important  for  this  discussion  in  its  func¬ 
tion  of  the  origin  and  the  background  of  modem  Europe. 

The  whole  point  of  the  present  enquiry  is  to  demonstrate 
those  factors  in  Western  civilization  which  jointly  constitute 
a  new  element  in  the  history  of  culture.  Of  course  no 
novelty  is  wholly  novel.  Factors  which  were  present  spo¬ 
radically  and  as  the  dreams  of  individuals,  or  as  a  faint 
tinge  upon  other  modes  of  mentality,  received  a  new  im¬ 
portance  in  the  later  civilization  of  Europe.  The  question 
is  to  understand  how  the  shift  of  emphasis  happened,  and 
to  recognize  the  effects  of  this  shift  upon  the  sociology  of 
the  Western  World.  In  this  way  we  obtain  some  presup¬ 
positions  of  thought  which  the  detailed  criticism  of  modem 
sociological  development  requires.  We  can  then  discern  the 
status  of  the  impulses  which  are  driving  forward  the 
World  of  mankind. 

In  the  story  of  this  transmission  of  civilization  from 
East  to  West,  the  Hebrew,  the  Hellenic,  and  the  Hellenistic 
epochs  can,  with  equal  reason,  be  considered  together, 
either  as  outposts  of  the  Near  East  in  the  process  of  dif- 


The  Human  Soul  17 

ferentiating  itself  into  the  first  phase  of  European  mental¬ 
ity,  or  as  the  earliest  groups  of  Europeans  to  receive  the 
torch  and  successfully  to  assert  their  spiritual  independence. 
Between  them,  the  Hebrews  and  the  Greeks  introduced 
into  Europe,  and  into  the  latest  phase  of  the  Near  East,  no¬ 
tions  concerning  the  status  of  mankind  in  general,  and  of 
individual  men  in  particular,  and  a  discipline  and  direction 
in  the  general  exercise  of  mentality,  which  in  their  com¬ 
bination  have  started  the  modem  phase  of  progress  within 
the  European  races.  The  first  part  of  this  book  is  occupied 
with  the  most  general  aspect  of  the  sociological  functions 
arising  from,  and  issuing  into,  ideas  concerning  the  human 
race;  and  the  second  part  is  concerned  with  modern  cos¬ 
mological  principles  which  also  are  the  outcome  of  ancient 
Greek  and  Hebrew  thought.  A  simple-minded  interest  in 
ideas  with  one  or  other  of  these  two  types  of  generality 
is  the  main  source  from  which  mankind  acquires  novelty 
of  outlook. 


2.  The  Human  Soul 

Section  I.  In  any  human  society,  one  fundamental  idea 
tingeing  every  detail  of  activity  is  the  general  conception 
of  the  status  of  the  individual  members  of  that  group,  con¬ 
sidered  apart  from  any  special  preeminence.  In  such 
societies  as  they  emerge  into  civilization,  the  members 
recognize  each  other  as  individuals  exercising  the  enjoy¬ 
ment  of  emotions,  passions,  comforts  and  discomforts, 
perceptions,  hopes,  fears,  and  purposes.  Also  there  are 
powers  of  intellectual  understanding  involving  discrimina¬ 
tion  of  details  of  characters,  judgments  of  ‘true  or  false,’ 
and  of  ‘beautiful  or  ugly,’  and  of  ‘good  or  bad.’  We  pass 
our  lives  vaguely  and  flittingly  entertaining  grouos  of  such 
experiences,  and  we  attribute  like  ways  of  existence  to 
others. 

But  in  the  early  stages  of  civilization  such  experiences 
and  beliefs  are  mere  matters  of  course.  They  provoke  no 
abrupt  reflective  reaction  isolating  them  for  thoughtful 
inspection.  Accordingly  there  is  no  modification  of  habit 


18  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

arising  from  the  valuation  of  human  beings  as  such.  Thus 
the  various  members  of  a  society  find  themselves  cherish¬ 
ing  each  other,  destroying,  obeying  or  commanding,  as  the 
case  may  be.  There  is  a  communal  organization,  and  there 
are  beliefs  about  it  slowly  forming  themselves  into  ex¬ 
planations. 

We  are  to  discuss  the  later  phases  when  civilization  has 
reached  its  modern  height,  a  period  of  three  thousand  years 
at  the  most.  Thinkers  have  now  arisen.  The  notion  of  duty 
has  dawned  and  received  some  definition.  Above  all  the 
notion  of  a  psyche — that  is,  of  a  mind — has  dawned.  In 
its  first  phase  of  gradual  emergence,  this  great  notion  was 
instinctively  used  as  a  master-key  to  make  intelligible  the 
baffling  occurrences  of  nature.  The  two  most  obvious 
characteristics  of  Nature,  writes  Lytton  Strachey,1  are 
loveliness  and  power.  The  beauty  dawned  later  upon 
human  intelligences  than  did  its  power.  Also  in  early  phases 
of  thought  the  powers  of  nature  became  the  minds  of 
Nature — minds  bestial,  ruthless,  and  yet  placable.  In  all 
stages  of  civilization  the  popular  gods  represent  the  more 
primitive  brutalities  of  the  tribal  life.  The  progress  of 
religion  is  defined  by  the  denunciation  of  gods.  The  key¬ 
note  of  idolatry  is  contentment  with  the  prevalent  gods. 

The  factor  in  human  life  provocative  of  a  noble  dis¬ 
content  is  the  gradual  emergence  into  prominence  of  a 
sense  of  criticism,  founded  upon  appreciations  of  beauty, 
and  of  intellectual  distinction,  and  of  duty.  The  moral 
element  is  derivative  from  the  other  factors  in  experience. 
For  otherwise  there  is  no  content  for  duty  to  operate  upon. 
There  can  be  no  mere  morality  in  a  vacuum.  Thus  the 
primary  factors  in  experience  are  first  the  animal  passions 
such  as  love,  sympathy,  ferocity,  together  with  analogous 
appetitions  and  satisfactions;  and  secondly,  the  more 
distinctly  human  experiences  of  beauty,  and  of  intellectual 
fineness,  consciously  enjoyed.  Here  the  notion  of  intel¬ 
lectual  distinction,  or  of  fineness,  is  somewhat  broader  than 
that  of  ‘truth/  which  is  ordinarily  cited  in  this  connection. 
There  is  a  grandeur  of  achievement  in  the  delicate  adjust¬ 
ment  of  thought  to  thought,  which  is  independent  of  the 
mere  blunt  question  of  truth.  We  may  term  it  ‘beauty.’  But 
intellectual  beauty,  however  capable  of  being  hymned  in 


1  Cf.  Books  and  Characters,  Chapter  on  *The  Poetry  of  Blake\ 


The  Human  Soul  19 

terms  relevant  to  sensible  beauty,  is  yet  beautiful  by 
stretch  of  metaphor.  The  same  consideration  applies  to 
moral  beauty.  All  three  types  of  character  partake  in  the 
highest  ideal  of  satisfaction  possible  for  actual  realization, 
and  in  this  sense  can  be  termed  that  beauty  which  provides 
the  final  contentment  for  the  Eros  of  the  Universe. 

For  European  thought,  the  effective  expression  of  this 
critical  discontent,  which  is  the  gadfly  of  civilization,  has 
been  provided  by  Hebrew  and  Greek  thought.  Its  most 
adequate  expression,  so  far  as  concerns  literary  delicacy 
and  definition  of  the  issues  involved,  is  to  be  found  in 
Plato’s  Dialogues.  We  there  find  him  criticizing  the  cus¬ 
tomary  gods  of  the  poets — indeed  he  would  banish  all 
poets — and  analyzing  the  capacities  latent  in  the  human 
soul.  The  religion  of  Plato  is  founded  on  his  conception  of 
what  a  God  can  be,  with  gaze  fixed  upon  forms  of  eternal 
beauty;  and  his  sociology  is  derived  from  his  conception 
of  what  man  can  be,  in  virtue  of  a  nature,  which  for  its 
full  description  requires  terms  applicable  to  the  nature  of 
gods.  Between  them,  the  Hebrews  and  the  Greeks  provided 
a  program  for  discontent.  But  the  value  of  their  discontent 
lies  in  the  hope  which  never  deserted  their  glimpses  of 
perfection. 

Section  II.  The  intellectual  agencies  involved  in  the 
modification  of  epochs  are  the  proper  subject  of  this  book. 
When  we  examine  them  we  find  a  rough  division  into  two 
types,  one  of  general  ideas,  the  other  of  highly  specialized 
notions.  Among  the  former,  there  are  the  ideas  of  high 
generality  expressing  conceptions  of  the  nature  of  things, 
of  the  possibilities  of  human  society,  of  the  final  aim  which 
should  guide  the  conduct  of  individual  men.  In  each  age  of 
the  world  distinguished  by  high  activity  there  will  be 
found  at  its  culmination,  and  among  the  agencies  leading 
to  that  culmination,  some  profound  cosmological  outlook, 
implicitly  accepted,  impressing  its  own  type  upon  the 
current  springs  of  action.  This  ultimate  cosmology  is  only 
partly  expressed,  and  the  details  of  such  expression  issue 
into  derivative  specialized  questions  of  violent  controversy. 
The  intellectual  strife  of  an  age  is  mainly  concerned  with 
these  latter  questions  of  secondary  generality  which  con¬ 
ceal  a  general  agreement  upon  first  principles  almost  too 
obvious  to  need  expression,  and  almost  too  general  to  be 
capable  of  expression.  In  each  period  there  is  a  general 


20  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

form  of  the  forms  of  thought;  and,  like  the  air  we  breathe, 
such  a  form  is  so  translucent,  and  so  pervading,  and  so 
seemingly  necessary,  that  only  by  extreme  effort  can  we 
become  aware  of  it. 

In  order  to  find  an  example  capable  of  ready  expression, 
we  must  descend  below  the  utmost  generality.  In  the 
region  of  political  theory,  consider  the  divergence  of  out¬ 
look  in  the  classical  Mediterranean  civilization.  Think  of 
the  differences  between  Pericles  and  Cleon,  Plato  and 
Alexander  the  Great,  Marius  and  Sulla,  Cicero  and  Caesar. 
Yet  they  all  agreed  in  one  fundamental  notion  which  lies 
at  the  base  of  all  political  theory.  Throughout  the  Hellenic 
and  Hellenistic  Roman  civilizations — those  civilizations 
which  we  term  ‘classical’ — it  was  universally  assumed 
that  a  large  slave  population  was  required  to  perform 
services  which  were  unworthy  to  engage  the  activities  of  a 
fully  civilized  man.  In  other  words  in  that  epoch  a  civilized 
community  could  not  be  self-sustaining.  A  comparatively 
barbarous  substratum  had  to  be  interwoven  in  the  social 
structure,  so  as  to  sustain  the  civilized  apex.  This  assump¬ 
tion  that  a  complex  urban  civilization  requires  a  base  of 
slavery  was  so  universal,  both  in  practice  and  in  implicit 
presuppositions,  that  we  may  assume  it  to  be  derived 
from  some  well-founded  reason  in  the  conditions  per¬ 
mitting  the  formation  of  the  earlier  phases  of  civilized  life. 
The  Egyptians  wanted  bricks,  so  they  captured  the 
Hebrews.  The  confusion  of  tongues  associated  with  the 
tower  of  Babel  may  be  historically  doubtful  in  the  form  of 
the  surviving  legend:  it  is  at  least  well-found  as  a  reference 
to  the  confusion  of  races  amid  the  slave  populations 
supplying  the  mechanized  man-power  for  the  building  of 
cities. 

Now  in  respect  to  the  political  factions  of  the  ancient 
world  nothing  has  yet  been  settled.  Every  problem  which 
Plato  discusses  is  still  alive  today.  Yet  there  is  a  vast 
difference  between  ancient  and  modern  political  theories. 
For  we  differ  from  the  ancients  on  the  one  premise  on 
which  they  were  all  agreed.  Slavery  was  the  presupposition 
of  political  theorists  then;  Freedom  is  the  presupposition 
of  political  theorists  now.  In  those  days  the  penetrating 
minds  found  a  difficulty  in  reconciling  their  doctrine  of 
slavery  to  certain  plain  facts  of  moral  feeling  and  of 
sociological  practice;  and  in  these  days  our  sociological 


The  Human  Soul  21 

speculations  find  a  difficulty  in  reconciling  our  doctrine 
of  freedom  to  another  group  of  plain  facts,  perplexing, 
irreconcilable,  only  to  be  conceived  as  a  hateful  brute 
necessity.  Yet,  when  all  such  qualifications  have  been 
made,  Freedom  and  Equality  constitute  an  inevitable 
presupposition  for  modem  political  thought,  with  an 
admixture  of  subsequent  lame  qualification;  while  Slavery 
was  a  corresponding  presupposition  for  the  ancients,  with 
their  admixture  of  lame  qualification.  For  both  sets  of 
thinkers  God  has  been  a  great  resource:  a  lot  of  things, 
which  won’t  work  on  Earth,  can  be  conceived  as  true  in 
his  sight.  Ancients  and  Modems  in  respect  to  this  question 
face  in  directly  opposite  directions. 

Section  III.  This  growth  of  the  idea  of  the  essential 
rights  of  human  beings,  arising  from  their  sheer  humanity, 
affords  a  striking  example  in  the  history  of  ideas.  Its 
formation  and  its  effective  diffusion  can  be  reckoned  as  a 
triumph — a  chequered  triumph — of  the  later  phase  of 
civilization.  We  shall  find  out  how  general  ideas  arise  and 
are  diffused,  if  we  examine  the  sort  of  history  which 
belongs  to  this  particular  instance. 

The  great  classical  civilization  is  remarkable  for  two 
facts.  First,  it  constituted  a  culmination  of  slavery,  es¬ 
pecially  at  the  height  of  the  Roman  Empire.  At  that 
moment  slavery  reached  its  height,  in  necessity,  in  quan¬ 
tity,  in  horror,  and  in  danger.  In  earlier,  simpler  com¬ 
munities  slavery  may  have  been  conceived  as  an  accidental 
mercy,  a  favour  granted  to  a  few  fortunate  communities 
or  to  a  few  fortunate  individuals  within  any  community. 
But  for  a  thousand  years  of  the  classical  civilization,  to  be 
civilized  was  to  be  a  slave-owner.  Some  slave-owners  were 
kind,  some  were  brutal:  probably,  they  were  mostly 
mediocre.  In  Plato’s  Symposium  Agathon,  the  host,  is 
represented  with  a  uniform  well-bred  kindliness  both 
towards  his  slaves  and  his  guests.  Cicero  and  the  younger 
Pliny  exhibit  themselves  in  their  Letters  as  kindly  masters. 
But  on  the  whole  the  Roman  capitalists  with  their  vast 
estates  exemplify  the  necessity  for  ancient  civilization 
that  it  be  built  upon  iniquity.  Efficiency  spelt  Brutality. 
When  such  evils  culminate,  either  they  are  corrected  by 
the  introduction  of  some  new  principle,  or  they  destroy 
society.  In  the  case  of  the  classical  civilizations,  these 
alternatives  were  not  exclusive:  they  both  happened. 


22  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

We  now  come  to  the  second  fact  for  which  the  classical 
period  was  remarkable.  It  was  the  first  period  which 
introduced  moral  principles  forming  an  effective  criticism 
of  the  whole  system.  The  Athenians  were  slave-owners: 
but  they  seem  to  have  humanized  the  institution.  Plato 
was  an  aristocrat  by  birth  and  by  conviction,  also  he  must 
have  owned  slaves.  But  it  is  difficult  to  read  some  of  his 
Dialogues  without  an  uneasy  feeling  about  the  compulsory 
degradation  of  mankind.  Also  the  Stoic  lawyers  of  the 
Roman  Empire  introduced  a  legal  reformation  largely 
motivated  by  the  principle  that  human  nature  has  essential 
rights.  But  neither  the  humane  slave-owners,  nor  the  in¬ 
spired  Plato,  nor  the  clear-headed  lawyers,  initiated  any 
campaign  against  slavery.  They  accepted  it  as  a  matter  of 
course.  It  was  presupposed  in  the  very  structure  of  society; 
and  such  necessity  limits  the  scope  of  all  generalities. 
Distinctions  were  introduced,  the  sort  of  distinctions  which 
are  conclusive  so  long  as  you  know  that  in  practice  you 
have  got  to  accept  them. 

We  see  here  the  first  stage  of  the  introduction  of  great 
ideas.  They  start  as  speculative  suggestions  in  the  minds  of 
a  small,  gifted  group.  They  acquire  a  limited  application 
to  human  life  at  the  hands  of  various  sets  of  leaders  with 
special  functions  in  the  social  structure.  A  whole  literature 
arises  which  explains  how  inspiring  is  the  general  idea, 
and  how  slight  need  be  its  effect  in  disturbing  a  comfortable 
society.  Some  transition  has  been  produced  by  the  agency 
of  the  new  idea.  But  on  the  whole  the  social  system  has 
been  inoculated  against  the  full  infection  of  the  new 
principle.  It  takes  its  place  among  the  interesting  notions 
which  have  a  restricted  application. 

But  a  general  idea  is  always  a  danger  to  the  existing 
order.  The  whole  bundle  of  its  conceivable  special  embodi¬ 
ments  in  various  usages  of  society  constitutes  a  program 
of  reform.  At  any  moment  the  smouldering  unhappiness  of 
mankind  may  seize  on  some  such  program  and  initiate  a 
period  of  rapid  change  guided  by  the  light  of  its  doctrines. 
In  this  way,  the  conception  of  the  dignity  of  human  nature 
was  quietly  energizing  in  the  minds  of  Roman  officials, 
producing  somewhat  better  government  and  nerving  men 
like  Marcus  Aurelius  to  rise  to  the  height  of  their  appointed 
task.  It  was  a  worthy  moral  force,  but  society  had  been 
inoculated  against  its  revolutionary  application.  For  six 


The  Human  Soul  23 


hundred  years,  the  ideal  of  the  intellectual  and  moral 
grandeur  of  the  human  soul  had  haunted  the  ancient 
Mediterranean  world.  It  had  in  a  way  transformed  the 
moral  ideas  of  mankind:  it  had  readjusted  religions:  and 
yet  it  had  failed  to  close  with  the  basic  weakness  of  the 
civilization  in  which  it  flourished.  It  was  the  faint  light 
of  the  dawn  of  a  new  order  of  life. 

Section  IV.  In  the  midst  of  this  period  of  progress 
and  decadence,  Christianity  arose.  In  its  early  form  it  was 
a  religion  of  fierce  enthusiasm  and  of  impracticable  moral 
ideals.  Luckily  these  ideals  have  been  preserved  for  us  in 
a  literature  which  is  almost  contemporary  with  the  origin 
of  the  religion.  They  have  constituted  an  unrivalled  pro¬ 
gram  for  reform,  which  has  been  one  element  in  the 
evolution  of  Western  civilization.  The  progress  of  humanity 
can  be  defined  as  the  process  of  transforming  society  so 
as  to  make  the  original  Christian  ideals  increasingly  prac¬ 
ticable  for  its  individual  members.  As  society  is  now  con¬ 
stituted  a  literal  adherence  to  the  moral  precepts  scattered 
throughout  the  Gospels  would  mean  sudden  death. 

Christianity  rapidly  assimilated  the  Platonic  doctrine 
of  the  human  soul.  The  philosophy  and  the  religion  were 
very  congenial  to  each  other  in  their  respective  teachings; 
although,  as  was  natural,  the  religious  version  was  much 
more  specialized  than  the  philosophic  version.  We  have 
here  an  example  of  the  principle  that  dominates  the  history 
of  ideas.  There  will  be  a  general  idea  in  the  background 
flittingly,  waveringly,  realized  by  the  few  in  its  full 
generality — or  perhaps  never  expressed  in  any  adequate 
universal  form  with  persuasive  force.  Such  persuasive  ex¬ 
pression  depends  on  the  accidents  of  genius;  for  example, 
it  depends  on  the  chance  that  a  man  like  Plato  appears.  But 
this  general  idea,  whether  expressed  or  implicitly  just 
below  the  surface  of  consciousness,  embodies  itself  in 
special  expression  after  special  expression.  It  condescends 
so  as  to  lose  the  magnificence  of  its  generality,  but  it  gains 
in  the  force  of  its  peculiar  adaptation  to  the  concrete  cir¬ 
cumstances  of  a  particular  age.  It  is  a  hidden  driving 
force,  haunting  humanity,  and  ever  appearing  in  specialized 
guise  as  compulsory  on  action  by  reason  of  its  appeal  to 
the  uneasy  conscience  of  the  age.  The  force  of  the  appeal 
lies  in  the  fact  that  the  specialized  principle  of  immediate 
conduct  exemplifies  the  grandeur  of  the  wider  truth  arising 


24  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

from  the  very  nature  of  the  order  of  things,  a  truth  which 
mankind  has  grown  to  the  stature  of  being  able  to  feel 
though  perhaps  as  yet  unable  to  frame  in  fortunate 
expression. 

The  greatness  of  Christianity — the  greatness  of  any 
valuable  religion — consists  in  its  ‘interim  ethics.’  The 
founders  of  Christianity  and  their  earlier  followers  firmly 
believed  that  the  end  of  the  world  was  at  hand.  The  result 
was  that  with  passionate  earnestness  they  gave  free  reign 
to  their  absolute  ethical  intuitions  respecting  ideal  pos¬ 
sibilities  without  a  thought  of  the  preservation  of  society. 
The  crash  of  society  was  certain  and  imminent.  ‘Imprac¬ 
ticability’  was  a  word  which  had  lost  its  meaning;  or  rather, 
practical  good  sense  dictated  concentration  on  ultimate 
ideas.  The  last  things  had  arrived:  intermediate  stages  were 
of  no  account. 

This  consideration  was  of  more  influence  in  framing  the 
mentality  of  the  earlier  followers  than  in  the  initial  foun¬ 
dation  of  the  religion.  It  enabled  these  followers  to  transmit 
in  their  full  purity  the  primitive  notions.  But  the  religion 
arose  in  a  more  tranquil  atmosphere  although  highly 
sensitive  in  regard  to  religious  emotion,  and  with  some 
admixture  of  apocalyptic  belief.  The  Galilean  peasantry, 
having  regard  to  their  climate  and  simplicity  of  life,  were 
neither  rich  nor  poor:  they  were  unusually  intellectual  for 
a  peasantry,  by  reason  of  their  habits  of  study  of  historical 
and  religious  records:  they  were  protected  from  dis¬ 
turbance,  from  within  or  from  without,  by  the  guardian 
structure  of  the  Roman  Empire.  They  had  no  responsibility 
for  the  maintenance  of  this  complex  system.  Their  own 
society  was  of  the  simplest;  and  they  were  ignorant  of  the 
conditions  by  which  the  Empire  arose,  of  the  conditions 
requisite  for  its  efficiency,  and  of  the  conditions  necessary 
for  its  preservation.  They  were  ignorant  even  of  the  services 
which  the  Empire  was  rendering  them.  The  alternation  cf 
procurators  was  like  that  of  the  seasons,  some  were  better 
and  some  were  worse;  but  all  alike,  seasons  and  procurators 
of  Judaea,  issued  from  an  inscrutable  order  of  things. 

The  tone  of  life  of  this  peasantry  provided  an  ideal 
environment  in  which  concepts  of  ideal  relations  between 
rational  beings  could  be  formulated — concepts  devoid  of 
ferocity,  concepts  gracious,  kindly,  and  shrewd,  concepts 
in  which  mercy  prevailed  over  judicial  classification.  In 


The  Human  Soul  25 


this  ideal  world  forgiveness  could  be  stretched  to  seventy 
times  seven,  whereas  in  the  real  world  of  the  Herods  and 
the  Roman  Empire  a  sevenfold  forgiveness  touched  upon 
the  impracticable.  But  the  Galilean  people  were  uncon¬ 
cerned  with  the  discipline  of  the  Roman  legions,  with  the 
imperial  inspection  of  the  doings  of  proconsuls,  and  with 
the  complexities  of  a  legal  system  which  was  to  impose  an 
order  upon  multitudinous  transactions,  stretching  from  the 
hills  of  Scotland  to  the  marshes  of  Mesopotamia.  A 
gracious,  simple  mode  of  life,  combined  with  a  fortunate 
ignorance,  endowed  mankind  with  its  most  precious  instru¬ 
ment  of  progress — the  impracticable  ethics  of  Christianity. 

A  standard  had  now  been  created,  expressed  in  concrete 
illustrations  foolproof  against  perversions.  This  standard 
is  a  gauge  by  which  to  test  the  defects  of  human  society. 
So  long  as  the  Galilean  images  are  but  the  dreams  of  an 
unrealized  world,  so  long  they  must  spread  the  infection 
of  an  uneasy  spirit. 

Section  V.  In  ethical  ideals  we  find  the  supreme 
example  of  consciously  formulated  ideas  acting  as  a  driving 
force  effecting  transitions  from  social  state  to  social  state. 
Such  ideas  are  at  once  gadflies  irritating,  and  beacons 
luring,  the  victims  among  whom  they  dwell.  The  conscious 
agency  of  such  ideas  should  be  contrasted  with  senseless 
forces,  floods,  barbarians,  and  mechanical  devices.  The 
great  transitions  are  due  to  a  coincidence  of  forces  derived 
from  both  sides  of  the  world,  its  physical  and  its  spiritual 
natures.  Mere  physical  nature  lets  loose  a  flood,  but  it  re¬ 
quires  intelligence  to  provide  a  system  of  irrigation. 

The  ethical  ideas,  embodied  in  the  great  religions, 
Christianity  for  instance,  though  representing  a  high  ap¬ 
proach  to  final  generality,  are  yet  specializations  of  the 
Platonic  generality.  Partly  these  ethical  intuitions  are  a 
direct  application  of  metaphysical  doctrine  for  the  de¬ 
termination  of  practice.  The  ethical  principle  is  then  a 
parable  illuminating  the  superior  generality  on  which  it 
depends.  Thus  the  codes  of  all  religions  also  embody  the 
particular  temperaments  and  stages  of  civilization  of  their 
adherents.  No  religion  can  be  considered  in  abstraction 
from  its  followers,  or  even  from  its  various  types  of  fol¬ 
lowers.  Religious  ideas  represent  highly  specialized  forms 
of  general  notions.  Sometimes  these  specializations  are 
concrete  embodiments  with  peculiar  beauty  and  aptness: 


26  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

sometimes  they  are  the  result  of  a  throw  back  to  barbaric 
brutality.  Neither  religions  nor  individual  men  demonstrate 
their  sanctity  by  their  ejaculations.  We  find  however  this 
whole  bundle  of  more  special  notions,  legal,  political, 
ethical,  religious,  driving  forward  human  life,  and  deriving 
a  force  of  grandeur  from  their  various  exemplifications  of 
the  mystery  of  the  human  soul  in  its  journey  toward  the 
source  of  all  harmony.  It  is  a  story  of  crime,  misunder¬ 
standing,  profanation.  Great  ideas  enter  into  reality  with 
evil  associates  and  with  disgusting  alliances.  But  the  great¬ 
ness  remains,  nerving  the  race  in  its  slow  ascent. 

In  the  Middle  Ages  institutional  Christianity  was  hon¬ 
ourably  distinguished  as  a  driving  force  toward  the  grander 
intuitions.  Unfortunately,  in  accordance  with  the  habits  of 
all  institutions,  it  adapted  itself  to  its  environment.  It 
became  an  instrument  of  conservation  instead  of  an  in¬ 
strument  of  progress.  After  a  short  period  of  progressive 
energy,  the  Reformation  Churches  again  accepted  the  same 
idolatrous  role.  On  the  whole,  well-established  religious 
institutions  are  to  be  reckoned  among  the  conservative 
forces  of  society.  They  soon  become  the  grand  support  of 
what  Clement  had  termed  ‘communal  custom.’  But  the 
ultimate  ideals,  of  which  they  profess  themselves  the 
guardians,  are  a  standing  criticism  of  current  practices. 

Accordingly  the  next  resurgence  of  the  notion  of  the 
essential  greatness  of  the  human  soul  is  associated  with 
the  sceptical  humanitarianism  of  the  eighteenth  century. 
We  have  arrived  at  the  Age  of  Reason  and  the  Rights  of 
Man.  This  great  French  age  of  thought  has  remade  the 
presuppositions  of  the  civilized  world,  in  speculation,  in 
science,  and  in  sociological  premises.  It  was  derived  from 
the  English  thought  of  the  seventeenth  century,  Francis 
Bacon,  Isaac  Newton,  and  John  Locke.  Also  it  gained 
inspiration  from  the  English  revolutions  of  the  same  epoch. 
But  the  English  modes  always  retained  the  note  of  in¬ 
sularity.  The  French  broadened,  clarified,  and  universal¬ 
ized.  They  thus  made  world-wide,  ideas  which  such  a  man 
as  Edmund  Burke  could  only  grasp  in  their  application  to 
one  race,  and  even  at  times  to  one  island. 

But  the  thought  of  John  Locke  survived  also  in  England. 
Its  influence  was  reinforced  by  the  general  pride  in  the 
doctrines  of  freedom  embodied  in  the  English  Common 
Law.  There  was  thus  a  Whiggish  tinge  even  to  Tory 


The  Human  Soul  27 

Parliaments  in  those  days.  In  this  way  the  British  Govern¬ 
ment  was  the  first  government  to  make  effective  two 
decisive  steps  in  the  abolition  of  slavery.  Two  parliaments 
determined  the  new  policies.  They  were  composed  of 
aristocratic  land-owners  and  evangelical  bankers  and  mer¬ 
chants,  one  parliament  Tory  and  the  other  Whig.  The  first 
step  was  the  abolition  of  the  British  slave-trade  in  1808, 
and  the  second  step  was  the  purchase  and  freeing  of  all 
slaves  in  the  British  Dominions  in  the  year  1833.  This 
latter  operation  cost  twenty  million  pounds  at  a  time  of 
grave  financial  difficulty. 

But  the  problem  was  comparatively  simple  for  the 
English  people.  None  the  less  this  action  constituted  a 
foretaste  of  the  final  triumph  of  that  same  wavering  alliance 
of  philosophy,  law,  and  religion  which  had  its  first  success 
in  the  reforms  of  the  Roman  Imperial  system.  We  notice 
that  a  great  idea  in  the  background  of  dim  consciousness  is 
like  a  phantom  ocean  beating  upon  the  shores  of  human 
life  in  successive  waves  of  specialization.  A  whole  succes¬ 
sion  of  such  waves  are  as  dreams  slowly  doing  their  work 
of  sapping  the  base  of  some  cliff  of  habit:  but  the  seventh 
wave  is  a  revolution — ‘And  the  nations  echo  round.’  In 
the  last  quarter  of  the  eighteenth  century,  Democracy  was 
born,  with  its  earliest  incarnations  in  America  and  in 
France;  and  finally  it  was  Democracy  that  freed  the  slaves. 
In  the  modem  world,  Democracy  has  a  deeper  import 
than  among  the  ancients.  At  last,  in  the  nineteenth  century, 
the  fundamental  question  of  slavery  has  been  explicitly 
faced.  In  Europe,  it  was  already  a  decaying  institution, 
slowly  withdrawing  from  slavery  to  serfdom,  from  serfdom 
to  feudalism,  from  feudalism  to  aristocracy,  from  aristoc¬ 
racy  to  legal  equality,  from  legal  equality  to  careers 
effectively  open  to  talent.  But  the  question  was  assuming  a 
new  and  menacing  form  by  reason  of  the  impact  of  the 
European  and  Arabian  races  upon  the  African  tribes. 

So  modern  Democrats,  in  the  nineteenth  century,  nerved 
themselves  to  face  the  question  of  Slavery,  explicitly  and 
with  thoroughness.  The  slow  working  of  ideas  is  thereby 
illustrated.  Two  thousand  years  had  elapsed  since  the 
foundation  of  Plato’s  Academy,  since  the  reforms  of  the 
Stoic  lawyers,  since  the  composition  of  the  Gospels.  The 
great  program  of  reform  bequeathed  by  the  classical 
civilization  was  achieving  another  triumph. 


28  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

Section  VI.  The  slow  issue  of  general  ideas  into  prac¬ 
tical  consequences  is  not  wholly  due  to  inefficiency  of 
human  character.  There  is  a  problem  to  be  solved,  and  its 
complexity  is  habitually  ignored  by  impetuous  seekers.  The 
difficulty  is  just  this: — It  may  be  impossible  to  conceive  a 
reorganization  of  society  adequate  for  the  removal  of  some 
admitted  evil  without  destroying  the  social  organization 
and  the  civilization  which  depends  on  it.  An  allied  plea  is 
that  there  is  no  known  way  of  removing  the  evil  without 
the  introduction  of  worse  evils  of  some  other  type. 

Such  arguments  are  usually  implicit.  Even  the  wisest  are 
unable  to  conceive  the  possibility  of  untried  forms  of  social 
relations.  Human  nature  is  so  complex  that  paper  plans 
for  society  are  to  the  statesman  not  worth  even  the  price 
of  the  defaced  paper.  Successful  progress  creeps  from  point 
to  point,  testing  each  step.  It  is  not  difficult  to  frame  the 
sort  of  defence  that  Cicero  would  have  advanced,  if  chal¬ 
lenged  on  the  question  of  slavery.  The  Roman  Govern¬ 
ment,  he  would  have  said,  is  the  one  hope  for  the  human 
race.  Destroy  Rome;  and  Where  will  you  find  the  firmness 
of  the  Roman  Senate,  the  discipline  of  its  legions,  the  wis¬ 
dom  of  its  lawyers,  the  restraints  upon  misgovemment,  the 
appreciative  protection  of  Greek  learning?  But  he  would 
not  have  said  this.  His  genius  would  have  risen  to  proph¬ 
ecy,  and  he  would  have  foreseen  and  quoted  the  lines 
of  Virgil  on  the  mission  of  the  Eternal  City. 

In  fact,  we  do  know  exactly  the  stand  taken  upon  this 
very  question  by  the  lawyers,  Pagan  and  Christian,  and  by 
the  bishops  and  popes,  of  the  five  centuries  succeeding 
Cicero.  Among  them  were  statesmen  with  more  than 
Cicero’s  practical  sagacity,  and  his  equals  in  moral  sensi¬ 
bility.  They  introduced  careful  legal  restraints  upon  the 
powers  of  die  masters;  they  protected  some  of  the  essential 
rights  of  slaves.  But  they  preserved  the  institution.  Civiliza¬ 
tion,  Hellenic  and  Roman,  was  preserved  intact  for  more 
than  seven  centuries  after  the  death  of  Plato.  The  slaves 
were  the  martyrs  whose  toil  made  progress  possible.  There 
is  a  famous  statue  of  a  Scythian  slave  sharpening  a  knife. 
His  body  is  bent,  but  his  glance  is  upward.  That  figure  has 
survived  the  ages,  a  message  to  us  of  what  we  owe  to  the 
suffering  millions  in  the  dim  past. 

We  may  ask,  Would  Rome  have  been  destroyed  by  a 
crusade  for  the  abolition  of  slavery  in  the  time  of  Cicero 


The  Human  Soul  29 

or  in  the  time  of  Augustus?  Throughout  the  whole  period 
of  classical  civilization  the  foundations  of  social  order 
could  scarcely  sustain  the  weight  upon  them — the  wars  be¬ 
tween  states,  the  surrounding  barbarians,  the  political  con¬ 
vulsions,  the  evils  of  the  slave  system.  In  the  age  from  the 
birth  of  Cicero  to  the  accession  of  Augustus  to  undisputed 
power,  the  whole  structure  almost  collapsed,  before  it  had 
finished  its  appointed  task.  Even  earlier,  it  had  nearly  met 
its  fate,  and  later  by  a  few  centuries  came  the  final  collapse. 
It  is  impossible  to  doubt  the  effect  of  any  vigorous  effort 
for  the  immediate  abolition  of  the  only  social  system  that 
men  knew.  It  may  be  better  that  the  heavens  should  fall, 
but  it  is  folly  to  ignore  the  fact  that  they  will  fall. 

Suppose  that,  in  the  middle  of  the  nineteenth  century, 
the  shock  that  overwhelmed  the  Confederate  States  in  the 
American  Civil  War  had  equally  overwhelmed  the  whole 
of  North  America  and  the  whole  of  Europe.  The  sole  hope 
of  progressive  civilization  would  have  been  lost.  We  may 
speculate  about  a  recovery,  but  of  that  we  know  nothing. 
In  the  ancient  world,  the  dangers  were  immeasurably 
greater. 

Section  VII.  The  argument  of  the  previous  section  can 
be  generalized.  It  amounts  to  this: — that  the  final  introduc- 
tion  of  a  reform  does  not  necessarily  prove  the  moral 
superiority  of  the  reforming  generation.  It  certainly  does 
require  that  that  generation  exhibits  reforming  energy.  But 
conditions  may  have  changed,  so  that  what  is  possible  now 
may  not  have  been  possible  then.  A  great  idea  is  not  to  be 
conceived  as  merely  waiting  for  enough  good  men  to  carry 
it  into  practical  effect.  That  is  a  childish  view  of  the  history 
of  ideas.  The  ideal  in  the  background  is  promoting  the 
gradual  growth  of  the  requisite  communal  customs,  ade¬ 
quate  to  sustain  the  load  of  its  exemplification. 

Many  factors  contributed  to  the  final  inversion  of  soci¬ 
ological  theory,  from  the  presupposition  of  slavery  to  the 
presupposition  of  freedom.  The  chief  factor  has  already 
been  mentioned,  namely,  the  sceptical,  humanitarian  move¬ 
ment  of  the  eighteenth  century,  of  which  Voltaire  and 
Rousseau  were  among  the  chief  exponents,  and  the  French 
Revolution  the  culmination. 

Thus  in  a  sense,  and  more  especially  when  we  consider 
the  whole  world-wide  movement,  religion  was  in  the  back¬ 
ground.  But  in  one  section  of  this  stirring  of  mankind  the 


30  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

religious  motive  was  among  the  chief  agencies.  Through¬ 
out  the  Anglo-Saxon  world,  English  and  American,  the 
Wesleyan  protestant  revival  was  in  full  activity.^  It  had  been 
reserved  for  a  great  French  historian,  Elie  Halevy,  to  point 
out  the  full  sociological  significance  of  this  episode.  The 
Methodist  preachers  aimed  at  saving  men’s  souls  in  the  next 
world,  but  incidentally  they  gave  a  new  direction  to  emo¬ 
tions  energizing  in  this  world.  The  movement  was  singularly 
devoid  of  new  ideas,  and  singularly  rich  in  vivid  feelings. 
It  is  the  first  decisive  landmark  indicating  the  widening 
chasm  between  the  theological  tradition  and  the  modem 
intellectual  world.  From  the  earliest  Greek  theologians  to 
Jerome  and  Augustine:  from  Augustine  to  Aquinas:  from 
Aquinas  to  Luther,  Calvin,  and  Suarez:  from  Suarez  to 
Leibniz  and  John  Locke:  every  great  religious  movement 
was  accompanied  by  a  noble  rationalistic  justification.  You 
may  disagree  with  the  theologians — indeed  it  is  impossible 
to  agree  with  all  of  them — but  you  cannot  complain  that 
they  have  been  unwilling  to  indulge  in  rational  argument. 
The  Middle  Ages  argued,  Luther  defended  ninety-seven 
theses,  Calvin  produced  his  Institute,  the  Council  of  Trent 
argued  on  and  off  for  eighteen  years,  the  judicious 
Hooker  argued,  at  the  Synod  of  Dort  Arminians  and 
Calvinists  argued. 

The  great  Methodist  movement  more  than  deserves  the 
eulogies  bestowed  on  it.  But  it  can  appeal  to  no  great 
intellectual  construction  explanatory  of  its  modes  of  under¬ 
standing.  It  may  have  chosen  the  better  way.  Its  instinct 
may  be  sound.  However  that  may  be,  it  was  a  notable  event 
in  the  history  of  ideas  when  the  clergy  of  the  Western 
races  began  to  waver  in  their  appeal  to  constructive  reason. 
More  recently  scientists  and  critical  philosophers  have 
followed  the  Methodist  example. 

In  an  age  of  aristocracy  in  England,  the  Methodists  ap¬ 
pealed  to  the  direct  intuitions  of  working  men  and  of  retail 
traders  concerned  with  working  men.  In  America  they 
appealed  to  the  toiling,  isolated  groups  of  pioneers.  They 
brought  hope,  fear,  emotional  release,  spiritual  insight. 
They  stemmed  the  inroads  of  revolutionary  ideas.  Also, 
allowing  for  many  qualifications,  they  must  be  credited 
with  one  supreme  achievement.  They  made  the  conception 
of  the  brotherhood  of  man  and  of  the  importance  of  men, 
a  vivid  reality.  They  had  produced  the  final  effective  force 


The  Human  Soul  31 

which  hereafter  made  slavery  impossible  among  progres¬ 
sive  races. 

In  the  history  of  ideas  the  great  danger  is  over¬ 
simplification.  It  is  true  that  the  Methodists  produced  the 
final  wave  of  popular  feeling  which  drove  the  anti-slavery 
movement  to  success.  But  the  Methodist  movement  suc¬ 
ceeded  because  it  came  at  the  right  time.  In  this  section 
we  are  discussing  the  religious  influences.  During  the  six¬ 
teenth,  seventeenth,  and  eighteenth  centuries  the  Church 
of  Rome — to  use  a  Quaker  phrase — had  a  ‘concern’  for 
the  races,  groaning  under  European  exploitation,  which  far 
surpassed  that  of  the  combined  Protestant  churches.  The 
priests  did  not  consider  the  problem  in  terms  of  human 
freedom.  But,  not  to  speak  of  the  rest  of  the  world,  in 
America  alone  the  heroism  of  the  Catholic  missionaries  ex¬ 
tended  their  self-sacrifice  from  the  northern  to  the  southern 
icefields.  It  is  impossible  to  doubt  but  that  their  example 
kept  alive  a  sensitiveness  of  the  European  conscience  re¬ 
specting  the  obligations  of  men  to  men. 

Neither  the  Catholics,  nor  the  Methodists,  gave  the  first 
modern  formulation  of  an  explicit  purpose  to  procure  the 
abolition  of  slavery.  This  supreme  honour  belongs  to  the 
Quakers,  and  in  particular  to  that  Apostle  of  Human  Free¬ 
dom,  John  Woolman.  Also  the  American  Civil  War  was 
the  tremendous  episode  constituting  the  climax  of  this 
sombre  journey  of  civilization  toward  the  light. 

Thus  in  the  evolution  of  the  strands  of  thought  which 
constituted  the  final  stage  in  the  destruction  of  the  iniqui¬ 
tous  slave-foundation  of  civilization,  there  are  interwoven 
the  insights  and  the  heroisms  of  sceptical  humanitarians,  of 
Catholics,  of  Methodists,  of  Quakers.  But  the  intellectual 
origin  of  the  movement  is  to  be  traced  back  for  more  than 
two  thousand  years  to  the  speculations  of  the  philosophical 
Greeks  upon  functions  of  the  human  soul,  and  its  status  in 
the  world  of  flux. 

Section  VIII.  In  this  chapter  the  story  of  the  transla¬ 
tion  of  the  Greek  metaphysical  speculations  into  the  socio¬ 
logical  concept  of  human  freedom  has  been  only  half  told. 
In  the  next  chapter  I  shall  consider  in  more  detail  some 
nineteenth  century  criticisms  of  this  whole  movement 
towards  Democracy  and  Freedom.  But,  so  far  as  it  has 
gone,  the  story  illustrates  the  extreme  difficulty  of  express¬ 
ing  in  language  the  final  generalities.  The  importance  of 


32  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

man  as  the  supreme  example  of  a  living  organism  is  be¬ 
yond  question.  Yet  when  we  try  to  express  the  general 
notions  thus  involved,  and  their  bearing  upon  conduct,  at 
every  step  controversy  arises.  The  immense  history  of 
Plato’s  metaphysical  concept  of  the  soul,  with  its  influence 
on  religion,  and  on  social  theory,  carries  this  moral  de¬ 
cisively. 

Human  life  is  driven  forward  by  its  dim  apprehension 
of  notions  too  general  for  its  existing  language.  Such  ideas 
cannot  be  grasped  singly,  one  by  one  in  isolation.  They  re¬ 
quire  that  mankind  advances  in  its  apprehension  of  the 
general  nature  of  things,  so  as  to  conceive  systems  of  ideas 
elucidating  each  other.  But  the  growth  of  generality  of 
apprehension  is  the  slowest  of  all  evolutionary  changes.  It 
is  the  task  of  philosophy  to  promote  this  growth  in  men¬ 
tality.  In  so  far  as  there  is  success,  the  specialized  applica¬ 
tions  of  great  ideas  are  purified  from  their  gross  associations 
with  savage  fancies.  The  Carthaginians  were  a  great  civil¬ 
ized  trading  nation.  They  belonged  racially  to  one  of  the 
great  progressive  sections  of  mankind.  They  traded  from 
the  shores  of  Syria,  throughout  the  Mediterranean  Sea,  up 
the  Atlantic  Coast  of  Europe,  to  the  tin  mines  of  Cornwall 
in  England.  They  circumnavigated  Africa.  They  ruled 
Spain  and  Sicily  and  North  Africa.  Yet,  when  Plato  was 
speculating,  this  great  people  could  so  conceive  the  supreme 
powers  of  the  Universe  that  they  sacrificed  their  children  to 
Moloch  as  an  act  of  religious  propitiation.  The  growth  in 
generality  of  understanding  makes  such  savagery  impos¬ 
sible  in  corresponding  civilizations  today. 

Human  Sacrifice,  Human  Slavery  are  instances  of  great 
intuitions  of  religion  and  of  civilized  purposes  expressing 
themselves  by  means  of  inherited  brutalities  of  instinctive 
behaviour.  Direct  religious  intuitions,  even  those  of  the 
purest  origin,  are  in  danger  of  allying  themselves  with  lower 
practices  and  emotions  which  in  fact  pervade  existing  so¬ 
ciety.  Religion  lends  a  driving  force  to  philosophy.  But  in 
its  turn,  Speculative  philosophy  guards  our  higher  intuitions 
from  base  alliances  by  its  suggestions  of  ultimate  meanings, 
disengaged  from  the  facts  of  current  modes  of  behaviour. 

The  history  of  ideas  is  a  history  of  mistakes.  But  through 
all  mistakes  it  is  also  the  history  of  the  gradual  purification 
of  conduct.  When  there  is  progress  in  the  development  of 
favourable  order,  we  find  conduct  protected  from  relapse 


The  Humanitarian  Ideal  33 

into  brutalization  by  the  increasing  agency  of  ideas  con¬ 
sciously  entertained.  In  this  way  Plato  is  justified  in  his 
saying,  The  creation  of  the  world — that  is  to  say,  the  world 
of  civilized  order — is  the  victory  of  persuasion  over  force. 


3.  The  Humanitarian  Ideal 

Section  I.  In  the  previous  chapter  we  considered  the 
combined  influence  of  philosophy,  law,  and  religion,  upon 
the  evolution  from  the  notion  of  society  based  upon  servi¬ 
tude  to  that  of  society  based  upon  individual  freedom.  To 
this  transformation  philosophy  contributed  its  generality, 
law  contributed  the  constructive  ability,  religion  the  moral 
energy.  By  themselves  and  apart  from  correction  by  the 
Platonic  philosophy,  the  religions  derived  from  Western 
Asia  were  tinged  with  the  mentality  of  the  older  civiliza¬ 
tions  of  that  region.  They  conceived  the  universe  in  terms 
of  despots  and  slaves.  None  of  these  religions  have  been 
able  wholly  to  shake  off  the  horrible  implications  latent  in 
such  a  conception.  But  the  fortunate  coalescence  of  the 
initial  Christian  institutions  with  the  philosophic  Platonic 
doctrines  provided  the  Western  races  with  a  beautiful  soci¬ 
ological  ideal,  intellectually  expressed,  and  closely  allied 
with  intermittent  bursts  of  emotional  energy.  Unfortunately, 
interwoven  with  this  ideal  in  Christian  theology  and  in  the 
patterns  of  Christian  emotion,  there  has  survived  through¬ 
out  history  the  older  concept  of  a  Divine  Despot  and  a 
slavish  Universe,  each  with  the  morals  of  its  kind. 

The  theme  of  the  former  chapter  has  been  the  agency  of 
these  sociological  ideals  in  the  transformation  of  society. 
They  constitute  the  intellectual  side  of  the  transformation, 
combined  with  an  explanation  how  such  intellectual  con¬ 
cepts  acquired  driving  force.  In  the  present  chapter  we  first 
glance  at  accessory  causes,  and  then  proceed  to  the 
criticism  of  the  humanitarian  ideal,  a  criticism  which  has 
been  gathering  strength  since  its  origin  in  the  nineteenth 
century.  Finally,  the  barest  sketch  of  a  reply  to  this 
criticism  is  suggested. 

The  growth  of  technology  is  the  greatest  among  the 


34  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

accessory  causes  which  weakened  the  necessity  for  slavery. 
But  this  agency  hardly  came  into  play  before  the  seven¬ 
teenth  century.  Till  that  time  the  technology  of  the  ancients, 
in  their  prime,  probably  surpassed  that  of  the  modems. 
From  that  century  onward,  technological  advance  has  more 
than  satisfied  the  complex  demands  for  effective  labour, 
without  recourse  to  slavery.  Of  course,  the  fixed  order  of 
society  in  a  well-managed  feudal  system  must  not  be  con¬ 
fused  with  slavery,  even  in  its  application  to  the  agricul¬ 
tural  labourers  at  the  base  of  the  whole  structure.  Each 
order  had  its  rights  and  duties,  and  in  the  happier  examples 
of  later  feudalism  the  villagers  were  quite  competent  to  go 
to  law  with  their  feudal  chief.  The  system  was  very  liable 
to  degenerate  into  practical  slavery,  and  often  did  so. 
Indeed,  there  is  evidence1  that,  during  the  early  Norman 
period  in  England,  there  was  a  relatively  small  class  of 
slaves  whose  lives  were  at  the  arbitrary  will  of  their  owners. 
But  the  slave-trade  shocked  the  conscience  of  those  times. 
William  the  Conqueror  legislated  against  it,  and  Bishops 
denounced  it.  In  those  times,  it  must  be  remembered,  to 
be  attached  to  the  land  was  a  protection  as  well  as  a 
restriction.  It  was  the  basis  of  a  recognized  status  in  an 
organized  society — so  far  as  the  social  system  was  organ¬ 
ized,  and  was  not  a  welter  of  violence. 

The  modem  evolution  of  big  business  involves  a  closer 
analogy  of  feudalism,  than  does  feudalism  to  slavey.  In 
fact,  the  modem  social  system  with  its  variety  of  indispen¬ 
sable,  interlocked  avocations  necessitates  such  organiza¬ 
tion.  The  only  questions  at  issue  are  the  freedom  of 
individuals  to  circulate  among  the  grades,  and  satisfactory 
legal  conceptions  of  the  variety  or  relations  of  the  grades 
with  each  other.  Individualists  and  socialists  are  merely 
debating  over  the  details  of  the  neo-feudalism  which  mod¬ 
em  industry  requires.  The  self-sufficing  independent  man, 
with  his  peculiar  property  which  concerns  no  one  else,  is 
a  concept  without  any  validity  for  modem  civilization. 
Unfortunately  this  notion  has  been  embodied  in  ancient 
moral  codes  applicable  to  Syrian  deserts,  and  has  reap¬ 
peared  tingeing  Western  political  theory  in  the  commercial 
epoch  immediately  succeeding  the  decay  of  mediaeval 
feudalism.  But  it  is  not  the  practicable  alternative  to  a 

1  Cf.  Mediaeval  England,  pp.  100,  101,  by  Mary  Bateson,  T.  Fisher  Unwin, 
London  1903,  and  G.  P.  Putnam’s  Sons,  New  York. 


The  Humanitarian  Ideal  35 


slave  society.  The  problem  of  social  life  is  the  problem  of 
the  coordination  of  activities,  including  the  limits  of  such 
coordination. 

The  sense  of  the  unity  of  civilization  fostered  by  the 
Catholic  Church,  the  general  similarities  of  mankind 
throughout  Europe,  and  the  simplicities  of  life  in  the  middle 
ages,  are  probably  the  main  reasons  why  mediaeval  wars 
were  dissociated  from  slave-raiding  expeditions.  We  hear 
of  Saxon  slaves  in  the  slave-market  in  Rome.  But  that  was 
in  the  lifetime  of  Gregory  the  Great,  and  the  Saxons  were 
not  Christians.  Indeed,  whenever  the  European  races  came 
into  contact  with  non-Christian  foreign  races,  they  seem  to 
have  had  no  compunction  about  slavery.  We  read  of  Sara¬ 
cen  slaves,  of  the  enslavement  of  the  indigenous  American 
tribes,  and,  above  all,  of  Negro  slavery.  But  thanks  to  the 
growth  of  technology  concurrently  with  the  advance  of 
civilization,  the  European  races  have  avoided  slavery  in 
temperate  climates.  Finally,  the  humanitarian  movement 
of  the  eighteenth  century,  combined  with  a  religious  sense 
of  the  kinship  of  men,  has  issued  in  the  settled  policy  of  the 
great  civilized  governments  to  extirpate  slavery  from  the 
world. 

Section  IL  This  success  came  only  just  in  time.  For 
before  and  during  the  nineteenth  century,  several  strands 
of  thought  emerged  whose  combined  effect  was  in  direct 
opposition  to  the  humanitarian  ideal.  At  the  moment  when 
the  ‘brotherhood  of  man’  triumphed,  the  intellectual  world 
was  meditating  on  political  economy  conceived  in  terms 
of  unrestrained  competition,  on  Malthus’  iron  law  that  the 
mass  of  the  population  must  always  press  on  the  limits  of 
bare  subsistence,  and  on  the  zoological  law  of  natural 
selection  by  which  an  iron  environment  crushed  out  the 
less  favoured  species,  and  on  Hume’s  criticism  of  the  notion 
of  the  soul.  This  new  trend  of  thought  was  in  its  immediate 
origin  British  and  is  to  be  compared  and  contrasted  with 
the  antecedent  Wesleyan  movement.  In  neither  case  did 
the  leaders  intend  the  sociological  effects  which  followed 
from  their  efforts.  It  is  often  the  case  that  the  originators 
belong  to  the  antecedent  epoch,  and  stand  outside  the 
epoch  of  their  followers.  The  Methodist  preachers  did  not 
intend  to  transform  society,  their  object  was  to  save  souls. 
In  like  manner,  Adam  Smith  was  a  typical  figure  of  the 
eighteenth  century  enlightenment. 


36  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

He  and  Hume  are  two  of  the  last  great  Scotchmen  who 
mark  the  traditional  affiliation  of  Scotland  with  France, 
which  had  survived  from  the  earlier  centuries  of  joint  an¬ 
tagonism  to  England.  At  their  date  the  intellectual  life  of 
Edinburgh  and  Glasgow  is  not  to  be  assimilated  with  that 
of  England.  Throughout  the  greater  part  of  the  eighteenth 
century,  during  its  central  portion,  the  intellectual  life  of 
England,  so  far  as  concerns  any  originative  energy,  is  neg¬ 
ligible.  Indeed,  one  of  the  reasons  for  the  separation  of 
America  from  England  was  that  the  particular  circum¬ 
stances  of  English  life  were  not  applicable  to  America,  and 
that  England  was  not  fermenting  with  any  universal  ideas 
capable  of  specialization  for  American  conditions.  English 
influence  survived,  it  is  true,  in  the  Common  Law;  but, 
apart  from  that  exception,  the  mentality  of  men  like  Jeffer¬ 
son  and  Franklin  was  French.  There  was  the  homeland  of 
their  thoughts.  It  has  required  the  whole  of  the  activity  of 
the  nineteenth  century,  from  1790  onward,  to  reconstruct 
the  intellectual  influence  of  England  on  the  outside  world. 
In  the  eighteenth  century,  France  looked  to  England;  but 
it  was  to  the  England  of  the  seventeenth  century,  Bacon, 
Newton,  Locke  and  the  Regicides.  In  order  to  understand 
the  intellectual  history  of  Europe,  it  is  essential  to  remem¬ 
ber  the  collapse  of  Germany  during  and  after  The  Thirty 
Years’  War,  to  remember  the  collapse  of  Italy  owing  to 
the  supersession  of  the  Mediterranean  trade  route  to  the 
East,  owing  to  the  Catholic  Reaction  with  its  activity  of 
censorship,  and  owing  to  the  domination  of  Spaniards  and 
Habsburgs,  and  to  remember  the  collapse  of  England 
owing  to  absorption  in  the  commercial  expansion  of  the 
eighteenth  century — in  the  words  of  the  old  song,  ‘When 
George  and  pudding-time  came  round.’  In  the  eighteenth 
century  France  carried  the  ‘White  Man’s  Burden’  of  in¬ 
tellectual  advance. 

Perhaps  it  was  owing  to  the  loss  of  the  habit  of  specula¬ 
tive  thoroughness,  that  in  the  revival  of  intellectual  activity 
in  England  the  issue  of  the  emerging  lines  of  thought  was 
not  discerned.  Hume’s  flux  of  impressions  and  of  reactions 
to  impressions,  each  impression  a  distinct,  self-sufficient 
existence,  was  very  different  to  the  Platonic  soul.  The 
status  of  man  in  the  universe  required  re-considering. 
‘What  is  man  that  thou  art  mindful  of  him?’  The  brother¬ 
hood  of  man  at  the  top  of  creation  ceased  to  be  the  well- 


The  Humanitarian  Ideal  37 

defined  foundation  for  moral  principles.  There  seems  no 
very  obvious  reason  why  one  flux  of  impressions  should  not 
be  related  to  another  flux  of  impressions  in  the  relative 
status  of  master  to  slave.  To  put  the  matter  at  its  very 
lowest,  the  point  requires  arguing.  It  is  no  answer  to  point 
out  that  Hume  and  Huxley  were  united  in  their  dislike  of 
slavery — certainly  Huxley,  probably  Hume.  The  question 
is  what  reason  could  they  give,  apart  from  their  own 
psychological  inheritance  from  the  Platonic  religious  tradi¬ 
tion.  For  example,  in  Book  III,  of  his  Treatise ,  Part  II, 
Section  I,  Hume  writes,  “In  general,  it  may  be  affirm’d 
that  there  is  no  such  passion  in  human  minds,  as  the  love 
of  mankind,  merely  as  such,  independent  of  personal  qual¬ 
ities,  or  services,  or  of  relation  to  ourself.”  This  sentence 
seems  very  remote  from  the  Catholic  missionaries  in  Amer¬ 
ica,  from  the  Quaker  John  Woolman,  or  from  the  free- 
thinking  Thomas  Paine.  In  some  mysterious  way,  they  all 
cared  for  ‘mankind,  merely  as  such.’ 

Section  III.  In  the  Middle  Ages  of  Europe  the  keynote 
of  sociological  theory  is  ‘coordination.’  The  Church  co¬ 
ordinated  religious  speculations;  the  Feudal  System  coordi¬ 
nated  the  intimate  structure  of  society;  the  Empire — or, 
Was  it  the  Church?  Here  dispute  crept  in — coordinated 
the  Governments  of  the  provincial  regions,  Counts,  Dukes, 
Kings,  and  City-Republics.  In  the  provinces  of  theology 
and  of  clerical  organization,  the  success  was  considerable. 
To  a  less  degree  the  Feudal  system  effected  its  purpose. 
No  other  system  can  be  suggested  which  at  that  time  and 
in  those  circumstances  could  have  replaced  it  successfully: 
although  the  towns  with  their  commercial  and  artisan 
populations  stood  outside  it,  more  particularly  in  Italy. 
The  Empire  was  a  failure  mitigated  by  a  few  successes. 
The  Church,  as  an  agent  of  large-scale  political  organiza¬ 
tion,  was  more  successful  than  the  Empire.  Its  agents  were 
better  educated,  and — allowing  for  many  exceptions — had 
a  higher  morale.  Also  its  influence  extended  to  regions 
which  the  Empire  never  reached.  But,  on  the  whole,  the 
attempts  at  large-scale  organization  of  Europe  were  a 
failure.  There  is  a  pathetic  interest  in  Dante’s  De  Mon¬ 
orchia  with  its  initial  premise  of  the  desire  of  mankind  for 
peace  and  quietness.  We  have  only  to  remember  the  state 
of  Europe  at  that  time,  the  state  of  Italy,  and  Dante’s  own 
life.  Indeed,  men  do  long  for  peace  and  quietness  but  their 


38  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

desire  is  chequered  by  other  impulses.  The  Middle  Ages 
were  always  haunted  by  the  ghost  of  the  old  Roman  Em¬ 
pire,  with  its  message  of  vast  success  in  the  imposition  of 
order  upon  men. 

The  Renaissance  men  read  the  classical  authors,  and 
decisively  ignored  the  ideals  of  the  Roman  statesmen. 
Plato,  perhaps,  would  have  been  gratified  by  the  attention 
his  works  then  received.  But  he  would  have  been  horrified 
at  the  outburst  of  individualism.  In  the  men  of  the  Italian 
Renaissance  Plato  would  have  recognized  reproductions  of 
the  character  of  the  younger  Dionysius  of  Syracuse.  At  the 
time  the  incongruity  was  not  perceived.  But  the  inevitable 
issues  followed.  Finally  in  the  nineteenth  century,  amid 
the  triumph  of  humanitarian  principles,  the  basic  positions 
of  the  social  theories  derived  from  Platonism  and  Chris¬ 
tianity  were  questioned.  Previously,  they  had  never  been 
fully  acted  on.  They  were  impracticable.  But  they  had  not 
been  questioned  as  a  social  ideal. 

Section  IV.  The  collapse  of  the  Middle  Ages  was,  in 
one  of  its  aspects,  a  revolt  against  coordination.  The  new 
keynote  is  expressed  in  the  word  ‘competition5 — 

Thou  shalt  not  murder,  but  tradition 

Approves  all  forms  of  competition.5 

Private  life  now  dominated  the  social  life  of  Europe  in  all 
its  special  forms — The  Right  of  Private  Judgment,  Private 
Property,  The  Competition  of  Private  Traders,  Private 
Amusement.  The  notion  that  every  action  is  at  once  a 
private  experience  and  a  public  utility  had  to  be  born  again. 
It  sickened  and  died  with  the  disappearance  of  the  ‘mediae¬ 
val  mind.5  Wherever  men  looked,  they  saw  ‘competition5 
written  across  the  face  of  things.  Nations  arose,  and  men 
thought  of  nations  in  terms  of  international  competition. 
They  examined  the  theory  of  trade,  and  they  construed  its 
interactions  in  terms  of  competition,  mitigated  by  ‘higgling.5 
They  considered  the  bounty  of  nature  in  the  provision  of 
food,  and  they  saw  the  masses  of  mankind  competing  for 
insufficient  supplies.  They  saw  the  fecundity  of  nature  in 
the  provision  of  a  myriad  species  of  living  things,  and  they 
construed  the  explanation  in  terms  of  the  competition  of 
species.  What  the  notions  of  ‘form5  and  ‘harmony5  were 
to  Plato,  that  the  notions  of  ‘individuality5  and  ‘competi- 


The  Humanitarian  Ideal  39 

tion5  were  to  the  nineteenth  century.  God  had  placed  his 
bow  in  the  skies  as  a  symbol;  and  the  strip  of  colours, 
rightly  read,  spelt  ‘competition.5  The  prize  to  be  competed 
for  was  ‘life.5  Unsuccessful  competitors  died;  and  thus,  by 
a  beautiful  provision  of  nature,  ceased  from  constituting 
a  social  problem. 

Now  it  is  quite  obvious  that  a  much  needed  corrective 
to  an  unqualified,  sentimental  humanitarianism  is  here  be¬ 
ing  supplied.  Strife  is  at  least  as  real  a  fact  in  the  world  as 
Harmony.  If  you  side  with  Francis  Bacon  and  concentrate 
on  the  efficient  causes,  you  can  interpret  large  features  of 
the  growth  of  structure  in  terms  of  ‘strife.5  If,  with  Plato, 
you  fix  attention  on  the  end,  rationally  worthy,  you  can  in¬ 
terpret  large  features  in  terms  of  ‘harmony.5  But  until 
some  outline  of  understanding  has  been  reached  which 
elucidates  the  interfusion  of  strife  and  harmony,  the  in¬ 
tellectual  driving  force  of  successive  generations  will  sway 
uneasily  between  the  two. 

There  have  been  many  interpretations  of  special  aspects 
of  European  society  in  terms  of  strife:  Machiavelli’s  Prince , 
the  political  policies  of  the  great  Renaissance  Monarchs, 
Charles  the  Fifth,  Philip  the  Second,  Francis  the  First, 
Henry  the  Eighth,  Henri  Quatre,  William  the  Silent,  Queen 
Elizabeth.  The  people,  thus  indicated,  found  strife.  They 
could  not  evade  it.  Fleets,  armies,  hatreds,  assassin’s  dag¬ 
gers,  burnings  at  the  stake,  insurrections  were  there  as  real 
present  facts.  To  survive,  as  persons  or  as  nations,  meant 
force  and  policy  suppressing  competitors.  Harmony  crept 
in  under  the  guise  of  the  joy  of  the  adventure,  of  faculties 
stretched  to  the  full.  But  such  harmony  was  a  secondary 
effect,  merely  Romance  gilding  Strife. 

In  the  hands  of  theologians  both  in  the  Middle  Ages  and 
in  the  first  period  of  its  supersession,  the  Platonic-Christian 
tradition  leant  heavily  towards  its  mystical  religious  side. 
It  abandoned  this  world  to  the  Evil  Prince  thereof,  and  con¬ 
centrated  thought  upon  another  world  and  a  better  life. 
Plato  himself  explicitly  considers  this  solution  at  the  end 
of  his  dialogue,  the  Republic.  But  he  there  gives  it  another 
twist  to  that  adopted  by  later  theologians.  He  conceives 
the  perfect  Republic  in  Heaven  as  an  immediate  present 
possession  in  the  consciousness  of  the  wise  in  the  temporal 
world.  Thus  for  Plato,  at  least  in  his  mood  when  he  con¬ 
cluded  this  dialogue,  the  joy  of  heaven  is  realizable  on 


40  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

earth:  the  wise  are  happy.  Theoretically,  this  doctrine  also 
tinged  mediaeval  Christianity.  But  in  practice  there  has 
always  been  the  temptation  to  abandon  the  immediate  ex¬ 
perience  of  this  world  as  a  lost  cause.  The  shadows  pass — 
says  mystical  Religion.  But  they  also  recur,  and  recur — 
whispers  the  Experience  of  Mankind.  Be  tranquil,  they 
will  end — rejoins  Religion.  The  mystical  religion  which 
most  whole-heartedly  adopts  this  attitude  is  Buddhism.  In 
it  despair  of  this  world  is  conjoined  with  a  program  for  the 
world’s  abolition  by  a  mystic  tranquillity.  Christianity  has 
wavered  between  Buddhistic  renunciation,  and  its  own  im¬ 
practicable  ideals  culminating  in  a  crude  Millennium  within 
the  temporal  flux.  The  difference  between  the  two  consists 
in  the  difference  between  a  program  for  reform  and  a  pro¬ 
gram  for  abolition.  I  hazard  the  prophecy  that  that  religion 
will  conquer  which  can  render  clear  to  popular  understand¬ 
ing  some  eternal  greatness  incarnate  in  the  passage  of 
temporal  fact. 

Section  V.  The  political,  liberal  faith  of  the  nine¬ 
teenth  century  was  a  compromise  between  the  individual¬ 
istic,  competitive  doctrine  of  strife  and  the  optimistic 
doctrine  of  harmony.  It  was  believed  that  the  laws  of  the 
Universe  were  such  that  the  strife  of  individuals  issued  in 
the  progressive  realization  of  a  harmonious  society.  In  this 
way,  it  was  possible  to  cherish  the  emotional  belief  in  the 
Brotherhood  of  Man,  while  engaging  in  relentless  compe¬ 
tition  with  all  individual  men.  Theoretically,  it  seemed 
possible  to  conciliate  the  belief  with  the  practice  without 
the  intrusion  of  contradiction.  Unfortunately,  while  this 
liberalism  was  winning  triumph  after  triumph  as  a  political 
force  in  Europe  and  America,  the  foundations  of  its  doc¬ 
trine  were  receiving  shock  after  shock. 

The  new  industrial  system  which  should  have  been  a 
triumph  for  the  liberal  doctrines,  did  not  work  well.  It 
had  first  developed  in  England  under  treatment  exclusively 
dictated  by  the  doctrines  of  economic  liberalism.  On  this 
point,  in  their  treatment  of  the  manufacturing  and  mining 
industries,  the  English  Tories  at  first  were  as  orthodox  as 
the  English  Whigs.  Unfortunately  after  two  generations 
of  such  industrial  development,  the  widespread  misery  at 
the  base  of  the  whole  organization,  in  the  mines,  in  the 
factories,  in  the  slums,  aroused  the  public  conscience.  This 
foundation  of  social  relations  upon  individualism  and  com- 


The  Humanitarian  Ideal  41 


petition,  with  no  mitigating  practices,  was  not  working 
well  under  the  new  industrial  conditions,  such  as  mining 
for  raw  materials  and  mechanized  manufacturing  for  fin¬ 
ished  products.  At  least  this  judgment  holds  for  the  old, 
comparatively  crowded,  nations  of  Europe.  England  was 
the  pioneer  and  tried  the  system  whole-heartedly.  It  failed. 
The  evidence  is  scattered  through  the  records  of  the  two 
decades  from  1830  to  1850.  For  example  it  can  be  found 
summarized  in  any  life  of  the  Lord  Shaftesbury  of  the 
period — a  great  philanthropist — in  some  of  Disraeli’s  early 
novels,  in  the  joint  writings  of  J.  L.  Hammond  and  Barbara 
Hammond,  dealing  with  the  state  of  the  labourers,  town 
and  country.  The  mere  doctrines  of  freedom,  individual¬ 
ism,  and  competition,  had  produced  a  resurgence  of  some¬ 
thing  very  like  industrial  slavery  at  the  base  of  society. 

The  industrial  politics  of  the  nineteenth  century  in 
Europe  can  only  be  understood  by  remembering  this  fact. 
The  pure  doctrine  of  nineteenth-century  liberalism  failed. 
During  the  decade  of  the  eighteen  forties  and  since,  in 
England  and  in  every  European  country  a  series  of  reme¬ 
dial  industrial  measures  were  introduced.  The  great  liberal 
leaders,  Cobden,  Bright,  and  even  Gladstone,  were  either 
opposed,  or  were  notably  cold,  to  these  measures.  They 
infringed  the  purity  of  the  liberal  doctrine.  The  important 
internal  division  of  the  political  liberals  in  England  was  not 
the  prominent  one  between  Radicals  and  Whigs.  It  was  the 
division  between  the  pure  liberals  and  the  modified  liber¬ 
als.  These  modified  liberals  were  in  some  ways  nearer  to 
the  old  Tories.  They  repudiated  the  liberal  doctrine  of  an 
atomistic  society.  Unfortunately  for  the  liberal  political 
party  in  England,  its  later  leaders,  Gladstone,  Lord  Hart-  • 
ington,  Asquith  belonged  to  the  pure  liberal  faction.  If 
Campbell-Bannerman  had  been  somewhat  abler  and,  what 
is  still  more  important,  if  he  had  lived,  political  history  in 
England  would  have  been  different.  As  it  was,  in  the  last 
phase,  English  political  liberalism  under  Asquith’s  leader¬ 
ship  was  engaged  in  direct  opposition,  or  apathy,  in  re¬ 
spect  to  every  reform  which  it  was  the  task  of  a  reforming 
political  party  to  undertake — the  Women’s  movement, 
Education,  Industrial  Reorganization.  During  the  seventy 
years  of  its  greatest  triumphs,  from  1830  onward,  English 
liberalism  was  slowly  decaying  by  its  failure  to  acquire  a 
coherent  system  of  practicable  ideals.  On  the  whole,  the 


42  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

pure  liberals  retained  command  of  the  political  machine 
in  England,  from  Mr.  Gladstone  in  the  last  third  of  the 
nineteenth  century  to  Mr.  Asquith  in  the  opening  phase  of 
the  twentieth  century. 

Notwithstanding  this  reluctance  of  the  great  representa¬ 
tive  liberals,  before  the  middle  of  the  century  a  whole  new 
movement  of  social  coordination  arose,  in  the  form  of  Gov¬ 
ernmental  measures,  regulative  of  mining,  of  factories,  of 
slum  areas.  The  Industrial  System  then  spread  to  Germany, 
where  the  necessity  for  coordination  and  the  failure  of  free 
competition  were  at  once  taken  for  granted.  The  early  form 
of  the  industrial  doctrine  of  liberalism  was  never  even  tried 
in  that  country.  But  the  modification  of  the  liberal  doc¬ 
trines  came  grudgingly;  and  its  failure  generated  a  new 
formulation  of  an  old  idea.  Karl  Marx  proclaimed  the  doc¬ 
trine  of  ‘The  Class  War.’  The  learned  economists  are 
unanimous  in  telling  us  that  Das  Kapital  does  not  express 
a  sound  scientific  doctrine,  which  will  stand  comparison 
with  the  facts.  The  success  of  the  book — for  it  is  still  with 
us  as  a  power — can  then  only  be  accounted  for  by  the 
magnitude  of  the  evils  ushered  in  by  the  first  phase  of  the 
industrial  revolution. 

The  early  liberal  faith  that  by  the  decree  of  benevolent 
Providence,  individualistic  competition  and  industrial  activ¬ 
ity,  would  necessarily  work  together  for  human  happiness 
had  broken  down  as  soon  as  it  was  tried.  Perhaps  a  more 
enlightened  training  of  the  directing  classes  was  required. 
Then  coordination  should  mainly  be  directed  towards  edu¬ 
cation  and  sociological  training:  Perhaps,  governmental 
agency  regulating  the  conditions  of  all  employments  was 
the  proper  corrective:  Perhaps  the  State,  controlled  by  the 
workers,  should  be  the  sole  employer.  All  these  suggestions 
are  still  matters  of  fierce  debate.  In  some  country  or  other 
almost  every  solution  has  been  tried.  But  no  one  now  holds 
that,  apart  from  some  further  directive  agency,  mere  in¬ 
dividualistic  competition,  of  itself  and  by  its  own  self- 
righting  character,  will  produce  a  satisfactory  society. 

Unfortunately,  the  Malthusian  doctrine,  in  its  popular 
rendering,  affirmed  that  as  a  law  of  nature  the  masses  of 
mankind  could  never  emerge  into  a  high  state  of  well-being. 
Still  worse,  biological  science  drew  the  conclusion  that  the 
destruction  of  individuals  was  the  very  means  by  which 
advance  was  made  to  higher  types  of  species.  This  was  the 


The  Humanitarian  Ideal  43 

famous  doctrine  of  Natural  Selection,  promulgated  in  1859, 
by  Charles  Darwin.  This  exclusive  reliance  upon  Natural 
Selection  was  not  characteristic  of  Darwin’s  own  theory. 
For  him,  it  was  one  agency  among  many  others.  But,  in 
the  form  in  which  the  doctrine  reigned  in  thought  from 
that  day  to  this,  Natural  Selection  was  the  sole  factor  to  be 
seriously  considered.  As  applied  to  human  society  this 
theory  is  a  challenge  to  the  whole  humanitarian  movement. 
The  contrast  between  the  dominant  theories  of  Lamarck 
and  Darwin  made  all  the  difference.  Instead  of  dwelling 
on  the  brotherhood  of  man,  we  are  now  directed  to  procure 
the  extermination  of  the  unfit.  Again  the  modem  doctrines 
of  heredity,  gained  partly  from  the  experience  of  breeders 
of  stock,  partly  from  practical  horticulturists,  partly  from 
the  statistical  researches  of  Francis  Galton,  Karl  Pearson, 
and  their  school,  partly  from  the  laws  of  heredity  discov¬ 
ered  by  Mendel,  the  Austrian  Abbot,  who  published  his 
unnoticed  researches  comtemporaneously  with  the  publi¬ 
cation  of  Darwin’s  Origin  of  Species — these  doctrines  have 
all  weakened  the  Stoic-Christian  ideal  of  democratic 
brotherhood. 

Religion  by  itself  has  always  wavered  between  that  con¬ 
ception  and  the  despot-slaves’  conception  of  God  and  his 
creatures.  But  the  democratic  liberalism  of  the  late  eight¬ 
eenth  and  early  nineteenth  centuries  was  the  triumph  of  the 
Stoic-Christian  strain  of  thought.  In  Hume’s  criticism  of 
the  doctrine  of  the  soul,  in  the  breakdown  of  pure  unmiti¬ 
gated  competitive  individualism  as  a  practical  working 
system,  in  the  Malthusian  doctrine  of  the  pressure  of  poou- 
lation  on  the  means  of  subsistence,  in  the  scientific  doctrine 
of  the  elimination  of  the  unfit  as  the  engine  of  prog¬ 
ress,  in  the  Galtonian  and  Mendelian  doctrines  of  heredity, 
in  the  rejection  of  the  Lamarckian  doctrine  that  usage  can 
raise  the  standard  of  fitness— in  the  concurrence  of  all 
these  strands  of  thought  the  liberalism  of  the  early  nine¬ 
teenth  century  lost  its  security  of  intellectual  justification. 

Section  VI.  There  are  two  intellectual  movements  to 
be  set  on  the  other  side  of  the  account.  One  is  Jeremy  Bent- 
ham’s  legal  reformation  based  on  the  Utilitarian  Principle 
of  ‘The  Greatest  Happiness  of  The  Greatest  Number,’  the 
other  is  Auguste  Comte’s  ‘Religion  of  Humanity,’  that  is  to 
say,  Positivism.  M[ost  of  what  has  been  practically  effective, 
in  morals,  in  religion,  or  in  political  theory,  from  their 


44  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

day  to  this  has  derived  strength  from  one  or  other  of  these 
men.  Their  doctrines  have  been  largely  repudiated  as  the¬ 
oretical  foundations,  but  as  practical  working  principles 
they  dominate  the  world.  On  the  whole,  their  influence  has 
been  democratic.  They  have  swept  away  mysterious  claims 
of  privileged  orders  of  men,  based  on  mystical  intuitions 
originated  by  religion  or  philosophy.  They  carried  back  to 
the  Roman  Stoic  lawyers,  though  they  repudiated  the  ulti¬ 
mate  metaphysical  doctrines  of  Stoicism.  They  were  in 
effect  a  resurrection  of  this  Stoic  legal  movement,  but  de¬ 
void  of  its  intellectual  grandeur.  From  another  point  of 
view,  they  recurred  to  the  scientific  revolt  against  meta¬ 
physics,  led  by  Newton,  in  the  seventeenth  century.  They 
extended  this  revolt  to  moral  and  political  theory. 

For  two  thousand  years,  Platonic  philosophic  theories 
and  Christian  intuitions  had  furnished  the  intellectual  jus¬ 
tification  for  the  slow  growth  in  Western  Europe  of  emo¬ 
tions  of  respect  and  friendliness  between  man  and  man— 
the  notion  of  brotherhood.  These  emotions  are  at  the  basis 
of  all  social  groups.  As  relatively  blind  emotions  they  must 
pervade  animal  society,  namely,  the  urge  to  cooperate,  to 
help,  to  feed,  to  cherish,  to  play  together,  to  express  affec¬ 
tion.  Among  mankind  these  fundamental  feelings  reign 
with  great  strength  within  limited  societies.  But  the  range 
of  human  intelligence — its  very  foresight  as  to  dangers  and 
opportunities,  the  power  of  the  imaginative  entertaining  of 
differences  between  group  and  group,  of  their  divergencies 
of  habit  and  sentiment — this  range  of  intelligence  has  pro¬ 
duced  a  ferocity  of  inversion  of  this  very  sentiment  of  in¬ 
terracial  benevolence.  Mankind  is  distinguished  by  its 
strength  of  tribal  feeling,  and  conversely  it  is  also  dis¬ 
tinguished  by  far-reaching  malign  exploitation  and  inter¬ 
tribal  warfare.  Also  the  tribal  feeling  is  apt  to  be  chequered 
by  limitations  of  benevolence  to  special  sections  within 
the  boundary  of  the  same  community. 

For  two  thousand  years  philosophy  and  religion  had 
held  up  before  Western  Europe  the  ideal  figure  of  man,  as 
man,  and  had  claimed  for  it  a  supreme  worth.  Under  this 
urge,  Jesuits  had  gone  to  Patagonia,  John  Woolman  had 
denounced  slavery,  Tom  Paine  had  revolted  against  social 
oppression  and  against  the  doctrine  of  original  sin.  These 
Jesuits,  these  Quakers,  and  these  Freethinkers  differed 
among  themselves.  But  they  owed  their  emotions  towards 


MAN'S  PROGRESS 


Here  is  an  exciting  intellectual  adventure  conducted 
by  Alfred  North  Whitehead,  the  philosopher  who 
has  been  called  one  of  the  greatest  minds  of  the 
20th  century.  Beautifully  written  and  lucidly  ex¬ 
pressed,  this  book  interprets  the  history  of  civiliza¬ 
tion  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  great  ideas  which 
have  advanced  humanity. 

Professor  Whitehead  points  out  how  vital  and 
revolutionary  changes  in  ideas  alter  the  actual  basic 
conditions  of  society.  He  cites,  as  an  example, 
human  slavery  which  the  ancients  considered  an 
inescapable  premise  of  civilization  and  which  has 
now  been  rejected  by  modem  man.  In  the  four  main 
sections  of  this  book,  he  explains  how  the  leaven 
of  ideas  works  on  society,  in  religion  and  philosophy, 
and  finally  with  the  human  spirit  desiring  perfection. 

Unusual  in  scope  and  bold  in  its  presentation, 
Adventures  of  Ideas  is  a  book  of  tremendous  im¬ 
portance  to  everyone  interested  in  man's  future. 

“It  is  one  of  the  most  refreshing  adventures  I 
know.9’ — N,Y.  World  Telegram 

“Not  only  a  masterpiece  of  survey  and  observa¬ 
tion,  but  a  treatise  which  may  herald  a  new  era 
in  philosophic  thought." — Milwaukee  Journal 

“Stimulating  ideas  and  brilliant  prose  •  .  .  im¬ 
portant  and  elevating  book." — Commonweal 


THIS  IS  A  REPRINT  OF  THE  ORIGINAL  HARDCOVER  EDI¬ 
TION  PUBLISHED  BY  THE  MACMILLAN  COMPANY. 


Other  MENTOR  Books  You  Will  Enjoy 


The  Aims  of  Education  by  Alfred  North  Whitehead 
One  of  the  great  modern  philosophers  explains  his 
theory  that  education  should  stimulate  inquiry  into 
parallel  fields.  (#M41— 350) 

Science  and  the  Modern  World  by  Alfred  North 
Whitehead 

A  penetrating  study  of  the  influence  of  four  centuries 
of  scientific  thought  on  civilization.  (#M28 — 350) 

The  Ace  of  Analysis:  20th  Century  Philosophers 
Selected  and  Edited  by  Morton  White 
The  philosophy  of  our  day,  in  all  its  complexity  and 
diversity,  embodied  in  the  writings  of  leading  20th 
Century  philosophers  in  the  fields  of  logic,  existen¬ 
tialism,  philosophical  and  linguistic  analysis,  and 
clearly  interpreted  by  Morton  White  of  the  Depart¬ 
ment  of  Philosophy,  Harvard.  (#MD142 — 500) 

Reconstruction  in  Philosophy  by  John  Dewey 
An  outstanding  American  thinker  outlines  his  phi¬ 
losophy  of  experience  and  how  it  can  be  integrated 
with  contemporary  life.  (#M53 — 350) 

Philosophy  in  a  New  Key  by  Susanne  K.  Longer 
A  study  of  the  symbolism  of  reason,  rite  and  art,  in 
clear,  readable  style.  (#M25 — 350) 

To  Our  Readers 

We  welcome  your  comments  about  Signet,  Signet  Key, 
and  Mentor  books,  as  well  as  your  suggestions  for  new 
reprints.  If  your  dealer  does  not  have  the  books  you  want, 
you  may  order  them  by  mail,  enclosing  the  list  price  plus 
50  a  copy  to  cover  mailing  costs.  Send  for  a  copy  of  our 
complete  catalog.  The  New  American  Library  of  World 
Literature,  Inc.,  501  Madison  Ave.,  New  York  22,  N.  Y. 


C-P.S, 


CE> 

53 


by 

Alfred  North  Whitehead 


A  MENTOR  BOOK 
Published  by  THE  NEW  AMERICAN  LIBRARY 


Copyright,  1933,  by  the  Macmillan  Company 

All  rights  reserved.  No  part  of  this  book  may 
be  reproduced  in  any  form  without  permission 
in  writing  from  the  publisher,  except  by  a 
reviewer  who  wishes  to  quote  brief  passages 
in  connection  with  a  review  written  for 
inclusion  in  magazine  or  newspaper. 


Published  as  a  MENTOR  BOOK 
By  Arrangement  with  the  Macmillan  Company 


First  Printing,  August,  1955 


MENTOR  BOOKS  are  published  by 
The  New  American  Library  of  World  Literature,  Inc. 
501  Madison  Avenue ,  New  York  22,  New  York 


PRINTED  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  OF  AMERICA 


Contents 


Preface,  vh 

Part  One:  SOCIOLOGICAL 

1.  Introduction,  11 

2.  The  Human  Soul,  17 

3.  The  Humanitarian  Ideal,  33 

4.  Aspects  of  Freedom,  50 

5.  From  Force  to  Persuasion,  75 

6.  Foresight,  93 
Epilogue,  106 

Part  Two:  COSMOLOGICAL 

7.  Laws  of  Nature,  107 

8.  Cosmologies,  123 

9.  Science  and  Philosophy,  143 

10.  The  New  Reformation,  163 

Part  Three:  PHILOSOPHICAL 

11.  Objects  and  Subjects,  177 

12.  Past,  Present,  Future,  193 

13.  The  Grouping  of  Occasions,  202 

14.  Appearance  and  Reality,  210 

15.  Philosophic  Method,  221 

Part  Four:  CIVILIZATION 

16.  Truth,  240 

17.  Beauty,  251 

16.  Truth  a  in  S'  Beaut-  264 

19.  Adventure,  272 

20.  Peace,  282 

Index  of  Proper  Names,  296 
Index  of  Terms,  298 


part  one  Sociological 


1.  Introduction 

Section  I.  In  its  widest  possible  extension  the  title  of  this 
book — Adventure  of  Ideas — might  be  taken  as  a  syno¬ 
nym  for  The  History  of  The  Human  Race,  in  respect  to  its 
wide  variety  of  mental  experiences.  In  this  sense  of  the 
title,  the  Human  Race  must  experience  its  own  history.  It 
cannot  be  written  in  its  total  variety. 

Throughout  this  book  I  propose  to  consider  critically 
the  sort  of  history  which  ideas  can  have  in  the  life  of  hu¬ 
manity,  and  to  illustrate  my  thesis  by  an  appeal  to  some 
well-known  examples.  The  particular  topics  chosen  for  il¬ 
lustration  will  be  dictated  by  the  arbitrary  limitations  of 
my  own  knowledge,  and  by  the  consideration  of  their  gen¬ 
eral  interest  and  importance  in  our  modern  life.  Also  for 
our  purpose  in  the  book  the  notion  of  History  includes  the 
present  and  the  future  together  with  the  past,  affording 
a  mutual  elucidation  and  wrapped  in  common  interest. 
For  the  facts  in  detail  we  shall  be  dependent  upon  that 
great  band  of  critical  scholars  whose  labours  today,  and 
for  the  past  three  centuries,  lay  upon  mankind  the  obliga¬ 
tion  to  deepest  reverence. 

Theories  are  built  upon  facts;  and  conversely  the  re¬ 
ports  upon  facts  are  shot  through  and  through  with  theo¬ 
retical  interpretation.  Direct  visual  observation  is  concerned 
with  the  vision  of  coloured  shapes  in  motion — ‘question¬ 
able  shapes.’  Direct  aural  observation  is  concerned  with 
auditions  of  sounds.  But  some  contemporary  observer  of 
such  shapes  and  noises,  for  example,  some  envoy  resident 
at  a  foreign  Court,  interpreting  the  so-called  ‘bare’  facts, 
states  that  ‘he  interviewed  the  minister  of  state,  who  mani- 

11 


12  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

fested  considerable  emotion  and  explained  with  great  clear¬ 
ness  the  measures  with  which  he  would  meet  the  impending 
crisis.’  In  such  ways  contemporary  evidence  is  contempo¬ 
rary  interpretation,  including  the  assumption  of  data  other 
than  these  bare  sensa. 

In  some  subsequent  age  the  critical  scholar  in  accord¬ 
ance  with  his  own  theoretical  judgments  selects  from 
bygone  contemporary  observations:  he  criticizes  the  con¬ 
temporary  observers,  and  gives  his  own  interpretations  of 
the  contemporary  evidence.  We  thus  arrive  as  ‘pure  his¬ 
tory,’  according  to  the  faith  of  the  school  of  history  preva¬ 
lent  in  the  latter  part  of  the  nineteenth  century.  This 
notion  of  historians,  of  history  devoid  of  aesthetic  prejudice, 
of  history  devoid  of  any  reliance  on  metaphysical  princi¬ 
ples  and  cosmological  generalizations,  is  a  figment  of  the 
imagination.  The  belief  in  it  can  only  occur  to  minds 
steeped  in  provinciality — the  provinciality  of  an  epoch,  of 
a  race,  of  a  school  of  learning,  of  a  trend  of  interest — 
minds  unable  to  divine  their  own  unspoken  limitations. 

The  historian  in  his  description  of  the  past  depends  on 
his  own  judgment  as  to  what  constitutes  the  importance 
of  human  life.  Even  when  he  has  rigorously  confined  him¬ 
self  to  one  selected  aspect,  political  or  cultural,  he  still 
depends  on  some  decision  as  to  what  constitutes  the  cul¬ 
mination  of  that  phase  of  human  experience  and  as  to 
what  constitutes  its  degradation.  For  example,  consider¬ 
ing  the  political  history  of  mankind,  Hegel  saw  in  the 
Prussian  State  of  his  date  its  culmination:  a  generation 
later  Macaulay  saw  that  culmination  in  the  English  con¬ 
stitutional  system  of  his  date.  The  whole  judgment  on 
thoughts  and  actions  depends  upon  such  implicit  presup¬ 
positions.  You  cannot  consider  wisdom  or  folly,  progress 
or  decadence,  except  in  relation  to  some  standard  of  judg¬ 
ment,  some  end  in  view.  Such  standards,  such  ends,  when 
widely  diffused,  constitute  the  driving  force  of  ideas  in  the 
history  of  mankind.  They  also  guide  the  composition  of 
historical  narrative. 

In  considering  the  history  of  ideas,  I  maintain  that  the 
notion  of  ‘mere  knowledge’  is  a  high  abstraction  which  we 
should  dismiss  from  our  minds.  Knowledge  is  always  ac¬ 
companied  with  accessories  of  emotion  and  purpose.  Also 
we  must  remember  that  there  are  grades  in  the  generality 
of  ideas.  Thus  a  general  idea  occurs  in  history  in  special 


Introduction  13 


forms  determined  by  peculiar  circumstances  of  race  and  of 
stage  of  civilization.  The  higher  generalities  rarely  receive 
any  accurate  verbal  expression.  They  are  hinted  at  through 
their  special  forms  appropriate  to  the  age  in  question.  Also 
the  emotional  accompaniments  are  partly  due  to  the  vague 
feeling  of  importance  derived  from  the  superior  generality, 
and  partly  due  to  the  special  interest  of  special  forms  in 
which  generalities  make  their  appearance.  Some  people  are 
stirred  by  a  flag,  a  national  anthem;  others  by  the  vague 
feeling  of  the  form  of  civilization  which  their  country 
stands  for.  In  most  people  the  two  origins  of  emotion  are 
fused  together. 

Gibbon’s  history  demonstrates  a  twofold  tale.  It  tells  of 
the  Decline  and  Fall  of  the  Roman  Empire  through  a  thou¬ 
sand  years.  We  see  the  greatness  of  that  Empire  at  its 
height,  its  military  organization,  its  provincial  administra¬ 
tion,  its  welter  of  races,  the  rise  and  clash  of  two  religions, 
the  passage  of  Greek  philosophy  into  Christian  theology. 
Gibbon  displays  before  us  the  greatness  and  the  littleness 
of  soldiers  and  of  statesmen,  of  philosophers  and  of  priests, 
the  pathos,  the  heroism,  the  grossness  of  the  general  multi¬ 
tude  of  humanity.  He  shows  us  the  happiness  of  mankind 
and  the  horrors  which  it  has  endured. 

But  throughout  this  history,  it  is  Gibbon  who  speaks. 
He  was  the  incarnation  of  the  dominant  spirit  of  his  own 
times.  In  this  way  his  volumes  also  tell  another  tale.  They 
are  a  record  of  the  mentality  of  the  eighteenth  century. 
They  are  at  once  a  detailed  history  of  the  Roman  Empire, 
and  a  demonstration  of  the  general  ideas  of  the  silver  age 
of  the  modern  European  Renaissance.  This  silver  age,  like 
its  Roman  counterpart  seventeen  hundred  years  earlier, 
was  oblivious  of  its  own  imminent  destruction  by  the  im¬ 
pact  of  the  Age  of  Steam  and  of  Democracy,  the  counter¬ 
parts  of  the  Barbarians  and  of  the  Christians.  Thus  Gibbon 
narrates  the  Decline  and  Fall  of  the  Roman  Empire  and 
exemplifies  the  prelude  to  the  Decline  and  Fall  of  his  own 
type  of  culture. 

Section  II.  The  history  of  ideas  is  dominated  by  a  di¬ 
chotomy  which  is  illustrated  by  this  comparison  of  Steam 
and  Democracy  in  recent  times  to  Barbarians  and  Chris¬ 
tians  in  the  classical  civilization.  Steam  and  Barbarians, 
each  in  their  own  age,  were  the  senseless  agencies  driving 
their  respective  civilizations  away  from  inherited  modes 


14  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

of  order.  These  senseless  agencies  are  what  Greek  writers 
sometimes  [  e.g .  in  the  Timceus  of  Plato,  and  passim 
throughout  general  literature]  call  ‘compulsion’  [avdyxn], 
and  sometimes  ‘violence’  [Bto].  They  are  apt  to  speak  of 
‘compulsion’  when  these  agencies  appear  with  a  general 
coordination  among  themselves,  and  of  ‘violence’  when 
they  appear  as  a  welter  of  sporadic  outbursts.  It  is  one 
task  of  history  to  display  the  types  of  compulsion  and  of 
violence  characteristic  of  each  age.  On  the  other  hand, 
Democracy  in  modem  times,  and  Christianity  in  the  Ro¬ 
man  Empire,  exemplify  articulated  beliefs  issuing  from 
aspirations,  and  issuing  into  aspirations.  Their  force  was 
that  of  consciously  formulated  ideals  at  odds  with  the  an¬ 
cestral  pieties  which  had  preserved  and  modulated  exist¬ 
ing  social  institutions.  For  example,  we  find  the  Christian 
theologian,  Clement  of  Alexandria,  exhorting  his  con¬ 
temporaries  to  shun  custom  [arvvq veia\.  These  Christian 
ideals  were  among  the  persuasive  agencies  refashioning 
their  respective  ages. 

The  well-marked  transition  from  one  age  into  another 
can  always  be  traced  to  some  analogues  to  Steam  and 
Democracy,  or — if  you  prefer  it — to  some  analogues  to 
Barbarians  and  Christians.  Senseless  agencies  and  formu¬ 
lated  aspirations  cooperate  in  the  work  of  driving  mankind 
from  its  old  anchorage.  Sometimes  the  period  of  change  is 
an  age  of  hope,  sometimes  it  is  an  age  of  despair.  When 
mankind  has  slipped  its  cables,  sometimes  it  is  bent  on  the 
discovery  of  a  New  World,  and  sometimes  it  is  haunted  by 
the  dim  sound  of  the  breakers  dashing  on  the  rocks  ahead. 
The  Fall  of  the  Roman  Empire  occurred  in  a  prolonged 
age  of  despair:  Steam  and  Democracy  belong  to  an  age 
of  hope. 

It  is  easy  to  exaggerate  the  contrast  between  these  two 
kinds  of  ages  of  transition.  It  all  depends  upon  the  sur¬ 
viving  records.  Whose  feelings  do  they  express?  After  all, 
even  during  the  worst  period  of  the  decline  of  Rome  the 
barbarians  were  enjoying  themselves.  To  Attila  and  his 
hordes  their  incursion  into  Europe  was  an  enjoyable  epi¬ 
sode  diversifying  the  monotonous  round  of  a  pastoral  life. 
But  we  have  preserved  for  us  hymns  and  ejaculations  of 
sentinels  in  North  Italian  towns  as  they  paced  the  walls 
amid  the  gathering  gloom  of  a  winter’s  night: — ‘From  the 
fury  of  the  Huns,  Good  Lord  deliver  us.’  In  this  instance 


Introduction  15 


it  seems  easy  to  discriminate;  barbarism  and  civilization 
were  at  odds  with  each  other,  and  we  stand  for  civilization. 
I  waive  the  point  that  we  now  know  something  about  the 
social  state  of  central  Asia  at  that  epoch,  and  that  the 
imagination  of  a  sentinel  on  the  walls  of  Padua  or  Aquileia 
was  not  quite  adequate  in  its  presentation  of  the  Huns. 

In  every  age  of  well-marked  transition  there  is  the  pat¬ 
tern  of  habitual  dumb  practice  and  emotion  which  is  pass¬ 
ing,  and  there  is  oncoming  of  a  new  complex  of  habit. 
Between  the  two  lies  a  zone  of  anarchy,  either  a  passing 
danger  or  a  prolonged  welter  involving  misery  of  decay 
and  zest  of  young  life.  In  our  estimate  of  these  agencies 
everything  depends  upon  our  standpoint  of  criticism.  In 
other  words,  our  history  of  ideas  is  derivative  from  our 
ideas  of  history,  that  is  to  say,  upon  our  own  intellectual 
standpoint. 

Mankind  is  not  wholly  dumb,  and  in  this  respect  it  dif¬ 
fers  from  other  races  of  animals.  Yet  in  the  history  of  the 
world  of  animals  even  among  the  ancestors  of  men,  there 
have  been  transitions  of  patterns  of  habit  which  exemplify 
a  history  of  forms  of  behaviour  devoid  of  any  contempo¬ 
rary  intellectual  expression,  either  in  the  form  of  ante¬ 
cedently  expressed  purpose  or  in  the  form  of  subsequently 
expressed  reflection.  For  example,  at  a  remote  period 
urged  by  the  growth  of  forests  some  mammals  ascended 
trees  and  became  apes;  and  then  later,  after  the  lapse  of 
some  vast  period,  urged  by  the  decay  of  forests,  the  same 
race  descended  from  trees  and  became  men. 

We  have  here  history  on  its  senseless  side,  with  its  tran¬ 
sitions  pushed  forward  either  by  rainfall  and  trees,  or  by 
brute  barbarians,  or  by  coal,  steam,  electricity  and  oil.  Yet 
even  the  senseless  side  of  history  refuses  to  accept  its  own 
proper  category  of  sheer  senselessness.  The  rainfall  and  the 
trees  are  items  in  a  majestic  order  of  nature:  Attila’s  Huns 
had  their  own  intellectual  point  of  view  in  some  respects 
surprisingly  preferable  to  that  of  the  degenerate  Romans: 
the  age  of  coal  and  steam  was  pierced  through  and  through 
by  the  intellectual  abilities  of  particular  men  who  urged 
forward  the  transition.  But  finally,  with  all  this  qualifica¬ 
tion,  rainfall  and  Huns  and  steam-engines  represent  brute 
necessity,  as  conceived  in  Greek  thought,  urging  forward 
mankind  apart  from  any  human  conception  of  an  end  in¬ 
tellectually  expressed.  Fragmentary  intellectual  agencies 


16  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

cooperated  blindly  to  turn  apes  into  men,  to  turn  the 
classic  civilization  into  mediaeval  Europe,  to  overwhelm 
the  Renaissance  by  the  Industrial  Revolution.  Men  knew 
not  what  they  did. 

Section  III.  The  fragment  of  human  history,  upon  which 
this  book  is  concentrated,  is  concerned  with  the  trans¬ 
mission  of  civilization  from  the  Near  East  to  Western 
Europe.  The  topic  is  limited  to  the  story  of  the  energizing 
of  two  or  three  main  ideas,  whose  effective  entertainment 
constitutes  civilization.  These  ideas  are  traced  in  outline 
from  their  status  in  the  ancient  world  of  the  Near  East 
up  to  the  present  time.  The  boundaries  of  a  civilization  are 
indefinite,  whether  we  are  speaking  of  geography  or  of 
time,  or  of  essential  character.  This  vagueness  more  espe¬ 
cially  characterizes  the  eastern  boundaries  of  Western 
Europe,  and  the  boundaries  of  the  Near  East.  Also  these 
boundaries  fluctuate  as  the  centuries  pass.  In  its  latest 
phase  of  brilliance  the  Near  East  touched  the  Atlantic 
Ocean.  But  during  its  earlier  period  of  greatness,  before 
the  age  of  the  Greeks,  it  stretched  from  the  Nile  Valley  to 
Mesopotamia,  and  from  the  Indian  Ocean  to  the  Euxine 
and  the  Caspian  Seas.  It  also  penetrated  into  the  ^Egean 
Basin,  and  later  into  the  Western  Mediterranean.  But  the 
Near  East  is  only  important  for  this  discussion  in  its  func¬ 
tion  of  the  origin  and  the  background  of  modem  Europe. 

The  whole  point  of  the  present  enquiry  is  to  demonstrate 
those  factors  in  Western  civilization  which  jointly  constitute 
a  new  element  in  the  history  of  culture.  Of  course  no 
novelty  is  wholly  novel.  Factors  which  were  present  spo¬ 
radically  and  as  the  dreams  of  individuals,  or  as  a  faint 
tinge  upon  other  modes  of  mentality,  received  a  new  im¬ 
portance  in  the  later  civilization  of  Europe.  The  question 
is  to  understand  how  the  shift  of  emphasis  happened,  and 
to  recognize  the  effects  of  this  shift  upon  the  sociology  of 
the  Western  World.  In  this  way  we  obtain  some  presup¬ 
positions  of  thought  which  the  detailed  criticism  of  modem 
sociological  development  requires.  We  can  then  discern  the 
status  of  the  impulses  which  are  driving  forward  the 
World  of  mankind. 

In  the  story  of  this  transmission  of  civilization  from 
East  to  West,  the  Hebrew,  the  Hellenic,  and  the  Hellenistic 
epochs  can,  with  equal  reason,  be  considered  together, 
either  as  outposts  of  the  Near  East  in  the  process  of  dif- 


The  Human  Soul  17 

ferentiating  itself  into  the  first  phase  of  European  mental¬ 
ity,  or  as  the  earliest  groups  of  Europeans  to  receive  the 
torch  and  successfully  to  assert  their  spiritual  independence. 
Between  them,  the  Hebrews  and  the  Greeks  introduced 
into  Europe,  and  into  the  latest  phase  of  the  Near  East,  no¬ 
tions  concerning  the  status  of  mankind  in  general,  and  of 
individual  men  in  particular,  and  a  discipline  and  direction 
in  the  general  exercise  of  mentality,  which  in  their  com¬ 
bination  have  started  the  modem  phase  of  progress  within 
the  European  races.  The  first  part  of  this  book  is  occupied 
with  the  most  general  aspect  of  the  sociological  functions 
arising  from,  and  issuing  into,  ideas  concerning  the  human 
race;  and  the  second  part  is  concerned  with  modern  cos¬ 
mological  principles  which  also  are  the  outcome  of  ancient 
Greek  and  Hebrew  thought.  A  simple-minded  interest  in 
ideas  with  one  or  other  of  these  two  types  of  generality 
is  the  main  source  from  which  mankind  acquires  novelty 
of  outlook. 


2.  The  Human  Soul 

Section  I.  In  any  human  society,  one  fundamental  idea 
tingeing  every  detail  of  activity  is  the  general  conception 
of  the  status  of  the  individual  members  of  that  group,  con¬ 
sidered  apart  from  any  special  preeminence.  In  such 
societies  as  they  emerge  into  civilization,  the  members 
recognize  each  other  as  individuals  exercising  the  enjoy¬ 
ment  of  emotions,  passions,  comforts  and  discomforts, 
perceptions,  hopes,  fears,  and  purposes.  Also  there  are 
powers  of  intellectual  understanding  involving  discrimina¬ 
tion  of  details  of  characters,  judgments  of  ‘true  or  false,’ 
and  of  ‘beautiful  or  ugly,’  and  of  ‘good  or  bad.’  We  pass 
our  lives  vaguely  and  flittingly  entertaining  groups  of  such 
experiences,  and  we  attribute  like  ways  of  existence  to 
others. 

But  in  the  early  stages  of  civilization  such  experiences 
and  beliefs  are  mere  matters  of  course.  They  provoke  no 
abrupt  reflective  reaction  isolating  them  for  thoughtful 
inspection.  Accordingly  there  is  no  modification  of  habit 


18  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

arising  from  the  valuation  of  human  beings  as  such.  Thus 
the  various  members  of  a  society  find  themselves  cherish¬ 
ing  each  other,  destroying,  obeying  or  commanding,  as  the 
case  may  be.  There  is  a  communal  organization,  and  there 
are  beliefs  about  it  slowly  forming  themselves  into  ex¬ 
planations. 

We  are  to  discuss  the  later  phases  when  civilization  has 
reached  its  modern  height,  a  period  of  three  thousand  years 
at  the  most.  Thinkers  have  now  arisen.  The  notion  of  duty 
has  dawned  and  received  some  definition.  Above  all  the 
notion  of  a  psyche — that  is,  of  a  mind — has  dawned.  In 
its  first  phase  of  gradual  emergence,  this  great  notion  was 
instinctively  used  as  a  master-key  to  make  intelligible  the 
baffling  occurrences  of  nature.  The  two  most  obvious 
characteristics  of  Nature,  writes  Lytton  Strachey,1  are 
loveliness  and  power.  The  beauty  dawned  later  upon 
human  intelligences  than  did  its  power.  Also  in  early  phases 
of  thought  the  powers  of  nature  became  the  minds  of 
Nature — minds  bestial,  ruthless,  and  yet  placable.  In  all 
stages  of  civilization  the  popular  gods  represent  the  more 
primitive  brutalities  of  the  tribal  life.  The  progress  of 
religion  is  defined  by  the  denunciation  of  gods.  The  key¬ 
note  of  idolatry  is  contentment  with  the  prevalent  gods. 

The  factor  in  human  life  provocative  of  a  noble  dis¬ 
content  is  the  gradual  emergence  into  prominence  of  a 
sense  of  criticism,  founded  upon  appreciations  of  beauty, 
and  of  intellectual  distinction,  and  of  duty.  The  moral 
element  is  derivative  from  the  other  factors  in  experience. 
For  otherwise  there  is  no  content  for  duty  to  operate  upon. 
There  can  be  no  mere  morality  in  a  vacuum.  Thus  the 
primary  factors  in  experience  are  first  the  animal  passions 
such  as  love,  sympathy,  ferocity,  together  with  analogous 
appetitions  and  satisfactions;  and  secondly,  the  more 
distinctly  human  experiences  of  beauty,  and  of  intellectual 
fineness,  consciously  enjoyed.  Here  the  notion  of  intel¬ 
lectual  distinction,  or  of  fineness,  is  somewhat  broader  than 
that  of  ‘truth,’  which  is  ordinarily  cited  in  this  connection. 
There  is  a  grandeur  of  achievement  in  the  delicate  adjust¬ 
ment  of  thought  to  thought,  which  is  independent  of  the 
mere  blunt  question  of  truth.  We  may  term  it  ‘beauty.’  But 
intellectual  beauty,  however  capable  of  being  hymned  in 


1  Cf.  Books  and  Characters,  Chapter  on  ‘The  Poetry  of  Blake*. 


The  Human  Soul  19 

terms  relevant  to  sensible  beauty,  is  yet  beautiful  by 
stretch  of  metaphor.  The  same  consideration  applies  to 
moral  beauty.  All  three  types  of  character  partake  in  the 
highest  ideal  of  satisfaction  possible  for  actual  realization, 
and  in  this  sense  can  be  termed  that  beauty  which  provides 
the  final  contentment  for  the  Eros  of  the  Universe. 

For  European  thought,  the  effective  expression  of  this 
critical  discontent,  which  is  the  gadfly  of  civilization,  has 
been  provided  by  Hebrew  and  Greek  thought.  Its  most 
adequate  expression,  so  far  as  concerns  literary  delicacy 
and  definition  of  the  issues  involved,  is  to  be  found  in 
Plato’s  Dialogues.  We  there  find  him  criticizing  the  cus¬ 
tomary  gods  of  the  poets — indeed  he  would  banish  all 
poets — and  analyzing  the  capacities  latent  in  the  human 
soul.  The  religion  of  Plato  is  founded  on  his  conception  of 
what  a  God  can  be,  with  gaze  fixed  upon  forms  of  eternal 
beauty;  and  his  sociology  is  derived  from  his  conception 
of  what  man  can  be,  in  virtue  of  a  nature,  which  for  its 
full  description  requires  terms  applicable  to  the  nature  of 
gods.  Between  them,  the  Hebrews  and  the  Greeks  provided 
a  program  for  discontent.  But  the  value  of  their  discontent 
lies  in  the  hope  which  never  deserted  their  glimpses  of 
perfection. 

Section  II.  The  intellectual  agencies  involved  in  the 
modification  of  epochs  are  the  proper  subject  of  this  book. 
When  we  examine  them  we  find  a  rough  division  into  two 
types,  one  of  general  ideas,  the  other  of  highly  specialized 
notions.  Among  the  former,  there  are  the  ideas  of  high 
generality  expressing  conceptions  of  the  nature  of  things, 
of  the  possibilities  of  human  society,  of  the  final  aim  which 
should  guide  the  conduct  of  individual  men.  In  each  age  of 
the  world  distinguished  by  high  activity  there  will  be 
found  at  its  culmination,  and  among  the  agencies  leading 
to  that  culmination,  some  profound  cosmological  outlook, 
implicitly  accepted,  impressing  its  own  type  upon  the 
current  springs  of  action.  This  ultimate  cosmology  is  only 
partly  expressed,  and  the  details  of  such  expression  issue 
into  derivative  specialized  questions  of  violent  controversy. 
The  intellectual  strife  of  an  age  is  mainly  concerned  with 
these  latter  questions  of  secondary  generality  which  con¬ 
ceal  a  general  agreement  upon  first  principles  almost  too 
obvious  to  need  expression,  and  almost  too  general  to  be 
capable  of  expression.  In  each  period  there  is  a  general 


20  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

form  of  the  forms  of  thought;  and,  like  the  air  we  breathe, 
such  a  form  is  so  translucent,  and  so  pervading,  and  so 
seemingly  necessary,  that  only  by  extreme  effort  can  we 
become  aware  of  it. 

In  order  to  find  an  example  capable  of  ready  expression, 
we  must  descend  below  the  utmost  generality.  In  the 
region  of  political  theory,  consider  the  divergence  of  out¬ 
look  in  the  classical  Mediterranean  civilization.  Think  of 
the  differences  between  Pericles  and  Cleon,  Plato  and 
Alexander  the  Great,  Marius  and  Sulla,  Cicero  and  Caesar. 
Yet  they  all  agreed  in  one  fundamental  notion  which  lies 
at  the  base  of  all  political  theory.  Throughout  the  Hellenic 
and  Hellenistic  Roman  civilizations — those  civilizations 
which  we  term  ‘classical’ — it  was  universally  assumed 
that  a  large  slave  population  was  required  to  perform 
services  which  were  unworthy  to  engage  the  activities  of  a 
fully  civilized  man.  In  other  words  in  that  epoch  a  civilized 
community  could  not  be  self-sustaining.  A  comparatively 
barbarous  substratum  had  to  be  interwoven  in  the  social 
structure,  so  as  to  sustain  the  civilized  apex.  This  assump¬ 
tion  that  a  complex  urban  civilization  requires  a  base  of 
slavery  was  so  universal,  both  in  practice  and  in  implicit 
presuppositions,  that  we  may  assume  it  to  be  derived 
from  some  well-founded  reason  in  the  conditions  per¬ 
mitting  the  formation  of  the  earlier  phases  of  civilized  life. 
The  Egyptians  wanted  bricks,  so  they  captured  the 
Hebrews.  The  confusion  of  tongues  associated  with  the 
tower  of  Babel  may  be  historically  doubtful  in  the  form  of 
the  surviving  legend:  it  is  at  least  well-found  as  a  reference 
to  the  confusion  of  races  amid  the  slave  populations 
supplying  the  mechanized  man-power  for  the  building  of 
cities. 

Now  in  respect  to  the  political  factions  of  the  ancient 
world  nothing  has  yet  been  settled.  Every  problem  which 
Plato  discusses  is  still  alive  today.  Yet  there  is  a  vast 
difference  between  ancient  and  modem  political  theories. 
For  we  differ  from  the  ancients  on  the  one  premise  on 
which  they  were  all  agreed.  Slavery  was  the  presupposition 
of  political  theorists  then;  Freedom  is  the  presupposition 
of  political  theorists  now.  In  those  days  the  penetrating 
minds  found  a  difficulty  in  reconciling  their  doctrine  of 
slavery  to  certain  plain  facts  of  moral  feeling  and  of 
sociological  practice;  and  in  these  days  our  sociological 


The  Human  Soul  21 

speculations  find  a  difficulty  in  reconciling  our  doctrine 
of  freedom  to  another  group  of  plain  facts,  perplexing, 
irreconcilable,  only  to  be  conceived  as  a  hateful  brute 
necessity.  Yet,  when  all  such  qualifications  have  been 
made,  Freedom  and  Equality  constitute  an  inevitable 
presupposition  for  modern  political  thought,  with  an 
admixture  of  subsequent  lame  qualification;  while  Slavery 
was  a  corresponding  presupposition  for  the  ancients,  with 
their  admixture  of  lame  qualification.  For  both  sets  of 
thinkers  God  has  been  a  great  resource:  a  lot  of  things, 
which  won’t  work  on  Earth,  can  be  conceived  as  true  in 
his  sight.  Ancients  and  Modems  in  respect  to  this  question 
face  in  directly  opposite  directions. 

Section  III.  This  growth  of  the  idea  of  the  essential 
rights  of  human  beings,  arising  from  their  sheer  humanity, 
affords  a  striking  example  in  the  history  of  ideas.  Its 
formation  and  its  effective  diffusion  can  be  reckoned  as  a 
triumph — a  chequered  triumph — of  the  later  phase  of 
civilization.  We  shall  find  out  how  general  ideas  arise  and 
are  diffused,  if  we  examine  the  sort  of  history  which 
belongs  to  this  particular  instance. 

The  great  classical  civilization  is  remarkable  for  two 
facts.  First,  it  constituted  a  culmination  of  slavery,  es¬ 
pecially  at  the  height  of  the  Roman  Empire.  At  that 
moment  slavery  reached  its  height,  in  necessity,  in  quan¬ 
tity,  in  horror,  and  in  danger.  In  earlier,  simpler  com¬ 
munities  slavery  may  have  been  conceived  as  an  accidental 
mercy,  a  favour  granted  to  a  few  fortunate  communities 
or  to  a  few  fortunate  individuals  within  any  community. 
But  for  a  thousand  years  of  the  classical  civilization,  to  be 
civilized  was  to  be  a  slave-owner.  Some  slave-owners  were 
kind,  some  were  brutal:  probably,  they  were  mostly 
mediocre.  In  Plato’s  Symposium  Agathon,  the  host,  is 
represented  with  a  uniform  well-bred  kindliness  both 
towards  his  slaves  and  his  guests.  Cicero  and  the  younger 
Pliny  exhibit  themselves  in  their  Letters  as  kindly  masters. 
But  on  the  whole  the  Roman  capitalists  with  their  vast 
estates  exemplify  the  necessity  for  ancient  civilization 
that  it  be  built  upon  iniquity.  Efficiency  spelt  Brutality. 
When  such  evils  culminate,  either  they  are  corrected  by 
the  introduction  of  some  new  principle,  or  they  destroy 
society.  In  the  case  of  the  classical  civilizations,  these 
alternatives  were  not  exclusive:  they  both  happened. 


22  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

We  now  come  to  the  second  fact  for  which  the  classical 
period  was  remarkable.  It  was  the  first  period  which 
introduced  moral  principles  forming  an  effective  criticism 
of  the  whole  system.  The  Athenians  were  slave-owners: 
but  they  seem  to  have  humanized  the  institution.  Plato 
was  an  aristocrat  by  birth  and  by  conviction,  also  he  must 
have  owned  slaves.  But  it  is  difficult  to  read  some  of  his 
Dialogues  without  an  uneasy  feeling  about  the  compulsory 
degradation  of  mankind.  Also  the  Stoic  lawyers  of  the 
Roman  Empire  introduced  a  legal  reformation  largely 
motivated  by  the  principle  that  human  nature  has  essential 
rights.  But  neither  the  humane  slave-owners,  nor  the  in¬ 
spired  Plato,  nor  the  clear-headed  lawyers,  initiated  any 
campaign  against  slavery.  They  accepted  it  as  a  matter  of 
course.  It  was  presupposed  in  the  very  structure  of  society; 
and  such  necessity  limits  the  scope  of  all  generalities. 
Distinctions  were  introduced,  the  sort  of  distinctions  which 
are  conclusive  so  long  as  you  know  that  in  practice  you 
have  got  to  accept  them. 

We  see  here  the  first  stage  of  the  introduction  of  great 
ideas.  They  start  as  speculative  suggestions  in  the  minds  of 
a  small,  gifted  group.  They  acquire  a  limited  application 
to  human  life  at  the  hands  of  various  sets  of  leaders  with 
special  functions  in  the  social  structure.  A  whole  literature 
arises  which  explains  how  inspiring  is  the  general  idea, 
and  how  slight  need  be  its  effect  in  disturbing  a  comfortable 
society.  Some  transition  has  been  produced  by  the  agency 
of  the  new  idea.  But  on  the  whole  the  social  system  has 
been  inoculated  against  the  full  infection  of  the  new 
principle.  It  takes  its  place  among  the  interesting  notions 
which  have  a  restricted  application. 

But  a  general  idea  is  always  a  danger  to  the  existing 
order.  The  whole  bundle  of  its  conceivable  special  embodi¬ 
ments  in  various  usages  of  society  constitutes  a  program 
of  reform.  At  any  moment  the  smouldering  unhappiness  of 
mankind  may  seize  on  some  such  program  and  initiate  a 
period  of  rapid  change  guided  by  the  light  of  its  doctrines. 
In  this  way,  the  conception  of  the  dignity  of  human  nature 
was  quietly  energizing  in  the  minds  of  Roman  officials, 
producing  somewhat  better  government  and  nerving  men 
like  Marcus  Aurelius  to  rise  to  the  height  of  their  appointed 
task.  It  was  a  worthy  moral  force,  but  society  had  been 
inoculated  against  its  revolutionary  application.  For  six 


The  Human  Soul  23 


hundred  years,  the  ideal  of  the  intellectual  and  moral 
grandeur  of  the  human  soul  had  haunted  the  ancient 
Mediterranean  world.  It  had  in  a  way  transformed  the 
moral  ideas  of  mankind:  it  had  readjusted  religions:  and 
yet  it  had  failed  to  close  with  the  basic  weakness  of  the 
civilization  in  which  it  flourished.  It  was  the  faint  light 
of  the  dawn  of  a  new  order  of  life. 

Section  IV.  In  the  midst  of  this  period  of  progress 
and  decadence,  Christianity  arose.  In  its  early  form  it  was 
a  religion  of  fierce  enthusiasm  and  of  impracticable  moral 
ideals.  Luckily  these  ideals  have  been  preserved  for  us  in 
a  literature  which  is  almost  contemporary  with  the  origin 
of  the  religion.  They  have  constituted  an  unrivalled  pro¬ 
gram  for  reform,  which  has  been  one  element  in  the 
evolution  of  Western  civilization.  The  progress  of  humanity 
can  be  defined  as  the  process  of  transforming  society  so 
as  to  make  the  original  Christian  ideals  increasingly  prac¬ 
ticable  for  its  individual  members.  As  society  is  now  con¬ 
stituted  a  literal  adherence  to  the  moral  precepts  scattered 
throughout  the  Gospels  would  mean  sudden  death. 

Christianity  rapidly  assimilated  the  Platonic  doctrine 
of  the  human  soul.  The  philosophy  and  the  religion  were 
very  congenial  to  each  other  in  their  respective  teachings; 
although,  as  was  natural,  the  religious  version  was  much 
more  specialized  than  the  philosophic  version.  We  have 
here  an  example  of  the  principle  that  dominates  the  history 
of  ideas.  There  will  be  a  general  idea  in  the  background 
flittingly,  waveringly,  realized  by  the  few  in  its  full 
generality — or  perhaps  never  expressed  in  any  adequate 
universal  form  with  persuasive  force.  Such  persuasive  ex¬ 
pression  depends  on  the  accidents  of  genius;  for  example, 
it  depends  on  the  chance  that  a  man  like  Plato  appears.  But 
this  general  idea,  whether  expressed  or  implicitly  just 
below  the  surface  of  consciousness,  embodies  itself  in 
special  expression  after  special  expression.  It  condescends 
so  as  to  lose  the  magnificence  of  its  generality,  but  it  gains 
in  the  force  of  its  peculiar  adaptation  to  the  concrete  cir¬ 
cumstances  of  a  particular  age.  It  is  a  hidden  driving 
force,  haunting  humanity,  and  ever  appearing  in  specialized 
guise  as  compulsory  on  action  by  reason  of  its  appeal  to 
the  uneasy  conscience  of  the  age.  The  force  of  the  appeal 
lies  in  the  fact  that  the  specialized  principle  of  immediate 
conduct  exemplifies  the  grandeur  of  the  wider  truth  arising 


24  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

from  the  very  nature  of  the  order  of  things,  a  truth  which 
mankind  has  grown  to  the  stature  of  being  able  to  feel 
though  perhaps  as  yet  unable  to  frame  in  fortunate 
expression. 

The  greatness  of  Christianity — the  greatness  of  any 
valuable  religion — consists  in  its  ‘interim  ethics.’  The 
founders  of  Christianity  and  their  earlier  followers  firmly 
believed  that  the  end  of  the  world  was  at  hand.  The  result 
was  that  with  passionate  earnestness  they  gave  free  reign 
to  their  absolute  ethical  intuitions  respecting  ideal  pos¬ 
sibilities  without  a  thought  of  the  preservation  of  society. 
The  crash  of  society  was  certain  and  imminent.  ‘Imprac¬ 
ticability’  was  a  word  which  had  lost  its  meaning;  or  rather, 
practical  good  sense  dictated  concentration  on  ultimate 
ideas.  The  last  things  had  arrived:  intermediate  stages  were 
of  no  account. 

This  consideration  was  of  more  influence  in  framing  the 
mentality  of  the  earlier  followers  than  in  the  initial  foun¬ 
dation  of  the  religion.  It  enabled  these  followers  to  transmit 
in  their  full  purity  the  primitive  notions.  But  the  religion 
arose  in  a  more  tranquil  atmosphere  although  highly 
sensitive  in  regard  to  religious  emotion,  and  with  some 
admixture  of  apocalyptic  belief.  The  Galilean  peasantry, 
having  regard  to  their  climate  and  simplicity  of  life,  were 
neither  rich  nor  poor:  they  were  unusually  intellectual  for 
a  peasantry,  by  reason  of  their  habits  of  study  of  historical 
and  religious  records:  they  were  protected  from  dis¬ 
turbance,  from  within  or  from  without,  by  the  guardian 
structure  of  the  Roman  Empire.  They  had  no  responsibility 
for  the  maintenance  of  this  complex  system.  Their  own 
society  was  of  the  simplest;  and  they  were  ignorant  of  the 
conditions  by  which  the  Empire  arose,  of  the  conditions 
requisite  for  its  efficiency,  and  of  the  conditions  necessary 
for  its  preservation.  They  were  ignorant  even  of  the  services 
which  the  Empire  was  rendering  them.  The  alternation  of 
procurators  was  like  that  of  the  seasons,  some  were  better 
and  some  were  worse;  but  all  alike,  seasons  and  procurators 
of  Judaea,  issued  from  an  inscrutable  order  of  things. 

The  tone  of  life  of  this  peasantry  provided  an  ideal 
environment  in  which  concepts  of  ideal  relations  between 
rational  beings  could  be  formulated — concepts  devoid  of 
ferocity,  concepts  gracious,  kindly,  and  shrewd,  concepts 
in  which  mercy  prevailed  over  judicial  classification.  In 


The  Human  Soul  25 


this  ideal  world  forgiveness  could  be  stretched  to  seventy 
times  seven,  whereas  in  the  real  world  of  the  Herods  and 
the  Roman  Empire  a  sevenfold  forgiveness  touched  upon 
the  impracticable.  But  the  Galilean  people  were  uncon¬ 
cerned  with  the  discipline  of  the  Roman  legions,  with  the 
imperial  inspection  of  the  doings  of  proconsuls,  and  with 
the  complexities  of  a  legal  system  which  was  to  impose  an 
order  upon  multitudinous  transactions,  stretching  from  the 
hills  of  Scotland  to  the  marshes  of  Mesopotamia.  A 
gracious,  simple  mode  of  life,  combined  with  a  fortunate 
ignorance,  endowed  mankind  with  its  most  precious  instru¬ 
ment  of  progress — the  impracticable  ethics  of  Christianity. 

A  standard  had  now  been  created,  expressed  in  concrete 
illustrations  foolproof  against  perversions.  This  standard 
is  a  gauge  by  which  to  test  the  defects  of  human  society. 
So  long  as  the  Galilean  images  are  but  the  dreams  of  an 
unrealized  world,  so  long  they  must  spread  the  infection 
of  an  uneasy  spirit. 

Section  V.  In  ethical  ideals  we  find  the  supreme 
example  of  consciously  formulated  ideas  acting  as  a  driving 
force  effecting  transitions  from  social  state  to  social  state. 
Such  ideas  are  at  once  gadflies  irritating,  and  beacons 
luring,  the  victims  among  whom  they  dwell.  The  conscious 
agency  of  such  ideas  should  be  contrasted  with  senseless 
forces,  floods,  barbarians,  and  mechanical  devices.  The 
great  transitions  are  due  to  a  coincidence  of  forces  derived 
from  both  sides  of  the  world,  its  physical  and  its  spiritual 
natures.  Mere  physical  nature  lets  loose  a  flood,  but  it  re¬ 
quires  intelligence  to  provide  a  system  of  irrigation. 

The  ethical  ideas,  embodied  in  the  great  religions, 
Christianity  for  instance,  though  representing  a  high  ap¬ 
proach  to  final  generality,  are  yet  specializations  of  the 
Platonic  generality.  Partly  these  ethical  intuitions  are  a 
direct  application  of  metaphysical  doctrine  for  the  de¬ 
termination  of  practice.  The  ethical  principle  is  then  a 
parable  illuminating  the  superior  generality  on  which  it 
depends.  Thus  the  codes  of  all  religions  also  embody  the 
particular  temperaments  and  stages  of  civilization  of  their 
adherents.  No  religion  can  be  considered  in  abstraction 
from  its  followers,  or  even  from  its  various  types  of  fol¬ 
lowers.  Religious  ideas  represent  highly  specialized  forms 
of  general  notions.  Sometimes  these  specializations  are 
concrete  embodiments  with  peculiar  beauty  and  aptness: 


26  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

sometimes  they  are  the  result  of  a  throw  back  to  barbaric 
brutality.  Neither  religions  nor  individual  men  demonstrate 
their  sanctity  by  their  ejaculations.  We  find  however  this 
whole  bundle  of  more  special  notions,  legal,  political, 
ethical,  religious,  driving  forward  human  life,  and  deriving 
a  force  of  grandeur  from  their  various  exemplifications  of 
the  mystery  of  the  human  soul  in  its  journey  toward  the 
source  of  all  harmony.  It  is  a  story  of  crime,  misunder¬ 
standing,  profanation.  Great  ideas  enter  into  reality  with 
evil  associates  and  with  disgusting  alliances.  But  the  great¬ 
ness  remains,  nerving  the  race  in  its  slow  ascent. 

In  the  Middle  Ages  institutional  Christianity  was  hon¬ 
ourably  distinguished  as  a  driving  force  toward  the  grander 
intuitions.  Unfortunately,  in  accordance  with  the  habits  of 
all  institutions,  it  adapted  itself  to  its  environment.  It 
became  an  instrument  of  conservation  instead  of  an  in¬ 
strument  of  progress.  After  a  short  period  of  progressive 
energy,  the  Reformation  Churches  again  accepted  the  same 
idolatrous  role.  On  the  whole,  well-established  religious 
institutions  are  to  be  reckoned  among  the  conservative 
forces  of  society.  They  soon  become  the  grand  support  of 
what  Clement  had  termed  ‘communal  custom.’  But  the 
ultimate  ideals,  of  which  they  profess  themselves  the 
guardians,  are  a  standing  criticism  of  current  practices. 

Accordingly  the  next  resurgence  of  the  notion  of  the 
essential  greatness  of  the  human  soul  is  associated  with 
the  sceptical  humanitarianism  of  the  eighteenth  century. 
We  have  arrived  at  the  Age  of  Reason  and  the  Rights  of 
Man.  This  great  French  age  of  thought  has  remade  the 
presuppositions  of  the  civilized  world,  in  speculation,  in 
science,  and  in  sociological  premises.  It  was  derived  from 
the  English  thought  of  the  seventeenth  century,  Francis 
Bacon,  Isaac  Newton,  and  John  Locke.  Also  it  gained 
inspiration  from  the  English  revolutions  of  the  same  epoch. 
But  the  English  modes  always  retained  the  note  of  in¬ 
sularity.  The  French  broadened,  clarified,  and  universal¬ 
ized.  They  thus  made  world-wide,  ideas  which  such  a  man 
as  Edmund  Burke  could  only  grasp  in  their  application  to 
one  race,  and  even  at  times  to  one  island. 

But  the  thought  of  John  Locke  survived  also  in  England. 
Its  influence  was  reinforced  by  the  general  pride  in  the 
doctrines  of  freedom  embodied  in  the  English  Common 
Law.  There  was  thus  a  Whiggish  tinge  even  to  Tory 


The  Human  Soul  27 

Parliaments  in  those  days.  In  this  way  the  British  Govern¬ 
ment  was  the  first  government  to  make  effective  two 
decisive  steps  in  the  abolition  of  slavery.  Two  parliaments 
determined  the  new  policies.  They  were  composed  of 
aristocratic  land-owners  and  evangelical  bankers  and  mer¬ 
chants,  one  parliament  Tory  and  the  other  Whig.  The  first 
step  was  the  abolition  of  the  British  slave-trade  in  1808, 
and  the  second  step  was  the  purchase  and  freeing  of  all 
slaves  in  the  British  Dominions  in  the  year  1833.  This 
latter  operation  cost  twenty  million  pounds  at  a  time  of 
grave  financial  difficulty. 

But  the  problem  was  comparatively  simple  for  the 
English  people.  None  the  less  this  action  constituted  a 
foretaste  of  the  final  triumph  of  that  same  wavering  alliance 
of  philosophy,  law,  and  religion  which  had  its  first  success 
in  the  reforms  of  the  Roman  Imperial  system.  We  notice 
that  a  great  idea  in  the  background  of  dim  consciousness  is 
like  a  phantom  ocean  beating  upon  the  shores  of  human 
life  in  successive  waves  of  specialization.  A  whole  succes¬ 
sion  of  such  waves  are  as  dreams  slowly  doing  their  work 
of  sapping  the  base  of  some  cliff  of  habit:  but  the  seventh 
wave  is  a  revolution — ‘And  the  nations  echo  round.’  In 
the  last  quarter  of  the  eighteenth  century,  Democracy  was 
born,  with  its  earliest  incarnations  in  America  and  in 
France;  and  finally  it  was  Democracy  that  freed  the  slaves. 
In  the  modern  world,  Democracy  has  a  deeper  import 
than  among  the  ancients.  At  last,  in  the  nineteenth  century, 
the  fundamental  question  of  slavery  has  been  explicitly 
faced.  In  Europe,  it  was  already  a  decaying  institution, 
slowly  withdrawing  from  slavery  to  serfdom,  from  serfdom 
to  feudalism,  from  feudalism  to  aristocracy,  from  aristoc¬ 
racy  to  legal  equality,  from  legal  equality  to  careers 
effectively  open  to  talent.  But  the  question  was  assuming  a 
new  and  menacing  form  by  reason  of  the  impact  of  the 
European  and  Arabian  races  upon  the  African  tribes. 

So  modern  Democrats,  in  the  nineteenth  century,  nerved 
themselves  to  face  the  question  of  Slavery,  explicitly  and 
with  thoroughness.  The  slow  working  of  ideas  is  thereby 
illustrated.  Two  thousand  years  had  elapsed  since  the 
foundation  of  Plato’s  Academy,  since  the  reforms  of  the 
Stoic  lawyers,  since  the  composition  of  the  Gospels.  The 
great  program  of  reform  bequeathed  by  the  classical 
civilization  was  achieving  another  triumph. 


28  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

Section  VI.  The  slow  issue  of  general  ideas  into  prac¬ 
tical  consequences  is  not  wholly  due  to  inefficiency  of 
human  character.  There  is  a  problem  to  be  solved,  and  its 
complexity  is  habitually  ignored  by  impetuous  seekers.  The 
difficulty  is  just  this: — It  may  be  impossible  to  conceive  a 
reorganization  of  society  adequate  for  the  removal  of  some 
admitted  evil  without  destroying  the  social  organization 
and  the  civilization  which  depends  on  it.  An  allied  plea  is 
that  there  is  no  known  way  of  removing  the  evil  without 
the  introduction  of  worse  evils  of  some  other  type. 

Such  arguments  are  usually  implicit.  Even  the  wisest  are 
unable  to  conceive  the  possibility  of  untried  forms  of  social 
relations.  Human  nature  is  so  complex  that  paper  plans 
for  society  are  to  the  statesman  not  worth  even  the  price 
of  the  defaced  paper.  Successful  progress  creeps  from  point 
to  point,  testing  each  step.  It  is  not  difficult  to  frame  the 
sort  of  defence  that  Cicero  would  have  advanced,  if  chal¬ 
lenged  on  the  question  of  slavery.  The  Roman  Govern¬ 
ment,  he  would  have  said,  is  the  one  hope  for  the  human 
race.  Destroy  Rome;  and  Where  will  you  find  the  firmness 
of  the  Roman  Senate,  the  discipline  of  its  legions,  the  wis¬ 
dom  of  its  lawyers,  the  restraints  upon  misgovemment,  the 
appreciative  protection  of  Greek  learning?  But  he  would 
not  have  said  this.  His  genius  would  have  risen  to  proph¬ 
ecy,  and  he  would  have  foreseen  and  quoted  the  lines 
of  Virgil  on  the  mission  of  the  Eternal  City. 

In  fact,  we  do  know  exactly  the  stand  taken  upon  this 
very  question  by  the  lawyers,  Pagan  and  Christian,  and  by 
the  bishops  and  popes,  of  the  five  centuries  succeeding 
Cicero.  Among  them  were  statesmen  with  more  than 
Cicero’s  practical  sagacity,  and  his  equals  in  moral  sensi¬ 
bility.  They  introduced  careful  legal  restraints  upon  the 
powers  of  the  masters;  they  protected  some  of  the  essential 
rights  of  slaves.  But  they  preserved  the  institution.  Civiliza¬ 
tion,  Hellenic  and  Roman,  was  preserved  intact  for  more 
than  seven  centuries  after  the  death  of  Plato.  The  slaves 
were  the  martyrs  whose  toil  made  progress  possible.  There 
is  a  famous  statue  of  a  Scythian  slave  sharpening  a  knife. 
His  body  is  bent,  but  his  glance  is  upward.  That  figure  has 
survived  the  ages,  a  message  to  us  of  what  we  owe  to  the 
suffering  millions  in  the  dim  past. 

We  may  ask,  Would  Rome  have  been  destroyed  by  a 
crusade  for  the  abolition  of  slavery  in  the  time  of  Cicero 


The  Human  Soul  29 

or  in  the  time  of  Augustus?  Throughout  the  whole  period 
of  classical  civilization  the  foundations  of  social  order 
could  scarcely  sustain  the  weight  upon  them — the  wars  be¬ 
tween  states,  the  surrounding  barbarians,  the  political  con¬ 
vulsions,  the  evils  of  the  slave  system.  In  the  age  from  the 
birth  of  Cicero  to  the  accession  of  Augustus  to  undisputed 
power,  the  whole  structure  almost  collapsed,  before  it  had 
finished  its  appointed  task.  Even  earlier,  it  had  nearly  met 
its  fate,  and  later  by  a  few  centuries  came  the  final  collapse. 
It  is  impossible  to  doubt  the  effect  of  any  vigorous  effort 
for  the  immediate  abolition  of  the  only  social  system  that 
men  knew.  It  may  be  better  that  the  heavens  should  fall, 
but  it  is  folly  to  ignore  the  fact  that  they  will  fall. 

Suppose  that,  in  the  middle  of  the  nineteenth  century, 
the  shock  that  overwhelmed  the  Confederate  States  in  the 
American  Civil  War  had  equally  overwhelmed  the  whole 
of  North  America  and  the  whole  of  Europe.  The  sole  hope 
of  progressive  civilization  would  have  been  lost.  We  may 
speculate  about  a  recovery,  but  of  that  we  know  nothing. 
In  the  ancient  world,  the  dangers  were  immeasurably 
greater. 

Section  VII.  The  argument  of  the  previous  section  can 
be  generalized.  It  amounts  to  this: — that  the  final  introduc¬ 
tion  of  a  reform  does  not  necessarily  prove  the  moral 
superiority  of  the  reforming  generation.  It  certainly  does 
require  that  that  generation  exhibits  reforming  energy.  But 
conditions  may  have  changed,  so  that  what  is  possible  now 
may  not  have  been  possible  then.  A  great  idea  is  not  to  be 
conceived  as  merely  waiting  for  enough  good  men  to  carry 
it  into  practical  effect.  That  is  a  childish  view  of  the  history 
of  ideas.  The  ideal  in  the  background  is  promoting  the 
gradual  growth  of  the  requisite  communal  customs,  ade¬ 
quate  to  sustain  the  load  of  its  exemplification. 

Many  factors  contributed  to  the  final  inversion  of  soci¬ 
ological  theory,  from  the  presupposition  of  slavery  to  the 
presupposition  of  freedom.  The  chief  factor  has  already 
been  mentioned,  namely,  the  sceptical,  humanitarian  move¬ 
ment  of  the  eighteenth  century,  of  which  Voltaire  and 
Rousseau  were  among  the  chief  exponents,  and  the  French 
Revolution  the  culmination. 

Thus  in  a  sense,  and  more  especially  when  we  consider 
the  whole  world-wide  movement,  religion  was  in  the  back¬ 
ground.  But  in  one  section  of  this  stirring  of  mankind  the 


30  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

religious  motive  was  among  the  chief  agencies.  Through¬ 
out  the  Anglo-Saxon  world,  English  and  American,  the 
Wesleyan  protestant  revival  was  in  full  activity.  It  had  been 
reserved  for  a  great  French  historian,  Elie  Halevy,  to  point 
out  the  full  sociological  significance  of  this  episode.  The 
Methodist  preachers  aimed  at  saving  men’s  souls  in  the  next 
world,  but  incidentally  they  gave  a  new  direction  to  emo¬ 
tions  energizing  in  this  world.  The  movement  was  singularly 
devoid  of  new  ideas,  and  singularly  rich  in  vivid  feelings. 
It  is  the  first  decisive  landmark  indicating  the  widening 
chasm  between  the  theological  tradition  and  the  modem 
intellectual  world.  From  the  earliest  Greek  theologians  to 
Jerome  and  Augustine:  from  Augustine  to  Aquinas:  from 
Aquinas  to  Luther,  Calvin,  and  Suarez:  from  Suarez  to 
Leibniz  and  John  Locke:  every  great  religious  movement 
was  accompanied  by  a  noble  rationalistic  justification.  You 
may  disagree  with  the  theologians — indeed  it  is  impossible 
to  agree  with  all  of  them — but  you  cannot  complain  that 
they  have  been  unwilling  to  indulge  in  rational  argument. 
The  Middle  Ages  argued,  Luther  defended  ninety-seven 
theses,  Calvin  produced  his  Institute,  the  Council  of  Trent 
argued  on  and  off  for  eighteen  years,  the  judicious 
Hooker  argued,  at  the  Synod  of  Dort  Arminians  and 
Calvinists  argued. 

The  great  Methodist  movement  more  than  deserves  the 
eulogies  bestowed  on  it.  But  it  can  appeal  to  no  great 
intellectual  construction  explanatory  of  its  modes  of  under¬ 
standing.  It  may  have  chosen  the  better  way.  Its  instinct 
may  be  sound.  However  that  may  be,  it  was  a  notable  event 
in  the  history  of  ideas  when  the  clergy  of  the  Western 
races  began  to  waver  in  their  appeal  to  constructive  reason. 
More  recently  scientists  and  critical  philosophers  have 
followed  the  Methodist  example. 

In  an  age  of  aristocracy  in  England,  the  Methodists  ap¬ 
pealed  to  the  direct  intuitions  of  working  men  and  of  retail 
traders  concerned  with  working  men.  In  America  they 
appealed  to  the  toiling,  isolated  groups  of  pioneers.  They 
brought  hope,  fear,  emotional  release,  spiritual  insight. 
They  stemmed  the  inroads  of  revolutionary  ideas.  Also, 
allowing  for  many  qualifications,  they  must  be  credited 
with  one  supreme  achievement.  They  made  the  conception 
of  the  brotherhood  of  man  and  of  the  importance  of  men, 
a  vivid  reality.  They  had  produced  the  final  effective  force 


The  Human  Soul  31 

which  hereafter  made  slavery  impossible  among  progres¬ 
sive  races. 

In  the  history  of  ideas  the  great  danger  is  over¬ 
simplification.  It  is  true  that  the  Methodists  produced  the 
final  wave  of  popular  feeling  which  drove  the  anti-slavery 
movement  to  success.  But  the  Methodist  movement  suc¬ 
ceeded  because  it  came  at  the  right  time.  In  this  section 
we  are  discussing  the  religious  influences.  During  the  six¬ 
teenth,  seventeenth,  and  eighteenth  centuries  the  Church 
of  Rome — to  use  a  Quaker  phrase — had  a  ‘concern’  for 
the  races,  groaning  under  European  exploitation,  which  far 
surpassed  that  of  the  combined  Protestant  churches.  The 
priests  did  not  consider  the  problem  in  terms  of  human 
freedom.  But,  not  to  speak  of  the  rest  of  the  world,  in 
America  alone  the  heroism  of  the  Catholic  missionaries  ex¬ 
tended  their  self-sacrifice  from  the  northern  to  the  southern 
icefields.  It  is  impossible  to  doubt  but  that  their  example 
kept  alive  a  sensitiveness  of  the  European  conscience  re¬ 
specting  the  obligations  of  men  to  men. 

Neither  the  Catholics,  nor  the  Methodists,  gave  the  first 
modem  formulation  of  an  explicit  purpose  to  procure  the 
abolition  of  slavery.  This  supreme  honour  belongs  to  the 
Quakers,  and  in  particular  to  that  Apostle  of  Human  Free¬ 
dom,  John  Woolman.  Also  the  American  Civil  War  was 
the  tremendous  episode  constituting  the  climax  of  this 
sombre  journey  of  civilization  toward  the  light. 

Thus  in  the  evolution  of  the  strands  of  thought  which 
constituted  the  final  stage  in  the  destruction  of  the  iniqui¬ 
tous  slave-foundation  of  civilization,  there  are  interwoven 
the  insights  and  the  heroisms  of  sceptical  humanitarians,  of 
Catholics,  of  Methodists,  of  Quakers.  But  the  intellectual 
origin  of  the  movement  is  to  be  traced  back  for  more  than 
two  thousand  years  to  the  speculations  of  the  philosophical 
Greeks  upon  functions  of  the  human  soul,  and  its  status  in 
the  world  of  flux. 

Section  VIII.  In  this  chapter  the  story  of  the  transla¬ 
tion  of  the  Greek  metaphysical  speculations  into  the  socio¬ 
logical  concept  of  human  freedom  has  been  only  half  told. 
In  the  next  chapter  I  shall  consider  in  more  detail  some 
nineteenth  century  criticisms  of  this  whole  movement 
towards  Democracy  and  Freedom.  But,  so  far  as  it  has 
gone,  the  story  illustrates  the  extreme  difficulty  of  express¬ 
ing  in  language  the  final  generalities.  The  importance  of 


32  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

man  as  the  supreme  example  of  a  living  organism  is  be¬ 
yond  question.  Yet  when  we  try  to  express  the  general 
notions  thus  involved,  and  their  bearing  upon  conduct,  at 
every  step  controversy  arises.  The  immense  history  of 
Plato’s  metaphysical  concept  of  the  soul,  with  its  influence 
on  religion,  and  on  social  theory,  carries  this  moral  de¬ 
cisively. 

Human  life  is  driven  forward  by  its  dim  apprehension 
of  notions  too  general  for  its  existing  language.  Such  ideas 
cannot  be  grasped  singly,  one  by  one  in  isolation.  They  re¬ 
quire  that  mankind  advances  in  its  apprehension  of  the 
general  nature  of  things,  so  as  to  conceive  systems  of  ideas 
elucidating  each  other.  But  the  growth  of  generality  of 
apprehension  is  the  slowest  of  all  evolutionary  changes.  It 
is  the  task  of  philosophy  to  promote  this  growth  in  men¬ 
tality.  In  so  far  as  there  is  success,  the  specialized  applica¬ 
tions  of  great  ideas  are  purified  from  their  gross  associations 
with  savage  fancies.  The  Carthaginians  were  a  great  civil¬ 
ized  trading  nation.  They  belonged  racially  to  one  of  the 
great  progressive  sections  of  mankind.  They  traded  from 
the  shores  of  Syria,  throughout  the  Mediterranean  Sea,  up 
the  Atlantic  Coast  of  Europe,  to  the  tin  mines  of  Cornwall 
in  England.  They  circumnavigated  Africa.  They  ruled 
Spain  and  Sicily  and  North  Africa.  Yet,  when  Plato  was 
speculating,  this  great  people  could  so  conceive  the  supreme 
powers  of  the  Universe  that  they  sacrificed  their  children  to 
Moloch  as  an  act  of  religious  propitiation.  The  growth  in 
generality  of  understanding  makes  such  savagery  impos¬ 
sible  in  corresponding  civilizations  today. 

Human  Sacrifice,  Human  Slavery  are  instances  of  great 
intuitions  of  religion  and  of  civilized  purposes  expressing 
themselves  by  means  of  inherited  brutalities  of  instinctive 
behaviour.  Direct  religious  intuitions,  even  those  of  the 
purest  origin,  are  in  danger  of  allying  themselves  with  lower 
practices  and  emotions  which  in  fact  pervade  existing  so¬ 
ciety.  Religion  lends  a  driving  force  to  philosophy.  But  in 
its  turn,  Speculative  philosophy  guards  our  higher  intuitions 
from  base  alliances  by  its  suggestions  of  ultimate  meanings, 
disengaged  from  the  facts  of  current  modes  of  behaviour. 

The  history  of  ideas  is  a  history  of  mistakes.  But  through 
all  mistakes  it  is  also  the  history  of  the  gradual  purification 
of  conduct.  When  there  is  progress  in  the  development  of 
favourable  order,  we  find  conduct  protected  from  relapse 


The  Humanitarian  Ideal  33 


into  brutalization  by  the  increasing  agency  of  ideas  con¬ 
sciously  entertained.  In  this  way  Plato  is  justified  in  his 
saying,  The  creation  of  the  world — that  is  to  say,  the  world 
of  civilized  order — is  the  victory  of  persuasion  over  force. 


3.  The  Humanitarian  Ideal 

Section  I.  In  the  previous  chapter  we  considered  the 
combined  influence  of  philosophy,  law,  and  religion,  upon 
the  evolution  from  the  notion  of  society  based  upon  servi¬ 
tude  to  that  of  society  based  upon  individual  freedom.  To 
this  transformation  philosophy  contributed  its  generality, 
law  contributed  the  constructive  ability,  religion  the  moral 
energy.  By  themselves  and  apart  from  correction  by  the 
Platonic  philosophy,  the  religions  derived  from  Western 
Asia  were  tinged  with  the  mentality  of  the  older  civiliza¬ 
tions  of  that  region.  They  conceived  the  universe  in  terms 
of  despots  and  slaves.  None  of  these  religions  have  been 
able  wholly  to  shake  off  the  horrible  implications  latent  in 
such  a  conception.  But  the  fortunate  coalescence  of  the 
initial  Christian  institutions  with  the  philosophic  Platonic 
doctrines  provided  the  Western  races  with  a  beautiful  soci¬ 
ological  ideal,  intellectually  expressed,  and  closely  allied 
with  intermittent  bursts  of  emotional  energy.  Unfortunately, 
interwoven  with  this  ideal  in  Christian  theology  and  in  the 
patterns  of  Christian  emotion,  there  has  survived  through¬ 
out  history  the  older  concept  of  a  Divine  Despot  and  a 
slavish  Universe,  each  with  the  morals  of  its  kind. 

The  theme  of  the  former  chapter  has  been  the  agency  of 
these  sociological  ideals  in  the  transformation  of  society. 
They  constitute  the  intellectual  side  of  the  transformation, 
combined  with  an  explanation  how  such  intellectual  con¬ 
cepts  acquired  driving  force.  In  the  present  chapter  we  first 
glance  at  accessory  causes,  and  then  proceed  to  the 
criticism  of  the  humanitarian  ideal,  a  criticism  which  has 
been  gathering  strength  since  its  origin  in  the  nineteenth 
century.  Finally,  the  barest  sketch  of  a  reply  to  this 
criticism  is  suggested. 

The  growth  of  technology  is  the  greatest  among  the 


34  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

accessory  causes  which  weakened  the  necessity  for  slavery. 
But  this  agency  hardly  came  into  play  before  the  seven¬ 
teenth  century.  Till  that  time  the  technology  of  the  ancients, 
in  their  prime,  probably  surpassed  that  of  the  modems. 
From  that  century  onward,  technological  advance  has  more 
than  satisfied  the  complex  demands  for  effective  labour, 
without  recourse  to  slavery.  Of  course,  the  fixed  order  of 
society  in  a  well-managed  feudal  system  must  not  be  con¬ 
fused  with  slavery,  even  in  its  application  to  the  agricul¬ 
tural  labourers  at  the  base  of  the  whole  structure.  Each 
order  had  its  rights  and  duties,  and  in  the  happier  examples 
of  later  feudalism  the  villagers  were  quite  competent  to  go 
to  law  with  their  feudal  chief.  The  system  was  very  liable 
to  degenerate  into  practical  slavery,  and  often  did  so. 
Indeed,  there  is  evidence1  that,  during  the  early  Norman 
period  in  England,  there  was  a  relatively  small  class  of 
slaves  whose  fives  were  at  the  arbitrary  will  of  their  owners. 
But  the  slave-trade  shocked  the  conscience  of  those  times. 
William  the  Conqueror  legislated  against  it,  and  Bishops 
denounced  it.  In  those  times,  it  must  be  remembered,  to 
be  attached  to  the  land  was  a  protection  as  well  as  a 
restriction.  It  was  the  basis  of  a  recognized  status  in  an 
organized  society — so  far  as  the  social  system  was  organ¬ 
ized,  and  was  not  a  welter  of  violence. 

The  modem  evolution  of  big  business  involves  a  closer 
analogy  of  feudalism,  than  does  feudalism  to  slavery.  In 
fact,  the  modem  social  system  with  its  variety  of  indispen¬ 
sable,  interlocked  avocations  necessitates  such  organiza¬ 
tion.  The  only  questions  at  issue  are  the  freedom  of 
individuals  to  circulate  among  the  grades,  and  satisfactory 
legal  conceptions  of  the  variety  or  relations  of  the  grades 
with  each  other.  Individualists  and  socialists  are  merely 
debating  over  the  details  of  the  neo-feudalism  which  mod¬ 
em  industry  requires.  The  self-sufficing  independent  man, 
with  his  peculiar  property  which  concerns  no  one  else,  is 
a  concept  without  any  validity  for  modem  civilization. 
Unfortunately  this  notion  has  been  embodied  in  ancient 
moral  codes  applicable  to  Syrian  deserts,  and  has  reap¬ 
peared  tingeing  Western  political  theory  in  the  commercial 
epoch  immediately  succeeding  the  decay  of  mediaeval 
feudalism.  But  it  is  not  the  practicable  alternative  to  a 

1  Cf.  Mediaeval  England,  pp.  100,  101,  by  Mary  Bateson,  T.  Fisher  Unwin, 
London  1903,  and  G.  P.  Putnam’s  Sons,  New  York. 


The  Humanitarian  Ideal  35 

slave  society.  The  problem  of  social  life  is  the  problem  of 
the  coordination  of  activities,  including  the  limits  of  such 
coordination. 

The  sense  of  the  unity  of  civilization  fostered  by  the 
Catholic  Church,  the  general  similarities  of  mankind 
throughout  Europe,  and  the  simplicities  of  life  in  the  middle 
ages,  are  probably  the  main  reasons  why  mediaeval  wars 
were  dissociated  from  slave-raiding  expeditions.  We  hear 
of  Saxon  slaves  in  the  slave-market  in  Rome.  But  that  was 
in  the  lifetime  of  Gregory  the  Great,  and  the  Saxons  were 
not  Christians.  Indeed,  whenever  the  European  races  came 
into  contact  with  non-Christian  foreign  races,  they  seem  to 
have  had  no  compunction  about  slavery.  We  read  of  Sara¬ 
cen  slaves,  of  the  enslavement  of  the  indigenous  American 
tribes,  and,  above  all,  of  Negro  slavery.  But  thanks  to  the 
growth  of  technology  concurrently  with  the  advance  of 
civilization,  the  European  races  have  avoided  slavery  in 
temperate  climates.  Finally,  the  humanitarian  movement 
of  the  eighteenth  century,  combined  with  a  religious  sense 
of  the  kinship  of  men,  has  issued  in  the  settled  policy  of  the 
great  civilized  governments  to  extirpate  slavery  from  the 
world. 

Section  II.  This  success  came  only  just  in  time.  For 
before  and  during  the  nineteenth  century,  several  strands 
of  thought  emerged  whose  combined  effect  was  in  direct 
opposition  to  the  humanitarian  ideal.  At  the  moment  when 
the  ‘brotherhood  of  man’  triumphed,  the  intellectual  world 
was  meditating  on  political  economy  conceived  in  terms 
of  unrestrained  competition,  on  Malthus’  iron  law  that  the 
mass  of  the  population  must  always  press  on  the  limits  of 
bare  subsistence,  and  on  the  zoological  law  of  natural 
selection  by  which  an  iron  environment  crushed  out  the 
less  favoured  species,  and  on  Hume’s  criticism  of  the  notion 
of  the  soul.  This  new  trend  of  thought  was  in  its  immediate 
origin  British  and  is  to  be  compared  and  contrasted  with 
the  antecedent  Wesleyan  movement.  In  neither  case  did 
the  leaders  intend  the  sociological  effects  which  followed 
from  their  efforts.  It  is  often  the  case  that  the  originators 
belong  to  the  antecedent  epoch,  and  stand  outside  the 
epoch  of  their  followers.  The  Methodist  preachers  did  not 
intend  to  transform  society,  their  object  was  to  save  souls. 
In  like  manner,  Adam  Smith  was  a  typical  figure  of  the 
eighteenth  century  enlightenment. 


36  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

He  and  Hume  are  two  of  the  last  great  Scotchmen  who 
mark  the  traditional  affiliation  of  Scotland  with  France, 
which  had  survived  from  the  earlier  centuries  of  joint  an¬ 
tagonism  to  England.  At  their  date  the  intellectual  life  of 
Edinburgh  and  Glasgow  is  not  to  be  assimilated  with  that 
of  England.  Throughout  the  greater  part  of  the  eighteenth 
century,  during  its  central  portion,  the  intellectual  life  of 
England,  so  far  as  concerns  any  originative  energy,  is  neg¬ 
ligible.  Indeed,  one  of  the  reasons  for  the  separation  of 
America  from  England  was  that  the  particular  circum¬ 
stances  of  English  life  were  not  applicable  to  America,  and 
that  England  was  not  fermenting  with  any  universal  ideas 
capable  of  specialization  for  American  conditions.  English 
influence  survived,  it  is  true,  in  the  Common  Law;  but, 
apart  from  that  exception,  the  mentality  of  men  like  Jeffer¬ 
son  and  Franklin  was  French.  There  was  the  homeland  of 
their  thoughts.  It  has  required  the  whole  of  the  activity  of 
the  nineteenth  century,  from  1790  onward,  to  reconstruct 
the  intellectual  influence  of  England  on  the  outside  world. 
In  the  eighteenth  century,  France  looked  to  England;  but 
it  was  to  the  England  of  the  seventeenth  century,  Bacon, 
Newton,  Locke  and  the  Regicides.  In  order  to  understand 
the  intellectual  history  of  Europe,  it  is  essential  to  remem¬ 
ber  the  collapse  of  Germany  during  and  after  The  Thirty 
Years’  War,  to  remember  the  collapse  of  Italy  owing  to 
the  supersession  of  the  Mediterranean  trade  route  to  the 
East,  owing  to  the  Catholic  Reaction  with  its  activity  of 
censorship,  and  owing  to  the  domination  of  Spaniards  and 
Habsburgs,  and  to  remember  the  collapse  of  England 
owing  to  absorption  in  the  commercial  expansion  of  the 
eighteenth  century — in  the  words  of  the  old  song,  ‘When 
George  and  pudding-time  came  round.’  In  the  eighteenth 
century  France  carried  the  ‘White  Man’s  Burden’  of  in¬ 
tellectual  advance. 

Perhaps  it  was  owing  to  the  loss  of  the  habit  of  specula¬ 
tive  thoroughness,  that  in  the  revival  of  intellectual  activity 
in  England  the  issue  of  the  emerging  lines  of  thought  was 
not  discerned.  Hume’s  flux  of  impressions  and  of  reactions 
to  impressions,  each  impression  a  distinct,  self-sufficient 
existence,  was  very  different  to  the  Platonic  soul.  The 
status  of  man  in  the  universe  required  re-considering. 
‘What  is  man  that  thou  art  mindful  of  him?’  The  brother¬ 
hood  of  man  at  the  top  of  creation  ceased  to  be  the  well- 


The  Humanitarian  Ideal  37 


defined  foundation  for  moral  principles.  There  seems  no 
very  obvious  reason  why  one  flux  of  impressions  should  not 
be  related  to  another  flux  of  impressions  in  the  relative 
status  of  master  to  slave.  To  put  the  matter  at  its  very 
lowest,  the  point  requires  arguing.  It  is  no  answer  to  point 
out  that  Hume  and  Huxley  were  united  in  their  dislike  of 
slavery — certainly  Huxley,  probably  Hume.  The  question 
is  what  reason  could  they  give,  apart  from  their  own 
psychological  inheritance  from  the  Platonic  religious  tradi¬ 
tion.  For  example,  in  Book  III,  of  his  Treatise ,  Part  II, 
Section  I,  Hume  writes,  “In  general,  it  may  be  affirm’d 
that  there  is  no  such  passion  in  human  minds,  as  the  love 
of  mankind,  merely  as  such,  independent  of  personal  qual¬ 
ities,  or  services,  or  of  relation  to  ourself.”  This  sentence 
seems  very  remote  from  the  Catholic  missionaries  in  Amer¬ 
ica,  from  the  Quaker  John  Woolman,  or  from  the  free- 
thinking  Thomas  Paine.  In  some  mysterious  way,  they  all 
cared  for  ‘mankind,  merely  as  such.’ 

Section  III.  In  the  Middle  Ages  of  Europe  the  keynote 
of  sociological  theory  is  ‘coordination.’  The  Church  co¬ 
ordinated  religious  speculations;  the  Feudal  System  coordi¬ 
nated  the  intimate  structure  of  society;  the  Empire — or, 
Was  it  the  Church?  Here  dispute  crept  in — coordinated 
the  Governments  of  the  provincial  regions,  Counts,  Dukes, 
Kings,  and  City-Republics.  In  the  provinces  of  theology 
and  of  clerical  organization,  the  success  was  considerable. 
To  a  less  degree  the  Feudal  system  effected  its  purpose. 
No  other  system  can  be  suggested  which  at  that  time  and 
in  those  circumstances  could  have  replaced  it  successfully: 
although  the  towns  with  their  commercial  and  artisan 
populations  stood  outside  it,  more  particularly  in  Italy. 
The  Empire  was  a  failure  mitigated  by  a  few  successes. 
The  Church,  as  an  agent  of  large-scale  political  organiza¬ 
tion,  was  more  successful  than  the  Empire.  Its  agents  were 
better  educated,  and — allowing  for  many  exceptions — had 
a  higher  morale.  Also  its  influence  extended  to  regions 
which  the  Empire  never  reached.  But,  on  the  whole,  the 
attempts  at  large-scale  organization  of  Europe  were  a 
failure.  There  is  a  pathetic  interest  in  Dante’s  De  Mon¬ 
orchia  with  its  initial  premise  of  the  desire  of  mankind  for 
peace  and  quietness.  We  have  only  to  remember  the  state 
of  Europe  at  that  time,  the  state  of  Italy,  and  Dante’s  own 
life.  Indeed,  men  do  long  for  peace  and  quietness  but  their 


38  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

desire  is  chequered  by  other  impulses.  The  Middle  Ages 
were  always  haunted  by  the  ghost  of  the  old  Roman  Em¬ 
pire,  with  its  message  of  vast  success  in  the  imposition  of 
order  upon  men. 

The  Renaissance  men  read  the  classical  authors,  and 
decisively  ignored  the  ideals  of  the  Roman  statesmen. 
Plato,  perhaps,  would  have  been  gratified  by  the  attention 
his  works  then  received.  But  he  would  have  been  horrified 
at  the  outburst  of  individualism.  In  the  men  of  the  Italian 
Renaissance  Plato  would  have  recognized  reproductions  of 
the  character  of  the  younger  Dionysius  of  Syracuse.  At  the 
time  the  incongruity  was  not  perceived.  But  the  inevitable 
issues  followed.  Finally  in  the  nineteenth  century,  amid 
the  triumph  of  humanitarian  principles,  the  basic  positions 
of  the  social  theories  derived  from  Platonism  and  Chris¬ 
tianity  were  questioned.  Previously,  they  had  never  been 
fully  acted  on.  They  were  impracticable.  But  they  had  not 
been  questioned  as  a  social  ideal. 

Section  IV.  The  collapse  of  the  Middle  Ages  was,  in 
one  of  its  aspects,  a  revolt  against  coordination.  The  new 
keynote  is  expressed  in  the  word  ‘competition’ — 

Thou  shalt  not  murder,  but  tradition 

Approves  all  forms  of  competition.’ 

Private  life  now  dominated  the  social  life  of  Europe  in  all 
its  special  forms — The  Right  of  Private  Judgment,  Private 
Property,  The  Competition  of  Private  Traders,  Private 
Amusement.  The  notion  that  every  action  is  at  once  a 
private  experience  and  a  public  utility  had  to  be  bom  again. 
It  sickened  and  died  with  the  disappearance  of  the  ‘mediae¬ 
val  mind.’  Wherever  men  looked,  they  saw  ‘competition’ 
written  across  the  face  of  things.  Nations  arose,  and  men 
thought  of  nations  in  terms  of  international  competition. 
They  examined  the  theory  of  trade,  and  they  construed  its 
interactions  in  terms  of  competition,  mitigated  by  ‘higgling.’ 
They  considered  the  bounty  of  nature  in  the  provision  of 
food,  and  they  saw  the  masses  of  mankind  competing  for 
insufficient  supplies.  They  saw  the  fecundity  of  nature  in 
the  provision  of  a  myriad  species  of  living  things,  and  they 
construed  the  explanation  in  terms  of  the  competition  of 
species.  What  the  notions  of  ‘form’  and  ‘harmony’  were 
to  Plato,  that  the  notions  of  ‘individuality’  and  ‘competi- 


The  Humanitarian  Ideal  39 

tion’  were  to  the  nineteenth  century.  God  had  placed  his 
bow  in  the  skies  as  a  symbol;  and  the  strip  of  colours, 
rightly  read,  spelt  ‘competition.’  The  prize  to  be  competed 
for  was  ‘life.’  Unsuccessful  competitors’ died;  and  thus,  by 
a  beautiful  provision  of  nature,  ceased  from  constituting 
a  social  problem. 

Now  it  is  quite  obvious  that  a  much  needed  corrective 
to  an  unqualified,  sentimental  humanitarianism  is  here  be¬ 
ing  supplied.  Strife  is  at  least  as  real  a  fact  in  the  world  as 
Harmony.  If  you  side  with  Francis  Bacon  and  concentrate 
on  the  efficient  causes,  you  can  interpret  large  features  of 
the  growth  of  structure  in  terms  of  ‘strife.’  If,  with  Plato, 
you  fix  attention  on  the  end,  rationally  worthy,  you  can  in¬ 
terpret  large  features  in  terms  of  ‘harmony.’  But  until 
some  outline  of  understanding  has  been  reached  which 
elucidates  the  interfusion  of  strife  and  harmony,  the  in¬ 
tellectual  driving  force  of  successive  generations  will  sway 
uneasily  between  the  two. 

There  have  been  many  interpretations  of  special  aspects 
of  European  society  in  terms  of  strife:  Machiavelli’s  Prince , 
the  political  policies  of  the  great  Renaissance  Monarchs, 
Charles  the  Fifth,  Philip  the  Second,  Francis  the  First, 
Henry  the  Eighth,  Henri  Quatre,  William  the  Silent,  Queen 
Elizabeth.  The  people,  thus  indicated,  found  strife.  They 
could  not  evade  it.  Fleets,  armies,  hatreds,  assassin’s  dag¬ 
gers,  burnings  at  the  stake,  insurrections  were  there  as  real 
present  facts.  To  survive,  as  persons  or  as  nations,  meant 
force  and  policy  suppressing  competitors.  Harmony  crept 
in  under  the  guise  of  the  joy  of  the  adventure,  of  faculties 
stretched  to  the  full.  But  such  harmony  was  a  secondary 
effect,  merely  Romance  gilding  Strife. 

In  the  hands  of  theologians  both  in  the  Middle  Ages  and 
in  the  first  period  of  its  supersession,  the  Platonic-Christian 
tradition  leant  heavily  towards  its  mystical  religious  side. 
It  abandoned  this  world  to  the  Evil  Prince  thereof,  and  con¬ 
centrated  thought  upon  another  world  and  a  better  life. 
Plato  himself  explicitly  considers  this  solution  at  the  end 
of  his  dialogue,  the  Republic.  But  he  there  gives  it  another 
twist  to  that  adopted  by  later  theologians.  He  conceives 
the  perfect  Republic  in  Heaven  as  an  immediate  present 
possession  in  the  consciousness  of  the  wise  in  the  temporal 
world.  Thus  for  Plato,  at  least  in  his  mood  when  he  con¬ 
cluded  this  dialogue,  the  joy  of  heaven  is  realizable  on 


40  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

earth:  the  wise  are  happy.  Theoretically,  this  doctrine  also 
tinged  mediaeval  Christianity.  But  in  practice  there  has 
always  been  the  temptation  to  abandon  the  immediate  ex¬ 
perience  of  this  world  as  a  lost  cause.  The  shadows  pass — 
says  mystical  Religion.  But  they  also  recur,  and  recur — 
whispers  the  Experience  of  Mankind,  Be  tranquil,  they 
will  end — rejoins  Religion.  The  mystical  religion  which 
most  whole-heartedly  adopts  this  attitude  is  Buddhism.  In 
it  despair  of  this  world  is  conjoined  with  a  program  for  the 
world’s  abolition  by  a  mystic  tranquillity.  Christianity  has 
wavered  between  Buddhistic  renunciation,  and  its  own  im¬ 
practicable  ideals  culminating  in  a  crude  Millennium  within 
the  temporal  flux.  The  difference  between  the  two  consists 
in  the  difference  between  a  program  for  reform  and  a  pro¬ 
gram  for  abolition.  I  hazard  the  prophecy  that  that  religion 
will  conquer  which  can  render  clear  to  popular  understand¬ 
ing  some  eternal  greatness  incarnate  in  the  passage  of 
temporal  fact. 

Section  V.  The  political,  liberal  faith  of  the  nine¬ 
teenth  century  was  a  compromise  between  the  individual¬ 
istic,  competitive  doctrine  of  strife  and  the  optimistic 
doctrine  of  harmony.  It  was  believed  that  the  laws  of  the 
Universe  were  such  that  the  strife  of  individuals  issued  in 
the  progressive  realization  of  a  harmonious  society.  In  this 
way,  it  was  possible  to  cherish  the  emotional  belief  in  the 
Brotherhood  of  Man,  while  engaging  in  relentless  compe¬ 
tition  with  all  individual  men.  Theoretically,  it  seemed 
possible  to  conciliate  the  belief  with  the  practice  without 
the  intrusion  of  contradiction.  Unfortunately,  while  this 
liberalism  was  winning  triumph  after  triumph  as  a  political 
force  in  Europe  and  America,  the  foundations  of  its  doc¬ 
trine  were  receiving  shock  after  shock. 

The  new  industrial  system  which  should  have  been  a 
triumph  for  the  liberal  doctrines,  did  not  work  well.  It 
had  first  developed  in  England  under  treatment  exclusively 
dictated  by  the  doctrines  of  economic  liberalism.  On  this 
point,  in  their  treatment  of  the  manufacturing  and  mining 
industries,  the  English  Tories  at  first  were  as  orthodox  as 
the  English  Whigs.  Unfortunately  after  two  generations 
of  such  industrial  development,  the  widespread  misery  at 
the  base  of  the  whole  organization,  in  the  mines,  in  the 
factories,  in  the  slums,  aroused  the  public  conscience.  This 
foundation  of  social  relations  upon  individualism  and  com- 


The  Humanitarian  Ideal  41 


petition,  with  no  mitigating  practices,  was  not  working 
well  under  the  new  industrial  conditions,  such  as  mining 
for  raw  materials  and  mechanized  manufacturing  for  fin¬ 
ished  products.  At  least  this  judgment  holds  for  the  old, 
comparatively  crowded,  nations  of  Europe.  England  was 
the  pioneer  and  tried  the  system  whole-heartedly.  It  failed. 
The  evidence  is  scattered  through  the  records  of  the  two 
decades  from  1830  to  1850.  For  example  it  can  be  found 
summarized  in  any  life  of  the  Lord  Shaftesbury  of  the 
period — a  great  philanthropist — in  some  of  Disraeli’s  early 
novels,  in  the  joint  writings  of  J.  L.  Hammond  and  Barbara 
Hammond,  dealing  with  the  state  of  the  labourers,  town 
and  country.  The  mere  doctrines  of  freedom,  individual¬ 
ism,  and  competition,  had  produced  a  resurgence  of  some¬ 
thing  very  like  industrial  slavery  at  the  base  of  society. 

The  industrial  politics  of  the  nineteenth  century  in 
Europe  can  only  be  understood  by  remembering  this  fact. 
The  pure  doctrine  of  nineteenth-century  liberalism  failed. 
During  the  decade  of  the  eighteen  forties  and  since,  in 
England  and  in  every  European  country  a  series  of  reme¬ 
dial  industrial  measures  were  introduced.  The  great  liberal 
leaders,  Cobden,  Bright,  and  even  Gladstone,  were  either 
opposed,  or  were  notably  cold,  to  these  measures.  They 
infringed  the  purity  of  the  liberal  doctrine.  The  important 
internal  division  of  the  political  liberals  in  England  was  not 
the  prominent  one  between  Radicals  and  Whigs.  It  was  the 
division  between  the  pure  liberals  and  the  modified  liber¬ 
als.  These  modified  liberals  were  in  some  ways  nearer  to 
the  old  Tories.  They  repudiated  the  liberal  doctrine  of  an 
atomistic  society.  Unfortunately  for  the  liberal  political 
party  in  England,  its  later  leaders,  Gladstone,  Lord  Hart-  • 
ington,  Asquith  belonged  to  the  pure  liberal  faction.  If 
Campbell-Bannerman  had  been  somewhat  abler  and,  what 
is  still  more  important,  if  he  had  lived,  political  history  in 
England  would  have  been  different.  As  it  was,  in  the  last 
phase,  English  political  liberalism  under  Asquith’s  leader¬ 
ship  was  engaged  in  direct  opposition,  or  apathy,  in  re¬ 
spect  to  every  reform  which  it  was  the  task  of  a  reforming 
political  party  to  undertake — the  Women’s  movement, 
Education,  Industrial  Reorganization.  During  the  seventy 
years  of  its  greatest  triumphs,  from  1830  onward,  English 
liberalism  was  slowly  decaying  by  its  failure  to  acquire  a 
coherent  system  of  practicable  ideals.  On  the  whole,  the 


42  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

pure  liberals  retained  command  of  the  political  machine 
in  England,  from  Mr.  Gladstone  in  the  last  third  of  the 
nineteenth  century  to  Mr.  Asquith  in  the  opening  phase  of 
the  twentieth  century. 

Notwithstanding  this  reluctance  of  the  great  representa¬ 
tive  liberals,  before  the  middle  of  the  century  a  whole  new 
movement  of  social  coordination  arose,  in  the  form  of  Gov¬ 
ernmental  measures,  regulative  of  mining,  of  factories,  of 
slum  areas.  The  Industrial  System  then  spread  to  Germany, 
where  the  necessity  for  coordination  and  the  failure  of  free 
competition  were  at  once  taken  for  granted.  The  early  form 
of  the  industrial  doctrine  of  liberalism  was  never  even  tried 
in  that  country.  But  the  modification  of  the  liberal  doc¬ 
trines  came  grudgingly;  and  its  failure  generated  a  new 
formulation  of  an  old  idea.  Karl  Marx  proclaimed  the  doc¬ 
trine  of  The  Class  War.’  The  learned  economists  are 
unanimous  in  telling  us  that  Das  Kapital  does  not  express 
a  sound  scientific  doctrine,  which  will  stand  comparison 
with  the  facts.  The  success  of  the  book — for  it  is  still  with 
us  as  a  power — can  then  only  be  accounted  for  by  the 
magnitude  of  the  evils  ushered  in  by  the  first  phase  of  the 
industrial  revolution. 

The  early  liberal  faith  that  by  the  decree  of  benevolent 
Providence,  individualistic  competition  and  industrial  activ¬ 
ity,  would  necessarily  work  together  for  human  happiness 
had  broken  down  as  soon  as  it  was  tried.  Perhaps  a  more 
enlightened  training  of  the  directing  classes  was  required. 
Then  coordination  should  mainly  be  directed  towards  edu¬ 
cation  and  sociological  training:  Perhaps,  governmental 
agency  regulating  the  conditions  of  all  employments  was 
the  proper  corrective:  Perhaps  the  State,  controlled  by  the 
workers,  should  be  the  sole  employer.  All  these  suggestions 
are  still  matters  of  fierce  debate.  In  some  country  or  other 
almost  every  solution  has  been  tried.  But  no  one  now  holds 
that,  apart  from  some  further  directive  agency,  mere  in¬ 
dividualistic  competition,  of  itself  and  by  its  own  self- 
righting  character,  will  produce  a  satisfactory  society. 

Unfortunately,  the  Malthusian  doctrine,  in  its  popular 
rendering,  affirmed  that  as  a  law  of  nature  the  masses  of 
mankind  could  never  emerge  into  a  high  state  of  well-being. 
Still  worse,  biological  science  drew  the  conclusion  that  the 
destruction  of  individuals  was  the  very  means  by  which 
advance  was  made  to  higher  types  of  species.  This  was  the 


The  Humanitarian  Ideal  43 

famous  doctrine  of  Natural  Selection,  promulgated  in  1859, 
by  Charles  Darwin.  This  exclusive  reliance  upon  Natural 
Selection  was  not  characteristic  of  Darwin’s  own  theory. 
For  him,  it  was  one  agency  among  many  others.  But,  in 
the  form  in  which  the  doctrine  reigned  in  thought  from 
that  day  to  this,  Natural  Selection  was  the  sole  factor  to  be 
seriously  considered.  As  applied  to  human  society  this 
theory  is  a  challenge  to  the  whole  humanitarian  movement. 
The  contrast  between  the  dominant  theories  of  Lamarck 
and  Darwin  made  all  the  difference.  Instead  of  dwelling 
on  the  brotherhood  of  man,  we  are  now  directed  to  procure 
the  extermination  of  the  unfit.  Again  the  modem  doctrines 
of  heredity,  gained  partly  from  the  experience  of  breeders 
of  stock,  partly  from  practical  horticulturists,  partly  from 
the  statistical  researches  of  Francis  Galton,  Karl  Pearson, 
and  their  school,  partly  from  the  laws  of  heredity  discov¬ 
ered  by  Mendel,  the  Austrian  Abbot,  who  published  his 
unnoticed  researches  comtemporaneously  with  the  publi¬ 
cation  of  Darwin’s  Origin  of  Species — these  doctrines  have 
all  weakened  the  Stoic-Christian  ideal  of  democratic 
brotherhood. 

Religion  by  itself  has  always  wavered  between  that  con¬ 
ception  and  the  despot-slaves’  conception  of  God  and  hi 5 
creatures.  But  the  democratic  liberalism  of  the  late  eight¬ 
eenth  and  early  nineteenth  centuries  was  the  triumph  of  the 
Stoic-Christian  strain  of  thought.  In  Hume’s  criticism  of 
the  doctrine  of  the  soul,  in  the  breakdown  of  pure  unmiti¬ 
gated  competitive  individualism  as  a  practical  working 
system,  in  the  Malthusian  doctrine  of  the  pressure  of  popu¬ 
lation  on  the  means  of  subsistence,  in  the  scientific  doctrine 
of  the  elimination  of  the  unfit  as  the  engine  of  prog¬ 
ress,  in  the  Galtonian  and  Mendelian  doctrines  of  heredity, 
in  the  rejection  of  the  Lamarckian  doctrine  that  usage  can 
raise  the  standard  of  fitness — in  the  concurrence  of  all 
these  strands  of  thought  the  liberalism  of  the  early  nine¬ 
teenth  century  lost  its  security  of  intellectual  justification. 

Section  VI.  There  are  two  intellectual  movements  to 
be  set  on  the  other  side  of  the  account.  One  is  Jeremy  Bent- 
ham’s  legal  reformation  based  on  the  Utilitarian  Principle 
of  ‘The  Greatest  Happiness  of  The  Greatest  Number,’  the 
other  is  Auguste  Comte’s  ‘Religion  of  Humanity,’  that  is  to 
say,  Positivism.  Most  of  what  has  been  practically  effective, 
in  morals,  in  religion,  or  in  political  Scory,  from  their 


44  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

day  to  this  has  derived  strength  from  one  or  other  of  these 
men.  Their  doctrines  have  been  largely  repudiated  as  the¬ 
oretical  foundations,  but  as  practical  working  principles 
they  dominate  the  world.  On  the  whole,  their  influence  has 
been  democratic.  They  have  swept  away  mysterious  claims 
of  privileged  orders  of  men,  based  on  mystical  intuitions 
originated  by  religion  or  philosophy.  They  carried  back  to 
the  Roman  Stoic  lawyers,  though  they  repudiated  the  ulti¬ 
mate  metaphysical  doctrines  of  Stoicism.  They  were  in 
effect  a  resurrection  of  this  Stoic  legal  movement,  but  de¬ 
void  of  its  intellectual  grandeur.  From  another  point  of 
view,  they  recurred  to  the  scientific  revolt  against  meta¬ 
physics,  led  by  Newton,  in  the  seventeenth  century.  They 
extended  this  revolt  to  moral  and  political  theory. 

For  two  thousand  years,  Platonic  philosophic  theories 
and  Christian  intuitions  had  furnished  the  intellectual  jus¬ 
tification  for  the  slow  growth  in  Western  Europe  of  emo¬ 
tions  of  respect  and  friendliness  between  man  and  man — 
the  notion  of  brotherhood.  These  emotions  are  at  the  basis 
of  all  social  groups.  As  relatively  blind  emotions  they  must 
pervade  animal  society,  namely,  the  urge  to  cooperate,  to 
help,  to  feed,  to  cherish,  to  play  together,  to  express  affec¬ 
tion.  Among  mankind  these  fundamental  feelings  reign 
with  great  strength  within  limited  societies.  But  the  range 
of  human  intelligence — its  very  foresight  as  to  dangers  and 
opportunities,  the  power  of  the  imaginative  entertaining  of 
differences  between  group  and  group,  of  their  divergencies 
of  habit  and  sentiment — this  range  of  intelligence  has  pro¬ 
duced  a  ferocity  of  inversion  of  this  very  sentiment  of  in¬ 
terracial  benevolence.  Mankind  is  distinguished  by  its 
strength  of  tribal  feeling,  and  conversely  it  is  also  dis¬ 
tinguished  by  far-reaching  malign  exploitation  and  inter¬ 
tribal  warfare.  Also  the  tribal  feeling  is  apt  to  be  chequered 
by  limitations  of  benevolence  to  special  sections  within 
the  boundary  of  the  same  community. 

For  two  thousand  years  philosophy  and  religion  had 
held  up  before  Western  Europe  the  ideal  figure  of  man,  as 
man,  and  had  claimed  for  it  a  supreme  worth.  Under  this 
urge,  Jesuits  had  gone  to  Patagonia,  John  Woolman  had 
denounced  slavery,  Tom  Paine  had  revolted  against  social 
oppression  and  against  the  doctrine  of  original  sin.  These 
Jesuits,  these  Quakers,  and  these  Freethinkers  differed 
among  themselves.  But  they  owed  their  emotions  towards 


The  Humanitarian  Ideal  45 

men,  as  men,  to  the  generalization  of  feeling  produced  by 
the  joint  influence  of  philosophy  and  religion. 

Jeremy  Bentham  and  Auguste  Comte  accepted  these 
generalized  emotions  as  ultimate  moral  intuitions,  clear 
matter  of  fact,  requiring  no  justification  and  requiring  no 
ultimate  understanding  of  their  relations  to  the  rest  of 
things.  They  discarded  metaphysics.  In  so  doing,  they  ef¬ 
fected  an  immense  service  to  democratic  liberalism.  For 
they  produced  a  practicable  program  of  reform,  and  prac¬ 
ticable  modes  of  expression  which  served  to  unite  men 
whose  ultimate  notions  differed  vastly. 

Unfortunately,  owing  to  the  advance  of  scientific  theory, 
the  relations  of  the  emotions  to  the  rest  of  things  refused  to 
be  ignored.  In  the  evolution  of  life  Nature  is  implacable: 
Nature  discriminates.  Whence  comes  this  universal  benevo¬ 
lence  The  Religion  of  Humanity’  should  be  replaced  by  a 
cult  of  a  select  assortment  of  Humanity:  The  Greatest 
Happiness  of  the  Greatest  Number’  should  be  replaced  by 
‘The  Humane  Extinction  of  Inferior  Specimens.’  Hume 
denies  that  there  is  any  ‘such  passion  ...  as  love  of  man¬ 
kind  merely  as  such.’  Modern  science  gives  a  plausible  ex¬ 
planation  why  no  such  passion  is  required.  It  can  only 
stand  in  the  way  of  the  scavenging  process  of  evolution. 
If  any  people  are  subject  to  this  passion,  of  course  they  will 
act  on  it.  But  no  reason  can  be  given  why  we  should  incul¬ 
cate  the  passion  in  others,  or  why  we  should  pervert  legis¬ 
lation  to  subserve  the  ends  of  such  an  unreasonable 
emotion.  I  am  certainly  in  greater  sympathy  with  Bent- 
ham  and  Comte  than  with  this  deduction  from  Hume  and 
modern  Zoology.  But,  if  it  proves  nothing  else,  the  deduc¬ 
tion  does  show  that  Bentham  and  Comte  were  mistaken 
in  thinking  that  they  had  found  a  clear  foundation  for 
morals,  religion,  and  legislation,  to  the  exclusion  of  all  ul¬ 
timate  cosmological  principles.  On  the  surface,  their  pet 
doctrines  are  just  as  liable  to  sceptical  attack  as  metaphysi¬ 
cal  dogmas  ever  were.  They  have  gained  nothing  in  the 
way  of  certainty  by  dropping  Plato  and  Religion. 

More  ultimate  reasons  are  required  either  to  justify  dis¬ 
criminations  in  the  mixture,  or  to  provide  a  reconstructed 
justification  for  the  doctrine  of  regard  to  man,  as  man. 
Further  mere  ‘survival  value’  is  not  sufficient:  for  there  are 
conditions  which  stamp  out  just  those  types  which  we  find 
ourselves  most  willing  to  preserve  amid  happiness. 


46  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

Section  VII.  Auguste  Comte  founded  his  Positivisim 
on  the  assured  results  of  science,  the  physical  and  moral 
science  of  his  own  day.  He  died  in  1857,  and  two  years 
later  Darwin  published  his  Origin  of  Species .  We  have  al¬ 
ready  discussed  some  of  the  difficulties  for  the  Religion  of 
Humanity  introduced  by  the  subsequent  phases  of  the 
Evolution  Theory.  Such  a  foundation  may  be  adequate  to 
shape  the  methodology  of  a  group  of  men  with  limited  in¬ 
terests  at  some  definite  date.  But  certainly  this  adequacy 
does  not  arise  from  any  adequate  clarity  of  the  point  of 
view.  Many  a  worshipper  obtains  his  purpose  of  spiritual 
consolation  by  bowing  towards  the  sunrise  and  muttering 
an  incantation;  but  he  may  be  totally  unable  to  render  any 
coherent  account  of  the  grounds,  metaphysical  or  prag¬ 
matic,  which  render  his  procedure  effective. 

Apart  from  this  difficulty  of  conciliating  the  physical 
with  the  mental  sciences,  physical  science,  taken  by  itself, 
has  some  difficulty  with  its  own  fundamental  notions.  This 
perplexity  is  relevant  to  Platonic  religious  tradition  whose 
fortunes  and  specializations  we  have  been  tracing.  We  can 
classify  the  topics  of  physical  science  under  four  head¬ 
ings: —  (i)  The  true  and  real  things  which  endure,  (2) 
The  true  and  real  things  which  occur,  (3)  The  abstract 
things  which  recur,  (4)  The  Laws  of  Nature.  An  example 
of  the  first  heading  is  a  piece  of  rock,  or — to  pass  beyond 
mere  physical  science — the  individuality  of  a  human  be¬ 
ing,  his  soul,  as  Plato  would  have  it.  An  example  of  the 
second  kind  is  any  happenings,  in  a  street,  in  a  room,  in 
an  animal  body,  or — again  to  pass  beyond  mere  physical 
science — our  individual  complex  experience  within  a  tenth 
of  a  second.  An  example  of  the  third  type  is  the  shape  of  a 
rock.  It  seems  doubtful  whether  a  shade  of  colour,  or  the 
qualitative  element  in  the  performance  of  a  musical  sym¬ 
phony,  are  to  be  reckoned  as  concerned  with  nature  or 
mentality.  But  certainly  they  recur.  On  the  other  hand  a 
sort  of  feeling  of  affection  is  a  recurrence  which  belongs 
decidedly  to  the  mental  side  of  things.  An  example  of  the 
fourth  heading  is  the  Law  of  Gravitation,  or  the  geometri¬ 
cal  Relations  of  Things. 

I  am  not  going  to  plunge  into  a  metaphysical  discussion 
at  the  close  of  a  chapter,  already  sufficiently  complex.  Put 
it  is  relevant  to  point  out,  how  superficial  are  our  contro¬ 
versies  on  sociological  theory  apart  from  some  more  funda- 


The  Humanitarian  Ideal  47 

mental  determination  of  what  we  are  talking  about.  The 
four  topics  above  at  once  suggest  a  host  of  perplexing  ques- 
ions,  which  have  puzzled  thinkers  from  the  time  of  Plato 
to  the  present  time.  In  these  two  chapters  we  have  been 
tracing  the  history  of  three  very  different  types  of  thought, 
(a)  the  Platonic-Religious  ideas,  (b)  Individualistic,  Com¬ 
petitive  ideas  of  Commercial  Society,  (c)  the  idea  of 
physical  science.  Also  each  of  these  types  involves  internal 
complexities.  Now  we  may  hold,  indeed  I  think  we  must 
hold,  that  each  of  these  strains  of  theory  is  the  outcome  of 
valid  intuitions  and  embodies  truths  about  the  nature  of 
things  which  cannot  be  set  aside.  It  seems  an  easy  solution 
to  hold  that  each  type  of  idea  is  within  its  own  sphere  au¬ 
tonomous.  In  that  case,  the-  controversies  arise  from  the 
illegitimate  poaching  of  one  type  oyer  the  proper  territory 
of  some  other  type.  For  example,  it  is  fashionable  to  state 
that  religion  and  science  can  never  clash  because  they  deal 
with  different  topics.  I  believe  that  this  solution  is  entirely 
mistaken.  In  this..'**"  1----*,^  u  cannot  tear  aoarf- 


48  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

ally  employed,  the  phrase  refers  to  the  greatest  number  of 
men.  It  therefore  refers  to  endurances  and  not  to  occur¬ 
rences.  But  can  we  really  correlate  the  happinesses  of  thre 
shortlived  men  with  that  of  one  longlived  man?  Then 
again  there  are  the  qualitative  differences  between  differ¬ 
ent  types  of  happiness.  Finally  we  conclude  that  before  we 
can  profitably  proceed  with  this  discussion,  it  is  cessary 
to  attain  some  clarity  in  our  metaphysics,  notions  pOct- 
ing  endurances,  occurrences,  and  things  that  er 

Section  VIII.  We  now  pass  to  Science  and  usk  .ether 
it  provides  us  with  any  clear  notions,  independents,  of  a 
metaphysical  discussion.  Science  is  founded  on  the  notion 
of  Law — The  Laws  of  Nature.  The  notion  is  that  there 
are  many  things  in  the  woykC  whose  behaviour  towards 
each  other  always  exemplifies  fixed  rules.  These  rules  are 
evidently  indicating  recurrences  which  never  fall  to  recur. 
Yet  here  a  perplexity  arises  as  to  the  connection  of  the 
Laws  with  the  behaving  things.  Behaviours  differ  widely  in 
a  city — New  York,  for  ~  ~  L“*<^fQrest,  in  a  sub- 


uxxuvoo  aiiu.  uuuit'5*  j-»ut  aa  ouun  d.b 

7ou  find  the  supreme  importance  of  ma*. 

/hat  you  are  taking  about.  It  is  fatal  to 
;ally  from  thv  things  which  endure  to  the  unngs  wmw 
occur,  and  from  the  things  which  occur  to  the  things  which 
recur.  Discussions  based  on  no  metaphysical  clarity  in  the 
discrimination  <  endurance,  occurrence,  recurrence,  can 
be  made  sophisfi  illy  to  prove  anything. 

For  example,  l:  the  statement  of  the  Utilitarian  Prin¬ 
ciple,  we  find  the  phrase  ‘The  Greatest  Happiness  of  The 
Greatest  Number.’  Evidently  this  phrase  has  a  meaning,  at 
least  sufficient  for  us  to  take  it  as  a  rough  guide  to  action. 
But  when  we  use  th<5.  formula  as  a  criticism  of  the  other 
points  of  view  we  are  entitled  to  ask  what  it  means.  The 
'Happiness’  is  evidently  a  recurrent,  and  it  is  differentiated 
into  grades  of  intensity,  so  that  one  occurrence  may  be 
more  intense  than  another  in  point  of  Happiness.  But  what 
is  meant  by  the  addition  of  the  Happinesses  of  different  oc¬ 
currences.  There  is  no  occurence  with  the  Happiness  of 
this  addition  sum.  At  least,  if  there  be  such  an  occurrence, 
U  ought  to  be  indicated  in  the  principle,  and  this  indica¬ 
tion  will  lead  us  in  the  direction  of  the  discarded  Platonism. 
Again,  we  must  know  the  relation  of  the  endurances  to  the 
occurrences  in  order  to  understand  the  principle.  As  usu- 


aely  on  the  Moon,  on  tht*  atmosphere  of 
^  interior  of  a  dense  star  in  inter-stellar 

^ace. 

This  is  very  superficial.  We  all  know  that  if  we  analyse 
the  things  into  molecules  the  laws  of  chemistry  are  the  same 
in  the  city,  the  forest,  the  desert  and  tl  icefield.  These 
laws  of  chemistry  express  the  mutual  b  aaviour  of  mole¬ 
cules,  packed  with  sufficient  closeness.  But  molecules  are 
analysable.  Things  behave  very  di  Terentiy  amid  a  close 
pack  of  molecules  from  their  behaviour  s  mid  the  vibrations 
of  so-called  empty  space.  The  chemical  laws  are  merely 
relevant  to  the  inter-relations  of  molecules.  In  empty  space 
we  are  driven  back  to  the  fundamental  electromagnetic 
laws  controlling  the  flux  of  energy.  At  this  point  we  have 
to  stop  our  regression,  merely  because  our  penetration  has 
come  to  an  end. 

But  there  is  no  reason  to  doubt  that  the  laws  are  the 
outcome  of  the  environment  <jf  electromagnetic  occasions. 
This  whole  process  of  regression  suggests  an  inversion  of 
ideas.  The  laws  are  the  outcome  of  the  character  of  the  be¬ 
having  things:  they  are  the  ‘communal  customs’  of  which 
Clement  spoke.  This  conception  should  replace  the  older 
idea  of  given  things  with  mutual  behaviour  conditioned 


The  Humanitarian  Ideal  47 

mental  determination  of  what  we  are  talking  about.  The 
four  topics  above  at  once  suggest  a  host  of  perplexing  ques- 
ions,  which  have  puzzled  thinkers  from  the  time  of  Plato 
to  the  present  time.  In  these  two  chapters  we  have  been 
tracing  the  history  of  three  very  different  types  of  thought, 
(a)  the  Platonic-Religious  ideas,  (b)  Individualistic,  Com¬ 
petitive  ideas  of  Commercial  Society,  (c)  the  idea  of 
physical  science.  Also  each  of  these  types  involves  internal 
complexities.  Now  we  may  hold,  indeed  I  think  we  must 
hold,  that  each  of  these  strains  of  theory  is  the  outcome  of 
valid  intuitions  and  embodies  truths  about  the  nature  of 
things  which  cannot  be  set  aside.  It  seems  an  easy  solution 
to  hold  that  each  type  of  idea  is  within  its  own  sphere  au¬ 
tonomous.  In  that  case,  thV  controversies  arise  from  the 
illegitimate  poaching  of  one  type  ^ver  the -proper  territory7 
of  some  other  type.  For  example,  it  is  fashionable  to  state 
that  religion  and  science  can  never  clash  because  they  deal 
with  different  topics.  I  believe  that  this  solution  is  entirely 
mistaken.  In  this  vvbrld  at  lea^st,  you  cannot  tear  apart 
Inihds  and  bodie  s.  But  as  soon  as  .you  try  to  adjust  ideas 
mu  find  the  supreme  mportance  of  masking  perfectly  clear, 
/hat  you  are  ta''  :  ibout.  It  is  fatal  to  ^oscillate  uncriti- 
;ally  from  tlr-  things  which  endure  to  the  lfiih^^rdKSb. 
occur,  and  from  the  things  which  occur  to  the  things  which 
recur.  Discussions  based  on  no  metaphysical  clarity  in  the 
discrimination  (  endurance,  occurrence,  recurrence,  can 
be  made  sophisti  illy  to  prove  anything. 

For  example,  l  the  statement  of  the  Utilitarian  Prin¬ 
ciple,  we  find  the  p'hrase  ‘The  Greatest  Happiness  of  The 
Greatest  Number.’  Evidently  this  phrase  has  a  meaning,  at 
least  sufficient  for  us  to  take  it  as  a  rough  guide  to  action. 
But  when  we  use  tho  formula  as  a  criticism  of  the  other 
points  of  view  we  are  entitled  to  ask  what  it  means.  The 
‘Happiness’  is  evidently  a  recurrent,  and  it  is  differentiated 
into  grades  of  intensity,  s o  that  one  occurrence  may  be 
more  intense  than  another  iff  point  of  Happiness.  But  what 
is  meant  by  the  addition  of  the  Happinesses  of  different  oc¬ 
currences.  There  is  no  occurrence  with  the  Happiness  of 
this  addition  sum.  At  least,  if  there  be  such  an  occurrence, 
it  ought  to  be  indicated  in  the  principle,  and  this  indica¬ 
tion  will  lead  us  in  the  direction  of  the  discarded  Platonism. 
'Again,  we  must  know  the  relation  of  the  endurances  to  the 
-occurrences  in  order  to  understand  the  principle.  As  usu- 


48  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

ally  employed,  the  phrase  refers  to  the  greatest  number  of 
men.  It  therefore  refers  to  endurances  and  not  to  occur¬ 
rences.  But  can  we  really  correlate  the  happinesses  of  thre 
shortlived  men  with  that  of  one  longlived  man?  Then 
again  there  are  the  qualitative  differences  between  differ¬ 
ent  types  of  happiness.  Finally  we  conclude  that  before  We 
can  profitably  proceed  with  this  discussion,  it  is  necessity 
to  attain  some  clarity  in  our  metaphysics  notion/'  respect¬ 
ing  endurances,  occurrences,  and  tilings  that 

Section  VIII.  We  now  pass  to  Science  nnc  .  /  i  Aether 
it  provides  us  with  any  clear  notions,  independently  of  a 
metaphysical  discussion.  Science  is  founded  on  the  notion 
0f  Law — The  Laws  of  Nature^  Tlie  notion  is  that  there 
are  many  things  in  the  wo£k£  whose  behaviour  towards 
each  other  always  exerapfffi.es  fixed  rules.  These  rules  are 
evidently  indicating  recurrences  which  never  fail  to  recur. 
Yet  here  a  perplexity  arises  as  to  the  connection  of  the 
Laws  with  the  behaving  things.  Behaviours  differ  widely  in 
a  city — New  York,  for  jHlsfance— iff  "U  forest,  in  a  sub¬ 
tropical  desert,  in  an  Arctic  icefield.  Also,  to  travel  fur¬ 
ther,  they  differ  widely  on  the  Moon,  on  th&  atmosphere  of 
the  Sun,  in  interior  of  a  dense  star  in  inter-stellar 

This  is  very  superficial.  We  all  know  that  if  we  analyse 
the  things  into  molecules  the  laws  of  chemistry  are  the  same 
in  the  city,  the  forest,  the  desert  and  tv  icefield.  These 
laws  of  chemistry  express  the  mutual  t  aaviour  of  mole¬ 
cules,  packed  with  sufficient  closeness.  But  molecules  are 
analysable.  Things  behave  very  differently  amid  a  close 
pack  of  molecules  from  their  behaviou  -  md  the  vibrations 
of  so-called  empty  space.  The  chemical  laws  are  merely 
relevant  to  the  inter-relations  of  molecules.  In  empty  space 
we  are  driven  back  to  the  fundamental  electromagnetic 
laws  controlling  the  flux  of  energy.  At  this  point  we  have 
to  stop  our  regression,  merely  because  our  penetration  has 
come  to  an  end. 

But  there  is  no  reason  to  doubt  that  the  laws  are  the 
outcome  of  the  environment  iff  electromagnetic  occasions. 
This  whole  process  of  regression  suggests  an  inversion  of 
ideas.  The  laws  are  the  outcome  of  the  character  of  the  be¬ 
having  things:  they  are  the  ‘communal  customs’  of  which 
Clement  spoke.  This  conception  should  replace  the  older 
idea  of  given  things  with  mutual  behaviour  conditioned 


The  Humanitarian  Ideal  49 


by  imposed  laws.  What  we  know  of  external  nature  is 
wholly  in  terms  of  how  the  various  occasions  in  nature  con¬ 
tribute  to  each  other’s  natures.  The  whole  environment 
participates  in  the  nature  of  each  of  its  occasions.  Thus 
each  occasion  takes  its  initial  form  from  the  character  of 
its  environment.  Also  the  laws  which  condition  each  en¬ 
vironment  merely  express  the  general  character  of  the  oc¬ 
casions  composing  that  environment.  This  is  the  doctrine 
of  the  definition  of  tilings  in  terms  of  their  modes  of 
functioning. 

But  we  are  now  drawing  close  to  the  impracticable 
ethics  of  Christianity.  The  ideals  cherished  in  the  souls  of 
men  enter  into  the  character  of  their  actions.  These  inter¬ 
actions  within  society  modify  the  social  laws  by  modifying 
the  occasions  to  which  those  laws  apply.  Impracticable 
ideals  are  a  program  for  reform.  Such  a  program  is  not  to 
be  criticized  by  immediate  possibilities.  Progress  consists  in 
modifying  the  laws  of  nature  so  that  the  Republic  on  Earth 
may  conform  to  that  Society  to  be  discerned  ideally  by  the 
divination  of  Wisdom. 

In  these  two  chapters,  we  have  been  considering  the  ad¬ 
ventures  in  the  history  of  Europe  of  a  great  idea.  Plato 
conceived  the  notion  of  the  ideal  relations  between  men 
based  upon  a  conception  of  the  intrinsic  possibilities  of  hu¬ 
man  character.  We  see  this  idea  enter  into  human  conscious¬ 
ness  in  every  variety  of  specialization.  It  forms  alliances 
with  allied  notions  generated  by  religion.  It  differen¬ 
tiates  its  specializations  according  to  the  differentiations  of 
the  diverse  religions  and  diverse  scepticisms  associated  with 
it.  At  times  it  dies  down.  But  it  ever  recurs.  It  is  criticized, 
and  it  is  also  a  critic.  Force  is  always  against  it.  Its  victory 
is  the  victory  of  persuasion  over  force.  The  force  is  the 
sheer  fact  of  what  the  antecedent  volume  of  the  world  in 
fact  contains.  The  idea  is  a  prophecy  which  procures  its 
own  fulfillment. 

The  power  of  an  ideal  consists  in  this.  When  we  examine 
the  general  world  of  occurrent  fact,  we  find  that  its  general 
character,  practically  inescapable,  is  neutral  in  respect  to 
the  realization  of  intrinsic  value.  The  electromagnetic  occa¬ 
sions  and  the  electromagnetic  laws,  the  molecular  occasions 
and  the  molecular  laws,  are  all  alike  neutral.  They  condi¬ 
tion  the  sort  of  values  which  are  possible,  but  they  do  not 
determine  the  specialties  of  value.  When  we  examine  the 


50  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

specializations  of  societies  which  determine  values  with 
some  particularity,  such  specializations  as  societies  of  men, 
forests,  deserts,  prairies,  icefields,  we  find,  within  limits, 
plasticity.  The  story  of  Plato’s  idea  is  the  story  of  its  ener¬ 
gizing  within  a  local  plastic  environment.  It  has  a  creative 
power,  making  possible  its  own  approach  to  realization. 


4.  Aspects  of  Freedom 

Section  I.  The  cultural  history  of  Western  Civilization 
for  the  period  illuminated  by  written  records  can  be  con¬ 
sidered  from  many  aspects.  It  can  be  conceived  under  the 
guise  of  a  steady  economic  progression,  diversified  by  catas¬ 
trophic  collapses  to  lower  levels.  Such  a  point  of  view 
emphasizes  technology  and  economic  organization.  Al¬ 
ternatively,  history  can  be  conceived  as  a  series  of  oscilla¬ 
tions  between  worldliness  and  other- worldliness,  or  as  a 
theatre  of  contest  between  greed  and  virtue,  or  between 
truth  and  error.  Such  points  of  view  emphasize  religion, 
morality,  and  contemplative  habits  eliciting  generaliza¬ 
tions  of  thought.  Each  mode  of  consideration  is  a  sort  of 
searchlight  elucidating  some  of  the  facts,  and  retreating 
the  remainder  into  an  omitted  background.  Of  course  in 
any  history,  even  with  a  restricted  topic,  limited  to  politics, 
or  to  art,  or  to  science,  many  points  of  view  are  in  fact 
interwoven,  each  with  varying  grades  of  generality. 

One  of  the  most  general  philosophic  notions  to  be  used 
in  the  analysis  of  civilized  activities  is  to  consider  the  effect 
on  social  life  due  to  the  variations  of  emphasis  between 
Individual  Absoluteness  and  Individual  Relativity.  Here 
‘absoluteness’  means  the  notion  of  release  from  essential 
dependence  on  other  members  of  the  community  in  respect 
to  modes  of  activity,  while  relativity  means  the  converse 
fact  of  essential  relatedness.  In  one  of  their  particulariza¬ 
tions  these  ideas  appear  in  the  antagonism  between  notions 
of  freedom  and  of  social  organization.  In  another  they 
appear  in  the  relative  importance  to  be  ascribed  to  the 
welfare  of  the  state  and  to  the  welfare  of  its  individual 
members.  The  character  of  each  epoch  as  to  its  social 


Aspects  of  Freedom  51 

institutions,  its  jurisprudence,  its  notions  of  ideal  ends 
within  the  range  of  practicability,  depends  largely  upon 
those  various  patches  of  activity  within  which  one  or  other 
of  these  notions,  individual  absoluteness  or  individual  rela¬ 
tivity,  is  dominant  for  that  epoch.  No  period  is  wholly 
controlled  by  either  one  of  these  extremes,  reigning  through 
its  whole  range  of  activities.  Repression  in  one  direction 
is  balanced  by  freedom  in  others.  Military  discipline  is 
severe.  In  the  last  resort  individual  soldiers  are  sacrificed 
to  the  army.  But  in  many  fields  of  human  activity  soldiers 
are  left  completely  unfettered  both  by  regulation  and  by 
custom.  For  members  of  university  faculties  the  repressions 
and  the  freedoms  are  very  different  from  those  which 
obtain  for  soldiers. 

Distribution  of  emphasis  between  absoluteness  and  rela¬ 
tivity  is  seemingly  arbitrary.  Of  course  there  is  always  a 
historical  reason  for  the  pattern.  Frequently  the  shifting  of 
emphasis  is  to  be  ascribed  to  the  general  tendency  to  revolt 
from  the  immediate  past — to  interchange  black  and  white 
wherever  we  find  them.  Also  the  transformation  may  be  a 
judgment  upon  dogmas  held  responsible  for  inherited  fail¬ 
ures.  It  should  be  one  function  of  history  to  disengage  such 
a  judgment  from  the  irritation  due  to  transient  circum¬ 
stances. 

More  often  changes  in  the  social  pattern  of  intellectual 
emphasis  arise  from  a  shift  of  power  from  one  class  or 
group  of  classes,  to  another  class,  or  group  of  classes.  For 
example,  an  oligarchic  aristocratic  government  and  a  demo¬ 
cratic  government  may  each  tend  to  emphasize  social 
organization,  that  is  to  say,  the  relativity  of  individuals  to 
the  state.  But  governments  mainly  satisfying  the  trading 
and  professional  classes,  whether  nominally  they  be  aristo¬ 
cratic,  democratic,  or  absolute,  emphasize  personal  free¬ 
dom,  that  is  to  say,  individual  absoluteness.  Governments 
of  the  latter  kind  have  been  that  of  Imperial  Rome  with  its 
middle  class  imperial  agents,  and  its  middle  class  stoic 
lawyers,  and  in  its  happiest  period  its  middle  class  em¬ 
perors;  and  that  of  England  in  the  eighteenth  and  nine¬ 
teenth  centuries. 

With  the  shift  of  dominant  classes,  points  of  view  which 
in  one  epoch  are  submerged,  only  to  be  detected  by  an 
occasional  ripple,  later  emerge  into  the  foreground  of  action 
and  literary  expression.  Thus  the  various  activities  of  each 


52  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

age — governmental,  literary,  scientific,  religious,  purely 
social — express  the  mentalities  of  various  classes  in  the 
community  whose  influence  for  those  topics  happens  to  be 
dominant.  In  one  of  his  speeches  on  the  American  Revolu¬ 
tion,  Burke  exclaims,  “For  heaven’s  sake,  satisfy  some¬ 
body.” 

Governments  are  best  classified  by  considering  who  are 
the  ‘somebodies’  they  are  in  fact  endeavouring  to  satisfy. 
Thus  the  English  government  of  the  first  sixty  years  of  the 
eighteenth  century  was,  as  to  its  form  and  its  persons, 
aristocratic.  But  in  policy  it  was  endeavouring  to  satisfy  the 
great  merchants  of  the  City  of  London  and  of  the  City  of 
Bristol.  Their  dissatisfaction  was  the  immediate  source  of 
danger.  Sir  Robert  Walpole  and  William  Pitt,  the  Great 
Commoner,  personify  the  changing  moods  of  this  class,  in 
the  earlier  period  sick  of  wars,  and  later  imperialistic. 

In  a  period  when  inherited  modes  of  life  are  operating 
with  their  traditional  standard  of  efficiency,  or  inefficiency, 
the  class  to  be  actively  satisfied  may  be  relatively  restricted, 
for  example,  the  merchants  of  eighteenth  century  England. 
The  majority  will  then  be  relatively  quiescent,  and  con¬ 
servative  statesmen,  such  as  Walpole,  will  be  anxious  to  do 
nothing  to  stir  the  depths — ‘Quieta  non  movere.’  Walpole 
was  an  active  reformer  in  respect  to  trade  interests,  other¬ 
wise  a  conservative. 

The  corresponding  statesmen  in  France  were  actively 
concerned  with  the  interests  of  the  Court  whose  power  was 
based  on  a  bureaucracy  (legal,  administrative,  and  ecclesi¬ 
astical)  and  an  army.  As  in  contemporary  England,  the 
personnel  of  the  whole  French  organization,  civil  and  mili¬ 
tary,  was  aristocratic  and  middle  class.  French  politics 
ran  more  smoothly,  but  unfortunately  for  France  its  active 
political  element  was  more  divorced  from  the  main  interests 
of  the  country  than  the  active  element  in  England,  though 
in  each  country  government  exhibited  its  periods  of  insight 
and  folly.  The  French  emphasis  was  towards  coordination, 
the  English  towards  individual  freedom.  In  the  latter  por¬ 
tion  of  this  century,  in  England  the  more  active  class  poli¬ 
tically  were  the  rural  landowners.  Note  for  instance  the 
way  in  which,  at  the  end  of  his  political  life,  Burke  hugs 
the  improbable  belief  that  he  understood  agriculture.  Also 
the  municipality  of  the  City  of  London  was  in  the  earlier 
period  an  element  of  support  for  the  government,  and — 


Aspects  of  Freedom  53 

until  the  excesses  of  the  French  Revolution — in  the  later 
period  an  element  of  opposition. 

In  the  later  period  the  oncoming  industrial  revolution 
absorbed  the  energies  of  that  English  industrial  class,  whom 
at  the  earlier  period  the  slogan,  ‘The  Protestant  Succession5 
had  stirred  to  political  activity  because  for  them  it  spelled 
‘Industrial  Freedom.5  The  mass  of  the  people  were  now, 
towards  the  end  of  the  century,  stirring  uneasily,  as  yet 
ignorant  of  the  ways  in  which  their  interests  were  being 
determined,  and  with  its  better  members  engaged  in  saving 
their  souls  according  to  the  directions  of  John  Wesley. 
Finally  out  of  this  welter,  after  a  delay  caused  by  the  wars 
of  the  French  Revolution,  the  Victorian  epoch  emerged. 
The  solution  was  merely  temporary,  and  so  is  the  planet 
itself. 

Section  II.  In  our  endeavour  to  understand  sociological 
change  we  must  not  concentrate  too  exclusively  on  the 
effect  of  abstract  doctrine,  verbally  formulated  and  con¬ 
sciously  assented  to.  Such  elaborate  intellectual  efforts  play 
their  part  in  preserving,  or  transforming,  or  destroying. 
For  example,  die  history  of  Europe  is  not  to  be  understood 
without  some  reference  to  the  Augustinian  doctrines  of 
original  sin,  of  divine  grace,  and  of  the  consequent  mission 
of  die  Catholic  church.  The  history  of  the  United  States 
requires  in  addition  some  knowledge  of  the  English  politi¬ 
cal  doctrines  of  the  seventeenth  century,  and  of  French 
diought  in  the  eighteenth  century.  Men  are  driven  by  their 
thoughts  as  well  as  by  the  molecules  in  their  bodies,  by 
intelligence  and  by  senseless  forces.  Social  history,  how¬ 
ever,  concentrates  on  modes  of  human  experience  prev¬ 
alent  at  different  periods.  The  physical  conditions  are 
merely  the  background  which  partially  controls  the  flux  of 
modes  and  of  moods.  Even  here  we  must  not  over-in- 
tellectualize  the  various  types  of  human  experience.  Man¬ 
kind  is  the  animal  at  the  head  of  the  Primates,  and  cannot 
escape  habits  of  mind  which  cling  closely  to  habits  of  body. 

Our  consciousness  does  not  initiate  our  modes  of  func¬ 
tioning.  We  awake  to  find  ourselves  engaged  in  process, 
immersed  in  satisfactions  and  dissatisfactions,  and  actively 
modifying,  either  by  intensification,  or  by  attenuation,  or  by 
the  introduction  of  novel  purposes.  This  primary  procedure 
which  is  presupposed  in  consciousness,  I  will  term  Instinct. 
It  is  the  mode  of  experience  directly  arising  out  of  the  urge 


54  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

of  inheritance,  individual  and  environmental.  Also,  after 
instinct  and  intellectual  ferment  have  done  their  work,  there 
is  a  decision  which  determines  the  mode  of  coalescence  of 
instinct  with  intelligence.  I  will  term  this  factor  Wisdom. 
It  is  the  function  of  wisdom  to  act  as  a  modifying  agency 
on  the  intellectual  ferment  so  as  to  produce  a  self-deter¬ 
mined  issue  from  the  given  conditions.  Thus  for  the  purpose 
of  understanding  social  institutions,  this  crude  three-fold 
division  of  human  nature  is  required:  Instinct,  Intelligence, 
Wisdom. 

But  this  division  must  not  be  made  too  sharply.  After 
all,  intellectual  activity  is  itself  an  inherited  factor.  We  do 
not  initiate  thought  by  an  effort  of  self-consciousness.  We 
find  ourselves  thinking,  just  as  we  find  ourselves  breathing 
and  enjoying  the  sunset.  There  is  a  habit  of  daydreaming, 
and  a  habit  of  thoughtful  elucidation.  Thus  the  autonomy 
of  thought  is  strictly  limited,  often  negligible,  generally  be¬ 
yond  the  threshold  of  consciousness.  The  ways  of  thought 
of  a  nation  are  as  much  instinctive — that  is  to  say,  are 
subject  to  routine — as  are  its  ways  of  emotional  reaction. 
But  most  of  us  believe  that  there  is  a  spontaneity  of  thought 
which  lies  beyond  routine.  Otherwise,  the  moral  claim  for 
freedom  of  thought  is  without  meaning.  This  spontaneity 
of  thought  is,  in  its  turn,  subject  to  control  as  to  its  main¬ 
tenance  and  efficiency.  Such  control  is  the  judgment  of  the 
whole,  attenuating  or  strengthening  the  partial  flashes  of 
self-determination.  The  whole  determines  what  it  wills  to 
be,  and  thereby  adjusts  the  relative  importance  of  its  own 
inherent  flashes  of  spontaneity.  This  final  determination  is 
its  Wisdom  or,  in  other  words,  its  subjective  aim  as  to  its 
own  nature,  with  its  limits  set  by  inherited  factors. 

Wisdom  is  proportional  to  the  width  of  the  evidence 
made  effective  in  the  final  self-determination.  The  intellec¬ 
tual  operations  consist  in  the  coordination  of  notions 
derived  from  the  primary  facts  of  instinctive  experience  into 
a  logically  coherent  system.  Those  facts,  whose  qualitative 
aspects  are  thus  coordinated,  gain  importance  in  the  final 
self-determination.  This  intellectual  coordination  is  more 
readily  achieved  when  the  primary  facts  are  selected  so  as 
to  dismiss  the  baffling  aspects  of  things  into  intellectual 
subordination.  For  this  reason  intellectual  activity  is  apt  to 
flourish  at  the  expense  of  Wisdom.  To  some  extent,  to 
understand  is  always  to  exclude  a  background  of  intel- 


Aspects  of  Freedom  55 

lectual  incoherence.  But  Wisdom  is  persistent  pursuit  of 
the  deeper  understanding,  ever  confronting  intellectual 
system  with  the  importance  of  its  omissions.  These  three 
elements,  Instinct,  Intelligence,  Wisdom,  cannot  be  tom 
apart.  They  integrate,  react,  and  merge  into  hybrid  factors. 
It  is  the  case  of  the  whole  emerging  from  its  parts,  and 
the  parts  emerging  within  the  whole.  In  judging  social 
institutions,  their  rise,  their  culmination,  and  their 
decay,  we  have  to  estimate  the  types  of  instinct,  of  intelli¬ 
gence,  and  of  wisdom  which  have  cooperated  with  natural 
forces  to  develop  the  story.  The  folly  of  intelligent  people, 
clear-headed  and  narrow-visioned,  has  precipitated  many 
catastrophes. 

However  far  we  go  back  in  recorded  history,  we  are 
within  the  period  of  the  high  grade  functioning  of  man¬ 
kind,  far  removed  from  mere  animal  savagery.  Also,  within 
that  period  it  would  be  difficult  to  demonstrate  that  man¬ 
kind  has  improved  upon  its  inborn  mental  capacity.  Yet 
there  can  be  no  doubt  that  there  has  been  an  immense 
expansion  of  the  outfit  which  the  environment  provides  for 
the  service  of  thought.  This  outfit  can  be  summarized  under 
the  headings,  modes  of  communication,  physical  and 
mental,  writing,  preservation  of  documents,  variety  of 
modes  of  literature,  critical  thought,  systematic  thought, 
constructive  thought,  history,  comparison  of  diverse  lan¬ 
guages,  mathematical  symbolism,  improved  technology 
providing  physical  ease.  This  list  is  obviously  composed  of 
many  partially  redundant  and  overlapping  items.  But  it 
serves  to  remind  us  of  the  various  ways  in  which  we  have 
at  our  service  facilities  for  thought  and  suggestions  for 
thought,  far  beyond  those  at  hand  for  our  predecessors 
who  lived  anywhere  from  two  to  five  thousand  years  ago. 
Indeed  the  last  two  hundred  years  has  added  to  this  outfit 
in  a  way  which  may  create  a  new  epoch  unless  mankind 
degenerates.  Of  course,  a  large  share  of  this  outfit  had 
already  accumulated  between  two  and  three  thousand 
years  ago.  It  is  the  brilliant  use  which  the  leading  men  of 
that  millennium  made  of  their  opportunities  which  makes 
us  doubt  of  any  improvement  in  the  native  intelligence  of 
mankind. 

But  the  total  result  is  that  we  now  discern  a  certain 
simple-mindedness  in  the  way  our  predecessors  adjusted 
themselves  to  inherited  institutions.  To  a  far  greater  extent 


56  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

the  adjustment  was  a  matter  of  course,  in  short,  it  was 
instinctive.  In  the  great  period  they  discovered  what  we 
have  inherited.  But  there  was  a  naivety  about  the  discovery, 
a  surprise.  Instinctive  adaptation  was  so  pervasive  that  it 
was  unnoticed.  Probably  the  Egyptians  did  not  know  that 
they  were  governed  despotically,  or  that  the  priests  limited 
the  royal  power,  because  they  had  no  alternative  as  a  con¬ 
trast  either  in  fact  or  in  imagination.  They  were  nearer  in 
their  thoughts  to  the  political  philosophy  prevalent  in  an 
anthill. 

Another  aspect  of  this  fact  is  that  in  such  societies,  rela¬ 
tivity  is  stressed  rather  than  individual  freedom.  Indeed,  in 
the  earlier  stages  freedom  is  almost  a  meaningless  notion. 
Action  and  mood  both  spring  from  an  instinct  based  upon 
ancestral  coordination.  In  such  societies,  whatever  is  not 
the  outcome  of  inherited  relativity,  imposing  coordination 
of  action,  is  sheer  destructive  chaos.  Alien  groups  are  then 
evil  groups.  An  energetic  prophet  hewed  Agag  in  pieces. 
Unfortunately  the  spiritual  descendants  of  Samuel  still 
survive,  archaic  nuisances. 

Section  III.  We  can  watch  some  of  the  episodes  in  the 
discovery  of  freedom.  About  fourteen  hundred  years  before 
Christ,  the  Egyptian  king  Akhnaton  evidently  belonged  to 
an  advanced  group  who  thought  for  themselves  and  made 
a  step  beyond  the  inherited  religious  notions.  Such  groups, 
with  flashes  of  free  thought,  must  have  arisen  sporadically 
many  times  before,  during  countless  thousands  of  years, 
some  successful  and  most  of  them  failures.  Otherwise  the 
transition  to  civilization,  as  distinct  from  the  mere  diversity 
of  adaptations  of  thoughtless  customs,  could  never  have 
arisen.  Bees  and  ants  have  diverse  social  organizations;  but, 
so  far  as  we  know,  neither  species  is  in  any  sense  civilized. 
They  may  enjoy  thoughtless  adaptations  of  social  customs. 
Anyhow  their  flashes  of  freedom  are  below  the  level  that 
we  can  discern.  But  Akhnaton,  having  exercised  his  free¬ 
dom,  evidently  had  no  conception  of  freedom  as  such.  We 
have  all  the  evidence  archaeology  can  provide,  that  he 
rigidly  endeavoured  to  impose  his  notions  upon  the 
thoughts  and  customs  of  the  whole  Egyptian  nation.  Ap¬ 
parently  he  failed;  for  there  was  a  reaction.  But  reactions 
never  restore  with  minute  accuracy.  Thus  in  all  probability 
there  remained  a  difference  which  the  evidence  before  us 
is  unable  to  discriminate. 


Aspects  of  Freedom  57 

A  more  successful  group  were  the  Hebrew  prophets 
about  eight  or  nine  hundred  years  later.  Spurred  by  the 
evils  of  their  times  they  exercised  a  freedom  in  the  expres¬ 
sion  of  moral  intuition,  and  fitted  out  the  character  of 
Jehovah  with  the  results  of  their  thoughts.  Our  civilization 
owes  to  them  more  than  we  can  express.  They  constitute 
one  of  the  few  groups  of  men  who  decisively  altered  history 
in  any  intimate  sense.  Most  spectacular  upheavals  merely 
replace  one  set  of  individuals  by  another  analogous  set;  so 
that  history  is  mostly  a  barren  change  of  names.  But  the 
Hebrew  prophets  really  produced  a  decisive  qualitative 
alteration,  and  what  is  still  more  rare,  a  change  for  the 
better;  yet  the  conception  of  freedom  never  entered  into 
the  point  of  view  of  the  Jehovah  of  the  prophets.  Intoler¬ 
ance  is  the  besetting  sin  of  moral  fervours.  The  first  im¬ 
portant  pronouncement  in  which  tolerance  is  associated 
with  moral  fervour,  is  in  the  Parable  of  the  Tares  and  the 
Wheat,  some  centuries  later. 

Subsequent  examples  of  intolerance  supervening  upon 
the  exercise  of  freedom  are  afforded  by  the  Christian 
Church  after  its  establishment  by  Constantine,  and  by  the 
Protestants  under  the  guidance  of  Luther  and  Calvin.  At 
the  period  of  the  Reformation  mankind  had  begun  to  know 
better  and  so  charity  of  judgment  upon  the  Reformers 
begins  to  wear  thin.  But  then  charity  is  a  virtue  allied  to 
tolerance,  so  we  must  be  careful.  All  advanced  thinkers, 
sceptical  or  otherwise,  are  apt  to  be  intolerant,  in  the  past 
and  also  now.  On  the  whole,  tolerance  is  more  often  found 
in  connection  with  a  genial  orthodoxy.  The  apostles  of 
modem  tolerance — in  so  far  as  it  exists — are  Erasmus,  the 
Quakers,  and  John  Locke.  They  should  be  commemorated 
in  every  laboratory,  in  every  church,  and  in  every  court  of 
law.  We  must  however  remember  that  many  of  the  greatest 
seventeenth  century  statesmen  and  thinkers,  including  John 
Locke,  owed  their  lives  to  the  wide  tolerance  of  the  Dutch 
Republic. 

Certainly  these  men  were  not  the  originators  of  their 
admirable  ideas.  To  find  the  origins  we  must  go  behind 
them  for  two  thousand  years.  So  slow  is  translation  of  idea 
into  custom.  We  must  however  first  note  that  the  examples 
cited  have  all  been  concerned  with  religion.  There  are 
other  forms  of  behaviour,  active  and  contemplative.  The 
Athenians  have  given  us  the  first  surviving  instance  of  the 


58  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

explicit  recognition  of  the  importance  of  tolerance  in  re¬ 
spect  to  varieties  of  social  behaviour.  No  doubt  antecedent 
civilizations  must  have  provided  many  practical  examples 
of  it.  For  example,  it  is  difficult  to  believe  that  in  big 
metropolitan  cities  such  as  Babylon  and  Nineveh,  there 
was  much  detailed  supervision  of  social  behaviour.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  ways  of  life  in  Egypt  seem  to  have  been 
tightly  organized.  But  the  first  explicit  defence  of  social 
tolerance,  as  a  requisite  for  high  civilization,  is  found  in 
the  speech  of  Pericles  as  reported  by  Thucydides.  It  puts 
forth  the  conception  of  the  organized  society  successfully 
preserving  freedom  of  behaviour  for  its  individual  mem¬ 
bers.  Fifty  years  later,  in  the  same  social  group,  Plato 
introduced  deeper  notions  from  which  all  claims  for  free¬ 
dom  must  spring.  His  general  concept  of  the  psychic  factors 
in  the  Universe  stressed  them  as  the  source  of  all  spon¬ 
taneity,  and  ultimately  as  the  ground  of  all  life  and  motion. 
The  human  psychic  activity  thus  contains  the  origins  of 
precious  harmonies  within  the  transient  world.  The  end 
of  human  society  is  to  elicit  such  psychic  energies.  But 
spontaneity  is  of  the  essence  of  soul.  Such  in  outline  is  the 
argument  from  Platonic  modes  of  thought  to  the  im¬ 
portance  of  social  freedom. 

Plato’s  own  writings  constitute  one  prolonged  apology 
for  freedom  of  contemplation,  and  for  freedom  for  the 
communication  of  contemplative  experiences.  In  the  per¬ 
sistent  exercise  of  this  right  Socrates  and  Plato  lived,  and 
it  was  on  its  behalf  that  Socrates  died.  There  are  excep¬ 
tional  passages,  but  throughout  the  bulk  of  the  Dialogues 
Socrates  and  Plato  are  engaged  in  expressing  manners  of 
thought.  Hardly  ever  is  there  a  passage  which  can  be  di¬ 
rectly  translated  into  a  particular  action.  The  conclusions 
of  the  Republic  will  work  only  in  heaven.  The  great 
exception  is  The  Laws ,  which  is  a  minutely  practical 
scheme  for  the  establishment  of  small  city-states  of  the 
type  then  prevalent  in  the  yEgean  area.  The  Thucydidean 
Pericles  stresses  the  other  side.  He  is  thinking  of  the  activ¬ 
ities  of  the  individual  citizens.  The  peculiar  civilization  of 
the  speech  arises  from  its  stress  upon  the  aesthetic  end  of 
all  action.  A  Barbarian  speaks  in  terms  of  power.  He 
dreams  of  the  superman  with  the  mailed  fist.  He  may 
plaster  his  lust  with  sentimental  morality  of  Carlyle’s  type. 
But  ultimately  his  final  good  is  conceived  as  one  will  im- 


Aspects  of  Freedom  59 

posing  itself  upon  other  wills.  This  is  intellectual  barbarism. 
The  Periclean  ideal  is  action  weaving  itself  into  a  texture 
of  persuasive  beauty  analogous  to  the  delicate  splendor 
of  nature. 

The  establishment  of  freedom  requires  more  than  its 
mere  intellectual  defence.  Plato  above  all  men  introduced 
into  the  world  this  further  essential  element  of  civilization. 
For  he  exhibited  the  tone  of  mind  which  alone  can  main¬ 
tain  a  free  society,  and  he  expressed  the  reasons  justifying 
that  tone.  His  Dialogues  are  permeated  with  a  sense  of  the 
variousness  of  the  Universe,  not  to  be  fathomed  by  our 
intellects,  and  in  his  Seventh  Epistle  he  expressly  disclaims 
the  possibility  of  an  adequate  philosophic  system.  The 
moral  of  his  writings  is  that  all  points  of  view,  reasonably 
coherent  and  in  some  sense  with  an  application,  have  some¬ 
thing  to  contribute  to  our  understanding  of  the  universe, 
and  also  involve  omissions  whereby  they  fail  to  include  the 
totality  of  evident  fact.  The  duty  of  tolerance  is  our  finite 
homage  to  the  abundance  of  inexhaustible  novelty  which  is 
awaiting  the  future,  and  to  the  complexity  of  accomplished 
fact  which  exceeds  our  stretch  of  insight. 

Thus  two  types  of  character  must  be  excluded  from  those 
effectually  promoting  freedom.  One  type  belongs  to  those 
who  despair  of  attaining  any  measure  of  truth,  the  Sceptics. 
Such  temperaments  can  obviously  have  no  message  for 
those  who  hold  that  thought  does  count.  Again  the  pursuit 
of  freedom  with  an  intolerant  mentality  is  self-defeating. 
For  all  his  equipment  of  imagination,  learning,  and  literary 
magnificence  in  defence  of  freedom,  the  example  of  Mil¬ 
ton’s  life  probably  does  as  much  to  retard  the  cause  as  to 
advance  it.  He  promotes  a  frame  of  mind  of  which  the 
issue  is  intolerance. 

The  ancient  world  of  paganism  was  tolerant  as  to  creeds. 
Provided  that  your  actions  conformed,  your  speculations 
were  unnoticed.  Indeed,  one  mark  of  progress  beyond 
purely  instinctive  social  relations  is  an  uneasy  feeling  as  to 
the  destructive  effect  of  speculative  thought.  Creeds  are  at 
once  the  outcome  of  speculation  and  efforts  to  curb  specu¬ 
lation.  But  they  are  always  relevant  to  it.  Antecedently  to 
speculation  there  can  be  no  creeds.  Wherever  there  is  a 
creed,  there  is  a  heretic  round  the  corner  or  in  his  grave. 
Amid  the  great  empires,  Egyptian,  Mesopotamian,  and 
Hittite,  and  with  the  discovery  of  navigation,  the  inter- 


60  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

course  between  races  promoted  shrewd  comparisons  grad¬ 
ually  broadening  into  speculative  thought.  In  its  beginnings 
this  shift  in  human  mentality  must  have  developed  slowly. 
Where  there  is  no  anticipation,  change  has  to  wait  upon 
chance,  and  peters  out  amid  neglect.  Fortunately  the  Bible 
preserves  for  us  fragments  of  the  process  as  it  affected  one 
gifted  race  at  a  nodal  point.  The  record  has  been  written  up 
by  editors  with  the  mentality  of  later  times.  Thus  the  task 
of  modem  scholars  is  analogous  to  an  endeavour  to  recover 
the  histories  of  Denmark  and  Scotland  from  a  study  of 
Hamlet  and  Macbeth.  We  can  see  initial  antagonisms 
broadening  into  speculative  attempts  to  rationalize  the 
welter.  We  can  watch  Samuel  and  Agag  succeeded  by 
Solomon  and  the  Queen  of  Sheba.  There  are  the  medita¬ 
tions  of  Job  and  his  friends,  the  prophetical  books,  and  the 
‘wisdom’  books  of  the  Bible.  And  with  a  leap  of  six  hundred 
years  one  version  of  the  story  ends  with  the  creed  of  the 
Council  at  Nicaea. 

Section  IV.  The  episode  of  Greek  civilization  during  its 
short  phase  of  independence  created  a  new  situation.  Spec¬ 
ulation  was  explicitly  recognized.  It  was  ardently  pursued. 
Its  various  modes  and  methods  were  discovered.  The  rela¬ 
tion  of  the  Greeks  to  their  predecessors  is  analogous,  as  to 
stretch  of  time  and  intensity  of  effect,  to  that  of  the  second 
phase  of  the  modern  industrial  revolution  during  the  last 
fifty  years  to  the  first  phase  which  in  truth  sprawls  over  the 
long  centuries  from  the  fifteenth  century  to  the  close  of 
the  nineteenth. 

By  reason  of  its  inheritance  from  the  episode  of  Hellenic 
culture  the  Roman  Empire  was  more  self-conscious  than  its 
predecessors  in  its  treatment  of  the  problem  of  liberty  and 
of  the  allied  problem  of  social  institutions.  So  far  as  con¬ 
cerns  Western  Europe,  the  origin  of  the  Mediaeval  civiliza¬ 
tion  must  be  dated  from  the  Emperor  Augustus  and  the 
Journeys  of  St.  Paul.  For  the  Byzantine,  Semitic,  Egyptian 
area,  the  date  must  be  pushed  back  to  the  death  of  Alexan¬ 
der  the  Great,  and  the  renaissance  of  Graeco-Egyptian 
learning.  For  the  first  two  centuries  after  Augustus  the 
former  area,  centered  in  Italy,  was  incomparably  the  more 
important.  Latin  literature  is  the  translation  of  Hellenic 
culture  into  the  mediaeval  modes  of  thought,  extending  that 
period  to  end  with  the  French  Revolution.  Throughout  that 
whole  period  culture  was  backward  looking.  Lucretius, 


Aspects  of  Freedom  61 

Cicero,  Virgil  were  mediaevals  in  their  relation  to  Hellenic 
literature  and  speculation;  though  they  lacked  the  Semitic 
factor.  After  that  first  Latin  period,  the  notable  contribu¬ 
tions  to  thought.  Pagan,  Christian,  and  Mahometan,  all 
derive  from  the  eastern  region,  with  the  important  excep¬ 
tion  of  Augustine.  Finally,  the  centre  of  culture  again 
swings  westward,  as  the  Eastern  civilization  collapses  under 
the  prolonged  impacts  of  Tartars  and  Turks.  The  notes  of 
these  three  allied  cultures,  the  Eastern,  the  Latin,  and  the 
later  European,  are  scholarly  learning,  recurrence  to  Hel¬ 
lenic  speculation  re-stated  in  creedal  forms,  imitative  litera¬ 
tures  stressing  humane  aspirations,  the  canalization  of 
curiosity  into  professional  grooves,  and — in  the  West — a 
new  grade  of  intelligence  exhibited  in  the  development  of 
a  variety  of  social  institutions.  It  is  this  last  factor  which 
has  saved  the  progress  of  mankind. 

The  new  epoch  in  the  formation  of  social  institutions 
unfolded  itself  very  gradually.  It  is  not  yet  understood  in 
its  full  importance.  Social  philosophy  has  not  grasped  the 
relevant  principles,  so  that  even  now  each  case  is  treated  as 
a  peculiar  fact.  But  the  problem  of  liberty  has  been  trans¬ 
formed  by  it.  The  novelty  consists  in  the  deliberate  forma¬ 
tion  of  institutions,  embodying  purposes  of  special  groups, 
and  unconcerned  with  the  general  purposes  of  any  political 
state,  or  of  any  embodiment  of  tribal  unity  playing  the  part 
of  a  state.  Of  course  any  big  empire  involves  a  coalescence 
of  diverse  tribes,  customs,  and  modes  of  thought.  But  in 
the  earlier  examples,  each  subject  race  had  its  own  status 
in  the  complex  empire,  and  its  ways  of  procedure  were 
part  of  the  imperial  system.  Also  there  must  have  been 
complex  modes  of  behaviour,  peculiar  to  the  various  races, 
inherited  and  tolerated  as  a  matter  of  course.  In  the  case 
of  the  smaller  units  such  as  the  Greek  city  states,  we  find 
a  condition  of  affairs  in  which  all  corporate  action  is  an 
element  in  state-policy.  The  freedom  was  purely  individual, 
never  corporate.  All  incorporation,  religious  or  secular, 
was  communal,  or  patriarchal.  The  saying,  “Render  unto 
Caesar  the  things  that  are  Caesar’s  and  unto  God  the  things 
that  are  God’s”  was  uttered  by  Christ  in  the  reign  of 
Tiberius,  and  not  by  Plato  four  hundred  years  earlier. 
However  limited  may  be  the  original  intention  of  the  say¬ 
ing,  very  quickly  God  was  conceived  as  a  principle  of  or¬ 
ganization  in  complete  disjunction  from  Caesar. 


62  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

It  is  interesting  to  speculate  on  the  analogies  and  differ¬ 
ences  between  the  deaths  of  Socrates  and  of  Paul.  Both 
were  martyrs.  Socrates  died  because  his  speculative 
opinions  were  held  to  be  subversive  of  the  communal  life. 
It  is  difficult  to  believe  that  the  agents  of  Claudius,  or 
Nero,  or  Galba,  were  much  concerned  with  Paul’s  specula¬ 
tive  opinions  as  to  the  ways  of  God  to  man.  Later  on, 
Lucian’s  opinions  were  as  unorthodox  as  Paul’s.  But  he 
died  in  his  bed.  Unfortunately  for  Paul,  as  he  journeyed 
he  left  behind  him  organized  groups,  indulging  in  activities 
uncoordinated  with  any  purpose  of  state.  Thus  imperial 
agents  were  alarmed,  and  sympathized  with  popular  preju¬ 
dice.  Indeed,  we  know  exactly  what  one  of  the  best  of  the 
Roman  Emperors  about  half  a  century  later  thought  of 
the  matter.  Trajan  in  his  letter  to  the  younger  Pliny  dis¬ 
misses  Christian  Theology  as  negligible.  He  is  even  uncon¬ 
cerned  with  their  organization  into  groups,  so  long  as  no 
overt  action  emerges  affronting  the  traditional  association 
of  the  state  with  religion.  Yet  he  recognizes  that  the 
Christians  will  fit  into  no  current  political  philosophy,  and 
that  they  represent  corporate  actions  on  the  verge  of  the 
intolerable.  Thus,  if  circumstances  unearth  them,  they  are 
to  be  questioned,  dismissed  if  possible,  but  punished  when 
their  actions  become  glaring.  It  is  interesting  to  compare 
the  Christians  in  the  Roman  Empire,  from  Nero  to  Trajan, 
with  the  Communists  in  modem  America. 

Trajan  shows  himself  as  a  fine  statesman  dealing  with  the 
faint  dawn  of  a  new  epoch,  not  understood,  and  indeed 
not  yet  understood.  The  old  organization  of  mankind  was 
being  affected  by  the  influence  of  the  new  width  of  intel¬ 
lectuality  due  to  Hellenism.  Organizations  mainly  derived 
from  blind  inheritance,  and  affected  by  the  intellect  only 
in  detail  and  in  interpretation,  are  to  receive  the  shock  of 
other  types  founded  primarily  on  the  intellectual  apprecia¬ 
tion  of  private  ends,  that  is  to  say,  of  ends  unconcerned 
with  the  State.  What  Henry  Osbom  Taylor  has  termed 
‘rational  consideration’  is  becoming  a  major  force  in  human 
organization.  Of  course,  Plato  and  Aristotle  exhibited 
rational  consideration  on  a  magnificent  scale.  But  a  group 
of  thinkers  do  not  necessarily  constitute  a  political  force. 
Centuries,  sometimes  thousands  of  years,  have  to  elapse 
before  thought  can  capture  action.  It  is  typical  of  this  gap, 
that  Aristotle’s  manuscripts  are  said  to  have  been  stowed 


aspects  of  Freedom  63 

in  a  cellar  for  two  hundred  years,  and  that  even  to  this 
day  Plato  is  mainly  valued  as  a  religious  mystic  and  a 
supreme  literary  artist.  In  these  latter  functions,  Plato 
represents  the  world  he  inherited  and  not  the  world  he 
created.  Perhaps  these  constitute  his  best  part.  But  he 
played  two  roles. 

The  situation  in  the  Roman  Empire  was  in  effect  novel. 
Pericles  had  conceived  a  freedom  for  private  actions,  of  a 
certain  civilized  type  within  narrowly  restricted  bounds. 
Plato  voices  the  claim  for  contemplative  freedom.  But  the 
Empire  was  faced  with  the  claim  for  freedom  of  corporate 
action.  Modem  political  history,  from  that  day  to  this,  is 
the  confused  story  of  the  strenuous  resistance  of  the  State, 
and  of  its  partial  concessions.  The  Empire  reasserted  the 
old  doctrine  of  the  divine  Emperor;  but  also  yielded  by 
admitting  as  legal  principle  the  Stoic  doctrine  of  the  Voice 
of  Nature.  The  Middle  Ages  compromised  with  the  doc¬ 
trine  of  the  two  swords.  In  recent  times,  the  State  is  fighting 
behind  its  last  ditch,  which  is  the  legal  doctrine  of  sover¬ 
eignty.  The  thought  of  the  seventeenth  and  eighteenth  cen¬ 
turies  rationalized  its  political  philosophy  under  the  fiction 
of  the  ‘Original  Contract.’  This  concept  proved  itself 
formidable.  It  helped  to  dismiss  the  Stuarts  into  romance, 
to  found  the  American  Republic,  and  to  bring  about  the 
French  Revolution.  Indeed,  it  was  one  of  the  most  timely 
notions  known  to  history.  Its  weakness  is  that  it  antedates 
the  era  of  the  importance  of  rational  consideration,  and 
overestimates  the  political  importance  which  at  any  time 
reason  has  possessed.  The  antagonistic  doctrine  was  that  of 
the  ‘Divine  Right  of  Kings,’  which  is  the  ghost  of  the 
‘divine  Emperor.’ 

Section  V.  Political  philosophy  can  claim  no  exemption 
from  the  doctrine  of  the  golden  mean.  Unrestricted  liberty 
means  complete  absence  of  any  compulsory  coordination. 
Human  society  in  the  absence  of  any  compulsion  is  trusting 
to  the  happy  coordination  of  individual  emotions,  purposes, 
affections,  and  actions.  Civilization  can  only  exist  amid  a 
population  which  in  the  mass  does  exhibit  this  fortunate 
mutual  adaptation.  Unfortunately  a  minority  of  adverse  in¬ 
dividual  instances,  when  unchecked,  are  sufficient  to  upset 
the  social  structure.  A  few  men  in  the  whole  caste  of  their 
character,  and  most  men  in  some  of  their  actions,  are  anti¬ 
social  in  respect  to  the  peculiar  type  of  any  society  possible 


64  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

in  their  time.  There  can  be  no  evasion  of  the  plain  fact 
that  compulsion  is  necessary  and  that  compulsion  is  the 
restriction  of  liberty. 

It  follows  that  a  doctrine  as  to  the  social  mingling  of 
liberty  and  compulsion  is  required.  A  mere  unqualified  de¬ 
mand  for  liberty  is  the  issue  of  shallow  philosophy,  equally 
noxious  with  the  antithetical  cry  for  mere  conformation  to 
standard  pattern.  Probably,  there  can  be  no  one  solution 
of  this  problem  adapted  to  all  the  circumstances  of  human 
societies  which  have  been  and  will  be.  We  must  confine 
ourselves  to  the  way  in  which  at  the  present  day  the  issue  is 
being  adjusted  in  the  Western  civilization,  European  and 
American. 

Roughly  speaking,  the  main  effectiveness  of  this  solution 
presupposes  a  wide  distribution  of  institutions  founded 
upon  professional  qualifications  and  exacting  such  quali¬ 
fications.  Obviously  the  canalization  of  a  variety  of  occu¬ 
pations  into  professions  is  a  pre-requisite.  Here  the  term 
Profession  means  an  avocation  whose  activities  are  sub¬ 
jected  to  theoretical  analysis,  and  are  modified  by  theoreti¬ 
cal  conclusions  derived  from  that  analysis.  This  analysis 
has  regard  to  the  purpose  of  the  avocation  and  to  the  adap¬ 
tation  of  the  activities  for  the  attainment  of  those  purposes. 
Such  criticism  must  be  founded  upon  some  understanding 
of  the  natures  of  the  things  involved  in  those  activities,  so 
that  the  results  of  action  can  be  foreseen.  Thus  foresight 
based  upon  theory,  and  theory  based  upon  understanding 
of  the  nature  of  things,  are  essential  to  a  profession.  Again 
the  purposes  of  a  profession  are  not  a  simple  bundle  of 
definite  ends.  There  is  a  general  purpose,  such  as  the  cur¬ 
ing  of  sickness,  which  defines  medicine.  But  in  a  multitude 
of  ways  every  human  body  might  be  in  a  better  state  of 
biological  fitness,  and  might  easily  be  worse.  There  has  in 
every  case  to  be  a  selection  of  ends  dependent  partly  on  in¬ 
trinsic  importance  if  attained,  and  partly  upon  practica¬ 
bility  of  attainment.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  the  practice 
of  a  profession  cannot  be  disjoined  from  its  theoretical 
understanding,  and  vice  versa .  We  do  however  find  it 
necessary  to  specialize  even  further,  not  only  within  some 
department  of  that  profession,  such  as  surgery,  but  also 
either  to  a  major  consideration  of  its  theory  or  to  a  major 
devotion  to  its  current  practice. 

The  antithesis  to  a  profession  is  an  avocation  based  upon 


Aspects  of  Freedom  65 

customary  activities  and  modified  by  the  trial  and  error  of 
individual  practice.  Such  an  avocation  is  a  Craft,  or  at  a 
lower  level  of  individual  skill  it  is  merely  a  customary  di¬ 
rection  of  muscular  labour.  The  ancient  civilizations  were 
dominated  by  crafts.  Modern  life  ever  to  a  greater  extent  is 
grouping  itself  into  professions.  Thus  ancient  society  was 
a  coordination  of  crafts  for  the  instinctive  purposes  of  com¬ 
munal  life,  whereas  modem  society  is  a  coordination  of 
professions.  Without  question  the  distinction  between  crafts 
and  professions  is  not  clear-cut.  In  all  stages  of  civilization, 
crafts  are  shot  through  and  through  with  flashes  of  con¬ 
structive  understanding,  and  professions  are  based  upon 
inherited  procedures.  Nor  is  it  true  that  the  type  of  men 
involved  are  to  be  ranked  higher  in  proportion  to  the 
dominance  of  abstract  mentality  in  their  lives.  On  the 
contrary,  a  due  proportion  of  craftsmanship  seems  to  breed 
the  finer  types.  The  brilliant  ability,  in  proportion  to  popu¬ 
lation,  of  Europe  in  the  fifteenth,  sixteenth,  and  seven¬ 
teenth  centuries  suggests  that  at  about  that  period  the  best 
harmony  had  been  reached.  Pure  mentality  easily  be¬ 
comes  trivial  in  its  grasp  of  fact. 

The  organization  of  professions  by  means  of  self- 
governing  institutions  places  the  problem  of  liberty  at  a 
new  angle.  For  now  it  is  the  institution  which  claims  liberty 
and  also  exercises  control.  In  ancient  Egypt  the  Pharaoh 
decided,  acting  through  his  agents.  In  the  modem  world 
a  variety  of  institutions  have  the  power  of  action  without 
immediate  reference  to  the  state.  This  new  form  of  liberty 
which  is  the  autonomous  institution  limited  to  special  pur¬ 
poses,  was  especially  exemplified  in  the  guilds  of  the  middle 
ages;  and  that  period  was  characterized  by  a  remarkable 
growth  of  civilized  genius.  The  meaning  that — in  England 
at  least — was  then  assigned  to  the  word  ‘liberty’  illustrates 
the  projection  of  the  new  social  structure  upon  the  older 
form  of  customary  determination.  For  a  ‘liberty’  did  not 
then  mean  a  general  freedom,  but  a  special  license  to  a 
particular  group  to  organize  itself  within  a  special  field  of 
action.  For  this  reason  ‘liberties’  were  sometimes  a  general 
nuisance. 

Of  course  the  Catholic  Church  was  the  great  ‘liberty’ 
which  first  confronted  the  Roman  Empire,  and  then  domi¬ 
nated  mediaeval  life.  In  its  early  stages  it  is  seen  in  its 
proper  theoretical  relation  to  other  autonomous  societies. 


66  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

For  example  in  the  pagan  Empire,  its  legal  status  seems 
to  have  been  analogous  to  that  of  the  pagan  burial  socie¬ 
ties;  although  the  status  of  the  Church  property  before  the 
age  of  Constantine  has  not  yet  been  finally  elucidated  by 
scholars.  But  in  the  middle  ages,  the  Church  so  towered 
above  other  institutions  that  it  out-rivalled  the  state  itself. 
Accordingly  its  analogy  to  secular  guilds  and  to  other  pro¬ 
fessional  institutions  such  as  universities  was  obscured  by 
its  greatness.  The  Catholic  Church  had  another  character¬ 
istic  of  priceless  value.  It  was,  so  far  as  concerned  Europe, 
universal,  that  is  to  say,  catholic.  Until  the  approach  of 
the  Renaissance  there  were  no  European  nations  in  the 
modem  sense.  But  the  Church  transcended  all  govern¬ 
mental  boundaries,  all  racial  divisions  and  all  geographic 
divisions.  It  was  a  standing  challenge  to  any  form  of  com¬ 
munal  despotism,  a  universal  ‘liberty.’ 

Section  VI.  From  the  beginning  of  the  sixteenth  cen¬ 
tury  this  first  form  of  institutional  civilization,  with  its 
feudalism,  its  guilds,  its  universities,  its  Catholic  Church, 
was  in  full  decay.  The  new  middle  classes,  whether  scholars 
or  traders,  would  have  none  of  it.  They  were  individualists. 
For  them  the  universities  were  secondary,  the  monasteries 
were  a  nuisance,  the  Church  was  a  nuisance,  feudalism  was 
a  nuisance,  the  guilds  were  a  nuisance.  They  wanted  good 
order,  and  to  be  let  alone  with  their  individual  activities. 
The  great  thinkers  of  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  cen¬ 
turies  were  singularly  detached  from  universities.  Erasmus 
wanted  printers,  and  Bacon,  Hervey,  Descartes,  Galileo, 
Leibniz,  wanted  governmental  patronage,  or  protection, 
more  than  university  colleagues,  mostly  reactionary.  When 
Luther,  Descartes,  Galileo,  or  Leibniz  shifted  his  residence, 
it  was  not  to  find  a  better  university,  but  a  more  suitable 
government — a  Duke  who  would  protect,  a  Prince  who 
would  pay,  or  a  Dutch  Republic  which  would  not  ask 
questions.  Nevertheless,  the  universities  survived  the  change 
better  than  other  institutions.  In  some  ways  it  was  a  great 
time  for  them,  though  they  shrank  to  be  national.  What 
finally  emerged  was  the  modem  national  organization  of 
Europe  with  the  sovereign  state  dictating  every  form  of  in¬ 
stitutional  organization,  as  subordinate  elements  for  its  own 
purposes.  This  was  a  recurrence  to  that  earlier  form  of 
human  organization  which  showed  its  faint  signs  of  decay 
during  the  period  of  the  Roman  Empire.  Naturally  there 


Aspects  of  Freedom  67 

were  great  differences.  For  nothing  is  ever  restored.  In  fact 
the  reaction  was  a  failure,  because  mankind  has  outgrown 
the  simplicities  of  the  earlier  form  of  civilization. 

The  political  philosophy  of  the  modem  era  was  a  retro¬ 
gression,  based  upon  a  recurrence  to  the  philosophers  and 
lawyers  of  the  old  classical  civilizations.  The  Middle  Ages, 
in  the  simplified  form  of  the  relations  of  Church  with 
State,  were  considering  the  problem  of  a  civilization  in 
which  men  owed  a  divided  allegiance  to  many  intersecting 
institutions  pursuing  diverse  ends.  This  is  the  real  problem 
in  a  world  dominated  by  fraternity  derived  from  the  catholic 
diffusion  of  ideas,  and  from  the  international  distribution 
of  property.  The  solution  provided  by  the  doctrine  of  the 
sole  sovereignty  of  the  state,  however  grateful  to  protestants 
and  to  sovereigns,  is  both  shocking  and  unworkable,  a 
mere  stick  with  which  to  beat  Papists  in  the  sixteenth  and 
seventeenth  centuries,  a  mere  way  to  provide  policemen  for 
the  counting-houses  of  merchants.  But,  amid  this  reaction¬ 
ary  triumph  of  Periclean  individualism  in  the  political 
philosophies  of  the  eighteenth  and  nineteenth  centuries, 
there  was  an  outcrop  of  institutions  based  upon  the  vigour 
of  modem  intellectual  interests.  These  institutions,  even 
when  national,,  were  concerned  with  interests  impartial 
among  the  nations.  These  were  the  centuries  in  which 
science  triumphed,  and  science  is  universal.  Thus  scientific 
institutions,  though  in  form  national,  informally  established 
a  Catholic  league.  Again  the  advance  of  scholarship,  and 
of  natural  science,  transformed  the  professions.  It  intel- 
lectualized  them  far  beyond  their  stage  of  advance  in  earlier 
times.  Professions  first  appear  as  customary  activities 
largely  modified  by  detached  strains  of  theory.  Theories  are 
often  wrong;  and  some  of  the  earlier  professional  doctrines 
erred  grievously  and  were  maintained  tenaciously.  Doc¬ 
trines  emerged  as  plausible  deductions,  and  survived  as  the 
wisdom  of  ancestors.  Thus  the  older  professional  practice 
was  rooted  upon  custom,  though  it  was  turning  towards 
the  intellectual  sunlight.  Here  and  there  individuals  stood 
out  far  in  advance  of  their  colleagues.  For  example,  in  the 
fourteen  hundred  years  separating  Galen  from  Vesalius, 
the  standard  of  European  medical  practice  was  not  to  be 
compared  with  the  attainments  of  either  of  these  men.  Also 
more  than  a  century  after  Vesalius,  Charles  the  Second,  of 
England,  on  his  deathbed  was  tortured  by  physicians  em- 


68  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

ploying  futile  remedies  customary  at  that  time.  Again,  as  a 
designing  engineer  Leonardo  da  Vinci  was  unequalled  until 
the  advent  of  Vauban  and  James  Watt.  In  the  earlier  cen¬ 
turies  the  professional  influence,  as  a  general  sociological 
fact,  was  mainly  a  welter  of  bygone  flashes  of  intelligence 
relapsing  into  customary  procedures.  It  represented  the 
continual  lapse  of  intellect  into  instinct.  But  the  culmina¬ 
tion  of  science  completely  inverted  the  roles  of  custom  and 
intelligence  in  the  older  professions.  By  this  inversion  pro¬ 
fessional  institutions  have  acquired  an  international  life. 
Each  such  institution  practices  within  its  own  nation,  but 
its  sources  of  life  are  world-wide.  Thus  loyalties  stretch 
beyond  sovereign  states. 

Perhaps  the  most  important  function  of  these  institutions 
is  the  supervision  of  standards  of  individual  professional 
competence  and  of  professional  practice.  For  this  purpose 
there  is  a  complex  interweaving  of  universities  and  more 
specialized  institutions.  The  problem  of  freedom  comes  in 
here.  For  it  is  not  opinions  which  are  censured,  but  learn¬ 
ing  and  ability.  Thus  in  the  more  important  fields  of 
thought,  opinion  is  free  and  so  are  large  divergencies  of 
practice.  The  community  is  provided  with  objective  infor¬ 
mation  as  to  the  sort  of  weight  to  be  attached  to  individuals 
and  as  to  the  sort  of  freedom  of  action  which  may  safely 
be  granted.  Whatever  is  done  can  be  subjected  to  the  test 
of  general  professional  opinion,  acting  through  this  network 
of  institutions.  Further,  even  large  freedom  can  now  be 
allowed  to  non-professional  individuals.  For  the  great  pro¬ 
fessional  organizations,  so  long  as  they  are  efficient,  should 
be  able  to  demonstrate  the  dangers  of  extravagant  notions. 
In  this  way,  where  sudden  action  is  not  in  question,  reason 
has  obtained  an  entrenchment  which  should  be  impreg¬ 
nable.  Indeed  individual  freedom,  standing  apart  from 
organization,  has  now  its  indispensable  role.  For  all  organi¬ 
zations  are  liable  to  decay,  and  license  for  outside  criticism 
is  the  best  safeguard  for  the  professions. 

Also  the  sovereign  state  of  modern  legal  theory  has  its 
sphere  of  action  and  its  limitation.  The  state  represents  the 
general  wisdom  of  the  community  derived  from  an  experi¬ 
ence  broader  than  the  topics  of  the  various  sciences.  The 
role  of  the  state  is  a  general  judgment  on  the  activity  of  the 
various  organizations.  It  can  judge  whether  they  welcome 
ability,  whether  they  stand  high  among  the  kindred  institu- 


Aspects  of  Freedom  69 

tions  throughout  the  world.  But  where  the  state  ceases 
to  exercise  any  legitimate  authority  is  when  it  presumes  to 
decide  upon  questions  within  the  purview  of  sciences  or 
professions. 

For  example,  in  the  teaching  profession  it  is  obvious  that 
young  students  cannot  be  subjected  to  the  vagaries  of  indi¬ 
vidual  teachers.  In  this  sense,  the  claim  for  the  freedom  of 
teaching  is  nonsense.  But  the  general  community  is  very 
incompetent  to  determine  either  the  subject  matter  to  be 
taught  or  the  permissible  divergences  to  be  allowed,  or  the 
individual  competence.  There  can  be  only  one  appeal,  and 
this  is  to  general  professional  opinion  as  exhibited  in  the 
practice  of  accredited  institutions.  The  appeal  is  catholic. 
The  State  of  Tennessee  did  not  err  in  upholding  the  prin¬ 
ciple  that  there  are  limits  to  the  freedom  of  teaching  in 
schools  and  colleges.  But  it  exhibited  a  gross  ignorance  of 
its  proper  functions  when  it  defied  a  professional  opinion 
which  throughout  the  world  is  practically  unanimous.  Even 
here  that  State  is  hardly  to  be  blamed.  For  the  current 
political  philosophy  of  sovereignty  is  very  weak  as  to  the 
limitations  of  moral  authority.  Of  course  whoever  at  any 
moment  has  physical  power  has  that  power  of  physical 
compulsion,  whether  he  be  a  bandit,  or  a  judge,  or  political 
ruler.  But  moral  authority  is  limited  by  competence  to 
attain  those  ends  whose  immediate  dominance  is  evident  to 
enlightened  wisdom.  Political  loyalty  ceases  at  the  frontiers 
of  radical  incapacity. 

The  functions  of  professional  institutions  have  been  con¬ 
sidered  in  some  detail  because  they  constitute  a  clear-cut 
novelty  within  modem  societies.  There  were  faint  anticipa¬ 
tions  in  the  ancient  world,  for  example  the  schools  at 
Athens,  in  particular  those  founded  by  Plato,  Aristotle,  and 
the  Stoics,  and  elsewhere  the  great  foundation  at  Alex¬ 
andria.  Also  later  the  theologians  of  the  Christian  Church 
formed  another  professional  group  which  even  stretched  its 
claim  to  authority  beyond  all  bounds  of  good  sense.  It  is 
by  reason  of  these  anticipations,  and  of  the  legal  develop¬ 
ments  of  the  Roman  and  Byzantine  schools  of  law,  that 
the  beginnings  of  the  modem  world,  in  respect  to  the  prob¬ 
lem  of  freedom  and  of  moral  authority,  have  been  placed 
as  early  as  Alexander  and  Augustus. 

Section  VII.  In  the  immediate  present,  economic  or¬ 
ganization  constitutes  the  most  massive  problem  of  human 


70  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

relationships.  It  is  passing  into  a  new  phase,  and  presents 
confused  outlines.  Evidently  something  new  is  developing. 
The  individualistic  liberalism  of  the  nineteenth  century  has 
collapsed,  quite  unexpectedly.  So  long  as  the  trading  middle 
classes  were  dominant  as  the  group  to  be  satisfied,  its  doc¬ 
trines  were  self-evident.  As  soon  as  industrialism  and  edu¬ 
cation  produced  in  large  numbers  the  modern  type  of 
artisan,  its  whole  basis  was  widely  challenged.  Again  the 
necessity  for  large  capital,  with  the  aid  of  legal  ingenuity 
produced  the  commercial  corporation  with  limited  liability. 
These  fictitious  persons  are  exempt  from  physiological 
death  and  can  only  disappear  by  a  voluntary  dissolution  or 
by  bankruptcy.  The  introduction  into  the  arena  of  this  new 
type  of  ‘person’  has  considerably  modified  the  effective 
meaning  of  the  characteristic  liberal  doctrine  of  contractual 
freedom.  It  is  one  thing  to  claim  such  freedom  as  a  natural 
right  for  human  persons,  and  quite  another  to  claim  it  for 
corporate  persons.  And  again  the  notion  of  private  prop¬ 
erty  had  a  simple  obviousness  at  the  foot  of  Mount  Sinai 
and  even  in  the  eighteenth  century.  When  there  were 
primitive  roads,  negligible  drains,  private  wells,  no  elabo¬ 
rate  system  of  credit,  when  payment  meant  the  direct  pro¬ 
duction  of  gold-pieces,  when  each  industry  was  reasonably 
self-contained — in  fact  when  the  world  was  not  as  it  is 
now — then  it  was  fairly  obvious  what  was  meant  by  private 
property,  apart  from  any  current  legal  fictions.  Today 
private  property  is  mainly  a  legal  fiction,  and  apart  from 
such  legal  determination  its  outlines  are  completely  in¬ 
definite.  Such  legal  determination  is  probably,  indeed  al¬ 
most  certainly,  the  best  way  of  arranging  society.  But  the 
‘voice  of  nature’  is  a  faint  echo  when  we  are  dealing  with  it. 
There  is  a  striking  analogy  between  the  ha zy  notions  of 
justice  in  Plato’s  Republic,  and  the  hazy  notions  of  private 
property  today.  The  modern  artisan,  like  Thras;ymachus  of 
old,  is  apt  to  define  it  as  ‘the  will  of  the  stronger.’ 

Of  course  these  extremes  as  to  the  nature  of  property — 
simple-minded  assertion  and  simple-minded  denial — are 
exaggeration.  The  whole  concept  of  absolute  individuals 
with  absolute  rights,  and  with  a  contractual  power  of  form¬ 
ing  fully  defined  external  relations,  has  broken  down.  The 
human  being  is  inseparable  from  its  environment  in  each 
occasion  of  its  existence.  The  environment  which  the  occa¬ 
sion  inherits  is  immanent  in  it,  and  conversely  it  is  imma- 


Aspects  of  Freedom  71 

nent  in  the  environment  which  it  helps  to  transmit.  The 
favorite  doctrine  of  the  shift  from  a  customary  basis  for 
society  to  a  contractual  basis,  is  founded  on  shallow  soci¬ 
ology.  There  is  no  escape  from  customary  status.  This 
status  is  merely  another  name  for  the  inheritance  immanent 
in  each  occasion.  Inevitably  customary  status  is  there,  an 
inescapable  condition.  On  the  other  hand,  the  inherited 
status  is  never  a  full  determination.  There  is  always  the 
freedom  for  the  determination  of  individual  emphasis.  In 
terms  of  high-grade  human  society,  there  is  always  the  cus¬ 
tomary  fact  as  an  essential  element  in  the  meaning  of  every 
contractual  obligation.  There  can  be  no  contract  which  does 
not  presuppose  custom,  and  no  custom  leaving  no  loophole 
for  spontaneous  contract.  It  is  this  truth  that  gives  vitality 
to  the  Anglo-American  Common  Law.  It  is  an  instrument, 
in  the  hands  of  skilled  experts,  for  the  interpretation  of  ex¬ 
plicit  contract  in  terms  of  implicit  status.  No  code  of  verbal 
statement  can  ever  exhaust  the  shifting  background  of  pre¬ 
supposed  fact.  What  does  alter  for  dominant  interests  within 
each  social  system  is  the  relative  importance  of  the  con¬ 
tractual  and  customary  factors  in  general  conscious  experi¬ 
ence.  This  balance,  fortunate  or  unfortunate,  largely  de¬ 
pends  on  the  type  of  social  inheritance  provided  by  that 
society.  But  contract  is  a  mode  of  expression  for  spon¬ 
taneity.  Otherwise  it  is  meaningless,  a  futile  gesture  of 
consciousness. 

In  the  end  nothing  is  effective  except  massively  coordi¬ 
nated  inheritance.  Sporadic  spontaneity  is  composed  of 
flashes  mutually  thwarting  each  other.  Ideas  have  to  be 
sustained,  disentangled,  diffused,  and  coordinated  with  the 
background.  Finally  they  pass  into  exemplification  in 
action.  The  distinguishing  mark  of  modem  civilization  is 
the  number  of  institutions  whose  origin  can  be  traced  to  the 
initial  entertainment  of  some  idea.  In  the  ancient  civiliza¬ 
tions  thought  was  mainly  explanatory.  It  was  only  creative 
in  respect  to  individual  actions.  But  the  corporate  actions 
preceded  thought.  The  ancient  Gods,  either  as  notions  or  as 
persons,  did  not  create  the  thunderstorm,  they  explained  it. 
Jehovah  did  not  create  the  Hebrew  tribal  emotions,  he 
explained  them.  He  never  made  a  covenant  which  initiated 
Hebrew  history;  the  notion  of  the  covenant  was  an  explan¬ 
atory  idea.  It  was  influential;  but  the  idea  arose  as  an  ex¬ 
planation  of  the  tribal  history.  Nevertheless  it  intensified  a 


72  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

preexisting  fact.  The  Old  Testament  is  on  the  verge  of  the 
dividing  line  between  ancient  and  modern.  This  watershed 
is  Hellenism.  The  difference  is  only  one  of  proportion,  of 
more  or  less.  But  a  sufficient  change  of  proportion  makes 
all  the  difference.  In  the  last  phase  of  ancient  life  there  is  a 
haunting  feeling  that  corporate  actions  ought  to  have  origi¬ 
nated  from  ideas.  Thus  their  historical  imagination  un¬ 
consciously  imported  types  of  explanation  of  their  past 
which  were  faintly  relevant  to  their  own  present:  explana¬ 
tions  fantastic,  incredible,  fit  only  for  exposure  by  scholars. 
It  was  the  shadow  of  the  future  thrown  back  onto  the  past. 

Returning  to  the  economic  side  of  life,  in  the  ancient 
world  there  were  economic  transactions  between  tribes  and 
between  states,  and  there  were  also  the  economic  activities 
of  craftsmen,  merchants,  and  bankers.  There  was  com¬ 
munal  activity  and  individual  activity.  Cicero’s  financial 
worries  are  preserved  for  us  in  his  letters  to  Atticus.  They 
are  very  analogous  to  Gibbon’s  letters  to  Holroyd,  which 
are  characteristic  of  educated  Europe  in  the  eighteenth  cen¬ 
tury.  Certainly  Cicero’s  affairs  were  sufficiently  complex. 
It  is  not  in  that  respect  that  the  ancient  world  fell  short.  It 
would  be  worth  sacrificing  a  good  deal  of  Latin  literature 
to  know  what  Atticus  thought  of  Cicero’s  financial  position. 
Even  after  two  thousand  years  it  is  difficult  not  to  entertain 
a  friendly  anxiety  on  the  subject.  Perhaps  as  Cicero  put  his 
head  out  of  the  litter  he  had  been  dreaming  of  bankruptcy, 
when  the  sword  of  the  soldier  gave  him  death. 

That  ancient  world  is  modern  both  in  the  physical  facts 
which  await  us,  and  in  the  ripples  of  anxiety  arising  from  its 
social  intricacies.  At  that  time  the  human  mind  was  singu¬ 
larly  powerful  for  the  generation  of  ideas.  To  the  epoch 
between  Plato  and  Justinian,  we  can  trace  our  philosophical 
ideas,  our  religious  ideas,  our  legal  ideas,  and  the  model  of 
modem  governmental  organization.  We  can  recognize  Pliny 
as  he  discusses  whether  the  parents  should  serve  on  the 
board  of  governors  of  the  Grammar  School  he  had  founded. 
Sidonius  Apollinaris  is  an  anticipation  of  many  New 
England  gentlemen,  ecclesiastic  and  lay.  But  within  that 
period  the  ferment  of  ideas  had  not  persisted  for  a  sufficient 
time  to  transform  society  by  a  profusion  of  corporations 
originated  by  explicit  thought.  In  particular  the  great  com¬ 
mercial  corporations  awaited  modem  times,  The  Bank  of 
St.  George  at  Genoa,  The  Bank  of  England,  the  great 


Aspects  of  Freedom  73 

trading  companies  to  India  and  the  East.  Atticus  was  a 
banker;  but  he  was  not  the  president  of  a  banking  corpora¬ 
tion.  Private  wealth  was  deposited  in  pagan  temples;  but 
temples  were  corporations  devoted  to  the  customary  rites  of 
religion.  The  state  taxes  were  farmed  by  private  corpora¬ 
tions  of  Roman  capitalists.  Here  we  approach  modem 
notions.  Yet  after  all  the  publicani  were  engaged  in  per¬ 
forming  one  of  the  direct  services  of  the  state.  Their  actions 
were  communal  and  traditional  with  a  tinge  of  modem 
modes  of  incorporation.  No  doubt  many  anticipations  of 
modern  commercial  institutions  can  be  found.  Those  times 
lie  within  the  modem  world.  But  it  was  modem  commerce 
in  its  infancy.  Indeed,  the  examples  quoted  of  modem 
commercial  activity  belong  to  an  intermediate  period,  and 
only  recently  has  the  influence  of  ideas  produced  its  full 
economic  effect.  But  wherever  ideas  are  effective,  there  is 
freedom. 

Section  VIII.  Unfortunately  the  notion  of  freedom  has 
been  eviscerated  by  the  literary  treatment  devoted  to  it. 
Men  of  letters,  artists  in  symphonies  of  pictorial  imagina¬ 
tion,  have  staged  the  shock  of  novel  thought  against  tra¬ 
dition.  The  concept  of  freedom  has  been  narrowed  to  the 
picture  of  contemplative  people  shocking  their  generation. 
When  we  think  of  freedom,  we  are  apt  to  confine  ourselves 
to  freedom  of  thought,  freedom  of  the  press,  freedom  for 
religious  opinions.  Then  the  limitations  to  freedom  are 
conceived  as  wholly  arising  from  the  antagonisms  of  our 
fellow  men.  This  is  a  thorough  mistake.  The  massive  habits 
of  physical  nature,  its  iron  laws,  determine  the  scene  for 
the  sufferings  of  men.  Birth  and  death,  heat,  cold,  hunger, 
separation,  disease,  the  general  impracticability  of  purpose, 
all  bring  their  quota  to  imprison  the  souls  of  women  and 
of  men.  Our  experiences  do  not  keep  step  with  our  hopes. 
The  Platonic  Eros,  which  is  the  soul  stirring  itself  to  life 
and  motion,  is  maimed.  The  essence  of  freedom  is  the  prac¬ 
ticability  of  purpose.  Mankind  has  chiefly  suffered  from  the 
frustration  of  its  prevalent  purposes,  even  such  as  belong  to 
the  very  definition  of  its  species.  The  literary  exposition  of 
freedom  deals  mainly  with  the  frills.  The  Greek  myth  was 
more  to  the  point.  Prometheus  did  not  bring  to  mankind 
freedom  of  the  press.  He  procured  fire,  which  obediently  to 
human  purpose  cooks  and  gives  warmth.  In  fact,  freedom 
of  action  is  a  primary  human  need.  In  modern  thought,  the 


74  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

expression  of  this  truth  has  taken  the  form  of  ‘the  economic 
interpretation  of  history.’ 

The  fact  that  the  ‘economic  interpretation’  is  itself  a 
novel  thought  arising  within  the  last  sixty  or  seventy  years 
illustrates  an  important  sociological  fact.  The  literary  world 
through  all  ages  belonged  mainly  to  the  fortunate  section 
of  mankind  whose  basic  human  wants  have  been  amply 
satisfied.  A  few  literary  men  have  been  in  want  throughout 
their  fives,  many  have  occasionally  suffered.  The  fact 
shocks  us.  It  is  remembered  because  it  is  rare.  The  fortu¬ 
nate  classes  are  oblivious  to  the  fact  that  throughout  the 
ages  the  masses  of  mankind  have  lived  in  conscious  dread 
of  such  disaster — a  drought,  a  wet  summer,  a  bad  harvest, 
a  cattle  disease,  a  raid  of  pirates.  Also  the  basic  needs  when 
they  are  habitually  satisfied  cease  to  dominate  thought. 
Delicacies  of  taste  displace  the  interest  in  fullness  of 
stomach.  Thus  the  motives  which  stir  the  fortunate  direct¬ 
ing  classes  to  conscious  activity  have  a  long  range  fore¬ 
caste  and  an  aesthetic  tinge: — Power,  glory,  safety  in  the 
distant  future,  forms  of  government,  luxury,  religion,  ex¬ 
citement,  dislike  of  strange  ways,  contemplative  curiosity, 
play.  Mankind  survived  by  evolving  a  peculiar  excitability 
whereby  it  quickly  adapts  itself  to  novel  circumstances. 
This  instability  is  quickly  diverted  to  some  simple  form  of 
the  more  abstract  interests  of  the  minority.  The  great  con¬ 
vulsions  happen  when  the  economic  urge  on  the  masses 
has  dove-tailed  with  some  simplified  ideal  end.  Intellect 
and  instinct  then  combine,  and  some  ancient  social  order 
passes  away.  But  the  masses  of  the  population  are  always 
there,  requiring  at  least  a  minimum  of  satisfaction,  with 
their  standard  of  life  here  higher  and  there  lower,  also 
rising  or  falling.  Thus,  even  when  the  minority  is  dominant, 
the  plain  economic  facts  of  life  must  be  the  governing  force 
in  social  development.  Yet  in  general  the  masses  are  in¬ 
tellectually  quiescent,  though  the  more  ideal  ends  of  the 
minority,  good  and  bad,  permeate  the  masses,  directing 
policies  according  to  the  phantasies  of  the  generations.  And 
the  primary  demand  for  freedom  is  to  be  found  in  the 
general  urge  for  the  accomplishment  of  these  general  ends, 
which  are  a  fusion  of  ideal  and  economic  policies,  making 
the  stuff  of  history.  In  so  far  as  a  population  is  dominated 
by  some  general  appetition,  freedom  presents  no  peculiar 
problem  to  the  statesman.  The  tribal  actions  are  shaped 


From  Force  to  Persuasion  75 

inevitably,  and  that  group  of  mankind  is  pushed  toward 
accomplishment  or  frustration. 

In  modem  states  there  is  a  complex  problem.  There  are 
many  types  of  character.  Freedom  means  that  within  each 
type  the  requisite  coordination  should  be  possible  without 
the  destruction  of  the  general  ends  of  the  whole  community. 
Indeed,  one  general  end  is  that  these  variously  coordinated 
groups  should  contribute  to  the  complex  pattern  of  com¬ 
munity  life,  each  in  virtue  of  its  own  peculiarity.  In  this 
way  individuality  gains  the  effectiveness  which  issues  from 
coordination,  and  freedom  obtains  power  necessary  for  its 
perfection. 

This  is  the  hope  of  the  statesman,  the  solution  which  the 
long  course  of  history  is  patiently  disclosing.  But  it  is  not 
the  intuition  which  has  nerved  men  to  surpass  the  limita¬ 
tions  of  mankind.  After  all,  societies  of  primates,  of  ani¬ 
mals,  of  life  on  the  earth’s  surface,  are  transient  details. 
There  is  a  freedom  lying  beyond  circumstances,  derived 
from  the  direct  intuition  that  life  can  be  grounded  upon  its 
absorption  in  what  is  changeless  amid  change.  This  is  the 
freedom  at  which  Plato  was  groping,  the  freedom  which 
Stoics  and  Christians  obtained  as  the  gift  of  Hellenism. 
It  is  the  freedom  of  that  virtue  directly  derived  from  the 
source  of  all  harmony.  For  it  is  conditioned  only  by  its 
adequacy  of  understanding.  And  understanding  has  this 
quality  that,  however  it  be  led  up  to,  it  issues  in  the  soul 
freely  conforming  its  nature  to  die  supremacy  of  insight. 
It  is  the  reconciliation  of  freedom  with  the  compulsion  of 
the  truth.  In  this  sense  the  captive  can  be  free,  taking  as 
his  own  the  supreme  insight,  the  indwelling  persuasion 
towards  the  harmony  which  is  the  height  of  existence. 


5.  From  Force  to  Persuasion 

Section  I.  The  gradual  development  of  Persuasive 
Agencies  in  the  communal  life  of  mankind  was  not  wholly 
due  to  the  energizing  of  ideas.  Indeed  the  very  habit  of 
intellectual  activity  was  promoted  by  the  slow  natural 
development  of  persuasive  intercourse  within  the  social  life 


76  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

of  each  community,  and  between  different  communities. 
Evidently  the  existence  of  each  family  group  involves  a 
mixture  of  love,  dependence,  sympathy,  persuasion,  and 
compulsion.  There  can  never  have  been  any  period  when 
the  gentler  modes  of  human  relations  were  wholly  absent. 
Indeed  the  ferocity  may  have  been  the  later  development, 
due  to  the  increase  of  intelligent  self-interest.  It  may  easily 
have  arisen  as  a  strain  of  character  necessary  for  preserva¬ 
tion,  and  have  developed  into  an  overgrowth  checking  up¬ 
ward  evolution  beyond  a  low  level  of  life.  We  find  civilized 
communities  struggling  with  two  kinds  of  compulsion. 
There  are  the  natural  necessities,  such  as  food,  warmth, 
and  shelter.  There  are  also  the  necessities  for  a  coordina¬ 
tion  of  social  activities.  This  coordination  is  produced 
partly  by  instinctive  habit,  sustained  by  flashes  of  good 
sense,  partly  by  the  compulsion  exercised  by  other  mem¬ 
bers  of  the  community,  and  partly  by  reasonable  persua¬ 
sion.  In  so  far  as  the  area  of  reasonable  persuasion  widens, 
an  environment  has  been  provided  within  which  the  higher 
mental  activities  and  the  subtler  feelings  can  find  their  use 
and  their  enjoyment.  But  with  the  growth  of  intellect  the 
range  of  necessity  diminishes.  Some  command  over  nature 
has  been  attained.  Thus  a  widespread  reliance  on  persua¬ 
sion  produces  its  reward  in  the  shape  of  an  upward  evo¬ 
lution.  At  least,  it  produces  conditions  favourable  to  such 
an  upward  trend. 

In  this  chapter,  we  consider  the  effect  of  some  of  the 
natural  necessities,  such  as  food  and  clothing,  and  also 
the  effect  of  activities,  such  as  commerce,  which  naturally 
promote  the  persuasive  reactions  within  society,  and  be¬ 
tween  societies.  Also  we  consider  the  transition  of  these 
agencies  into  various  types  of  restlessness. 

Such  activities,  energizing  for  centuries,  indeed  for  thou¬ 
sands  of  years,  lie  behind  the  intellectual  ferment  which  we 
find  driving  onward  the  Hebrew  prophets  and  the  Greek 
philosophers.  Indeed,  apart  from  the  continuing  vigour  of 
such  agencies,  the  intellectual  life  of  mankind  would  wither, 
without  roots,  and  without  any  material  content  for  thought 
or  purpose. 

Section  II.  The  term  Commerce,  as  used  in  this 
chapter,  will  have  an  enlarged  sense.  It  will  include  the 
interchange  of  material  commodities,  and  their  manufacture 
for  the  purpose  of  such  interchange.  It  will  also  include 


From  Force  to  Persuasion  77 

the  management  of  currency,  which  is  a  conventionalized 
commodity,  possibly  but  not  necessarily  possessing  some 
intrinsic  value  of  its  own  apart  from  its  use  as  currency. 
Finally  we  shall  extend  the  meaning  of  the  term  even 
beyond  these  limits,  passing  beyond  the  bounds  of  material 
things.  In  its  most  general  sense,  the  commerce  of  man¬ 
kind  involves  every  species  of  interchange  which  proceeds 
by  way  of  mutual  persuasion. 

All  commercial  values  are  psychological,  that  is  to  say, 
they  are  measured  by  the  desire  widely  spread  among 
sections  of  mankind  to  acquire  the  numerous  articles  in 
question.  Such  desire  may  be  closely  connected  with  some 
physical  necessity  arising  out  of  possession  or  deprivation, 
for  example,  the  satisfaction  of  hunger  or  starvation.  When 
there  is  a  complete  absence  of  any  such  physical  necessity 
or  aesthetic  fact,  so  that  the  sole  advantages  of  possession 
depend  on  the  possibility  of  renewed  exchange,  we  are 
essentially  concerned  with  currency  founded  on  credit.  In 
this  field  of  human  behaviour  the  psychological  peculiarities 
of  mankind  produce  their  fullest  effect.  Very  often,  even 
in  connection  with  currencies,  there  is  no  explicit  contract, 
but  the  advantage  of  possession  consists  in  the  belief  as  to 
the  stability  of  certain  habits  of  mankind,  habits  which  are 
not  founded  on  physical  necessities  for  the  preservation  of 
life.  For  example,  gold  currencies  depend  for  their  prestige 
upon  the  habit  of  highly  prizing  the  possession  of  gold. 
This  habit  has  a  long  and  complex  history.  One  com¬ 
paratively  late  element  in  this  history  is  the  well-established 
use  of  coined  gold  pieces  as  a  medium  of  exchange. 
Another  element  is  the  unfounded  belief  that  the  value  of 
gold  is  still  mainly  independent  of  its  use  as  currency,  by 
reason  of  its  aesthetic  and  metallurgic  uses.  Another  ele¬ 
ment  is  the  well-founded  belief  that  so  long  as  gold  is 
generally  used  as  currency,  no  Government  can  arbitrarily 
increase  its  stock  of  gold  pieces.  All  of  these  characteristics 
of  gold  are  alterable.  A  chemical  discovery  in  the  remote 
future  may  render  the  production  of  gold  as  easy  as  that  of 
paper  currency-notes.  The  superstitious  reverence  for  gold 
may  pass  away.  The  governments  of  the  world  may  prefer 
paper  currencies,  perhaps  for  the  very  reason  that  they 
can  increase  the  number  of  paper  notes  at  their  arbitrary 
will,  thus  freeing  society  from  one  type  of  physical  com¬ 
pulsion.  But  the  fundamental  fact  is  that  so  long  as  the 


78  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

generality  of  mankind  deem  gold  to  be  wealth,  then  it  is 
wealth;  and  as  soon  as  this  opinion  passes,  gold  then 
becomes  a  metal  of  subsidiary  importance. 

Currencies  represent  only  one  particular  case  of  this 
dependence  on  habits  of  mankind.  All  producers  and  retail 
traders  are  in  this  position.  One  extreme  example  is 
afforded  by  the  commerce  in  religious  emblems,  such  as 
the  production  of  idols  for  worship  in  Central  Africa,  or 
the  production  of  black  gowns  for  the  vesture  of  Calvinistic 
or  Unitarian  preachers  in  some  countries.  However,  most 
commodities  belong  to  a  mixed  type.  In  temperate  climates 
dress  is  a  physical  necessity,  but  fashions  of  dress  depend 
upon  taste  and  are  in  fact  very  alterable.  Even  food, 
though  a  more  pressing  necessity  than  dress,  in  modern 
times  includes  an  abundance  of  alternatives.  The  upshot  of 
all  these  considerations  is  that  the  doctrines  of  Commerce 
have  to  be  founded  upon  assumptions  concerning  neces¬ 
sities,  habits,  technology,  and  prevalent  knowledge.  But 
habits,  technology,  and  knowledge  are  variable  from  epoch 
to  epoch,  and  even  in  any  one  epoch  differ  in  different 
sections  of  humanity.  Thus  any  theory  of  Commerce 
depends  upon  presuppositions  as  to  the  populations  con¬ 
cerned,  and  cannot  be  extended  beyond  these  limits  apart 
from  a  direct  investigation  of  the  wider  populations.  For 
example,  any  considerable  change  in  technology  alters  in 
effect  the  populations,  and  thus  requires  a  corresponding 
shift  in  commercial  theory.  This  conclusion  has  been  well- 
known  to  the  great  masters  of  economic  doctrine.  But 
certainly  it  has  not  been  adequately  attended  to  by  the 
majority  of  people  engaged  in  the  theory  or  the  practice  of 
commerce  or  in  its  political  regulation.  The  classical 
political  economy  which  dominated  the  nineteenth  century 
was  largely  based  upon  sociological  observation  of  the 
middle  classes  of  northern  Europe  and  northern  America 
in  the  eighteenth  century,  also  with  some  reference  to 
Mediterranean  commerce  of  earlier  epochs.  Everything 
else,  discernible  in  other  sections  of  the  European  popula¬ 
tions  or  in  other  continents,  was  dismissed  as  irrelevant 
interruption  to  the  pure  practice  of  perfect  commerce. 

The  development  of  economics  was,  in  truth,  affected  by 
the  moralizing  tendency  of  the  class  mainly  concerned. 
Their  ideal  of  commercial  activity  as  the  main  occupation 
of  perfected  civilization  led  to  the  consideration  of  eco- 


From  Force  to  Persuasion  79 

nomic  laws  which  should  hold,  and  to  the  neglect  of 
economic  procedures  which  in  fact  did  hold.  For  example, 
in  England  in  the  mid-nineteenth  century  radical  manu¬ 
factures  opposed  the  enactment  of  adulteration  laws,  basing 
their  action  on  the  axiom  Caveat  emptor.  In  this  instance 
their  individualistic  doctrine  of  society,  combined  with  their 
presupposition  that  respectable  men  and  women  are 
mainly  engaged  in  safeguarding  all  details  of  their  com¬ 
mercial  interests,  led  them  to  neglect  questions  of  prevalent 
fact.  In  the  study  of  ideas,  it  is  necessary  to  remember, 
that  insistence  on  hard-headed  clarity  issues  from  senti¬ 
mental  feeling,  as  it  were  a  mist,  cloaking  the  perplexities 
of  fact.  Insistence  on  clarity  at  all  costs  is  based  on  sheer 
superstition  as  to  the  mode  in  which  human  intelligence 
functions.  Our  reasonings  grasp  at  straws  for  premises  and 
float  on  gossamers  for  deductions. 

Section  III.  Another  instance  of  ill-judged  simplifica¬ 
tion  is  the  use  made  of  the  Malthusian  Law  of  Population. 
This  law,  in  any  reasonably  accurate  statement,  is  un¬ 
deniable.  The  increase  of  population  apart  from  checks  on 
impulse,  or  on  childbearing,  or  on  survival,  proceeds  by  a 
law  with  some  analogy  to  geometric  progression.  Also, 
apart  from  these  checks,  the  numerical  factor  of  the 
geometric  increase  is  greater  than  unity  by  a  difference 
which  is  not  negligible.  Again  the  means  of  subsistence — 
food,  clothing,  shelter — so  far  as  they  are  provided  by 
appliances  of  given  types,  can  only  be  increased  by  the 
production  of  additional  appliances  of  these  types.  Such 
additional  production,  even  if  variable,  must  conform  to 
the  general  type  of  arithmetical  progression.  But  a  geo¬ 
metric  progression  will  always  overtake  an  arithmetic 
progression.  It  was  then  concluded,  as  a  consequence  of 
this  Malthusian  Law,  that  population  will  always  overtake 
the  means  of  subsistence.  The  further  inference  was  then 
drawn  that,  apart  from  short  exceptional  periods,  the 
normal  structure  of  society  was  that  of  a  comparatively 
affluent  minority  subsisting  on  the  labours  of  a  teeming 
population  checked  by  starvation  and  other  discomforts. 

These  sociological  conclusions,  if  true,  are  of  enormous 
importance  to  commerce,  in  the  enlarged  sense  in  which  we 
have  used  that  term.  For,  in  the  first  place,  the  normal 
structure  of  society  is  now  defined.  It  consists  of  the 
fortunate  few,  and  of  the  semi-destitute  many.  Thus 


80  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

producers  must,  in  the  long  run,  design  their  production 
to  suit  these  types  of  customers.  Again  the  hope  of 
improving  the  social  system  by  a  humane  adjustment  of 
social  conditions  in  factories  must  be  abandoned.  It  is 
of  course  possible,  here  and  there,  as  the  result  of  isolated 
charity.  But  in  the  long  run,  there  must  be  a  pool  of  labour, 
starving  and  destitute,  ready  to  work  on  the  wages  of  bare 
subsistence.  Factories  taking  advantage  of  such  cheap 
labour  will  drive  out  of  trade  those  managed  on  fanciful 
humanitarian  lines.  Hence  the  final  improvement  of  the 
social  system  is  mirage.  In  so  far  as  medicine  saves  life, 
there  will  be  only  more  to  starve. 

These  sociological  conclusions  from  the  Malthusian 
Law  assume  first  that  all  the  restraints  upon  increase  of 
mankind  are  secondary  in  their  effect  until  they  are  raised 
to  dominance  by  excessive  population.  Secondly  they 
assume  that  within  the  span  of  time  required  for  the  oper- 
tion  of  the  Malthusian  Law,  sudden  increases  of  productive 
power,  due  to  improved  technology  will  not  be  introduced. 
Perhaps  such  improved  technology  may  even  require 
additional  population.  Thirdly  they  assume  that  the  geo¬ 
graphic  situation  of  the  population  concerned  will  not  be 
seriously  affected  by  migration.  In  truth  there  is  a  complex 
situation  depending  on  the  balance  of  many  factors.  By  ar¬ 
bitrarily  seizing  upon  one  or  two  factors,  and  by  relegating 
the  remainder  to  the  status  of  secondary  disturbances, 
almost  any  law  of  population  can  be  deduced.  Thus  the 
Malthusian  Law,  with  its  sociological  consequences,  is  not 
an  iron  necessity.  It  is  a  possibility  inherent  in  the  facts, 
which  may  afford  an  interpretation  of  the  circumstances 
of  some  human  societies,  perhaps  of  all. 

A  recourse  to  observation  at  once  discloses  the  im¬ 
portance  of  the  doctrine  of  Malthus.  China  and  India  both 
afford  examples  of  societies  which  illustrate  his  law.  They 
contain  large  populations  whose  standard  of  life  is  peri¬ 
lously  near  to  the  margin  of  subsistence.  We  must  con¬ 
clude,  therefore,  that  for  nearly  half  the  human  race, 
Malthus  has  provided  an  interpretation  for  some  of  the 
dominant  facts  of  history  occurring  within  the  last  few 
centuries,  and  perhaps  stretching  into  a  longer  period. 
Now  India  and  China  are  instances  of  civilized  societies 
which  for  a  long  period  in  their  later  histoty  maintained 
themselves  with  arrested  technology  and  with  fixed  geo- 


From  Force  to  Persuasion  81 

graphical  location.  They  provided  the  exact  conditions  re¬ 
quired  for  the  importance  of  the  Malthusian  Law. 

When  we  turn  to  the  European  races  the  evidence  is 
more  perplexing.  The  superficial  fact  is  that  during  the 
eleven  centuries  from  the  age  of  Charlemagne  to  the  present 
day  a  persistently  increasing  population  has  been  accom¬ 
panied  by  an  equally  persistent  rise  in  the  general  standard 
of  life.  Thus  any  simple-minded  Malthusian  correlation  of 
density  of  population  with  deficiency  in  the  necessaries 
of  life  does  not  apply.  Of  course,  the  stock  answer  to  this 
conclusion  is  that  the  checks,  which  the  leading  Malthusians 
have  always  explicitly  recognized,  have  intervened  to  delay 
the  inevitable  issue.  But  Europe,  even  Western  Europe, 
is  a  large  region,  and  a  thousand  years  is  a  long  time, 
about  one-sixth  of  the  whole  past  of  civilization  within  the 
historical  period.  The  plain  truth  is  that  during  this  period 
and  over  that  area,  the  so-called  checks  were  such  that  the 
Malthusian  law  represented  a  possibility,  unrealized  and  of 
no  importance.  Also  these  checks  were  not  even  in  pro¬ 
portion  to  the  density  of  the  population.  For  examples  the 
plagues  depended  mainly  on  insanitary  habits,  and  the 
densities  of  rats,  insects,  and  microbes.  At  the  time  of  the 
Black  Death,  a  Malthusian  discussing  the  excessive  birth 
rate  would  have  been  talking  irrelevant  nonsense.  Soap, 
water,  and  drains  were  the  key  to  the  situation.  The  Thirty 
Years’  War  halved  the  population  of  Germany.  It  was 
due  to  many  causes,  a  few  creditable,  but  most  of  them 
discreditable.  An  excessive  population  in  Germany  has 
never  been  mentioned  among  them.  Of  course  there  was 
plenty  of  misery  in  the  Middle  Ages,  and  during  the 
Renaissance.  For  example,  we  read  of  Peasants’  risings. 
But  this  misery  certainly  did  not  prevail  in  any  proportion 
to  density  of  population.  Thus,  in  the  early  years  of  the 
sixteenth  century,  Flanders  which  was  thickly  populated 
was  notably  more  prosperous  than  the  country-districts  in 
Germany  where,  at  that  time,  there  was  a  rising  of  the 
peasants.  Of  course  the  reasons  for  this  contrast  are  too 
obvious  to  be  worth  mentioning.  But  among  these  reasons, 
the  fact  emerges  that  the  Malthusian  Law  is  largely 
irrelevant  for  the  discussion  of  sociological  conditions  in 
Europe. 

Section  IV.  Nevertheless  there  have  been  such  oc¬ 
casions  of  relevance.  It  is  a  mistake  to  discuss  the  develop- 


82  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

ment  of  Western  Europe  in  isolation.  The  history  of  Europe 
has  been  decisively  influenced  by  its  reactions  with  the 
Near  East.  Here  the  term  Near  East  is  used  to  denote  that 
large  region,  including  three  metropolitan  districts,  on  its 
coastal  boundaries — Constantinople,  Mesopotamia,  and 
the  Delta  of  the  Nile,  and  also  including  the  Arabian  Desert 
with  its  fertile  fringes,  and  the  plateaus  and  mountains 
of  Asia  Minor.  The  history  of  civilization  in  the  Old  World 
is  the  history  of  the  internal  development  of  the  four  con¬ 
tinental  regions  fringing  Asia,  namely,  China,  India,  the 
Near  East,  and  Europe.  These  four  histories  cannot  be 
understood  apart  from  a  study  of  the  reactions  of  these 
vast  regions  on  each  other.  For  example,  the  Hellenic  and 
Hellenistic  epochs  comprise  the  story  of  how  the  ancient 
civilization  of  the  Near  East  brought  to  birth  the  new 
civilization  of  Europe,  and  how  European  civilization 
asserted  its  independence  of  the  social  system  to  which  it 
owed  its  nurture.  The  subsequent  collapse  of  the  older 
civilization  is  the  tragedy  of  history,  foreshadowed  by  the 
decline  of  the  Roman  Empire  whose  imperial  system  had 
reverted  to  Eastern  ideals. 

The  reactions  between  mediaeval  Europe  and  the  Near 
East  can  be  classified  under  four  headings,  Malthus,  Re¬ 
ligion,  Technology,  Commerce.  It  must  be  remembered, 
however,  that  all  the  major  crises  in  the  story  were  pre¬ 
cipitated  by  a  concurrence  of  many  causes.  It  is  a  great 
mistake  in  sociological  theory  to  link  impulse  towards 
activity  with  abject  destitution.  In  fact,  when  a  population 
has  sunk  its  standard  of  life  to  the  marginal  level  for 
subsistence,  the  poverty  of  life  weakens  the  impulse  towards 
adventure.  The  Malthusian  impulse  towards  conquest  arises 
when  a  well-nurtured,  hardy  population  is  only  beginning 
to  feel  the  pressure  of  its  numbers  on  its  resources.  There 
was  no  evidence  of  starvation  at  the  Courts  of  Central 
Asia  or  among  the  Arabian  tribes.  Probably  there  was  a 
growing  hard  dullness  of  life  provoking  unrest.  But  the 
active  stimulants  for  the  eruptions  of  the  Tartar  and 
Arabian  tribes  were  adventure,  the  dream  of  fabulous 
luxury,  religion.  The  dream  of  luxury  is  the  first,  and  more 
dangerous,  phase  of  the  Malthusian  pressure  on  a  popula¬ 
tion.  It  arises  before  the  inroad  of  enfeeblement.  But  the 
initial  phase  of  emotional  unrest  can  take  a  more  intel¬ 
lectual  form,  and  clothe  itself  in  religious  concepts.  A 


From  Force  to  Persuasion  83 

new  mass-religion  can  then  arise,  with  the  mission  to  sub¬ 
due  the  Earth  and  destroy  the  infidels.  In  fact,  it  is  a 
commonplace  of  history,  that  the  pressure  of  population 
upon  its  resources  is  one  main  ingredient  in  the  catastrophic 
reactions  between  large  regions,  and  between  diverse 
classes  within  the  same  social  system.  On  the  whole,  catas¬ 
trophes  are  disastrous  to  civilization.  They  are  a  plunge 
into  the  unknown;  and  civilization  is  not  the  average  result 
of  raw  nature.  It  depends  upon  the  long-time  operation  of 
selective  agency. 

Three  reasons  stand  out  to  explain  why  the  internal 
conditions  in  Europe,  for  more  than  a  thousand  years, 
reduced  to  insignificance  the  operation  of  the  Malthusian 
Law.  They  are,  Expansion  of  Commerce,  Development  of 
Technology,  and  Discovery  of  Empty  Continents.  All  these 
causes  are  interconnected.  Also  the  activities  involved  in 
each  can  be  represented  as  due  to  a  population  seeking 
means  of  subsistence.  But  the  point  is  that  mankind  has 
developed  an  unstable  sensitivity  in  respect  to  its  emotional 
and  intellectual  functions.  Thus  in  fortunate  societies  faint 
signs  of  economic  pressure  develop  disproportionate  forms 
of  adventure,  physical  and  intellectual.  Avocations  are 
initiated  as  means  of  subsistence:  they  end  as  passions. 
The  result  in  Europe  has  been  the  introduction  of  novelties, 
of  Commerce,  of  Scientific  Technology,  and  of  Geographic 
Knowledge,  which  have  entirely  masked  sociological  con¬ 
sequences  of  the  Malthusian  type. 

The  central  activity  from  which  the  other  two  developed 
was  Commerce.  We  are  speaking  of  Europe  from  the  Age 
of  Charlemagne  onwards.  If  we  had  included  the  six 
hundred  years  preceding  that  Age,  the  migration  of 
Peoples  within  Europe  was  one  main  factor.  But  in  the 
period  under  review  these  great  migrations  were  over.  The 
diffusion  of  the  Scandinavian  Northmen  was  still  in 
progress.  But  this  migration  was  hardly  a  mass  movement. 
It  is  best  conceived  as  the  diffusion  of  the  ablest  governing 
class  that  Europe  has  ever  seen— Canute  and  his  Danes, 
Norman  Barons  in  France,  and  in  England,  and  in  Southern 
Italy.  Also  their  direct  activities  were  not  such  as  to  mask 
the  Malthusian  Laws.  They  introduced  order,  and  good 
order  is  a  condition  for  the  increase  of  population.  Order, 
as  such,  gives  no  reason  for  escape  from  the  consequences 
of  an  increasing  population.  Also  an  enumeration  of  some 


84  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

main  interests  of  the  epoch  is  not  to  the  point.  For  example, 
the  various  activities  of  the  Catholic  Church,  the  scholastic 
controversies,  the  Holy  Roman  Empire,  architecture,  the 
artistic  and  literary  interests  of  the  Renaissance,  the 
Reformation,  had  no  direct  bearing  on  the  evasion  of 
Malthusian  consequences  arising  from  the  increase  of 
population.  Granting  the  increase  of  population,  History 
has  only  disclosed  three  ways  of  escape— expanding  Com¬ 
merce,  improving  Technology,  and  utilization  of  Empty 
Regions.  The  most  fundamental  of  all  sociological  classi¬ 
fications  is  that  between  civilized  societies  for  which  one 
or  more  of  these  conditions  do  obtain,  and  those  for  which 
they  do  not  obtain.  In  the  wide  sense  of  the  term,  Com¬ 
merce  covers  all  three  conditions.  Thus  Commerce  is  one 
central  factor,  essential  for  a  prosperous  civilization.  As 
soon  as  there  is  an  arrest,  when  expansion,  improvement, 
and  novel  utilization  cease,  then  slowly  and  imperceptibly 
a  blight  settles  upon  the  populations  concerned.  China 
and  India  survived,  with  populations  blighted  by  hopeless 
poverty,  the  Roman  Empire  fell  by  reason  of  the  blight,  the 
Near  East  is  the  store-house  of  buried  cities  recording 
ancient  magnificence.  The  central  factor  is  Commerce;  and 
more  than  that,  it  is  Commerce  developed  adventurously. 

In  the  first  three  hundred  years  of  the  slow  develop¬ 
ment  of  the  Feudal  System  after  Charlemagne,  we  see  a 
population  barely  gaining  a  livelihood  by  hard  toil.  This 
state  of  things  exemplifies  the  application  of  Malthus’ 
Doctrine  in  the  primitive  stages  of  civilization.  The  only 
way  of  coping  with  an  increase  of  population  was  to  cut 
down  another  forest,  and  arithmetically  to  add  field  to 
field,  till  fertile  land  was  fully  occupied.  Also  fertility  itself 
became  exhausted,  so  that  until  the  close  of  the  eighteenth 
century  fallow  fields  bore  witness  to  the  iron  limits  that 
nature  set  to  agriculture.  The  essence  of  technology  is  to 
enable  mankind  to  transcend  such  limitations  of  unguided 
nature.  For  example,  the  rotation  of  the  crops,  the  scientific 
understanding  of  fertilizers  and  of  genetics,  have  already 
altered  the  bounds  set  to  food  production. 

In  those  early  times  the  Malthusian  Laws  set  their  limits 
to  life.  The  ‘checks’  were  operating,  and  population  hardly 
increased.  The  slow  growth  of  Commerce,  the  foundation 
of  centres  of  trade  with  the  peculiar  privileges  of  the 
burgesses  and  the  guilds,  the  strange  knowledge  of  the 


From  Force  to  Persuasion  85 

Jews,  pilgrims,  the  glimpses  of  the  Near  East  provided  by 
Mediterranean  trade,  and  later  by  the  Crusades,  the  in¬ 
telligence  housed  in  the  great  monasteries — all  these  factors 
gradually  removed  the  repression  of  raw  nature  upon  the 
possibilities  of  human  existence.  European  life  began  to 
approach  the  standards  of  the  Near  East  and  of  China  so 
far  as  concerned  technology  and  general  commercial 
activities.  But  these  older  civilizations  were  about  to  face 
new  limitations,  equally  inexorable,  granting  their  stage 
of  technology  and  of  social  organization. 

Section  V.  Nature  is  plastic,  although  to  every 
prevalent  state  of  mind  there  corresponds  iron  nature 
setting  its  bounds  to  life.  Modem  history  begins  when 
Europeans  passed  into  a  new  phase  of  understanding  which 
enabled  them  to  introduce  new  selective  agencies,  un¬ 
guessed  by  the  older  civilizations.  It  is  a  false  dichotomy 
to  think  of  Nature  and  Man.  Mankind  is  that  factor  in 
Nature  which  exhibits  in  its  most  intense  form  the  plasticity 
of  nature.  Plasticity  is  the  introduction  of  novel  law.  The 
doctrine  of  the  Uniformity  of  Nature  is  to  be  ranked  with 
the  contrasted  doctrine  of  magic  and  miracle,  as  an  ex¬ 
pression  of  partial  truth,  unguarded  and  uncoordinated 
with  the  immensities  of  the  Universe.  Our  interpretations 
of  experience  determine  the  limits  of  what  we  can  do  with 
the  world. 

For  the  purpose  of  understanding  how  it  happened  that 
European  life  escaped  the  restrictions  which  finally  bound 
China,  India,  and  the  Near  East,  it  is  important  to  re¬ 
capture  the  attitude  towards  Commerce  prevalent  in  various 
epochs.  I  do  not  mean  records  of  trade,  but  records  of  the 
kinds  of  mentality  governing  commercial  relations.  We 
can  only  understand  a  society  by  knowing  what  sort  of 
people  undertook  what  sort  of  functions  in  that  society.  It 
must  be  remembered  that  China  and  Bagdad,  at  the  height 
of  their  prosperity,  exhibited  forms  of  human  life  in  many 
ways  more  gracious  than  our  own.  They  were  great 
civilizations.  But  they  became  arrested,  and  the  arrest  is 
the  point  of  our  enquiry.  We  have  to  understand  the  reasons 
for  the  greatness  and  the  final  barriers  to  advancement. 
Of  course,  such  an  ambitious  design  is  absurd.  It  would 
mean  the  solution  of  the  main  problem  of  sociology. 
What  can  be  done,  is  to  note  some  indications  of  relevant 


86  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

tones  of  mind  apparently  widely  spread  in  various  districts 
at  different  epochs. 

There  is  ample  evidence  of  active  Commerce  in  China 
and  the  Near  East  in  ancient  times,  contemporary  with 
the  pre-Hellenic  and  Hellenic  periods  of  the  .Egean  Basin. 
There  are  Codes  of  Law  which  determine  commercial 
problems.  Also  among  the  early  inscriptions  recovered 
from  Babylon  and  Nineveh  there  are  a  mass  of  records 
of  private  transactions  between  merchants.  Three  thousand 
years  ago  the  importance  of  credit  would  have  been  no 
news  either  in  Mesopotamia  or  in  China.  Also  there  was 
foreign  trade  beyond  the  boundaries  of  the  Near  East. 
There  are  evidences  of  ocean-borne  trade  between  India 
and  Egypt,  perhaps  even  between  China  and  Egypt,  with 
Ceylon  as  an  intermediary.  Also  Central  Asia  was  nearing 
its  last  phase  of  prosperity  before  it  faded  out  into  desert. 
It  seems  to  have  provided  the  route  for  a  flourishing  over¬ 
land  trade  between  China  and  the  Near  East.  Thus  these 
great  civilizations  were  supported  by  internal  trade  and 
by  external  trade  with  each  other.  Also  there  was  the  whole 
coast-line  of  semi-barbarous  Europe — the  shores  of  the 
Black  Sea,  the  shores  of  the  Western  Mediterranean,  the 
Atlantic  coasts  of  Europe. 

Having  regard  to  relative  backwardness  of  the  art  of 
navigation  then,  compared  with  the  same  art  in  the  fifteenth 
and  sixteenth  centuries  after  Christ,  the  boldness  of  the 
Phoenician  sailors  and  the  enterprise  of  their  traders  at 
least  equal  that  in  any  of  the  later  feats.  It  is  impossible 
to  be  more  than  absolutely  fearless:  and  considering  the 
dim  geographic  knowledge  possessed  by  the  ancients,  the 
Phoenicians  must  be  allowed  the  fame  of  having  displayed 
that  extremity  of  courage.  The  Greeks  were  bold  sailors, 
but  the  Phoenicians  led  the  way.  There  is  no  reason  to 
believe  that  in  later  times  a  Greek  or  a  Roman  vessel  ever 
saw  a  coast-line  not  previously  visited  by  Phoenician 
traders.  Also,  remembering  Hanno’s  voyage  in  the  sixth 
century  before  Christ,  the  whole  oceanic  coast-line  of 
Africa  was  explored  by  the  men  of  the  Near  East,  where 
western  Europeans  did  not  venture  till  the  lapse  of  nigh 
two  thousand  years.  In  the  last  few  hundred  years, 
European  races  have  been  apt  to  forget  the  greatness  of 
the  Near  East,  whose  populations,  with  no  predecessors 
to  guide  them,  carried  mankind  from  the  stage  of  semi- 


From  Force  to  Persuasion  87 

barbarism  only  half-erect  from  the  soil,  to  peaks  of  civilized 
life,  in  art,  in  religion,  and  in  adventure,  which  remain  un¬ 
surpassed.  Their  civilization  in  its  prime  was  founded  on 
Expanding  Commerce,  Development  of  Technology,  and 
Discovery  of  Empty  Continents.  But  in  this  list  one  item 
has  been  omitted,  the  Souls  of  Men. 

The  vigour  of  the  Near  East  survived  the  first  effort  to 
establish  a  widespread  European  civilization.  This  Euro¬ 
pean  attempt  was  embodied  in  the  western  portion  of  the 
Roman  Empire.  It  was  sustained  during  four  hundred  and 
fifty,  or  five  hundred  years.  The  limits  of  this  period  may 
be  approximately  assigned  from  Caesar  and  Augustus  at 
the  commencement  down  to  the  taking  of  Rome  by  Alaric 
in  the  year  410  a.d.  The  failure  did  not  consist  in  the 
decline  and  fall  of  its  political  institutions.  Such  state- 
systems  .  are  transient  expedients  upon  the  surface  of 
civilization.  The  real  failure  consists  in  the  fact  that  in  the 
year  600  a.d..  Western  Europe  was  less  civilized  than  in  the 
year  100  a.d.,  and  was  far  behind  the  Eastern  Mediter¬ 
ranean  during  the  third  and  fourth  centuries  before  Christ. 
Pope  Gregory  the  Great  would  have  been  poor  company 
for  Sophocles,  Aristotle,  Eratosthenes,  or  Archimedes. 
Gregory  was  the  man  for  his  time.  But  the  delicacies  of 
civilization — in  art,  or  in  thought,  or  in  human  behaviour 
— were  then  at  a  discount. 

In  every  sense  of  the  term,  the  Western  Empire  had 
lacked  expansive  force.  Across  the  Rhine  and  the  Danube 
the  northern  forests  were  impenetrable.  On  the  west,  the 
Atlantic  Ocean  was  trackless.  With  the  minor  exception  of 
the  conquest  of  Britain,  all  attempt  at  physical  expansion 
ceased  after  Varus  lost  the  legions  of  Augustus.  The 
Western  Empire  in  all  its  ramifications  was  a  purely  de¬ 
fensive  institution,  in  its  sociological  functionings  and  in 
its  external  behaviour.  Its  learning  lacked  speculative  ad¬ 
venture.  In  no  sense,  however  we  stretch  the  metaphor, 
did  it  discover  a  New  World.  Unfortunately  life  is  an 
offensive,  directed  against  the  repetitious  mechanism  of  the 
Universe.  It  is  the  thesis  of  this  discussion  that  a  policy  of 
sociological  defence  is  doomed  to  failure.  We  are  analysing 
those  types  of  social  functioning  which  provide  that  ex¬ 
pansion  and  novelty  which  life  demands.  Life  can  only  be 
understood  as  an  aim  at  that  perfection  which  the  con¬ 
ditions  of  its  environment  allow.  But  the  aim  is  always 


88  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

beyond  the  attained  fact.  The  goal  is  some  type  of  perfected 
things,  however  lowly  and  basically  sensual.  Inorganic 
nature  is  characterized  by  its  acceptance  of  matter  of  fact. 
In  nature,  the  soil  rests,  while  the  root  of  the  plant  pursues 
the  sources  of  its  refreshment.  In  the  Western  Empire  there 
was  no  pursuit.  Its  remnants  of  irritability  were  devoid  of 
transcendent  aim. 

Of  course  Christianity  was  a  tremendous  exception.  But 
on  the  whole,  in  its  immediate  effect  it  was  a  destructive 
agency.  Its  disregard  of  temporal  fact,  based  on  apocalyptic 
prophecy,  was  too  extreme.  It  was  not  till  its  first  few  cen¬ 
turies  were  passed  that  it  began  to  acquire  a  fortunate 
worldliness.  Indeed  the  translation  of  Eastern  modes  of 
thought — Semitic,  Greek,  and  Egyptian — to  Western 
Europe  had  the  unfortunate  effect  of  making  the  ideal  side 
of  civilization  appear  more  abstract  than  it  was  in  the  lands 
and  the  epochs  of  its  origin.  It  had  this  effect  in  the  Near 
East  itself  when  by  the  lapse  of  time  circumstances  altered. 
For  the  early  Hebrews,  their  God  was  a  personage  whose 
aims  were  expressible  in  terms  of  the  immediate  political 
and  social  circumstances.  Their  religious  notions  had 
singularly  slight  reference  to  another  World.  The  absorp¬ 
tion  of  the  Greek  philosophers  in  the  city  life  of  their  times 
is  evident.  But  in  other  times  and,  still  more,  in  other 
lands,  such  thoughts  and  ideals  took  on  an  abstract  tinge. 
They  had  lost  their  practical  application.  The  notion  arose 
that  the  man  of  culture  and  the  man  of  ideal  aim  was  a 
stranger  in  the  busy  world.  It  is  true  that  such  a  notion 
haunted  Plato.  But  it  dominated  Augustine.  Yet  in 
Augustine’s  age,  towards  the  close  of  the  century  after 
Constantine,  the  mission  of  the  Church  for  the  reformation 
of  this  World  was  in  its  first  phase.  The  obstinate  survival 
of  the  present  World  was  upsetting  the  unworldly  tactics  of 
the  early  Christians. 

But  the  civilization  of  the  Near  East,  including  its 
Byzantine  fringe,  contained  other  sources  of  vigour,  pre¬ 
serving  it  from  the  decadence  of  its  Western  off-shoot. 
The  true  successors  of  Alexander,  the  men  who  realized  his 
fabled  dream  of  extending  the  Near  Eastern  civilization 
from  the  Tigris  to  the  western  shores  of  the  Mediterranean, 
belonged  to  the  age  of  Justinian  and  to  the  age  of  Mahome¬ 
tan  expansion.  Justinian’s  success  was  incomplete.  It  was 
a  false  dawn.  But  the  Mahometans  represent  the  complete 


From  Force  to  Persuasion  89 


triumph  of  the  Near  East,  after  it  had  absorbed  the  novel 
ingredients  introduced  by  Hellenism  and  Hebrewism,  its 
two  great  off-shoots  destined  to  re-create  civilization.  Thus 
there  are  two  peaks  to  the  Near  Eastern  Culture.  The 
earlier  is  embodied  in  the  first  known  examples  of  high 
civilization  in  Babylon  and  Egypt.  The  metaphor  of  a 
peak  here  fails;  for  this  earlier  type  of  life  maintained  itself 
for  long  ages.  The  advent  of  the  Persians  represents  a  tran¬ 
sitional  period.  They  almost  antedated  the  Mahometans, 
But  the  times  were  not  ready. 

The  distinction  separating  the  Byzantines  and  the 
Mahometans  from  the  Romans  is  that  the  Romans  were 
themselves  deriving  the  civilization  which  they  spread.  In 
their  hands  it  assumed  a  frozen  form.  Thought  halted,  and 
literature  copied.  The  Byzantines  and  the  Mahometans 
were  themselves  the  civilization.  Thus  their  culture  retained 
its  intrinsic  energies,  sustained  by  physical  and  spiritual 
adventure.  They  traded  with  the  Far  East:  they  expanded 
westward:  they  codified  law:  they  developed  new  forms 
or  art:  they  elaborated  theologies:  they  transformed 
mathematics:  they  developed  medicine.  In  this  final  period 
of  Near  Eastern  greatness  the  Jews  played  the  same  part 
as  did  the  Greeks  during  the  Persian  epoch.  Finally,  the 
Near  East  as  a  centre  of  civilization  was  destroyed  by  the 
Tartars  and  the  Turks. 

Luckily  for  Europe,  the  more  northern  thrust  of  the 
Tartars  across  Russia  seems  to  have  been  checked  by  the 
forests  of  Poland  and  the  more  southern  hills  and 
mountains.  These  conquerors  of  the  Near  East  were  never 
civilized  in  any  effective  sense  of  the  term.  During  the 
later  centuries,  the  Turkish  pressure  on  Europe  constituted 
merely  the  threat  of  Europe  produced  by  a  lower  civiliza¬ 
tion,  an  ingenious  compound  of  primitive  brutality  and 
decadent  refinement.  In  the  eighteenth  and  nineteenth 
centuries  much  history  was  written  under  the  impression 
that  the  Turks  were  the  authentic  representatives  of  the 
previous  Near  Eastern  civilization.  Thus  the  early  Greeks 
were  staged  as  its  opponents  and  not  as  its  derivatives.  In 
fact  the  long  pupillage  of  Europe  to  the  Near  East  was 
entirely  misrepresented. 

Section  VI.  At  the  close  of  the  Dark  Ages  Europe 
started  upon  its  second  effort  after  civilization  with  three 
main  advantages:  its  Christian  ethics:  its  instinct  for  legal 


90  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

organization  transcending  local  boundaries,  derived  from 
the  Church  and  the  reminiscence  of  the  Empire:  and 
thirdly  its  wider  inheritance  of  antecedent  thought,  gradu¬ 
ally  disclosing  itself  as  Hebrew,  Greek,  and  Roman 
literatures.  The  total  effect  was  the  increased  sense  of  the 
dignity  of  man,  as  man.  There  has  been  a  growth,  slow  and 
wavering,  of  respect  for  the  preciousness  of  human  life. 
This  is  the  humanitarian  spirit,  gradually  emerging  in  the 
slow  sunrise  of  a  thousand  years. 

The  creation  of  the  world — said  Plato — is  the  victory  of 
persuasion  over  force.  The  worth  of  men  consists  in  their 
liability  to  persuasion.  They  can  persuade  and  can  be 
persuaded  by  the  disclosure  of  alternatives,  the  better  and 
the  worse.  Civilization  is  the  maintenance  of  social  order, 
by  its  own  inherent  persuasiveness  as  embodying  the  nobler 
alternative.  The  recourse  to  force,  however,  unavoidable, 
is  a  disclosure  of  the  failure  of  civilization,  either  in  the 
general  society  or  in  a  remnant  of  individuals.  Thus  in  a 
live  civilization  there  is  always  an  element  of  unrest.  For 
sensitiveness  to  ideas  means  curiosity,  adventure,  change. 
Civilized  order  survives  on  its  merits,  and  is  transformed  by 
its  power  of  recognizing  its  imperfections. 

Now  the  intercourse  between  individuals  and  between 
social  groups  takes  one  of  two  forms,  force  or  persuasion. 
Commerce  is  the  great  example  of  intercourse  in  the  way 
of  persuasion.  War,  slavery,  and  governmental  compulsion 
exemplify  the  reign  of  force.  The  weakness  of  the  Near 
Eastern  civilizations  consisted  in  their  large  reliance  upon 
force.  The  growth  of  persuasive  intercourse  within  the 
texture  of  society  became  halted.  These  civilizations  never 
eradicated  a  large  reliance  upon  the  sway  of  conquerors 
over  conquered  populations,  and  upon  the  rule  of  in¬ 
dividual  masters  over  slaves.  This  habit  of  dominance 
spread  its  infection  beyond  these  limits.  A  rule  of  men  over 
women  remained  an  established  feature  of  highly  civilized 
societies.  It  survived  as  a  hang-over  from  barbarism.  But 
its  demoralizing  effects  increased  with  civilization.  This 
inequality  of  men  and  women  seems  to  have  been  based 
upon  physical  superiorities,  and  the  absorption  of  women 
in  the  birth  and  care  of  children.  Anyhow  it  issued  in  the 
degradation  of  women  below  the  level  of  the  males.  Thus 
these  Eastern  races  entered  upon  the  fatal  experiment  of 
maintaining  themselves  at  two  levels  of  culture,  and  of 


From  Force  to  Persuasion  91 

dominating  subject  populations  at  yet  a  third  level.  The 
enjoyment  of  power  is  fatal  to  the  subtleties  of  life.  Ruling 
classes  degenerate  by  reason  of  their  lazy  indulgence  in 
obvious  gratifications. 

Commerce  followed  upon  the  gradual  acquirement  of 
means  for  easy  locomotion  in  small  groups.  Whole  com¬ 
munities  had  wandered,  gradually  shifting  to  other  environ¬ 
ments.  But  travel  and  return,  undertaken  by  small  groups 
or  even  by  individual  men,  is  an  enterprise  of  entirely 
different  character.  It  requires  either  open  country,  free 
from  forest  barriers,  or  the  navigation  of  rivers  and  seas. 
The  strangers  arrive  in  small  groups.  They  are  thus  under 
no  temptation  to  dominate,  and  excite  no  fear.  Commerce 
may  stabilize  itself  into  a  steady  traditional  routine.  This 
halt  in  progress  has  happened  over  large  areas  for  long 
periods  of  time.  But  on  the  whole,  Commerce  is  unstable. 
It  brings  together  groups  of  men  with  different  modes  of 
life,  different  technologies,  and  different  ways  of  thought. 
Apart  from  Commerce,  the  mariners’  compass,  with  the 
vast  theory  which  it  has  suggested,  would  never  have 
reached  the  shores  of  the  Atlantic,  and  printing  would  not 
have  spread  from  Pekin  to  Cairo. 

The  expanding  Commerce  of  mediaeval  and  modem 
Europe  was  promoted  in  the  first  place  by  the  great  roads 
which  were  the  legacy  from  the  Roman  Empire,  by  the 
improving  art  of  navigation  which  enabled  the  indented 
coast-line  to  be  utilized,  and  by  the  sense  of  unity  promoted 
by  the  Catholic  Church  and  Christian  ethics.  There  were 
pirates,  and  feudal  wars,  and  rough  sporadic  disorder. 
But  men  from  different  regions,  of  different  races,  and  of 
different  occupation  were  meeting  together  on  the  basis  of 
free  persuasion.  Even  the  feudal  castle,  though  it  often 
harboured  men  with  the  mentality  of  gangsters,  was  more 
apt  for  defence  than  for  offence.  Also  feudal  levies,  with 
their  short  periods  of  service,  were  mostly  effective  as 
defensive  forces.  In  later  times  the  evils  of  this  system 
outweighed  its  merits.  But  in  its  origin  it  can  be  compared 
to  the  modern  police,  quite  as  aptly  as  to  the  modem  army. 
Of  course  it  differed  from  both.  The  point  is  that  the  feudal 
castle  was  mostly  a  sensible  mode  of  self-protection  for  a 
peaceful  district.  The  merit  of  Commerce  lies  in  its  close 
relation  to  technology.  The  novelty  of  experience  promoted 
by  Commerce  suggests  alternatives  in  ways  of  production. 


92  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

Again  European  technology  was  fertilized  from  another 
source.  The  art  of  clear  thinking,  of  criticism  of  premises, 
of  speculative  assumption,  of  deductive  reasoning — this 
great  art  was  discovered,  at  least  in  embryo,  by  the  Greeks, 
and  was  inherited  by  Europe.  Like  other  inventions  it  has 
often  been  disastrously  misused.  But  its  effect  on  intel¬ 
lectual  capacity  can  only  be  compared  with  that  of  fire  and 
iron  and  steel  for  the  production  of  the  blades  of  Damascus 
and  Toledo.  Mankind  was  now  armed  intellectually,  as 
well  as  physically. 

Curiosity  was  now  progressive.  The  static  wisdom  of  the 
proverbs  of  Solomon,  and  of  the  Wisdom  Books  of  the 
Bible,  has  been  supplanted  by  Euclid’s  Elements,  by 
Newton’s  Physics,  by  the  modem  epoch  in  industry.  ‘All 
the  rivers  run  into  the  sea;  there  is  nothing  new  under  the 
sun,’  was  the  final  judgment  of  the  Near  East.  When  we 
have  allowed  for  all  its  brilliance,  and  for  its  many  modes 
of  activity,  this  great  civilization  finally  sank  under  the 
barren  criticism  of  disillusioned  sensualists.  It  is  the  nemesis 
of  the  reign  of  force,  of  the  worship  of  power,  that  the 
ideals  of  the  semi-divine  rulers  centre  upon  some  variant 
of  Solomon’s  magnificent  harem  of  three  hundred  wives 
and  seven  hundred  concubines.  The  variation  may  be 
towards  decency,  but  it  is  equally  decadent.  Christianity 
has  only  escaped  from  the  Near  East  with  scars  upon  it. 

Section  VII.  In  this  rapid  survey  of  the  rise  and  fall  of 
civilizations,  we  have  noted  four  factors  which  decisively 
govern  the  fate  of  social  groups.  First,  there  stands  the 
inexorable  law  that  apart  from  some  transcendent  aim 
the  civilized  life  either  wallows  in  pleasure  or  relapses 
slowly  into  a  barren  repetition  with  waning  intensities  of 
feeling.  Secondly,  there  stands  the  iron  compulsion  of 
nature  that  the  bodily  necessities  of  food,  clothing,  and 
shelter  be  provided.  The  rigid  limits  which  are  thereby  set 
to  modes  of  social  existence  can  only  be  mitigated  by  the 
growth  of  an  understanding  by  which  the  interplay  between 
man  and  the  rest  of  nature  can  be  adjusted.  Thirdly,  the 
compulsory  dominion  of  men  over  men  has  a  double  sig¬ 
nificance.  It  has  a  benign  effect  so  far  as  it  secures  the  co¬ 
ordination  of  behaviour  necessary  for  social  welfare.  But 
it  is  fatal  to  extend  this  dominion  beyond  the  barest  limits 
necessary  for  this  coordination.  The  progressive  societies 
are  those  which  most  decisively  have  trusted  themselves  to 


Foresight  93 

the  fourth  factor  which  is  the  way  of  persuasion.  Amidst 
all  the  activities  of  mankind  there  are  three  which  chiefly 
have  promoted  this  last  factor  in  human  life.  They  are 
family  affections  aroused  in  sex  relations  and  in  the  nurture 
of  children,  intellectual  curiosity  leading  to  enjoyment  in 
the  interchange  of  ideas,  and — as  soon  as  large-scale  so¬ 
cieties  arose — the  practice  of  Commerce.  But  beyond  these 
special  activities  a  greater  bond  of  sympathy  has  arisen. 
This  bond  is  the  growth  of  reverence  for  that  power  in 
virtue  of  which  nature  harbours  ideal  ends,  and  produces 
individual  beings  capable  of  conscious  discrimination  of 
such  ends.  This  reverence  is  the  foundation  of  the  respect 
for  man  as  man.  It  thereby  secures  that  liberty  of  thought 
and  action,  required  for  the  upward  adventure  of  life  "on 
this  Earth. 


6.  Foresight 

Section  I.  By  the  phrase  Historical  Foresight,  I  mean 
something  quite  different  from  the  accurate  exercise  of 
Scientific  Induction.  Science  is  concerned  with  generali¬ 
ties.  The  generalities  apply,  but  they  do  not  determine  the 
course  of  history  apart  from  some  anchorage  in  fact.  There 
might  have  been  many  alternative  courses  of  history  con¬ 
ditioned  by  the  same  laws.  Perhaps,  if  we  knew  enough 
of  the  laws,  then  we  should  understand  that  the  develop¬ 
ment  of  the  future  from  the  past  is  completely  determined 
by  the  details  of  the  past  and  by  these  scientific  laws  which 
condition  all  generation.  Unfortunately  our  knowledge  of 
scientific  laws  is  woefully  defective,  and  our  knowledge 
of  the  relevant  facts  of  the  present  and  the  past  is  scanty 
in  the  extreme.  Thus  as  the  result  of  all  our  science,  we 
are  ignorant  of  that  remote  epoch  when  there  will  be  a 
second  collision  between  the  sun  and  a  passing  star,  we  are 
ignorant  of  the  future  of  life  on  the  earth,  we  are  igno¬ 
rant  of  the  future  of  mankind,  we  are  ignorant  of  the 
course  of  history  a  year  hence,  we  are  ignorant  of  most  of 
the  domestic  details  of  our  lives  tomorrow,  we  are  even 
ignorant  of  the  term  that  has  been  set  to  our  own  existence. 


94  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

This  catalogue  of  ignorances  at  once  reminds  us  that  our 
state  is  not  that  of  blank  absence  of  knowledge.  Our  igno¬ 
rance  is  suffused  with  Foresight.  Also  the  basis  of  our  de¬ 
fect  in  foresight  is  our  scant  knowledge  of  the  relevant 
detailed  facts  in  past  and  present  which  are  required  for 
the  application  of  the  scientific  laws.  Where  the  circum¬ 
stances  are  comparatively  simple,  as  in  Astronomy,  we 
know  that  the  facts  and  the  astronomical  laws  provide  an 
apparatus  of  great  accuracy  in  forecast.  The  main  diffi¬ 
culty  in  Historical  Foresight  is  the  power  of  collecting  and 
selecting  the  facts  relevant  to  the  particular  type  of  fore¬ 
cast  which  we  wish  to  make.  Discussions  on  the  method 
of  science  wander  off  onto  the  topic  of  experiment.  But 
experiment  is  nothing  else  than  a  mode  of  cooking  the 
facts  for  the  sake  of  exemplifying  the  law.  Unfortunately 
the  facts  of  history,  even  those  of  private  individual  history, 
are  on  too  large  a  scale.  They  surge  forward  beyond  con- 

It  is  thus  evident  that  this  topic  of  Historical  Foresight 
is  not  to  be  exhausted  by  a  neat  description  of  some  defi¬ 
nite  methods.  It  is  faced  with  two  sources  of  difficulty, 
where  science  has  only  one.  Science  seeks  the  laws  only, 
but  Foresight  requires  in  addition  due  emphasis  on  the 
relevant  facts  from  which  the  future  is  to  emerge.  Of 
tlie  two  tasks  required  for  Foresight,  this  selection  amid  the 
welter  is  the  more  difficult.  Probably  a  neat  doctrine  of 
Foresight  is  impossible.  But  what  can  be  done  is  to  con¬ 
fine  attention  to  one  field  of  human  activity,  and  to  de¬ 
scribe  the  type  of  mentality  which  seems  requisite  for  the 
attainment  of  Foresight  within  that  field.  The  present 
state  of  the  world,  and  the  course  of  the  discussions  in  this 
book,  suggest  the  field  of  Commercial  relations.  This  field 
will  therefore  be  chosen  to  illustrate  the  function  of  ideas 
in  the  provision  of  anticipation  and  purpose. 

To  avoid  misunderstanding  I  must  disclaim  the  foolish 
notion  that  it  is  possible  for  anyone,  devoid  of  personal 
experience  of  commerce,  to  provide  useful  suggestions  for 
its  detailed  conduct.  There  is  no  substitute  for  first-hand 
practice.  Also  the  word  ‘commerce’  is  here  used  in  the 
largest  sense  of  that  term,  in  which  it  includes  a  variety 
of  activities.  Any  useful  theory,  capable  of  immediate  ap¬ 
plication  to  specific  instances,  must  depend  on  a  direct 
knowledge  of  the  relevant  reactions  of  men  and  women 


Foresight  95 

composing  that  society,  or  perhaps  group  of  nations, 
within  which  the  specific  business  in  question  is  to  flourish. 
In  this  discussion  there  is  no  pretence  of  such  detailed 
knowledge. 

There  remains,  however,  the  question  of  the  general 
type  of  mentality  which  in  the  present  condition  of  the 
world  will  promote  the  general  success  of  a  commercial 
community.  Such  a  type  is,  of  course,  very  complex.  But 
we  are  considering  one  unquestioned  element  in  it,  namely 
Foresight,  and  will  discuss  the  conditions  for  its  develop¬ 
ment  and  its  successful  exercise. 

Some  people  are  born  with  astounding  knacks  of  the 
mind.  For  example,  there  are  calculating  boys  who  can 
perform  intricate  operations  of  mental  "arithmetic  in  a 
flash,  there  are  also  other  sorts  of  peculiar  faculties  of 
divination;  in  particular  there  are  men  with  a  knack  of 
shrewdness  in  judging  circumstances  within  the  narrow 
range  of  their  immediate  observation.  But  after  all,  bank¬ 
ers  prefer  that  their  clerks  should  learn  arithmetic,  and 
trained  geologists  are  preferred  to  men  with  divining  rods. 
In  the  same  way,  there  are  general  conditions  of  training 
which  promote  the  development  of  a  wider  type  of  fore¬ 
sight. 

It  is  a  great  mistake  to  divide  people  into  sharp  classes, 
namely,  people  with  such-and-such  a  knack  and  people 
without  it.  These  trenchant  divisions  are  simply  foolish. 
Most  humans  are  bom  with  certain  aptitudes.  But  these 
aptitudes  can  easily  remain  latent  unless  they  are  elicited 
into  activity  by  fortunate  circumstances.  If  anyone  has  no 
aptitude  of  a  certain  type,  no  training  can  elicit  it.  But, 
granted  the  aptitude,  we  can  discuss  the  ways  of  training  it. 
Foresight  depends  upon  understanding.  In  practical  affairs 
it  is  a  habit.  But  the  habit  of  foreseeing  is  elicited  by  the 
habit  of  understanding.  To  a  large  extent,  understanding 
can  be  acquired  by  a  conscious  effort  and  it  can  be  taught. 
Thus  the  training  of  Foresight  is  by  the  medium  of  Under¬ 
standing.  Foresight  is  the  product  of  Insight. 

Section  II.  The  general  topic  to  be  understood  is  the 
entire  internal  functioning  of  human  society,  including  its 
technologies,  the  biological  and  physical  laws  on  which 
these  technologies  depend,  and  including  the  sociological 
reactions  of  humans  depending  on  fundamental  psycho¬ 
logical  principles.  In  fact,  the  general  topic  is  sociology  in 


96  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

the  broadest  sense  of  the  term,  including  its  auxiliary  sci¬ 
ences.  Such  a  width  of  understanding  is,  of  course,  beyond 
the  grasp  of  any  single  human.  But  no  part  of  it  is  entirely 
foreign  to  the  provision  of  foresight  in  business.  Such  a 
complete  understanding  is  a  cooperative  enterprise;  and  a 
business  community  maintains  its  success  for  long  periods 
so  far  as  its  average  foresight  is  dominated  by  some  ap¬ 
proach  to  such  general  understanding. 

We  shall  comprehend  better  the  varieties  of  individual 
understanding  which  go  to  complete  this  general  equip¬ 
ment  of  an  ideal  business  community,  if  we  commence  by 
considering  the  contrast  between  understanding  and  rou¬ 
tine. 

Routine  is  the  god  of  every  social  system;  it  is  the 
seventh  heaven  of  business,  the  essential  component  in  the 
success  of  every  factory,  the  ideal  of  every  statesman.  The 
social  machine  should  run  like  clockwork.  Every  crime 
should  be  followed  by  an  arrest,  every  arrest  by  a  judicial 
trial,  every  trial  by  a  conviction,  every  conviction  by  a 
punishment,  every  punishment  by  a  reformed  character. 
Or,  you  can  conceive  an  analogous  routine  concerning  the 
making  of  a  motor  car,  starting  with  the  iron  in  the  ore, 
and  the  coal  in  the  mine,  and  ending  with  the  car  driving 
out  of  the  factory  and  with  the  President  of  the  Corpora¬ 
tion  signing  the  dividend  warrants,  and  renewing  his  con¬ 
tracts  with  the  mining  Corporations.  In  such  a  routine 
everyone  from  the  humblest  miner  to  the  august  president 
is  exactly  trained  for  his  special  job.  Every  action  of  miner 
or  president  is  the  product  of  conditioned  reflexes,  accord¬ 
ing  to  current  physiological  phraseology.  When  the  rou¬ 
tine  is  perfect,  understanding  can  be  eliminated,  except 
such  minor  flashes  of  intelligence  as  are  required  to  deal 
with  familiar  accidents,  such  as  a  flooded  mine,  a  prolonged 
drought,  or  an  epidemic  of  influenza.  A  system  will  be  the 
product  of  intelligence.  But  when  the  adequate  routine 
is  established,  intelligence  vanishes,  and  the  system  is 
maintained  by  a  coordination  of  conditioned  reflexes.  What 
is  then  required  from  the  humans  is  receptivity  of  special 
training.  No  one,  from  President  to  miner,  need  under¬ 
stand  the  system  as  a  whole.  There  will  be  no  foresight, 
but  there  will  be  complete  success  in  the  maintenance  of 
the  routine. 

Now  it  is  the  beginning  of  wisdom  to  understand  that 


Foresight  97 

social  life  is  founded  upon  routine.  Unless  society  is  per¬ 
meated,  through  and  through,  with  routine,  civilization 
vanishes.  So  many  sociological  doctrines,  the  products  of 
acute  intellects,  are  wrecked  by  obliviousness  to  this  fun¬ 
damental  sociological  truth.  Society  requires  stability,  fore¬ 
sight  itself  presupposes  stability,  and  stability  is  the  product 
of  routine.  But  there  are  limits  to  routine,  and  it  is  for  the 
discernment  of  these  limits,  and  for  the  provision  of  the 
consequent  action,  that  foresight  is  required. 

The  two  extremes  of  complete  understanding  and  of 
complete  routine  are  never  realized  in  human  society.  But 
of  the  two,  routine  is  more  fundamental  than  understand¬ 
ing,  that  is  to  say,  routine  modified  by  minor  flashes  of 
short  range  intelligence.  Indeed  the  notion  of  complete  un¬ 
derstanding  controlling  action  is  an  ideal  in  the  clouds, 
grotesquely  at  variance  with  practical  life.  But  we  have 
under  our  eyes  countless  examples  of  societies  entirely 
dominated  by  routine.  The  elaborate  social  organizations 
of  insects  appear  to  be  thoroughgoing  examples  of  routine. 
Such  organizations  achieve  far-reaching,  complex  pur¬ 
poses:  they  involve  a  differentiation  of  classes,  from  cows 
to  serfs,  from  serfs  to  workers,  from  workers  to  warriors, 
from  warriors  to  janitors,  and  from  janitors  to  queens. 
Such  organizations  have  regard  to  needs  in  a  distant  fu¬ 
ture,  especially  if  the  comparatively  short  space  of  life 
of  the  individual  insects  is  taken  into  account  as  the  unit 
of  measurement. 

These  insect  societies  have  been  astoundingly  successful, 
so  far  as  concerns  survival  power.  They  seem  to  have  a 
past  extending  over  tens  of  thousands  of  years,  perhaps  of 
millions  of  years.  It  is  the  greatest  of  mistakes  to  believe 
that  it  has  required  the  high-grade  intelligence  of  mankind 
to  construct  an  elaborate  social  organization.  A  particular 
instance  of  this  error  is  the  prevalent  assumption  that  any 
social  routine  whose  purposes  are  not  obvious  to  our  analy¬ 
sis  is  thereby  to  be  condemned  as  foolish.  We  can  observe 
insects  performing  elaborate  routine  actions  whose  pur¬ 
poses  they  cannot  possibly  understand,  which  yet  are  es¬ 
sential  either  for  their  own  individual  survival  or  for 
race-survival. 

But  these  insect  societies  have  one  great  characteristic 
in  common.  They  are  not  progressive.  It  is  exactly  this 
characteristic  that  discriminates  communities  of  mankind 


98  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

from  communities  of  insects.  Further,  this  great  fact  of 
progressiveness,  be  it  from  worse  to  better,  or  from  better 
to  worse,  has  become  of  greater  and  greater  importance 
in  Western  civilization  as  we  come  to  modem  times.  The 
rate  of  change  has  increased  even  in  my  life-time.  It  is 
possible  that  in  future  ages  mankind  may  relapse  into  the 
stage  of  stable  societies.  But  such  a  relapse  is  extremely 
unlikely  within  any  span  of  time  which  we  need  take  into 
account. 

Section  III.  The  recent  shortening  of  the  time-span  be¬ 
tween  notable  changes  in  social  customs  is  very  obvious,  if 
we  examine  history.  Originally  it  depended  upon  some 
slow  development  of  physical  causes.  For  example,  a 
gradual  change  of  physical  configuration  such  as  the  ele¬ 
vation  of  mountains:  the  time-span  for  such  a  change  is  of 
the  order  of  a  million  years.  Again,  a  gradual  change  of 
climate:  the  time-span  for  such  a  change  is  of  the  order 
of  five-thousand  years.  Again  a  gradual  over-population  of 
the  region  occupied  by  some  community  with  its  conse¬ 
quent  swarming  into  new  territories:  having  regard  to  the 
huge  death-rate  of  pre-scientific  ages,  the  time-span  for 
such  a  change  was  of  the  order  of  five-hundred  years. 
Again,  the  sporadic  inventions  of  new  technologies,  such 
as  the  chipping  of  flints,  the  invention  of  fire,  the  taming 
of  animals,  the  invention  of  metallurgy:  in  the  pre-scientific 
ages,  the  average  time-span  for  such  changes  was,  at  least, 
of  the  order  of  five-hundred  years.  If  we  compare  the  tech¬ 
nologies  of  civilizations  west  of  Mesopotamia  at  the  epochs 
100  a.d.,  the  culmination  of  the  Roman  Empire,  and  1400 
a.d.,  the  close  of  the  Middle  Ages,  we  find  practically  no 
advance  in  technology.  There  was  some  gain  in  metallurgy, 
some  elaboration  of  clockwork,  the  recent  invention  of 
gun  powder  with  its  influence  all  in  the  future,  some  ad¬ 
vance  in  the  art  of  navigation,  also  with  its  influence  in  the 
future.  If  we  compare  1400  a.d.  with  1700  a.d.,  there  is 
a  great  advance;  gunpowder,  and  printing,  and  navigation, 
and  the  technique  of  commerce,  had  produced  their  effect. 
But  even  then,  the  analogy  between  life  in  the  eighteenth 
century  and  life  in  the  great  period  of  ancient  Rome  was 
singularly  close,  so  that  the  peculiar  relevance  of  Latin 
literature  was  felt  vividly.  In  the  fifty  years  between  1780 
and  1830,  a  number  of  inventions  came  with  a  rush  into 
effective  operation.  The  age  of  steam  power  and  of  ma- 


Foresight  99 

chinery  was  introduced.  But  for  two  generations,  from 
1830  to  1890,  there  was  a  singular  uniformity  in  the  prin¬ 
ciples  of  technology  which  were  regulating  the  structure 
of  society  and  the  usages  of  business. 

The  conclusion  to  be  drawn  from  this  survey  is  a  mo¬ 
mentous  one.  Our  sociological  theories,  our  political  phi¬ 
losophy,  our  practical  maxims  of  business,  our  political 
economy,  and  our  doctrines  of  education,  are  derived  from 
an  unbroken  tradition  of  great  thinkers  and  of  practical 
examples,  from  the  age  of  Plato  in  the  fifth  century  before 
Christ  to  the  end  of  the  last  century.  The  whole  of  this 
tradition  is  warped  by  the  vicious  assumption  that  each 
generation  will  substantially  live  amid  the  conditions  gov¬ 
erning  the  lives  of  its  fathers  and  will  transmit  those  con¬ 
ditions  to  mould  with  equal  force  the  lives  of  its  children. 
We  are  living  in  the  first  period  of  human  history  for  which 
this  assumption  is  false. 

Of  course  in  the  past,  there  were  great  catastrophes: 
for  example,  plagues,  floods,  barbarian  invasions.  But,  if 
such  catastrophes  were  warded  off,  there  was  a  stable,  well- 
known  condition  of  civilized  life.  This  assumption  subtly 
pervades  the  premises  of  political  economy,  and  has  per¬ 
mitted  it  to  confine  attention  to  a  simplified  edition  of 
human  nature.  It  is  at  the  basis  of  our  conception  of  the 
reliable  business  man,  who  has  mastered  a  technique  and 
never  looks  beyond  his  contracted  horizon.  It  colours  our 
political  philosophy  and  our  educational  theory,  with  their 
overwhelming  emphasis  on  past  experience.  The  note  of 
recurrence  dominates  the  wisdom  of  the  past,  and  still  per¬ 
sists  in  many  forms  even  where  explicitly  the  fallacy  of  its 
modern  application  is  admitted.  The  point  is  that  in  the 
past  the  time-span  of  important  change  was  considerably 
longer  than  that  of  a  single  human  fife.  Thus  mankind  was 
trained  to  adapt  itself  to  fixed  conditions. 

Today  this  time-span  is  considerably  shorter  than  that  of 
hmnan  life,  and  accordingly  our  training  must  prepare  in¬ 
dividuals  to  face  a  novelty  of  conditions.  But  there  can  be 
no  preparation  for  the  unknown.  It  is  at  this  point  that  we 
recur  to  the  immediate  topic,  Foresight.  We  require  such 
an  understanding  of  the  present  conditions,  as  may  give  us 
some  grasp  of  the  novelty  which  is  about  to  produce  a 
measurable  influence  on  the  immediate  future.  Yet  the 
doctrine,  that  routine  is  dominant  in  any  society  that  is  not 


100  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

collapsing,  must  never  be  lost  sight  of.  Thus  the  grounds, 
in  human  nature  and  in  the  successful  satisfaction  of  pur¬ 
pose,  these  grounds  for  the  current  routine  must  be  under¬ 
stood;  and  at  the  same  time  the  sorts  of  novelty  just  entering 
into  social  effectiveness  have  got  to  be  weighed  against  the 
old  routine.  In  this  way  the  type  of  modification  and  the 
type  of  persistence  exhibited  in  the  immediate  future  may 
be  foreseen. 

Section  IV.  It  is  now  time  to  give  some  illustrations 
of  assertions  already  made.  Consider  our  main  conclusions 
that  our  traditional  doctrines  of  sociology,  of  political 
philosophy,  of  the  practical  conduct  of  large  business,  and 
of  political  economy  are  largely  warped  and  vitiated  by  the 
implicit  assumption  of  a  stable  unchanging  social  system. 
With  this  assumption  it  is  comparatively  safe  to  base  rea¬ 
soning  upon  a  simplified  edition  of  human  nature.  For  well- 
known  stimuli  working  under  well-known  conditions 
produce  well-known  reactions.  It  is  safe  then  to  assume  that 
human  nature,  for  the  purpose  in  hand,  is  adequately  de¬ 
scribed  in  terms  of  some  of  the  major  reactions  to  some  of 
the  major  stimuli.  For  example,  we  can  all  remember  our 
old  friend,  the  economic  man. 

The  beauty  of  the  economic  man  was  that  we  knew  ex¬ 
actly  what  he  was  after.  Whatever  his  wants  were,  he  knew 
them  and  his  neighbours  knew  them.  His  wants  were  those 
developed  in  a  well-defined  social  system.  His  father  and 
grandfather  had  the  same  wants,  and  satisfied  them  in  the 
same  way.  So  whenever  there  was  a  shortage,  everyone — 
including  the  economic  man  himself— knew  what  was 
short,  and  knew  the  way  to  satisfy  the  consumer.  In  fact, 
the  consumer  knew  what  he  wanted  to  consume.  This  was 
the  demand.  The  producer  knew  how  to  produce  the  re¬ 
quired  articles,  hence  the  supply.  The  men  who  got  the 
goods  onto  the  spot  first,  at  the  cheapest  price,  made  their 
fortunes;  the  other  producers  were  eliminated.  This  was 
healthy  competition.  This  is  beautifully  simple  and  with 
proper  elaboration  is  obviously  true.  It  expresses  the  domi¬ 
nant  truth  exactly  so  far  as  there  are  stable  well-tried  con¬ 
ditions.  But  when  we  are  concerned  with  a  social  system 
which  in  important  ways  is  changing,  this  simplified  con¬ 
ception  of  human  relations  requires  severe  qualification. 

It  is,  of  course,  common  knowledge  that  the  whole  trend 
of  political  economy  during  the  last  thirty  or  forty  years 


Foresight  101 

has  been  away  from  these  artificial  simplifications.  Such 
sharp-cut  notions  as  ‘the  economic  man,5  ‘supply  and  de¬ 
mand,5  ‘competition,5  are  now  in  process  of  dilution  by  a 
close  study  of  the  actual  re-actions  of  various  populations 
to  the  stimuli  which  are  relevant  to  modem  commerce. 
This  exactly  illustrates  the  main  thesis.  The  older  political 
economy  reigned  supreme  for  about  a  hundred  years  from 
the  time  of  Adam  Smith,  because  in  its  main  assumptions 
it  did  apply  to  the  general  circumstances  of  life  as  led,  then 
and  for  innumerable  centuries  in  the  past.  These  circum¬ 
stances  were  then  already  passing  away.  But  it  still  re¬ 
mained  a  dominant  truth  that  in  commercial  relations  men 
were  dominated  by  well-conditioned  reactions  to  com¬ 
pletely  familiar  stimuli. 

In  the  present  age,  the  element  of  novelty  which  life 
affords  is  too  prominent  to  be  omitted  from  our  calcula¬ 
tions.  A  deeper  knowledge  of  the  varieties  of  human  na¬ 
ture  is  required  to  determine  the  reaction,  in  its  character 
and  its  strength,  to  those  elements  of  novelty  which  each 
decade  of  years  introduces  into  social  life.  The  possibility 
of  this  deeper  knowledge  constitutes  the  Foresight  under 
discussion. 

Another  example  which  concerns  sociological  habits, 
and  thence  business  relations  and  the  shifting  values  of 
property,  is  to  be  seen  in  the  history  of  cities.  Throughout 
the  whole  span  of  civilization  up  to  the  present  moment, 
the  growth  of  condensed  aggregates  of  humans,  which  we 
call  cities,  has  been  an  inseparable  accompaniment  of  the 
growth  of  civilization.  There  are  many  obvious  reasons,  the 
defence  of  accumulated  wealth  behind  city  walls,  the  con¬ 
centration  of  materials  requisite  for  manufacture,  the 
concentration  of  power  in  the  form  of  human  muscles  and, 
later,  in  the  form  of  available  heat  energy,  the  ease  of 
mutual  intercourse  required  for  business  relations,  the 
pleasure  arising  from  a  concentration  of  aesthetic  and  cul¬ 
tural  opportunities,  the  advantages  of  a  concentration  of 
governmental  and  other  directing  agencies,  administrative, 
legal,  and  military. 

But  there  are  disadvantages  in  cities.  As  yet  no  civiliza¬ 
tion  has  been  self-supporting.  Each  civilization  is  bom,  it 
culminates,  and  it  decays.  There  is  a  widespread  testimony 
that  this  ominous  fact  is  due  to  inherent  biological  defects 
in  the  crowded  life  of  cities.  Now,  slowly  and  at  first  faintly, 


102  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

an  opposite  tendency  is  showng  itself.  Better  roads  and 
better  vehicles  at  first  induced  the  wealthier  classes  to  live 
on  the  outskirts  of  the  cities.  The  urgent  need  for  defence 
had  also  vanished.  This  tendency  is  now  spreading  rapidly 
downwards.  But  a  new  set  of  conditions  is  just  showing 
itself.  Up  to  the  present  time,  throughout  the  eighteenth 
and  nineteenth  centuries,  this  new  tendency  placed  the 
homes  in  the  immediate  suburbs,  but  concentrated  manu¬ 
facturing  activity,  business  relations,  government,  and 
pleasure,  in  the  centres  of  the  cities.  Apart  from  the  care  of 
children,  and  periods  of  sheer  rest,  the  active  lives  were 
spent  in  the  cities.  In  some  ways,  the  concentration  of  such 
activities  was  even  more  emphasized,  and  the  homes  were 
pushed  outwards  even  at  the  cost  of  the  discomfort  of  com¬ 
muting.  But,  if  we  examine  the  trend  of  technology  during 
the  past  generation,  the  reasons  for  this  concentration  are 
largely  disappearing.  Still  more,  the  reasons  for  the  choice 
of  sites  for  cities  are  also  altering.  Mechanical  power  can 
be  transmitted  for  hundreds  of  miles,  men  can  communi¬ 
cate  almost  instantaneously  by  telephone,  the  chiefs  of 
great  organizations  can  be  transported  by  airplanes,  the 
cinemas  can  produce  plays  in  every  village,  music,  speeches, 
and  sermons  can  be  broadcast.  Almost  every  reason  for  the 
growth  of  cities,  concurrently  with  the  growth  of  civiliza¬ 
tion,  has  been  profoundly  modified. 

What  then  is  to  be  the  future  of  cities,  three  hundred 
years  hence,  a  hundred  years  hence,  or  even  thirty  years 
hence?  I  do  not  know.  But  I  venture  a  guess: — that  those 
who  are  reasonably  fortunate  in  this  foresight  will  make 
their  fortunes,  and  that  others  will  be  ruined  by  mistakes 
in  calculation. 

My  second  point  that  the  reasons  for  the  choice  of  sites 
for  cities  have  also  been  modified  is  illustrated  by  recent 
changes  in  my  own  country,  England.  The  first  effect  of 
the  new  industrial  age  of  the  eighteenth  and  nineteenth 
centuries  was  to  concentrate  population  round  the  coal¬ 
fields.  Thus  the  central  portion  of  England  on  its  northern 
edge  has  become  one  huge  city,  disguised  under  different 
names  for  its  various  regional  parts.  But  the  novel  condi¬ 
tions  are  shifting  population  and  manufactures  to  the  south 
of  England,  near  to  the  great  southern  ports  which  look 
towards  the  Mediterranean,  the  South  Atlantic  Ocean,  and 
the  Panama  Canal.  They  are  the  best  ports,  with  the  easiest 


Foresight  103 

navigation,  and  with  uncrowded  land  around  them.  At 
present  the  transmission  of  electric  power  is  one  of  the 
major  pre-occupations  of  the  government  of  England. 

The  effect  of  new  technologies  on  the  sites  of  cities,  and 
on  transformation  of  cities,  is  one  of  the  fundamental  prob¬ 
lems  which  must  enter  into  all  sociological  theories,  in¬ 
cluding  the  forecasting  of  business  relations.  We  must  not 
exaggerate  the  importance  of  these  particular  examples. 
They  are  just  two  examples  selected  from  a  whole  situation 
which  can  be  analysed  into  innumerable  examples  with  the 
same  moral.  I  mean  nothing  so  absurd  as  that  all  indus¬ 
trialists  should  meditate  on  the  future  of  cities.  The  topic 
may  be  quite  irrelevant  to  the  future  activities  of  most  of 
them.  Also  I  am  ignorant  as  to  how  much  Political 
Economy  they  should  study. 

But  we  are  faced  with  a  fluid,  shifting  situation  in  the 
immediate  future.  Rigid  maxims,  a  rule-of-thumb  routine, 
and  cast-iron  particular  doctrines  will  spell  ruin.  The 
business  of  the  future  must  be  controlled  by  a  somewhat 
different  type  of  men  to  that  of  previous  centuries.  The 
type  is  already  changing,  and  has  already  changed  so  far 
as  the  leaders  are  concerned.  The  Business  Schools  of 
Universities  are  concerned  with  spreading  this  newer  type 
throughout  the  nations  by  aiming  at  the  production  of  the 
requisite  mentality. 

Section  V.  I  will  conclude  this  chapter  by  a  sketch  of 
the  Business  Mind  of  the  future.  In  the  first  place  it  is 
fundamental  that  there  be  a  power  of  conforming  to  rou¬ 
tine,  of  supervising  routine,  of  constructing  routine,  and 
of  understanding  routine  both  as  to  its  internal  structure 
and  as  to  its  external  purposes.  Such  a  power  is  the  bed¬ 
rock  of  all  practical  efficiency.  But  for  the  production  of 
the  requisite  Foresight,  something  more  is  wanted.  This 
extra  endowment  can  only  be  described  as  a  philosophic 
power  of  understanding  the  complex  flux  of  the  varieties  of 
human  societies:  for  instance,  the  habit  of  noting  varieties 
of  demands  on  life,  of  serious  purposes,  of  frivolous  amuse¬ 
ments.  Such  instinctive  grasp  of  the  relevant  features  of 
social  currents  is  of  supreme  importance.  For  example,  the 
time-span  of  various  types  of  social  behaviour  is  of  the 
essence  of  their  effect  on  policy.  A  widespread  type  of  re¬ 
ligious  interest,  with  its  consequent  modes  of  behaviour, 
has  a  dominant  life  of  about  a  hundred  years,  while  a 


104  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

fashion  of  dress  survives  any  time  between  three  months 
and  three  years.  Methods  of  agriculture  change  slowly. 
But  the  scientific  world  seems  to  be  on  the  verge  of  far- 
reaching  biological  discoveries.  The  assumption  of  slow 
changes  in  agriculture  must  therefore  be  scanned  vigilantly. 
This  example  of  time-spans  can  be  generalized.  The  quan¬ 
titative  aspect  of  social  changes  is  of  the  essence  of  busi¬ 
ness  relations.  Thus  the  habit  of  transforming  observation 
of  qualitative  changes  into  quantitative  estimates  should 
be  a  characteristic  of  business  mentality. 

I  have  said  enough  to  show  that  the  modem  commercial 
mentality  requires  many  elements  of  discipline,  scientific 
and  sociological.  But  the  great  fact  remains  that  details  of 
relevant  knowledge  cannot  be  foreseen.  Thus  even  for  mere 
success,  and  apart  from  any  question  of  intrinsic  quality  of 
life,  an  unspecialized  aptitude  for  eliciting  generalizations 
from  particulars  and  for  seeing  the  divergent  illustration  of 
generalities  in  diverse  circumstances  is  required.  Such  a  re¬ 
flective  power  is  essentially  a  philosophic  habit:  it  is  the 
survey  of  society  from  the  standpoint  of  generality.  This 
habit  of  general  thought,  undaunted  by  novelty,  is  the  gift 
of  philosophy,  in  the  widest  sense  of  that  term. 

Section  VI.  But  the  motive  of  success  is  not  enough.  It 
produces  a  short-sighted  world  which  destroys  the  sources 
of  its  own  prosperity.  The  cycles  of  trade  depression  which 
afflict  the  world  warn  us  that  business  relations  are  infected 
through  and  through  with  the  disease  of  short-sighted  mo¬ 
tives.  The  robber  barons  did  not  conduce  to  the  pros¬ 
perity  of  Europe  in  the  Middle  Ages,  though  some  of  them 
died  prosperously  in  their  beds.  Their  example  is  a  warn¬ 
ing  to  our  civilization.  Also  we  must  not  fall  into  the  fallacy 
of  thinking  of  the  business  world  in  abstraction  from  the 
rest  of  the  community.  The  business  world  is  one  main  part 
of  the  very  community  which  is  the  subject-matter  of  our 
study.  The  behaviour  of  the  community  is  largely  domi¬ 
nated  by  the  business  mind.  A  great  society  is  a  society  in 
which  its  men  of  business  think  greatly  of  their  functions. 
Low  thoughts  mean  low  behaviour,  and  after  a  brief  orgy 
of  exploitation  low  behaviour  means  a  descending  stand¬ 
ard  of  life.  The  general  greatness  of  the  community,  quali¬ 
tatively  as  well  as  quantitively,  is  the  first  condition  for 
steady  prosperity,  buoyant,  self-sustained,  and  command¬ 
ing  credit.  The  Greek  philosopher  who  laid  the  foundation 


PART  TWO  Cosmological 


1.  Laws  of  Nature 

Section  I.  The  previous  part  of  this  book  dealt  with  the 
mflucnce  exerted  by  the  Platonic  and  Christian  doctrines 
ot  the  human  soul  upon  the  sociological  development  of 
the  European  races.  In  this  second  part  of  the  book,  I  shall 
deal  with  the  influence  of  scientific  ideas  upon  European 
culture,  and  with  the  more  general  cosmological  ideas  thus 
generated  and  presupposed. 

It  would  be  useless  to  attempt  a  history  of  science  within 
this  compass.  Accordingly,  I  shall  confine  myself  to  the 
most  general  ideas  at  the  base  of  the  whole  development 
of  science.  I  mean  the  concepts  of  Speculation  and  of 
Scholarship,  and  the  various  notions  of  the  Order  of 
Nature,  and  of  Nature  itself.  In  short,  my  topic  is  ‘Cos- 
mologies,  Ancient  and  Modem,’  together  with  the  variety 
of  methods,  speculative  and  scholarly,  employed  in  their 
production.  Special  developments  of  learning  will  only  be 
cited  in  order  to  exemplify  the  specializations  of  general 
ideas  amid  changing  epochs  of  Western  culture. 

Modern  Europe  and  America  have  derived  their  civiliza¬ 
tion  from  the  races  whose  countries  border  the  Eastern 
Mediterranean.  In  the  earlier  chapters,  Greece  and  Pales¬ 
tine  were  the  regions  providing  the  initial  formulations  of 
the  ideas  concerning  the  essence  of  human  nature.  When 
we  examine  the  history  of  science,  to  these  two  countries 
we  must  add  Egypt.  These  three  countries  are  the  direct 
ancestors  of  our  modem  civilization. 

Of  course  there  is  a  long  tale  of  civilization  behind  them. 
Mesopotamia,  Crete,  Phoenicia,  and  India,  China,  also  con¬ 
tributed.  But  whatever  of  scientific  or  religious  value  has 

107 


108  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

passed  into  modem  life,  finally  reached  us  through  the 
mediation  of  these  three  countries,  Egypt,  Greece,  Pales¬ 
tine.  Of  these  countries,  Egypt  provided  the  mature 
technology,  arising  from  three  thousand  years  of  secure 
civilization,  Palestine  provided  the  final  religious  cos¬ 
mology,  Greece  provided  the  clear-cut  generalizations 
leading  to  philosophy  and  science.  This  logical  lucidity  also 
tinges  the  remaining  legacy  from  Greece,  its  art  and 
imaginative  literature.  Every  Greek  statue  expresses  the 
welding  of  beauty  to  regularity  of  geometrical  form:  every 
Greek  play  investigates  the  interweaving  of  physical  cir¬ 
cumstances  arising  from  the  Order  of  Nature  with  states  of 
mind  which  issue  from  the  urge  of  the  Moral  Order. 

‘Canst  thou  by  searching  find  out  God?’  is  good  Hebrew, 
but  it  is  bad  Greek.  The  effort  to  comprehend  the  great 
fact  which  procures  the  order  in  the  Universe  urged  Greek 
thinkers  to  that  culmination  when  Plato  and  Aristotle  de¬ 
fined  the  complex  of  general  ideas  forming  the  imperishable 
origin  of  Western  thought.  The  work  was  only  accom¬ 
plished  just  in  time.  In  the  very  lifetime  of  Aristotle  the 
political  and  cultural  barriers  collapsed;  and  the  subse¬ 
quent  Hellenistic  development  at  Alexandria  and  elsewhere 
was  the  joint  enterprise  of  Greeks,  Egyptians,  Semites,  and 
the  mixed  races  of  Syria  and  Asia  Minor.  The  untroubled 
faith  in  lucidity  within  the  depths  of  things,  to  be  captured 
by  some  happy  glance  of  speculation,  was  lost  forever. 
Duller  men  were  content  with  limited  accuracy  and  con¬ 
structed  special  sciences:  thicker  intellects  gloried  in  the 
notion  that  the  foundations  of  the  world  were  laid  amid 
impenetrable  fog.  They  conceived  God  in  their  own  image, 
and  depicted  him  with  a  positive  dislike  of  efforts  after 
understanding  beyond  assigned  methodologies.  Satan  ac¬ 
quired  an  intellectual  character,  and  fell  by  reason  of  an 
indecent  desire  to  understand  his  Creator.  It  was  the  down¬ 
fall  of  Greece. 

Section  II.  The  progress  of  mankind  proceeds  by  de¬ 
vious  paths.  The  shift  from  the  bright  Hellenic  age,  whose 
final  period  was  centered  in  Athens,  to  the  Hellenistic  age, 
with  Alexandria  as  its  intellectual  capital,  corresponds  to  a 
new  direction  of  constructive  genius.  The  special  sciences 
were  founded.  Their  principles  were  defined,  their  methods 
were  determined,  appropriate  deductions  were  elicited. 
Learning  was  stabilized.  It  was  furnished  with  methodol- 


Laws  of  Nature  109 

ogies,  and  was  handed  over  to  University  professors  of  the 
modem  type.  Doctors  of  Medicine,  Mathematicians,  As¬ 
tronomers,  Grammarians,  Theologians,  for  more  than  six 
hundred  years  dominated  the  schools  of  Alexandria,  issuing 
text-books,  treatises,  controversies,  and  dogmatic  defini¬ 
tions.  Literature  was  replaced  by  Grammar,  and  Specula¬ 
tion  by  the  Learned  Tradition. 

These  men  conventionalized  learning.  But  they  secured 
it.  Their  work  survived  two  great  religious  revolutions,  the 
rise  of  Christianity  and  the  rise  of  Mahometanism.  It  pro¬ 
vided  both  these  religions  with  their  philosophical  theol¬ 
ogies.  It  fitted  them  out  with  heresies  and  with  orthodoxies. 

In  the  Western  Roman  Empire,  the  Christian  Church, 
armed  with  Hellenistic  thought,  captured  the  intellects  of 
the  victorious  barbarians  and  civilized  Western  Europe  up 
to  the  Arctic  Ocean.  Along  the  south  of  the  Mediterranean 
the  Mahometan  conquerors  carried  Hellenistic  thought,  as 
coloured  by  the  mentalities  of  Arabs,  Jews,  and  Persians, 
through  Africa  into  Spain.  From  Spain,  the  Mahometan 
and  Jewish  versions  made  contact  with  the  Christian 
version  of  Alexandrian  culture.  This  fusion  produced  the 
brilliant  culmination  of  Christian  Scholasticism  in  the 
thirteenth  century;  and,  in  the  seventeenth  century,  Spinoza. 

The  note  of  Hellenism  is  delight,  speculation,  discoursive 
literature:  the  note  of  Hellenistic  Alexandria  is  concentra¬ 
tion,  thoroughness,  investigation  of  the  special  tvnes  of _ 


Foresight  105 

of  all  our  finer  thoughts  ended  his  most  marvellous  dia¬ 
logue  with  the  reflection  that  the  ideal  state  could  never 
arrive  till  philosophers  are  kings.  Today,  in  an  age  of 
democracy,  the  kings  are  the  plain  citizens  pursuing  their 
various  avocations.  There  can  be  no  successful  democratic 
society  till  general  education  conveys  a  philosophic  out¬ 
look. 

Philosophy  is  not  a  mere  collection  of  noble  sentiments. 
A  deluge  of  such  sentiments  does  more  harm  than  good. 
Philosophy  is  at  once  general  and  concrete,  critical  and 
appreciative  of  direct  intuition.  It  is  not — or,  at  least, 
should  not  be — a  ferocious  debate  between  irritable  profes¬ 
sors.  It  is  a  survey  of  possibilities  and  their  comparison 
with  actualities.  In  philosophy,  the  fact,  the  theory,  the 
alternatives,  and  the  ideal,  are  weighed  together.  Its  gifts 
are  insight  and  foresight,  and  a  sense  of  the  worth  of  life, 
in  short,  that  sense  of  importance  which  nerves  all  civilized 
effort.  Mankind  can  flourish  in  the  lower  stages  of  life 
with  merely  barbaric  flashes  of  thought.  But  when  civiliza¬ 
tion  culminates,  the  absence  of  a  coordinating  philosophy 
of  life,  spread  thoughout  the  community,  spells  decadence, 
boredom,  and  the  slackening  of  effort. 

Every  epoch  has  its  character  determined  by  the  way  its 
populations  re-act  to  the  material  events  which  they  en¬ 
counter.  This  reaction  is  determined  by  their  basic  beliefs 
— by  their  hopes,  their  fears,  their  judgments  of  what  is 
worth  while.  They  may  rise  to  the  greatness  of  an  oppor¬ 
tunity,  seizing  its  drama,  perfecting  its  art,  exploiting  its 
adventure,  mastering  intellectually  and  physically  the  net¬ 
work  of  relations  that  constitutes  the  very  being  of  the 
epoch.  On  the  other  hand,  they  may  collapse  before  the 
perplexities  confronting  them.  How  they  act  depends  partly 
on  their  courage,  partly  on  their  intellectual  grasp.  Phi¬ 
losophy  is  an  attempt  to  clarify  those  fundamental  beliefs 
which  finally  determine  the  emphasis  of  attention  that  lies 
at  the  base  of  character. 

Mankind  is  now  in  one  of  its  rare  moods  of  shifting  its 
outlook.  The  mere  compulsion  of  tradition  has  lost  its 
force.  It  is  our  business — philosophers,  students,  and  prac¬ 
tical  men — to  re-create  and  reenact  a  vision  of  the  world, 
including  those  elements  of  reverence  and  order  without 
which  society  lapses  into  riot,  and  penetrated  through  and 
through  with  unflinching  rationality.  Such  a  vision  is  the 


110  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

had  emitted  the  speculations  of  Aristarchus,  and  as  though 
Athanasius  had  suggested  the  profanities  of  Arius. 

1  am  not  alluding  to  the  mere  fact  that  men  change  their 
opinions,  with  the  advance  of  age,  or  with  the  advance  or 
decay  of  knowledge.  The  important  point  is  the  way  in 
which  opinions  are  held,  and  the  weight  attached  to  par¬ 
ticular  modes  of  statement.  St.  Augustine  changed  his 
opinions.  He  not  only  published  for  all  ages  the  tragic  in¬ 
tensity  of  feeling  which  the  conversion  involved,  but  also 
he  devoted  himself  to  exact  statements  of  his  new  doctrines. 
He  remained  a  Platonist,  and  his  interest  in  the  doctrine  of 
Grace  was  a  Platonic  interest  in  the  exact  expression  how 
finite  human  life  can  participate  in  the  Divine  Perfections. 
He  performed  an  immense  service  to  civilization  by  pro¬ 
viding  Western  Europe  with  accurate  definitions  on  great 
topics  just  before  the  oncoming  of  the  Barbarians.  He 
secured  that  western  Christianity  should  persist  as  a  civiliz¬ 
ing  influence,  and  not  degenerate  into  hereditary  supersti¬ 
tion  of  the  Abyssinian  type.  But  his  attitude  to  his  own 
doctrines  was  very  different  from  that  of  Plato.  Consider 
some  of  Plato’s  phrases  about  his  own  ideas:  “If,  then, 
Socrates,  we  find  ourselves  in  many  points  unable  to  make 
our  discourse  of  the  generation  of  gods  and  the  universe  in 
every  way  wholly  consistent  and  exact,  you  must  not  be 
surprised.  Nay,  we  must  be  well  content  if  we  can  provide 
an  account  not  less  likely  than  another’s;  we  must  re¬ 
member  that  I  who  speak,  and  you  who  are  my  audience, 
are  but  men  and  should  be  satisfied  to  ask  for  no  more 
than  the  likely  story.”1 

Again: — “Perhaps  they  may  be  in  a  difficulty;  and  if 
this  is  the  case,  there  is  a  possibility  that  they  may  accept  a 
suggestion  of  ours  respecting  the  nature  of  essence,  having 
nothing  of  their  own  to  offer.”2 

Can  we  imagine  Augustine  urbanely  approaching  Pela- 
gius  with  ‘a  suggestion  of  ours  respecting  the  nature  of 
Grace’?  It  is  quite  true  that  passages  can  be  quoted  from 
Plato,  more  particularly  from  The  Laws,  which  would 
justify  all  the  persecution  of  atheists  that  has  disgraced 
Europe.  But  the  passages  quoted  above  give  the  general 
tone  of  the  Dialogues  in  their  handling  of  the  precise  ex¬ 
pression  of  speculative  notions. 

1The  Tlmaeus,  A.  E.  Taylor’s  translation. 

2  The  Sophist ,  Jowett’s  translation. 


with  each  other.  This  improvement  depended  on  the  slow 

growth  of  mutual  respect,  sympathy,  and  general  kindli¬ 
ness.  All  these  feelings  can  exist  with  the  minimum  of  in¬ 
tellectuality.  Their  basis  is  emotional,  and  humanity 
acquired  these  emotions  by  reason  of  its  unthinking  activi¬ 
ties  amid  the  course  of  nature. 

But  mentality  as  it  emerges  into  coordinated  activity  has 
a  tremendous  effect  in  selecting,  emphasizing,  and  disinte¬ 
grating.  We  have  been  considering  the  emergence  of  ideas 
from  activities,  and  the  effect  of  ideas  in  modifying  the 
activities  from  which  they  emerge.  Ideas  arise  as  explana¬ 
tory  of  customs  and  they  end  by  founding  novel  methods 
and  novel  institutions.  In  the  preceding  chapters  we  have 
watched  instances  of  their  transition  from  one  to  the  other 
of  these  two  modes  of  functioning. 


part  two  Cosmological 


1.  Laws  of  Nature 

Section  I.  The  previous  part  of  this  book  dealt  with  the 
influence  exerted  by  the  Platonic  and  Christian  doctrines 
or  the  human  soul  upon  the  sociological  development  of 
the  European  races.  In  this  second  part  of  the  book,  I  shall 
deal  with  the  influence  of  scientific  ideas  upon  European 
culture,  and  with  the  more  general  cosmological  ideas  thus 
generated  and  presupposed. 

It  would  be  useless  to  attempt  a  history  of  science  within 
this  compass.  Accordingly,  I  shall  confine  myself  to  the 
most  general  ideas  at  the  base  of  the  whole  development 
of  science.  I  mean  the  concepts  of  Speculation  and  of 
Scholarship,  and  the  various  notions  of  the  Order  of 
Nature,  and  of  Nature  itself.  In  short,  my  topic  is  ‘Cos¬ 
mologies,  Ancient  and  Modern,’  together  with  the  variety 
of  methods,  speculative  and  scholarly,  employed  in  their 
production.  Special  developments  of  learning  will  only  be 
cited  in  order  to  exemplify  the  specializations  of  general 
ideas  amid  changing  epochs  of  Western  culture. 

Modern  Europe  and  America  have  derived  their  civiliza¬ 
tion  from  the  races  whose  countries  border  the  Eastern 
Mediterranean.  In  the  earlier  chapters,  Greece  and  Pales¬ 
tine  were  the  regions  providing  the  initial  formulations  of 
the  ideas  concerning  the  essence  of  human  nature.  When 
we  examine  the  history  of  science,  to  these  two  countries 
we  must  add  Egypt.  These  three  countries  are  the  direct 
ancestors  of  our  modem  civilization. 

Of  course  there  is  a  long  tale  of  civilization  behind  them. 
Mesopotamia,  Crete,  Phoenicia,  and  India,  China,  also  con¬ 
tributed.  But  whatever  of  scientific  or  religious  value  has 

107 


108  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

passed  into  modern  life,  finally  reached  us  through  the 
mediation  of  these  three  countries,  Egypt,  Greece,  Pales¬ 
tine.  Of  these  countries,  Egypt  provided  the  mature 
technology,  arising  from  three  thousand  years  of  secure 
civilization,  Palestine  provided  the  final  religious  cos¬ 
mology,  Greece  provided  the  clear-cut  generalizations 
leading  to  philosophy  and  science.  This  logical  lucidity  also 
tinges  the  remaining  legacy  from  Greece,  its  art  and 
imaginative  literature.  Every  Greek  statue  expresses  the 
welding  of  beauty  to  regularity  of  geometrical  form:  every 
Greek  play  investigates  the  interweaving  of  physical  cir¬ 
cumstances  arising  from  the  Order  of  Nature  with  states  of 
mind  which  issue  from  the  urge  of  the  Moral  Order. 

‘Canst  thou  by  searching  find  out  God?’  is  good  Hebrew, 
but  it  is  bad  Greek.  The  effort  to  comprehend  the  great 
fact  which  procures  the  order  in  the  Universe  urged  Greek 
thinkers  to  that  culmination  when  Plato  and  Aristotle  de¬ 
fined  the  complex  of  general  ideas  forming  the  imperishable 
origin  of  Western  thought.  The  work  was  only  accom¬ 
plished  just  in  time.  In  the  very  lifetime  of  Aristotle  the 
political  and  cultural  barriers  collapsed;  and  the  subse¬ 
quent  Hellenistic  development  at  Alexandria  and  elsewhere 
was  the  joint  enterprise  of  Greeks,  Egyptians,  Semites,  and 
the  mixed  races  of  Syria  and  Asia  Minor.  The  untroubled 
faith  in  lucidity  within  the  depths  of  things,  to  be  captured 
by  some  happy  glance  of  speculation,  was  lost  forever. 
Duller  men  were  content  with  limited  accuracy  and  con¬ 
structed  special  sciences:  thicker  intellects  gloried  in  the 
notion  that  the  foundations  of  the  world  were  laid  amid 
impenetrable  fog.  They  conceived  God  in  their  own  image, 
and  depicted  him  with  a  positive  dislike  of  efforts  after 
understanding  beyond  assigned  methodologies.  Satan  ac¬ 
quired  an  intellectual  character,  and  fell  by  reason  of  an 
indecent  desire  to  understand  his  Creator.  It  was  the  down¬ 
fall  of  Greece. 

Section  II.  The  progress  of  mankind  proceeds  by  de¬ 
vious  paths.  The  shift  from  the  bright  Hellenic  age,  whose 
final  period  was  centered  in  Athens,  to  the  Hellenistic  age, 
with  Alexandria  as  its  intellectual  capital,  corresponds  to  a 
new  direction  of  constructive  genius.  The  special  sciences 
were  founded.  Their  principles  were  defined,  their  methods 
were  determined,  appropriate  deductions  were  elicited. 
Learning  was  stabilized.  It  was  furnished  with  methodol- 


Foresight  105 

of  all  our  finer  thoughts  ended  his  most  marvellous  dia¬ 
logue  with  the  reflection  that  the  ideal  state  could  never 
arrive  till  philosophers  are  kings.  Today,  in  an  age  of 
democracy,  the  kings  are  the  plain  citizens  pursuing  their 
various  avocations.  There  can  be  no  successful  democratic 
society  till  general  education  conveys  a  philosophic  out¬ 
look. 

Philosophy  is  not  a  mere  collection  of  noble  sentiments. 
A  deluge  of  such  sentiments  does  more  harm  than  good. 
Philosophy  is  at  once  general  and  concrete,  critical  and 
appreciative  of  direct  intuition.  It  is  not — or,  at  least, 
should  not  be — a  ferocious  debate  between  irritable  profes¬ 
sors.  It  is  a  survey  of  possibilities  and  their  comparison 
with  actualities.  In  philosophy,  the  fact,  the  theory,  the 
alternatives,  and  the  ideal,  are  weighed  together.  Its  gifts 
are  insight  and  foresight,  and  a  sense  of  the  worth  of  life, 
in  short,  that  sense  of  importance  which  nerves  all  civilized 
effort.  Mankind  can  flourish  in  the  lower  stages  of  life 
with  merely  barbaric  flashes  of  thought.  But  when  civiliza¬ 
tion  culminates,  the  absence  of  a  coordinating  philosophy 
of  life,  spread  thoughout  the  community,  spells  decadence, 
boredom,  and  the  slackening  of  effort. 

Every  epoch  has  its  character  determined  by  the  way  its 
populations  re-act  to  the  material  events  which  they  en¬ 
counter.  This  reaction  is  determined  by  their  basic  beliefs 
— by  their  hopes,  their  fears,  their  judgments  of  what  is 
worth  while.  They  may  rise  to  the  greatness  of  an  oppor¬ 
tunity,  seizing  its  drama,  perfecting  its  art,  exploiting  its 
adventure,  mastering  intellectually  and  physically  the  net¬ 
work  of  relations  that  constitutes  the  very  being  of  the 
epoch.  On  the  other  hand,  they  may  collapse  before  the 
perplexities  confronting  them.  How  they  act  depends  partly 
on  their  courage,  partly  on  their  intellectual  grasp.  Phi¬ 
losophy  is  an  attempt  to  clarify  those  fundamental  beliefs 
which  finally  determine  the  emphasis  of  attention  that  lies 
at  the  base  of  character. 

Mankind  is  now  in  one  of  its  rare  moods  of  shifting  its 
outlook.  The  mere  compulsion  of  tradition  has  lost  its 
force.  It  is  our  business — philosophers,  students,  and  prac¬ 
tical  men — to  re-create  and  reenact  a  vision  of  the  world, 
including  those  elements  of  reverence  and  order  without 
which  society  lapses  into  riot,  and  penetrated  through  and 
through  with  unflinching  rationality.  Such  a  vision  is  the 


106  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

knowledge  which  Plato  identified  with  virtue.  Epochs  for 
which,  within  the  limits  of  their  development,  this  vision 
has  been  widespread  are  the  epochs  unfading  in  the 
memory  of  mankind. 

Our  discussion  has  insensibly  generalized  itself.  It  has 
passed  beyond  the  topic  of  Commercial  Relations  to  the 
function  of  a  properly  concrete  philosophy  in  guiding  the 
purposes  of  manldnd. 


Epilogue  to  Part  One 

At  this  stage  we  conclude  the  consideration  of  that  group 
of  ideas  that  most  directly  contributed  to  the  civilization  of 
the  behaviour-systems  of  human  beings  in  their  intercourse 
with  each  other.  This  improvement  depended  on  the  slow 
growth  of  mutual  respect,  sympathy,  and  general  kindli¬ 
ness.  All  these  feelings  can  exist  with  the  minimum  of  in¬ 
tellectuality.  Their  basis  is  emotional,  and  humanity 
acquired  these  emotions  by  reason  of  its  unthinking  activi¬ 
ties  amid  the  course  of  nature. 

But  mentality  as  it  emerges  into  coordinated  activity  has 
a  tremendous  effect  in  selecting,  emphasizing,  and  disinte¬ 
grating.  We  have  been  considering  the  emergence  of  ideas 
from  activities,  and  the  effect  of  ideas  in  modifying  the 
activities  from  which  they  emerge.  Ideas  arise  as  explana¬ 
tory  of  customs  and  they  end  by  founding  novel  methods 
and  novel  institutions.  In  the  preceding  chapters  we  have 
watched  instances  of  their  transition  from  one  to  the  other 
of  these  two  modes  of  functioning. 


Laws  of  Nature  109 

ogies,  and  was  handed  over  to  University  professors  of  the 
modem  type.  Doctors  of  Medicine,  Mathematicians,  As¬ 
tronomers,  Grammarians,  Theologians,  for  more  than  six 
hundred  years  dominated  the  schools  of  Alexandria,  issuing 
text-books,  treatises,  controversies,  and  dogmatic  defini¬ 
tions.  Literature  was  replaced  by  Grammar,  and  Specula¬ 
tion  by  the  Learned  Tradition. 

These  men  conventionalized  learning.  But  they  secured 
it.  Their  work  survived  two  great  religious  revolutions,  the 
rise  of  Christianity  and  the  rise  of  Mahometanism.  It  pro¬ 
vided  both  these  religions  with  their  philosophical  theol¬ 
ogies.  It  fitted  them  out  with  heresies  and  with  orthodoxies. 

In  the  Western  Roman  Empire,  the  Christian  Church, 
armed  with  Hellenistic  thought,  captured  the  intellects  of 
the  victorious  barbarians  and  civilized  Western  Europe  up 
to  the  Arctic  Ocean.  Along  the  south  of  the  Mediterranean 
the  Mahometan  conquerors  carried  Hellenistic  thought,  as 
coloured  by  the  mentalities  of  Arabs,  Jews,  and  Persians, 
through  Africa  into  Spain.  From  Spain,  the  Mahometan 
and  Jewish  versions  made  contact  with  the  Christian 
version  of  Alexandrian  culture.  This  fusion  produced  the 
brilliant  culmination  of  Christian  Scholasticism  in  the 
thirteenth  century;  and,  in  the  seventeenth  century,  Spinoza. 

The  note  of  Hellenism  is  delight,  speculation,  discoursive 
literature:  the  note  of  Hellenistic  Alexandria  is  concentra¬ 
tion,  thoroughness,  investigation  of  the  special  types  of 
order  appertaining  to  special  topics.  The  great  Alexan¬ 
drians  were  either  right  or  wrong:  Euclid  either  did,  or  did 
not  make  his  text-book  of  Geometry  logically  coherent: 
the  Ptolemaic  doctrine  of  the  heavens  is  true  or  false: 
Athanasius  is  directly  opposed  to  Arius:  and  Cyril  to 
Nestorius.  The  nearest  analogues  to  the  Alexandrian 
theological  debates  are  the  modem  debates  among  mathe¬ 
matical  physicists  on  the  nature  of  the  atom.  The  special 
topics  differ  slightly;  but  the  methods  and  the  men  are 
identical. 

It  is  unmeaning  bluntly  to  ask  of  Plato,  whether  he  be 
right  or  wrong,  in  the  same  exact  sense  in  which  we  frame 
the  question  about  the  Alexandrians.  When  any  eminent 
scholar  has  converted  Plato  into  a  respectable  professor,  by 
providing  him  with  a  coherent  system,  we  quickly  find  that 
Plato  in  a  series  of  dialogues  has  written  up  most  of  the 
heresies  from  his  own  doctrines.  It  is  as  though  Ptolemy 


110  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

had  emitted  the  speculations  of  Aristarchus,  and  as  though 
Athanasius  had  suggested  the  profanities  of  Arius. 

I  am  not  alluding  to  the  mere  fact  that  men  change  their 
opinions,  with  the  advance  of  age,  or  with  the  advance  or 
decay  of  knowledge.  The  important  point  is  the  way  in 
which  opinions  are  held,  and  the  weight  attached  to  par¬ 
ticular  modes  of  statement.  St.  Augustine  changed  his 
opinions.  He  not  only  published  for  all  ages  the  tragic  in¬ 
tensity  of  feeling  which  the  conversion  involved,  but  also 
he  devoted  himself  to  exact  statements  of  his  new  doctrines. 
He  remained  a  Platonist,  and  his  interest  in  the  doctrine  of 
Grace  was  a  Platonic  interest  in  the  exact  expression  how 
finite  human  life  can  participate  in  the  Divine  Perfections. 
He  performed  an  immense  service  to  civilization  by  pro¬ 
viding  Western  Europe  with  accurate  definitions  on  great 
topics  just  before  the  oncoming  of  the  Barbarians.  He 
secured  that  western  Christianity  should  persist  as  a  civiliz¬ 
ing  influence,  and  not  degenerate  into  hereditary  supersti¬ 
tion  of  the  Abyssinian  type.  But  his  attitude  to  his  own 
doctrines  was  very  different  from  that  of  Plato.  Consider 
some  of  Plato’s  phrases  about  his  own  ideas:  “If,  then, 
Socrates,  we  find  ourselves  in  many  points  unable  to  make 
our  discourse  of  the  generation  of  gods  and  the  universe  in 
every  way  wholly  consistent  and  exact,  you  must  not  be 
surprised.  Nay,  we  must  be  well  content  if  we  can  provide 
an  account  not  less  likely  than  another’s;  we  must  re¬ 
member  that  I  who  speak,  and  you  who  are  my  audience, 
are  but  men  and  should  be  satisfied  to  ask  for  no  more 
than  the  likely  story.”1 

Again: — “Perhaps  they  may  be  in  a  difficulty;  and  if 
this  is  the  case,  there  is  a  possibility  that  they  may  accept  a 
suggestion  of  ours  respecting  the  nature  of  essence,  having 
nothing  of  their  own  to  offer.”2 

Can  we  imagine  Augustine  urbanely  approaching  Pela- 
gius  with  ‘a  suggestion  of  ours  respecting  the  nature  of 
Grace’?  It  is  quite  true  that  passages  can  be  quoted  from 
Plato,  more  particularly  from  The  Laws ,  which  would 
justify  all  die  persecution  of  atheists  that  has  disgraced 
Europe.  But  the  passages  quoted  above  give  the  general 
tone  of  the  Dialogues  in  their  handling  of  the  precise  ex¬ 
pression  of  speculative  notions. 

i  The  Timaeus,  A.  E.  Taylor’s  translation. 

» The  Sophist,  Jowett’s  translation. 


Laws  of  Nature  111 

Section  III.  In  many  ways  Aristotle  and  Epicurus 
foreshadow  the  transition  from  Hellenic  speculation  to 
the  exact  scholarship  of  Alexandria.  In  both  of  them  we 
find  an  effort  towards  system,  explicitly  stated  and  exactly 
phrased.  Of  course,  Lucretius  is  our  main  authority  for  the 
Epicurean  doctrines. 

If  we  merely  knew  that  great  schools  of  exact  scientific 
investigation  had  arisen  in  the  succeeding  generation,  un¬ 
doubtedly  modern  critical  scholarship  would  have  assigned 
to  Aristotle’s  influence  the  honour  of  their  origination.  We 
can  imagine  the  contrast  which  would  have  been  drawn 
between  the  barrenness  of  mere  speculation  and  the  fruit¬ 
fulness  of  Aristotle’s  power  of  detailed  observation. 

Unfortunately,  cold  fact  points  in  exactly  the  opposite 
direction.  In  the  first  place  Aristotle  himself  derived  his 
own  sources  of  thought  from  Plato’s  theoretical  activity. 
He  dissected  fishes  with  Plato’s  thoughts  in  his  head.  He 
systematized  the  welter  of  Platonic  suggestions,  and  in 
the  course  of  his  work  he  modified,  improved,  and  spoilt. 
But  he  did  introduce  into  sciences  other  than  Astronomy 
the  much-needed  systematic  practice  of  passing  beyond 
theory  to  direct  observation  of  details.  Unfortunately  this 
was  the  one  aspect  of  his  life  which  never  had  any  direct 
influence  on  any  succeeding  epoch. 

Again,  in  point  of  fact  the  Alexandrian  culture  derived 
directly  from  Plato.  Its  thought  was  through  and  through 
Platonic  both  in  science  and  theology.  But  it  was  not  for 
nothing  that  Alexandria  was  situated  in  a  land  of  old, 
secure  technology.  There  were  crafts  and  learned  pro¬ 
fessions  with  traditions  of  detailed  procedure  stretching 
back  for  thousands  of  years.  The  schools  of  Alexandria 
were  thronged  with  sons  of  priests,  sons  of  metallurgists, 
sons  of  makers  of  implements  for  irrigation  and  agriculture, 
sons  of  land-surveyors.  It  is  no  wonder  that  the  first 
emergence  of  modem  scholarship  studied  in  a  modem  uni¬ 
versity,  took  place  when  Platonic  speculation  was  trans¬ 
ferred  to  a  land  of  old  professional  activity. 

Undoubtedly  the  chasm  between  Hellenic  mentality  and 
mediaeval  scholastic  learning  was  due  to  many  influences 
accumulating  their  effects  through  a  period  of  a  thousand 
years.  But  the  greatest  gap  in  the  transition  is  the  first  one, 
when  the  capital  of  Mediterranean  learning  was  transferred 
from  Athens  to  Alexandria.  The  general  type  of  the  cultural 


112  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

development  of  Western  civilization  was  then  predeter¬ 
mined.  How  science  should  be  developed:  How  mathe¬ 
matics  should  evolve:  How  religion,  Jewish,  Christian, 
Mahometan,  should  shape  its  various  theologies.  The 
modem  world  is  primarily  Alexandrian;  and  only  for  a 
short  period  of  about  a  hundred  years,  to  be  placed  some¬ 
where  between  the  Council  of  Constance  and  the  Sack  of 
Rome  in  1527,  did  the  Athenian  tone  of  mind  prevail: 
perhaps  also  earlier  in  the  Italy  of  the  Augustan  epoch. 
The  difference  between  the  two,  namely  the  Hellenic  and 
the  Hellenistic  types  of  mentality,  may  be  roughly  described 
as  that  between  speculation  and  scholarship.  For  progress, 
both  are  necessary.  But,  in  fact,  on  the  stage  of  history 
they  are  apt  to  appear  as  antagonists.  Speculation,  by  en¬ 
tertaining  alternative  theories,  is  superficially  sceptical,  dis¬ 
turbing  to  established  modes  of  prejudice.  But  it  obtains 
its  urge  from  a  deep  ultimate  faith,  that  through  and 
through  the  nature  of  things  is  penetrable  by  reason. 
Scholarship,  by  its  strict  attention  to  accepted  method¬ 
ologies,  is  superficially  conservative  of  belief.  But  its  tone 
of  mind  leans  towards  a  fundamental  negation.  For  scholars 
the  reasonable  topics  in  the  world,  are  penned  in  isolated 
regions,  this  subject-matter  or  that  subject-matter.  Your 
thorough-going  scholar  resents  the  airy  speculation  which 
connects  his  own  patch  of  knowledge  with  that  of  his 
neighbour.  He  finds  his  fundamental  concepts  interpreted, 
twisted,  modified.  He  has  ceased  to  be  king  of  his  own 
castle,  by  reason  of  speculations  of  uncomfortable  gen¬ 
erality,  violating  the  very  grammar  of  his  thoughts.  Pope 
Adrian  the  Sixth  exhibited  himself  as  a  typical  scholar 
by  remarking  that  in  Luther’s  theological  works  so  many 
errors  could  be  found  that  any  tyro  could  point  them  out. 

New  directions  of  thought  arise  from  flashes  of  intuition 
bringing  new  material  within  the  scope  of  scholarly  learn¬ 
ing.  They  commence  as  the  sheer  ventures  of  rash  specula¬ 
tion.  They  may  fortunately  obtain  quick  acceptance,  or 
they  may  initiate  a  quarrel  of  scholars  from  which  all  tinge 
of  speculation  has  faded.  Pope  Leo  the  Tenth  voiced  the 
vanishing  Athenian  epoch  when  he  characterized  the 
Lutheran  disputes  as  a  quarrel  of  monks. 

Pure  speculation,  undisciplined  by  the  scholarship  of 
detailed  fact  or  the  scholarship  of  exact  logic,  is  on  the 
whole  more  useless  than  pure  scholarship,  unrelieved  by 


Laws  of  Nature  113 

speculation.  The  proper  balance  of  the  two  factors  in 
progressive  learning  depends  on  the  character  of  the  epoch 
in  question  and  on  the  capacities  of  particular  individuals. 
Also  it  is  a  curious  fact,  somewhat  lost  sight  of  in  Greek 
thought,  that,  notwithstanding  the  law  of  the  Golden  Mean 
between  contrasted  components,  yet  a  certain  excessive¬ 
ness  seems  a  necessary  element  in  all  greatness.  In  some 
direction  or  other  we  must  devote  ourselves  beyond  what 
would  be  warranted  by  the  analysis  of  pure  reason. 

One  aspect  of  the  adventure  of  ideas  is  this  story  of  the 
interplay  of  speculation  and  scholarship,  a  strife  sustained 
through  the  ages  of  progress.  This  history  discloses  the 
happy  balance  attained  in  periods  of  culminating  greatness, 
and  it  also  exhibits  the  tinge  of  excessiveness  in  all  such 
peaks  of  achievement.  Thereby  it  gives  the  reason  for  the 
tragic  transcience  of  supreme  moments  in  human  life. 

Section  IV.  The  notion  of  Law,  that  is  to  say,  of  some 
measure  of  regularity  or  of  persistence  or  of  recurrence,  is 
an  essential  element  in  the  urge  towards  technology,  meth¬ 
odology,  scholarship,  and  speculation.  Apart  from  a 
certain  smoothness  in  the  nature  of  things,  there  can  be  no 
knowledge,  no  useful  method,  no  intelligent  purpose. 
Lacking  an  dement  of  Law,  there  remains  a  mere  welter 
of  details  with  no  foothold  for  comparison  with  any  other 
such  welter,  in  the  past,  in  the  future,  or  circumambient  in 
the  present.  But  the  expression  of  this  notion  of  Law  with 
due  accuracy,  and  with  due  regard  to  what  in  fact  is  pre¬ 
supposed  in  human  purposes,  is  a  matter  of  extreme 
difficulty.  Analogously  to  the  histories  of  all  the  more 
general  ideas,  the  notion  of  Law  has  entered  into  the 
explicit  consciousness  of  various  epochs  under  every  variety 
of  specialization,  arising  from  its  coalescence  with  other 
components  in  the  popular  cosmology. 

The  difficulty  in  all  such  notions  of  supreme  generality 
is  that  conscious  attention  is  not  naturally  directed  to  any 
factor  which  is  a  ‘matter  of  course’  in  experience.  Attention 
is  riveted  upon  ‘news,’  and  ‘news’  involves  some  aroma  of 
capriciousness.  It  is  useless  to  recur  to  periods  of  human 
history  which  lie  beyond  the  reach  of  direct  evidence.  But 
anthropologists  report  the  almost  universal  prevalence  of 
tribal  ceremonies  having  reference  to  the  succession  of  the 
yearly  seasons,  more  particularly  to  the  Spring,  the  Harvest, 
and  Mid-winter.  Undoubtedly,  as  we  view  them  now,  there 


114  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

is  a  reference  to  agriculture  in  such  celebrations.  Now 
agriculture  marks  the  first  decisive  step  towards  modem 
civilization.  Its  introduction  marks  the  arrival  of  a  stage  of 
high-grade  reflection  upon  the  course  of  events.  It  requires 
a  forecast  of  the  course  of  nature  months  ahead.  Many  an 
apeman  must  have  snatched  up  a  stone  wherewith  to  hit 
somebody,  either  another  man  or  other  animal,  on  the  head, 
without  any  reflection  upon  the  course  of  nature  beyond 
the  next  few  minutes.  Also  he  might  notice  that  some  stones 
are  better  than  others  as  lethal  weapons,  and  he  might 
even  help  them  out  by  chipping  them.  He  is  then  approach¬ 
ing  civilization.  But  he — or  more  probably,  she — has 
crossed  the  great  divide,  when  he  puts  seeds  into  a  patch 
of  earth  and  waits  for  a  season. 

It  is  obvious  that  seasonal  ceremonies  must  extend 
backwards  in  time  far  beyond  the  introduction  of  agri¬ 
culture.  The  differences  between  the  seasons  impose  dif¬ 
ferences  of  behaviour  upon  all  living  things,  vegetables 
and  animals  alike.  The  seasonal  urge  towards  change  of 
habit,  hibernation  or  migration,  must  have  begotten  some 
expression  of  emotional  restlessness.  The  interest  of  agri¬ 
culture  comes  in  when  we  consider  the  later  interpretation 
of  the  seasonal  ceremonies  in  which  the  tribe  had  been 
indulging  for  countless  ages.  Civilization  did  not  start  with 
a  social  contract  determining  modes  of  behaviour.  Its 
earliest  effort  was  the  slow  introduction  of  ideas  explana¬ 
tory  of  modes  of  behaviour  and  of  inrushes  of  emotion 
which  already  dominated  their  lives.  Undoubtedly  ideas 
modified  the  practice.  But  in  the  main  practice  precedes 
thought;  and  thought  is  mainly  concerned  with  the  justifica¬ 
tion  or  the  modification  of  a  pre-existing  situation. 

Now,  apart  from  the  practice  of  agriculture,  animal 
habits  are  mainly  based  on  the  massive  recurrence  of  the 
seasons,  heat  and  frost,  rain  and  drought,  day  and  night. 
There  was  stolid  recurrent  matter  of  fact,  with,  accompany¬ 
ing  rhythms  of  emotion  and  ritual.  Vagrant  questions  may 
have  disturbed  exceptional  minds.  But  there  was  little  to 
provoke  tribal  interest  in  explanation.  There  must  have 
been  some  instances  to  provoke  attention,  because  there 
was,  in  fact,  among  some  tribes  of  our  ancestors,  a  drift 
towards  better  ways  of  life.  But  I  am  seeking  to  determine 
the  dividing  line  after  which  the  curiously  quick  accelera¬ 
tion  of  civilized  thought  may  conceivably  have  arisen.  In 


Laws  of  Nature  115 

the  earlier  stage  the  convenient  unit  of  time  is  of  the  order 
of  a  hundred  thousand  years.  In  the  later  phases  it  shortens 
up  to  ten  thousand  years,  to  five  thousand  years,  to  one 
thousand  years,  to  a  hundred  years. 

Probably  there  was  a  concurrence  of  many  causes.  But 
among  such  causes  the  introduction  of  agriculture  must 
be  given  a  high  place  for  its  effectiveness  in  quickening 
progress.  It  at  once  introduced  the  capriciousness  of  the 
weather  as  a  major  topic  of  tribal  interest.  Also  it  provoked 
attention  to  the  mystery  of  germination,  and  to  the  depend¬ 
ence  of  vegetable  growth  upon  the  seasonal  phases.  It 
compelled  the  tribe  to  descend  from  passive  acquiescence 
in  a  general  manner  of  course  towards  active  interest  in 
the  details.  It  led  to  a  search  for  precautions,  and  discovery 
requires  understanding.  Of  course,  as  we  all  know,  the 
novel  situation  did  not  require  every  tribe  to  advance. 
Also  the  masses  of  mankind  are  always  liable  to  reach 
some  stable  level  of  custom,  and  to  halt  progress  there. 
But  human  life  had  then  reached  a  stage  at  which  obvious 
problems  were  presented  to  the  more  active  minds, 
wherever  such  existed. 

We  inherit  legends,  weird,  horrible,  beautiful,  expressing 
in  curious,  specialized  ways  the  interweaving  of  law  and 
capriciousness  in  the  mystery  of  things.  It  is  the  problem 
of  good  and  evil.  Sometimes  the  law  is  good  and  the 
capriciousness  evil;  sometimes  the  law  is  iron  and  evil  and 
the  capriciousness  is  merciful  and  good.  But  from  savage 
legends  up  to  Hume’s  civilized  Dialogues  on  natural  re¬ 
ligion,  with  the  conversation  between  Job  and  his  friends 
as  an  intermediate  between  the  two,  the  same  problem  is 
discussed.  Science  and  technology  are  based  upon  law. 
Human  behaviour  exhibits  custom  mitigated  by  impulse. 
What  exactly  do  we  mean  by  the  notion  of  the  Laws  of 
Nature? 

Section  V.  At  the  present  time,  there  are  prevalent 
four  main  doctrines  concerning  the  Laws  of  Nature:  the 
doctrine  of  Law  as  immanent,  the  doctrine  of  Law  as 
imposed,  and  the  doctrine  of  Law  as  observed  order  of 
succession,  in  other  words,  Law  as  mere  description,  and 
lastly  the  later  doctrine  of  Law  as  conventional  interpreta¬ 
tion.  It  will  be  convenient  first  to  discuss  these  four  alterna¬ 
tive  doctrines  from  the  standpoint  of  today.  We  shall  then 


116  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

be  in  a  better  position  to  understand  the  chequered  history 
of  the  notion  in  civilized  thought. 

By  the  doctrine  of  Law  as  immanent  it  is  meant  that 
the  order  of  nature  expresses  the  characters  of  the  real 
things  which  jointly  compose  the  existences  to  be  found 
in  nature.  When  we  understand  the  essences  of  these  things, 
we  thereby  know  their  mutual  relations  to  each  other.  Thus, 
according  as  there  are  common  elements  in  their  various 
characters,  there  will  necessarily  be  corresponding  identities 
in  their  mutual  relations.  In  other  words,  some  partial 
identity  of  pattern  in  the  various  characters  of  natural 
things  issues  in  some  partial  identity  of  pattern  in  the 
mutual  relations  of  those  things.  These  identities  of  pattern 
in  the  mutual  relations  are  the  Laws  of  Nature.  Conversely, 
a  Law  is  explanatory  of  some  community  in  character 
pervading  the  things  which  constitute  Nature.  It  is  evident 
that  the  doctrine  involves  the  negation  of  ‘absolute  being.’ 
It  presupposes  the  essential  interdependence  of  things. 

There  are  some  consequences  to  this  doctrine.  In  the 
first  place,  it  follows  that  scientists  are  seeking  for  explana¬ 
tions  and  not  merely  for  simplified  descriptions  of  their 
observations.  In  the  second  place  the  exact  conformation 
of  nature  to  any  law  is  not  to  be  expected.  If  all  the  things 
concerned  have  the  requisite  common  character,  then  the 
pattern  of  mutual  relevance  which  expresses  that  character 
will  be  exactly  illustrated.  But  in  general  we  may  expect 
that  a  large  proportion  of  things  do  possess  the  requisite 
character  and  a  minority  do  not  possess  it.  In  such  a  case, 
the  mutual  relations  of  these  things  will  exhibit  lapses 
when  the  law  fails  to  obtain  illustration.  In  so  far  as  we  are 
merely  interested  in  a  confused  result  of  many  instances, 
then  the  law  can  be  said  to  have  a  statistical  character.  It 
is  now  the  opinion  of  physicists  that  most  of  the  laws  of 
physics,  as  known  in  the  nineteenth  century,  are  of  this 
character. 

Thirdly,  since  the  laws  of  nature  depend  on  the  in¬ 
dividual  characters  of  the  things  constituting  nature,  as  the 
things  change,  then  correspondingly  the  laws  will  change. 
Thus  the  modern  evolutionary  view  of  the  physical  uni¬ 
verse  should  conceive  of  the  laws  of  nature  as  evolving 
concurrently  with  the  things  constituting  the  environment. 
Thus  the  conception  of  the  Universe  as  evolving  subject 
to  fixed,  eternal  laws  regulating  all  behaviour  should  be 


Laws  of  Nature  117 

abandoned.  Fourthly,  a  reason  can  now  be  produced  why 
we  should  put  some  limited  trust  in  induction.  For  if  we 
assume  an  environment  largely  composed  of  a  sort  of 
existences  whose  natures  we  partly  understand,  then  we 
have  some  knowledge  of  the  laws  of  nature  dominating 
that  environment.  But  apart  from  that  premise  and  apart 
from  the  doctrine  of  Immanent  Law,  we  can  have  no 
knowledge  of  the  future.  We  should  then  acknowledge 
blank  ignorance,  and  not  make  pretences  about  probability. 

Fifthly,  the  doctrine  of  Immanent  Law  is  untenable  un¬ 
less  we  can  construct  a  plausible  metaphysical  doctrine 
according  to  which  the  characters  of  the  relevant  things 
in  nature  are  the  outcome  of  their  interconnections,  and 
their  interconnections  are  the  outcome  of  their  characters 
This  involves  some  doctrine  of  Internal  Relations. 

Finally,  the  doctrine  of  Immanence  is  through  and 
through  a  rationalistic  doctrine.  It  is  explanatory  of  the 
possibility  of  understanding  nature. 

Section  VI.  The  doctrine  of  Imposed  Law  adopts  the 
alternative  metaphysical  doctrine  of  External  Relations 
between  the  existences  which  are  the  ultimate  constituents 
of  nature.  The  character  of  each  of  these  ultimate  things 
is  thus  conceived  as  its  own  private  qualification.  Such  an 
existent  is  understandable  in  complete  disconnection  from 
any  other  such  existent:  the  ultimate  truth  is  that  it  re¬ 
quires  nothing  but  itself  in  order  to  exist.  But  in  fact  there 
is  imposed  on  each  such  existent  the  necessity  of  entering 
into  relationships  with  the  other  ultimate  constituents  of 
nature.  These  imposed  behaviour  patterns  are  the  Laws  of 
Nature.  But  you  cannot  discover  the  natures  of  the  relata 
by  any  study  of  the  Laws  of  their  relations.  Nor,  conversely, 
can  you  discover  the  laws  by  inspection  of  the  natures. 

The  explanation  of  the  doctrine  of  Imposition  both  sug¬ 
gests  a  certain  type  of  Deism,  and  conversely  it  is  the  out¬ 
come  of  such  a  Deis  tic  belief  if  already  entertained.  For 
example,  we  know  from  Newton’s  own  statements  that  this 
was  exactly  how  the  Deistic  problem  presented  itself  to 
him.  He  definitely  stated  that  the  correlated  modes  of  be¬ 
haviour  of  the  bodies  forming  the  solar  system  require 
God  for  the  imposition  of  the  principles  on  which  all  de¬ 
pended.  He  was  certainly  doubtful,  indeed  more  than 
doubtful,  as  to  whether  the  Law  of  Gravity  was  the  ultimate 
statement  of  principles  imposed  by  God.  But  he  certainly 


118  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

thought  that  the  conception  of  the  solar  system  exhibited 
in  his  Principia  was  sufficiently  ultimate  to  make  obvious 
the  necessity  of  a  God  imposing  Law.  Newton  was  certainly 
ricffit  to  this  extent,  that  the  whole  doctrine  of  Imposition 
is  without  interest  apart  from  the  correlative  doctrine  of  a 
transcendent  imposing  Deity.  This  is  also  a  Cartesian 

"jhe  doctrine  of  Imposition  very  naturally  follows  from 
Descartes’  notion  of  ‘substance.’  Indeed  the  phrase  ‘requir¬ 
ing  nothing  but  itself  in  order  to  exist’  occurs  in  his  Prin¬ 
ciples  of  Philosophy.  The  whole  Cartesian  apparatus  of 
Deism,  substantial  materialism,  and  imposed  law,  in  con¬ 
junction  with  the  reduction  of  physical  relations  to  the 
notion  of  correlated  motions  with  mere  spatio-temporal 
character,  constitutes  the  simplified  notion  of  Nature  with 
which  Galileo,  Descartes,  and  Newton  finally  launched 
modem  science  on  its  triumphant  career.  If  success  be  a 
guarantee  of  truth,  no  other  system  of  thought  has  enjoyed 
a  tithe  of  such  success  since  mankind  started  on  its  job 
of  thinking.  Within  three  hundred  years  it  has  transformed 
human  life,  in  its  intimate  thoughts,  its  technologies,  its 
social  behaviour,  and  its  ambitions. 

It  follows  from  the  Deism,  which  is  part  of  the  whole 
conception,  that  the  Laws  of  Nature  will  be  exactly  obeyed. 
Certainly,  what  God  meant  he  did.  When  he  said,  Let 
there  be  light,  there  was  light  and  not  a  mere  imitation  or 
a  statistical  average.  Thus  the  statistical  notion,  though  it 
may  explain  some  facts  of  our  confused  perception,  is  not 
applicable  to  the  ultimate,  imposed  laws. .  . 

But  even  before  Descartes,  it  was  the  implicit  belief  in 
some  form  of  imposition,  with  its  consequent  exactness, 
that  constituted  the  motive  force  in  scientific  research. 
Why  should  educated  men  have  believed  that  there  was 
anything  to  find  out?  Suppose  that  the  doctrine  of  im¬ 
manence  had  prevailed  in  Europe  and  in  Mahometan  Asia. 
Why  should  men  assume  that  there  were  definite  laws  which 
even  beyond  the  limits  of  meticulous  observation  underlie 
the  apparent  capriciousness  of  physical  details?  There  are 
certain  grand  obvious  uniformities,  Day  follows  Night,  and 
again  relapses  into  Night,  the  Mountains  endure,  and 
Birth  proceeds.  But  these  grand  regularities  are  shot 
through  and  through  with  details  apparently  capricious. 
The  very  savages  saw  that,  and  tremblingly  worshipped 


Laws  of  Nature  119 

malignant  demons.  But  civilized  men,  who  understand 
the  doctrine  of  immanence,  should  draw  the  conclusion 
that  the  dominance  of  common  traits  of  character  through¬ 
out  the  constituents  of  nature  is  only  very  partial.  There 
is  no  reason  why  it  should  be  otherwise.  A  restless  search 
for  detailed  explanation  is  futile,  based  upon  no  approach 
to  probabffity.  If  in  the  past  men  had  believed  thus,  today 
there  would  be  no  science.  And  even  today,  how  little  do 
we  know  about  physiology.  Also  an  individual  electron 
is  a  rare  bird  whose  behaviour  is  unpredictable:  our  in- 
ormation  about  electrons  mostly  concerns  flocks  number¬ 
ing  millions.  What  reason  is  there  to  expect  success  if  we 
seek  to  push  the  reign  of  law  one  step  further  towards 
mmute  detail?  Indeed,  physicists  in  their  recent  researches 
have  disclosed  a  novel  illustration  of  capriciousness.  These 
men,  trained  in  the  Positivist  doctrine,  have  at  once  sug¬ 
gested  the  uselessness  of  further  search  for  ‘law.’  Unless 
the  psychology  of  mental  behaviour  still  includes  some 
traces  derived  from  the  notion  of  Deistic  imposition,  even 
today  the  progress  of  science  would  cease  by  reason  of 
toe  failure  of  hope.  A  considerable  proportion  of  present- 
day  philosophy  is  devoted  to  the  endeavour  by  means  of 
subtle  argument  to  evade  this  plain  inexorable  conclusion. 

.  Lastly  apart  from  some  notion  of  imposed  Law,  the  doc¬ 
trine  of  immanence  provides  absolutely  no  reason  why 
the  universe  should  not  be  steadily  relapsing  into  lawless 
chaos.  In  fact,  the  Universe,  as  understood  in  accordance 
with  the  doctrine  of  Immanence,  should  exhibit  itself  as 
including  a  stable  actuality  whose  mutual  implication  with 
the  remainder  of  things  secures  an  inevitable  trend  towards 
order.  The  Platonic  ‘persuasion’  is  required. 

Section  VII.  Of  the  three  earlier  theories,  there  re¬ 
mains  the  Positivist  doctrine  concerning  Law,  namely, 
that  a  Law  of  Nature  is  merely  an  observed  persistence  of 
pattern  in  the  observed  succession  of  natural  things:  Law 
is  then  merely  Description.  There  is  an  attractive  simplicity 
about  this  doctrine.  The  two  preceding  doctrines  lead  us 
to  the  dubieties  of  metaphysics,  such  as  the  doctrine  of 
internal  relations  or  the  existence  and  nature  of  God.  But 
this  third  doctrine  evades  all  such  difficulties. 

It  presupposes  that  we  have  direct  acquaintance  with  a 
succession  of  things.  This  acquaintance  is  analysable  into 
a  succession  of  things  observed.  But  our  direct  acquaintance 


120  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

consists  not  only  in  distinct  observations  of  the  distinct 
things  in  succession,  but  also  it  includes  a  comparative 
knowledge  of  the  successive  observations.  Acquaintance  is 
thus  cumulative  and  comparative.  The  laws  ol  nature  are 
nothing  else  than  the  observed  identities  of  pattern  persist¬ 
ing  throughout  the  series  of  comparative  observations. 
Thus  a  law  of  nature  says  something  about  things  observed 
and  nothing  more. 

The  pre-occupation  of  science  is  then  the  search  for 
simple  statements  which  in  their  joint  effect  will  express 
everything  of  interest  concerning  the  observed  recurrences. 
This  is  the  whole  tale  of  science,  that  and  nothing  more. 
It  is  the  great  Positivist  doctrine,  largely  developed  in  the 
first  half  of  the  nineteenth  century,  and  ever  since  growing 
in  influence.  It  tells  us  to  keep  to  things  observed,  and  to 
describe  them  as  simply  as  we  can.  This  is  all  we  can 
know.  Laws  are  statements  of  observed  facts.  This  doctrine 
dates  back  to  Epicurus,  and  embodies  his  appeal  to  the 
plain  man,  away  from  metaphysics  and  mathematics.  The 
observed  facts  of  clear  experience  are  understandable,  and 
nothing  else.  Also  ‘understanding’  means  ‘simplicity  of 
description.’ 

Without  doubt  this  Positivist  doctrine  contains  a  funda¬ 
mental  truth  about  scientific  methodology.  For  example, 
consider  the  greatest  of  all  scientific  generalizations,  New¬ 
ton’s  Law  of  Gravitation: — Two  particles  of  matter  attract 
each  other  with  a  force  directly  proportional  to  the  product 
of  their  masses  and  inversely  proportional  to  the  square 
of  their  distance.  The  notion  of  ‘force’  refers  to  the  notion 
of  the  addition  of  a  component  to  the  vector  acceleration  of 
either  particle.  It  also  refers  to  the  notion  of  the  masses  of 
the  particles.  Again  the  notion  of  mass  is  also  explicitly 
referred  to  in  the  statement.  Thus  the  mutual  spatial  rela¬ 
tions  of  the  particles,  and  their  individual  masses,  are  re¬ 
quired  for  the  Law.  To  this  extent  the  Law  is  an  expression 
of  the  presumed  characters  of  the  particles  concerned.  But 
the  form  of  the  Law,  namely  the  product  of  the  masses 
and  the  inverse  square  of  the  distance,  is  purely  based  upon 
description  of  observed  fact.  A  large  part  of  Newton’s 
Principia  is  devoted  to  a  mathematical  investigation  prov¬ 
ing  that  the  description  is  adequate  for  his  purposes;  it 
collects  many  details  under  one  principle.  Newton  himself 
insisted  upon  this  very  point.  He  was  not  speculating:  he 


Laws  of  Nature  121 

was  not  explaining.  Whatever  your  cosmological  doctrines 
may  be,  the  motions  of  the  planets  and  the  fall  of  the 
stones,  so  far  as  they  have  been  directly  measured,  con¬ 
form  to  his  Law.  He  is  enunciating  a  formula  which 
expresses  observed  correlations  of  observed  facts. 

Without  the  shadow  of  a  doubt,  all  science  bases  itself 
upon  this  procedure.  It  is  the  first  rule  of  scientific  method, 
—Enunciate  observed  correlations  of  observed  fact.  This 
is  the  great  Baconian  doctrine,  namely,  Observe  and 
observe,  until  finally  you  detect  a  regularity  of  sequence. 
The  scholastics  had  trusted  to  metaphysical  dialectic  giving 
them  secure  knowledge  about  the  nature  of  things,  includ¬ 
ing  the  physical  world,  the  spiritual  world,  and  the  existence 
of  God.  Thence  they  deduced  the  various  laws,  immanent 
and  imposed,  which  reigned  throughout  Nature. 

_  -Another  difference  between  Scholasticism  and  the 
Moderns  is  in  respect  to  criticism  and  reliance  upon 
authority.  But  this  distinction  has  been  overstressed  and 
misunderstood.  The  Scholastics  were  intensely  critical,  but 
they  were  critical  within  a  different  sphere  of  thought  from 
that  occupying  the  Modems.  Again  modem  scientists  rely 
upon  authority,  but  they  rely  upon  different  authorities 
from  those  to  whom  the  Scholastics  appealed.  Undoubtedly 
the  later  Scholastics  were  uncritical  in  their  appeal  to 
then  chosen  authority,  Aristotle,  especially  and  most  un¬ 
fortunately  in  regard  to  his  physics.  The  modems  push 
their  criticism  further.  But  the  Scholastics  and  the  modem 
Scientists  are  alike  scholars  of  the  Alexandrian  type.  They 
have  the  same  sort  of  merit  and  the  same  sort  of  defect. 
Also,  the  sort  of  person  who  was  a  scholastic  doctor  in  a 
mediaeval  university,  today  is  a  scientific  professor  in  a 
modem  university.  Again  the  Scholastics  differed  among 
themselves  in  opinion  widely.  The  earlier  set  were  not  even 
Aristotelians,  the  later  set  were  not  all  Thomists.  Analo¬ 
gously,  modem  scientists  differ  among  themselves,  about 
details  and  about  the  general  doctrine  of  the  Laws  of 
Nature. 

Within  the  sphere  of  dialectic  debate,  the  Scholastics 
were  supremely  critical.  They  trusted  Aristotle  because 
they  could  derive  from  him  a  coherent  system  of  thought. 
It  was  a  criticized  trust.  Unfortunately,  they  did  not  reflect 
that  some  of  his  main  ideas  depended  upon  his  direct  ac¬ 
quaintance  with  experienced  fact.  They  trusted  to  the  logi- 


122  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

cal  coherence  of  the  system  as  a  guarantee  of  the  un¬ 
restricted  relevance  of  his  primary  notions.  They  thus 
accepted  his  confusion — when  there  was  confusion — of 
superficial  aspects  with  fundamental  principles  of  widest 
generality.  Their  method  for  the  furtherance  of  natural 
knowledge  was  endless  debate,  unrelieved  by  recurrence 
to  direct  observation.  Unfortunately  also  their  instrument 
of  debate,  Aristotelian  Logic,  was  a  more  superficial 
weapon  than  they  deemed  it.  Automatically  it  kept  in  the 
background  some  of  the  more  fundamental  topics  for 
thought.  Such  topics  are  the  quantitative  relations  examined 
in  mathematics,  and  the  complex  possibilities  of  multiple 
relationship  within  a  system.  All  these  topics,  and  others, 
were  kept  in  the  background  by  Aristotelian  logic. 

Fortunately  the  scholastic  age  of  Alexandrian  scholar¬ 
ship  dominated  Europe  for  centuries,  and  bestowed  upon 
civilization  priceless  treasures  of  thought.  It  was  an  age 
of  immense  progress.  But  a  scholarly  age  works  within 
rigid  limitations.  Fortunately,  a  revival  of  Hellenism  over¬ 
whelmed  the  Hellenistic  unity  of  the  Middle  Ages.  Plato 
arose  as  if  from  his  tomb.  Vagrant  speculation  and  direct 
observation  broke  up  the  scholarly  system.  New  interests, 
new  Gods,  prevailed.  The  new  basis  for  thought  was  the 
report  upon  facts,  directly  observed,  directly  employed. 
Fortunately,  in  the  subsidence  of  the  Italian  Renaissance 
of  the  fifteenth  century,  the  drama  of  the  transference  of 
culture  from  Athens  to  Alexandria  was  again  repeated. 
Europe  gradually  entered  upon  a  new  scholarly  age.  The 
modern  historian  appeared,  the  modem  critical  literature 
appeared,  the  modem  man  of  science  appeared,  modem 
technology  appeared.  The  old  Egyptian  metallurgists,  the 
Semitic  mathematicians,  and  the  mediaeval  scholastics 
were  avenged. 

But  modem  scholarship  and  modem  science  reproduce 
the  same  limitations  as  dominated  the  bygone  Hellenistic 
epoch,  and  the  bygone  Scholastic  epoch.  They  canalize 
thought  and  observation  within  predetermined  limits,  based 
upon  inadequate  metaphysical  assumptions  dogmatically 
assumed.  The  modem  assumptions  differ  from  older  as¬ 
sumptions,  not  wholly  for  the  better.  They  exclude  from 
rationalistic  thought  more  of  the  final  values  of  existence. 
The  intimate  timidity  of  professionalized  scholarship  cir¬ 
cumscribes  reason  by  reducing  its  topics  to  triviality,  for 


Cosmologies  123 

example,  to  bare  sensa  and  to  tautologies.  It  then  frees 
itself  from  criticism  by  dogmatically  handing  over  the 
remainder  of  experience  to  an  animal  faith  or  a  religious 
mysticism,  incapable  of  rationalization.  The  world  will 
again  sink  into  the  boredom  of  a  drab  detail  of  rational 
thought,  unless  we  retain  in  the  sky  some  reflection  of 
light  from  the  sun  of  Hellenism. 


8.  Cosmologies 

Section  I.  At  the  close  of  the  previous  chapter  we  were 
left  with  four  antagonistic  schools  of  thought  regarding  the 
analysis  of  the  notion  of  Law,  The  School  of  Immanence, 
I  he  School  of  Imposition,  The  Positivist  School  of  Obser- 
vation,  that  is  to  say,  of  mere  Description,  and  finally  the 
School  of  Conventional  Interpretation.  We  find  that  each 
of  these  schools  could  produce  grave  reasons  in  confirma¬ 
tion  of  its  own  doctrine. 

There  is  no  greater  hindrance  to  the  progress  of  thought 
than  an  attitude  of  irritated  party-spirit.  Urbanity,  the  ur¬ 
banity  of  Plato  and,  if  we  may  trust  his  Dialogues ,  the 
urbanity  of  Athenian  society,  were  part  of  the  intellectual 
genius  of  those  times.  The  vicious  antagonisms  of  subse¬ 
quent  theologians,  some  centuries  later,  hid  from  them  con¬ 
siderations  which  they  ought  never  to  have  forgotten,  and 
have  hidden  from  us  the  metaphysical  genius  of  their  own 
contributions  to  thought. 

We  will  recommence  by  scanning  the  history  of  these 
doctrines  of  Natural  Law,  with  the  view  of  determining 
then  exact  points  of  divergence,  and  the  measure  of  con¬ 
ciliation  of  which  they  are  capable.  In  the  previous  chapter 
Plato  s  urbane  preface  to  a  philosophical  suggestion  was 
quoted.  The  suggestion  itself  is  now  relevant  to  the  present 
lecture: — 

“My  suggestion  would  be,  that  anything  which  possesses 
any  sort  of  power  to  affect  another,  or  to  be  affected  by  an¬ 
other  even  for  a  moment,  however  trifling  the  cause  and 
however  slight  and  momentary  the  effect,  has  real  exist- 


124  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

ence;  and  I  hold  that  the  definition  of  being  is  simply 
power.”1 

In  the  subsequent  conduct  of  the  dialogue  Plato  rises 
to  the  height  of  his  genius  as  a  metaphysician.  But  he  also 
wrestles  with  the  difficulty  of  making  language  express  any¬ 
thing  beyond  the  familiarities  of  daily  life.  It  is  misleading 
to  study  the  history  of  ideas  without  constant  remembrance 
of  the  struggle  of  novel  thought  with  the  obtuseness  of 

language.  . 

Also  it  is  interesting  to  notice  that,  according  to  Plato, 
the  distinguishing  mark  of  the  Philosopher  in  contrast  to 
the  Sophist  is  his  resolute  attempt  to  reconcile  conflicting 
doctrines,  each  with  its  own  solid  ground  of  support.  In  the 
history  of  ideas  the  doctrine  of  Speculation  is  at  least  as 
important  as  the  doctrines  for  Speculation. 

Section  II.  But,  to  return  to  Plato’s  suggestion — “and 
I  hold  that  the  definition  of  being  is  simply  power.” 

This  statement  can  be  construed  in  terms  of  the  notion 
of  imposed  law,  namely,  that  it  is  an  external  imposition 
on  each  existent,  that  it  be  correlated  with  determinate 
causal  action  on  other  such  existents.  But  such  an  interpre¬ 
tation  neglects  the  exact  wording.  Plato  says  that  it  is  the 
definition  of  being  that  it  exert  power  and  be  subject  to 
the  exertion  of  power.  This  means  that  the  essence  of  be¬ 
ing  is  to  be  implicated  in  causal  action  on  other  beings.  It 
is  the  doctrine  of  Law  as  immanent.  Further,  a  few  sen¬ 
tences  later  he  proceeds: — “.  .  .  being,  as  being  known, 
is  acted  on  by  knowledge,  and  is  therefore  in  motion,  for 
that  which  is  in  a  state  of  rest  cannot  be  acted  upon  as 
we  affirm.  .  .  .  Can  we  imagine  being  to  be  devoid  of  life 
and  mind,  and  to  remain  in  awful  unmeaningness  an  ever¬ 
lasting  fixture?” 

Notice  that  in  this  argument,  that  which  is  not  acted 
upon  is  a  fixture.  Plato  denies  that  being  can  be  conceived 
‘in  awful  unmeaningness  an  everlasting  fixture.”  It  is  there¬ 
fore  acted  upon.  This  agrees  with  his  primary  definition, 
that  ‘being’  is  the  agent  in  action,  and  the  recipient  of 
action.  Thus,  in  these  passages  Plato  enunciates  the  doc¬ 
trine  that  ‘action  and  reaction’  belong  to  the  essence  of 
being:  though  the  mediation  of  ‘life  and  mind’  is  invoked 
to  provide  the  medium  of  activity.  This  notion  of  a  me- 


1  Sophist,  247,  Jowett’s  translation. 


Cosmologies  125 

dium,  connecting  the  etemality  of  being  with  the  fluency  of 
becoming,  takes  many  shapes  in  Plato’s  Dialogues.  Very 
probably,  indeed  almost  certainly,  passages  inconsistent 
with  this  doctrine  can  be  found  in  the  Dialogues.  For  the 
moment,  the  interesting  fact  is  that  in  these  passages  in  this 
dialogue  we  find  a  clear  enunciation  of  the  doctrine  of 
Law  as  immanent. 

The  early,  naive  trend  of  Semitic  monotheism,  Jewish 
and  Mahometan,  is  towards  the  notion  of  Law  imposed  by 
the  fiat  of  the  One  God.  Subsequent  speculation  wavers 
between  these  two  extremes,  seeking  their  reconciliation. 
In  this,  as  in  most  other  matters,  the  history  of  Western 
thought  consists  in  the  attempted  fusion  of  ideas  which  in 
their  origin  are  predominantly  Hellenic,  with  ideas  which 
in  their  origin  are  predominantly  Semitic.  The  modem 
scholar,  with  his  tinge  of  speculation,  is  an  Egyptian  em¬ 
ploying  his  wisdom  upon  his  Hellenic  and  Semitic  heritage. 

In  this  instance,  the  extremes  of  the  two  doctrines  of 
Law  lead  on  the  one  hand  to  the  extreme  monotheistic 
doctrine  of  God,  as  essentially  transcendent  and  only  acci¬ 
dentally  immanent,  and  on  the  other  hand  to  the  pantheis¬ 
tic  doctrine  of  God,  as  essentially  immanent  and  in  no  way 
transcendent. 

Plato  in  the  Timceus  affords  an  early  instance  of  this 
wavering  between  the  two  doctrines  of  Law,  Immanence 
and  Imposition.  In  the  first  place,  Plato’s  cosmology  in¬ 
cludes  an  ultimate  creator,  shadowy  and  undefined,  impos¬ 
ing  his  design  upon  the  Universe.  Secondly,  the  action  and 
reaction  of  the  internal  constituents  are — for  Plato — the 
self-sufficient  explanation  of  the  flux  of  the  world: — “Noth¬ 
ing  was  given  off  from  it,  nothing  entered  it, — there  was 
nothing  but  itself.” 

We  have  here  been  examining  the  basic  notion  of  the 
initial  cosmology  which  dominated  the  world,  Pagan, 
Christian,  and  Mahometan,  before  the  rise  of  the  modern 
period.  It  was  modified  by  Aristotle,  by  the  Alexandrians, 
by  the  Scholastics.  But  this  fusion  of  the  doctrines  of  Im¬ 
position  and  Immanence,  with  adjustments  this  way  or  that 
way,  is  the  great  conception  which  reigned  supreme  till 
the  beginning  of  the  seventeenth  century. 

Section  III.  But  Greek  thought  provided  a  rival  cos¬ 
mology,  in  the  shape  of  the  Atomic  theory,  as  adumbrated 
by  Democritus,  systematized  by  Epicurus,  and  as  finally 


126  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

explained  in  Epic  shape  by  Lucretius.  According  to  Lucre¬ 
tius  the  world  is  an  interminable  shower  of  atomic  par¬ 
ticles,  streaming  through  space,  swerving,  intermingling, 
disentangling  their  paths,  recombining  them.  For  this  doc- 
trine  qualitative  differences  are  merely  the  statistical  ex- 
pression  of  geometrical  patterns  of  intermingled  paths,  the 
outcome  of  swerving,  combined  with  a  finite  number  of 

diversities  of  shape.  *  ,  . 

Plato  and  Lucretius  both  appeal  to  geometry,  Plato  to 
the  regular  solids,  and  Lucretius  to  the  shapes  of  paths,  and 
unspecified  shapes  of  atoms.  In  this  respect,  their  general 
attitude  has  been  sustained  by  modem  science.  It  seems 
necessary  however  for  Epicurus  to  treat  space  and  motion 
with  the  metaphysical  naivety  exhibited  later  in  Newton  s 
Principia.  Plato’s  doctrine  of  space,  as  stated  in  the  Timceus, 
has  a  superior  metaphysical  subtlety;  although  the  Platomc 
doctrine  of  a  Receptacle,  intrinsically  devoid  of  any  geo¬ 
metrical  form,  has  some  analogy  to  the  doctrine  of  the 
‘Void’  in  Lucretius.  It  is  probable  however  that  if  Lucre¬ 
tius  had  possessed  the  penetration  to  explain  Epicurus 
further,  he  would  have  found  it  necessary  to  endow  his 
Void  with  exactly  those  geometrical  forms  which  Plato  de¬ 
nied  to  his  Receptacle  considered  in  abstraction,  and 
which  Aristotle  denied  to  his  Matter  in  abstraction. 

Plato’s  cosmology  tends  to  a  fusion  of  the  doctrines  or 
Imposition  and  Immanence;  the  Atomic  Theory  of  Epi¬ 
curus  lends  itself  most  readily  to  a  fusion  of  the  doctrines 
of  Imposition  and  of  Description. 

The  reason  for  this  distinction  between  the  two  cosmol¬ 
ogies  is  that  for  Plato  behaviour  is  a  function  of  the  various 
characters  of  the  things  concerned— the  intelligent  activities 
of  indwelling  souls,  and  the  geometric  necessities  of  the  in¬ 
dwelling  shapes.  But  for  Epicurus  the  paths  of  the  atoms 
are  derived  from  no  necessities  of  their  natures.  It  is  intrin¬ 
sic  to  their  natures  that  they  partake  of  spatial  relations  and 
are  moveable.  But  the  special  path  of  a  special  atom  seems 
to  be  a  fact  entirely  extrinsic  to  its  nature.  The  modem 
wave-theory  of  the  atom  sides  with  Plato  rather  than  with 
Democritus:  Newtonian  dynamics  sides  with  Democritus 
against  Plato.  Some  passages  of  Lucretius  surreptitiously 
introduce  the  doctrine  of  immanence.  What  Lucretius 
mainly  cared  about  was  the  reign  of  laws  as  opposed  to 


Cosmologies  127 

the  capricious  intervention  of  demons  and  gods,  to  be 
coaxed  by  superstition. 

As  to  the  paths  of  the  atoms,  two  views  are  possible. 
One  theory  can  conceive  them  as  imposed,  and  imposition 
requires  a  transcendent  God  as  imposer.  This  is  practically 
the  cosmology  adopted  by  Newton.  The  Newtonian  forces, 
whatever  their  ultimate  mathematical  formulation,  are 
nothing  else  than  the  imposed  conditions  provided  by  God. 
This  point  of  view  was  the  working  formula  of  the  eight¬ 
eenth  century.  God  made  his  appearance  in  religion  under 
the  frigid  title  of  the  First  Cause,  and  was  appropriately 
worshipped  in  white-washed  churches. 

Another  theory  as  to  the  paths  can  be  adopted  by  the 
Positivist  School  of  Mere  Description.  For  this  reason,  the 
atomic  theory,  of  the  Lucretian  type,  has  always  been  a 
favorite  first  principle  of  cosmology  with  this  School  of 
Thought.  The  paths  of  the  molecules  can  be  ascribed  to 
mere  chance.  They  are  random  distributions,  each  path 
being  entirely  disconnected  from  any  other  path,  and  each 
continuation  of  one  path  being  unconditioned  by  the  ear¬ 
lier  portion  of  the  same  path. 

Thus  the  world,  as  we  know  it,  exhibits  for  our  confused 
perception  an  involution  of  paths  and  a  concatenation  of 
circumstances  which  have  arisen  entirely  by  chance.  We 
can  describe  what  has  happened,  but  with  that  description 
all  possibility  of  knowledge  ends. 

Lucretius  wavers  between  the  notion  of  imposed  law  and 
the  notion  of  chance.  For  example: — “This  point  too  we 
wish  you  to  apprehend:  when  bodies  are  borne  downwards 
sheer  through  void  by  their  own  weights,  at  quite  uncertain 
times  and  uncertain  spots  they  push  themselves  a  little  from 
their  course:  you  just  and  only  just  can  call  it  a  change  of 
inclination.  If  they  were  not  used  to  swerve,  they  would  all 
fall  down,  like  drops  of  rain,  through  the  deep  void,  and  no 
clashing  would  have  been  begotten  nor  blow  produced 
among  the  first-beginnings  [i.e.  the  atoms]:  thus  nature 
never  would  have  produced  aught.”2 

But  he  rigidly  limits  his  suggestion  of  chance: — 3 

“But  lest  you  haply  suppose  that  living  things  alone  are 


2  Book  II,  lines  216-244.  Translated  by  H.  A.  J.  Monro,  published  separately 
in  Bohn’s  series,  by  G.  Bell  and  Sons,  Ltd.:  Cf.  also  Cyril  Bailey’s  translation, 
Lucretius  on  the  Nature  of  Things,  Oxford  University  Press,  1929. 

3  Cf.  Book  U,  lines  718,  719. 


128  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

bound  by  these  conditions,  such  a  law  keeps  all  things 
witliin  their  limits.” 

The  objection  to  the  extreme  Positivist  doctrme  at  once 
suggests  itself,  that  the  enormous  aspect  of  regular  evolu- 
tior  through  vast  regions  embracing  the  remotest  star- 
gakxies,  and  through  vast  periods  of  time,  is  an  unlikely 
pro  luct  of  mere  chance. 

There  are  two  answers  to  this  objection.  In  the  first 
place,  there  is  plenty  of  time  and  plenty  of  space.  We  are 
dealing  with  all  space,  from  infinity  to  infinity,  we  are  deal¬ 
ing  with  all  time  from  eternity  to  eternity,  and  we  are 
dealing  with  the  unbounded  wealth  of  all  existence,  to  be 
comprehended  in  terms  of  no  finite  number.  In  any  finite 
region  of  space  and  time,  with  its  finite  cargo  of  atoms, 
any  pre-conceived  arrangement  of  paths,  however  simple 
or  however  complex,  is  equally  unlikely,  indeed  there  is  an 
infinite  probability  against  it.  But  we  are  not  dealing  with 
a  pre-conceived  concept,  we  observe  what  in  fact  is  the  case 
in  a  limited  region.  Something  must  be  the  case,  and  what 
we  have  observed  is  what  in  fact  has  been  the  case.  There 
is  nothing  pre-conceived,  and  thus  there  is  no  question  of 
infinite  improbability.  It  is  true  that  expectations  float 
through  our  minds,  but  they  are  vague  memories  of  what 
in  fact  has  happened,  combined  with  suggestions  as  to 
the  more  detailed  analysis  of  past  fact.  The  fact  in  the  past 
is  neither  probable  nor  improbable,  it  is  what  in  fact  took 
place  within  the  ambit  of  our  observation. 

The  second  answer  takes  the  same  point  of  view  as  that 
derived  from  the  doctrine  of  immanence.  There  is  no  need 

_ indeed  there  is  not  the  slightest  reason — to  exaggerate 

the  order  in  the  spatio-tempered  region  under  our  observa¬ 
tion.  In  the  remote  regions  and  epochs  we  have  only  in¬ 
telligence  of  very  general  aspects  of  order.  That  is  all  we 
know.  In  the  present  epoch  we  have  more  detail,  but  our 
observation  is  rough,  inaccurate,  and  sporadic.  Again,  that 
is  all  We  know.  We  must  not  ascribe,  we  must  not  expect, 
one  step  beyond  our  direct  knowledge.  The  Positivist  has 
no  foothold  on  which  he  can  rely  for  speculation  beyond 
the  region  of  direct  observation.  ...  ,  . 

Section  IV.  The  great  Positivist  school  of  thought, 
whose  epic  is  the  poem  of  Lucretius,  at  the  present  time 
reigns  supreme  in  the  domain  of  science.  Its  aim  is  to  con¬ 
fine  itself  to  fact,  with  a  discard  of  all  speculation.  Unfor- 


Cosmologies  129 

tunately,  among  all  the  variant  schools  of  opinion,  it  is  the 
one  which  can  least  bear  confrontation  with  the  facts.  It 
has  never  been  acted  on.  It  can  never  be  acted  on,  for  it 
gives  no  foothold  for  any  forecast  of  the  future  around 
which  purpose  can  weave  itself. 

But  before  confronting  Positivism  with  the  practice  of 
mankind,  it  is  interesting  to  note  that  atomism  has  taken 
on  a  new  form  of  modern  thought.  Epistemology  has  arisen, 
in  its  function  of  a  critic  of  all  pretensions  to  knowledge. 
Today,  the  question,  How  do  we  know,  takes  precedence 
of  the  question, — What  do  we  know. 

Again,  the  doctrine  of  atomism  re-appears.  The  atomism 
of  Democritus  in  the  science  of  Cosmology  is  replaced  by 
the  atomism  of  Hume  in  the  science  of  Epistemology.  Epi¬ 
curus  enunciates  the  doctrine  that  the  ultimate  elements 
of  the  physical  universe  are  physical  atoms,  showering 
through  space  with  paths  associated  in  complexes.  Hume 
enunciates  the  doctrine  that  the  ultimate  elements,  subjec¬ 
tively  given  in  the  activity  of  knowing,  are  the  impressions 
of  sensation,  showering  through  the  stream  of  experience, 
associated  as  memories,  provocative  of  emotions  and  re¬ 
flexions,  and  expectations.  But  for  Hume,  each  impression 
is  a  distinct  existence  arising  in  soul  from  unknown  causes. 
Epicurus  bases  himself  upon  an  epistemology  closely  allied 
to  that  of  Hume. 

Positivism  has  seized  on  Hume’s  atomism,  with  Hume 
himself  as  its  leader.  The  task  of  science  is  explained  to  be 
merely  the  formulation  of  observed  identities  of  pattern 
persistent  and  recurrent  in  each  stream  of  experience.  But 
since  Hume  is  dealing  with  subjective  experience,  he  can 
add  a  corollary  not  open  to  the  more  objective  doctrine  of 
Epicurus.  Hume  adds  that  we  expect  the  recurrences  ob¬ 
served  in  the  past,  also  to  recur  in  the  future.  At  this  stage, 
Hotspur’s  question  arises  in  our  mind,  “But  will  they  come, 
when  you  do  call  for  them?”  To  this  question  Hume,  fol¬ 
lowing  the  example  of  Glendower,  returns  no  answer.  It 
is  an  observed  fact  in  the  past  that  expected  recurrences 
have  recurred.  But  Positivistic  science  is  solely  concerned 
with  observed  fact,  and  must  hazard  no  conjecture  as  to 
the  future.  If  observed  fact  be  all  we  know,  then  there  is 
no  other  knowledge.  Probability  is  relative  to  knowledge. 
There  is  no  probability  as  to  the  future  within  the  doctrine 
of  Positivism. 


130  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

Of  course  most  men  of  science,  and  many  philosophers, 
use  the  Positivistic  doctrine  to  avoid  the  necessity  of  con¬ 
sidering  perplexing  fundamental  questions— in  short,  to 
avoid  metaphysics — ,  and  then  save  the  importance  of 
science  by  an  implicit  recurrence  to  their  metaphysical  per¬ 
suasion  that  the  past  does  in  fact  condition  the  future. 

Indeed,  as  Hume  pointed  out,  human  life  cannot  be  car¬ 
ried  on  without  this  persuasion.  In  this  way  the  Positivistic 
doctrine  of  today  bases  itself  on  some  form  of  atomism,  ob¬ 
jective  or  subjective,  and  deduces  that  the  sole  occupation 
of  science  is  to  elaborate  simple  descriptions  of  things  ob¬ 
served. 

There  is  a  curious  misconception  that  somehow  the 
mathematical  mysteries  of  Statistics  help  Positivism  to 
evade  its  proper  limitation  to  the  observed  past.  But  sta¬ 
tistics  tell  you  nothing  about  the  future  unless  you  make  the 
assumption  of  the  permanence  of  statistical  form.  For  ex¬ 
ample,  in  order  to  use  statistics  for  prediction,  assumptions 
are  wanted  as  to  the  stability  of  the  mean,  the  mode,  the 
probable  error,  and  the  symmetry  or  skewness  of  the  sta¬ 
tistical  expression  of  functional  correlation.  Mathematics 
can  tell  you  the  consequences  of  your  beliefs.  For  example, 
if  your  apple  is  composed  of  a  finite  number  of  atoms, 
mathematics  will  tell  you  that  the  number  is  odd  or  even. 
But  you  must  not  ask  mathematics  to  provide  you  with  the 
apple,  the  atoms,  and  the  finiteness  of  their  number. 
There  is  no  valid  inference  from  mere  possibility  to  matter 
of  fact,  or,  in  other  words,  from  mere  mathematics  to 
concrete  nature. 

Section  V.  It  is  now  time  to  confront  the  Positivist  doc¬ 
trine  with  the  facts  of  the  History  of  Science.  We  want  to 
discover  the  type  of  purpose  exhibited  in  the  practices  of 
men  of  science.  In  order  to  avoid  the  suspicion  of  biased 
selection,  consider  the  last  discovery,  which  at  the  time  of 
writing  this  chapter,  has  occupied  a  leading  position  in 
American  newspapers.  I  mean  the  discovery  of  the  new 
planet  by  the  Lowell  Observatory  in  Arizona.  The  final 
interpretation  of  this  discovery  is  irrelevant:  Nature,  even 
in  the  act  of  satisfying  anticipation,  often  provides  a  sur¬ 
prise.  The  story  is  typical  of  the  previous  discovery  of 
Neptune,  and  of  many  discoveries  of  the  faint  members 
of  double  stars,  and  of  the  famous  empirical  term  in  the 
formula  for  the  moon’s  motion. 


Cosmologies  131 

The  recent  discovery  is  based  upon  the  observed  devia¬ 
tions  of  the  orbits  of  the  planets  Uranus  and  Neptune  from 
the  calculated  order.  This  calculation  embraces  the  effect 
produced  by  all  the  previously  known  bodies  of  the  solar 
system  upon  the  motions  of  these  two  planets,  assuming  the 
Law  of  Gravitation.  But  their  observed  motions  deviate 
slightly  from  their  orbits  as  thus  calculated.  There  is  how¬ 
ever  no  difficulty  in  producing  a  mathematical  formula 
which  describes  the  observed  deviation.  Such  a  formula 
will  be  of  the  most  elementary  mathematical  character.  It 
will  consist  of  a  few  terms  involving  trigonometrical  sines 
and  cosines,  with  certain  numerical  components  defining 
their  periods,  with  other  numerical  components  defining 
their  amplitudes,  and  other  numerical  components  defin¬ 
ing  their  epochs — or  in  modem  popular  phraseology,  their 
‘zero  times.’  Altogether  a  description  of  charming  simplic¬ 
ity,  which  would  have  delighted  Plato  by  its  exemplifica¬ 
tion  of  his  most  daring  speculations  as  to  the  future  of 
mathematics. 

.  Every  Positivist  must  have  been  completely  satisfied.  A 
simple  description  had  been  evolved  which  fitted  the  ob¬ 
served  facts.  They  could  now  relapse  into  their  unexplained 
persuasion  that  in  the  future  these  formulas  would  continue 
to  describe  the  motions  of  Uranus  and  Neptune.  Positivism 
had  exhausted  its  message.  But  astronomers  were  not  satis¬ 
fied.  They  remembered  the  law  of  Gravitation.  Percy 
Lowell  calculated  the  direction  and  magnitude  of  the  vector 
component  of  acceleration,  directed  to  an  imaginary  point 
moving  round  the  sun  in  an  elliptic  path,  even  more  remote 
than  the  orbit  of  Neptune.  He  succeeded  in  choosing  his 
assumed  path,  so  that  the  magnitude  of  the  acceleration 
varies  as  the  inverse  square  of  the  distance  between  Nep¬ 
tune  and  the  moving  point.  A  new  description  had  been 
discovered,  requiring  some  complex  mathematics  to  con¬ 
nect  it  with  the  successive  positions  of  Uranus,  but  con¬ 
forming  to  the  general  form  of  Newton’s  Law.  There  has 
been  a  gain  in  generality,  pleasing  if  you  cherish  a  vir¬ 
tuosity  in  descriptions.  But  we  have  forgotten  the  main  in¬ 
terest: — We  have  only  got  to  look  in  the  sky,  towards 
Percy  Lowell’s  moving  point,  and  we  shall  see  a  new 
planet.  Certainly  we  shall  not.  All  that  any  person  has 
seen  is  a  few  faint  dots  on  photographic  plates,  involving 
the  intervention  of  photography,  excellent  telescopes, 


132  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

elaborate  apparatus,  long  exposures  and  favourable  nights. 
The  new  explanation  is  now  involved  in  the  speculative 
extension  of  a  welter  of  physical  laws,  concerning  tele¬ 
scopes,  light,  and  photography,  laws  which  merely  claim 
to  register  observed  facts.  It  is  involved  in  the  speculative 
application  of  such  laws  to  particular  circumstances  within 
the  observatories,  for  which  circumstances  these  laws  are 
not  concurrently  verified.  The  result  of  this  maze  of  specu¬ 
lative  extensions  is  to  connect  the  deviations  of  Uranus 
and  Neptune  with  the  dots  on  the  photographic  plates. 

This  narrative,  framed  according  to  the  strictest  require¬ 
ments  of  the  Positivist  Theory,  is  a  travesty  of  the  plain 
facts.  The  civilized  world  has  been  interested  at  the  thought 
of  the  newly  discovered  planet,  solitary  and  remote,  for 
endless  ages  circling  the  sun  and  adding  its  faint  influence 
to  the  tide  of  affairs.  At  last  it  is  discovered  by  human 
reason,  penetrating  into  the  nature  of  things  and  laying 
bare  the  necessities  of  their  interconnection.  The  specula¬ 
tive  extensions  of  laws,  baseless  on  the  Positivist  theory, 
are  the  obvious  issue  of  speculative  metaphysical  trust  in 
the  material  permanences,  such  as  telescopes,  observator¬ 
ies,  mountains,  planets,  which  are  behaving  towards  each 
other  according  to  the  necessities  of  the  universe,  including 
theories  of  their  own  natures.  The  point  is,  that  speculative 
extension  beyond  direct  observation  spells  some  trust  in 
metaphysics,  however  vaguely  these  metaphysical  notions 
may  be  entertained  in  explicit  thought.  Our  metaphysical 
knowledge  is  slight,  superficial,  incomplete.  Thus  errors 
creep  in.  But,  such  as  it  is,  metaphysical  understanding 
guides  imagination  and  justifies  purpose.  Apart  from  meta¬ 
physical  presupposition  there  can  be  no  civilization. 

There  is  a  moral  to  be  drawn  as  to  the  method  of  sci¬ 
ence.  All  scientific  progress  depends  on  first  framing  a 
formula  giving  a  general  description  of  observed  fact. 
Lowell  worked  with  such  a  formula  in  front  of  him,  namely, 
the  simple  mathematical  expression  for  the  deviations.  At 
one  stage,  the  method  of  all  discovery  conforms  to  the 
Positivist  doctrine.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that,  with  this 
restriction  of  meaning,  the  Positivist  doctrine  is  correct. 

Certain  branches  of  science  halt  for  centuries  in  this 
stage.  Then  their  votaries  embrace  the  unguarded  Positivist 
doctrine.  There  is  however  a  motive  of  unrest  which  urges 
scientists  beyond  mere  satisfaction  with  the  simple  descrip- 


Cosmologies  133 

tion,  beyond  even  the  general  description.  It  is  the  desire 
to  obtain  the  explanatory  description  which  may  justify  the 
speculative  extension  of  Laws,  beyond  actual,  particular 
instances  of  observation. 

This  urge  towards  explanatory  description  provides  the 
interplay  between  science  and  metaphysics.  The  doctrines 
of  metaphysics  are  modified,  so  as  to  be  capable  of  pro¬ 
viding  the  explanation,  and  the  explanations  of  science  are 
framed  in  terms  of  the  popular  metaphysics  lingering  in 
the  imaginations  of  these  scientists. 

One  aspect  of  the  history  of  thought  from  the  time  of 
Plato  to  the  present  day  is  the  struggle  between  metaphysi¬ 
cians  and  Positivists  over  the  interpretation  of  the  Laws  of 
Nature.  The  Greeks,  as  distinguished  from  the  Alexan¬ 
drians,  are  to  be  looked  on  as  the  discoverers  of  ideas, 
rather  than  their  systematizes.  Thus  it  is  not  surprising, 
that  the  attitude  of  Plato  on  this  topic  is  not  as  clearly  de¬ 
fined  as  the  preceding  quotations  might  imply.  In  some  of 
his  dialogues  his  attention  is  fixed  on  the  distinction  be¬ 
tween  the  eternal  world  of  ideas,  completely  open  to  the 
understanding,  and  the  fluent  world  disclosed  by  the  senses 
which  fails  to  participate  with  any  exact  clarity  in  the 
eternal  forms.  To  that  extent  the  sensible  world  is  closed 
to  the  understanding.  Its  history  is  reduced  to  matter  of 
fact,  incapable  of  complete  rationalization.  It  is  but  a  short 
step  from  the  Plato  who  composed  the  myth  of  the  shadows 
on  the  wall  of  the  cave  to  the  full  Positivist  doctrine  of 
Hume  [i.e.  the  ‘Hume’  of  the  Treatise ],  Mill,  Comte  and 
Huxley.  The  main  distinction  between  Plato  in  this  mood 
and  the  Moderns — and  it  is  a  great  distinction — is  that  the 
Platonic  emphasis  on  the  eminent  reality  of  the  eternal 
world  of  ideas  must  be  replaced  by  the  nominalism  of 
most  of  these  modems. 

But  in  his  later  dialogues  Plato’s  interest  is  concen¬ 
trated  on  cosmology;  and,  as  the  quotations  show,  his  final 
judgment,  or  the  decay  of  his  old  age,  leads  him  to  an  in¬ 
termediate  position  between  the  doctrines  of  Immanent 
Law,  and  of  Imposed  Law. 

Section  VI.  It  was  Plato  in  his  later  mood  who  put 
forward  the  suggestion,  “and  I  hold  that  the  definition  of 
being  is  simply  power.”  This  suggestion  is  the  charter  of 
the  doctrine  of  Immanent  Law. 

The  next  important  landmark  in  the  history  of  this  doc- 


134  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

trine  is  provided  by  the  theological  Alexandrians,  some 
four  to  six  hundred  years  later.  It  is  customary  to  under¬ 
value  theology  in  a  secular  history  of  philosophical  thought. 
This  is  a  mistake,  since  for  a  period  of  about  thirteen  hun¬ 
dred  years  the  ablest  thinkers  were  mostly  theologians. 

The  theologians  of  Alexandria  were  greatly  exercised 
over  the  immanence  of  God  in  the  world.  They  considered 
the  general  question,  how  the  primordial  Being,  who  is  the 
source  of  the  inevitable  recurrence  of  the  world  towards 
order,  shares  his  nature  with  the  world.  In  some  sense  he 
is  a  component  in  the  natures  of  all  fugitive  things.  Thus, 
an  understanding  of  the  nature  of  temporal  things  involves 
a  comprehension  of  the  immanence  of  the  Eternal  Being. 
This  doctrine  effects  an  important  reconciliation  between 
the  doctrines  of  Imposed  Law  and  Immanent  Law.  For, 
with  this  doctrine,  the  necessity  of  the  trend  towards  order 
does  not  arise  from  the  imposed  will  of  a  transcendent 
God.  It  arises  from  the  fact,  that  the  existents  in  nature  are 
sharing  in  the  nature  of  the  immanent  God. 

This  doctrine,  in  any  clear  form,  is  not  Platonic,  though 
it  is  a  natural  modification  from  Plato’s  own  doctrine.  But 
in  the  Timceus,  Plato  provides  a  soul  of  this  world  who 
definitely  is  not  the  ultimate  creator.  By  this  notion,  Plato 
prepared  the  way  for  the  Gnostics  with  their  fantastic 
machinery  of  emanations,  and  for  the  Arians.  In  the  Tim¬ 
ceus  the  doctrine  can  be  read  as  an  allegory.  In  that  case  it 
was  Plato’s  most  unfortunate  essay  in  mythology.  The 
World-Soul,  as  an  emanation,  has  been  the  parent  of  puerile 
metaphysics,  which  only  obscures  the  ultimate  question  of 
the  relation  of  reality  as  permanent  with  reality  as  fluent: 
the  mediator  must  be  a  component  in  common,  and  not  a 
transcendent  emanation. 

The  Western  doctrine  of  Grace,  derived  from  St.  Augus¬ 
tine,  leans  heavily  towards  the  notion  of  a  wholly  tran¬ 
scendent  God  imposing  his  partial  favours  on  the  world. 
Indeed,  Calvin’s  rigid  version  of  the  same  doctrine  suggests 
the  Manichean  doctrine  of  a  wholly  evil  material  world 
partially  rescued  by  God’s  arbitrary  selection.  For  Calvin- 
istic  thought  the  physical  order  of  the  world  was  an  arbi¬ 
trary  imposition  of  God’s  will.  Indeed  the  Augustinian 
doctrine  takes  on  diverse  aspects  according  as  it  is  derived 
from  the  will  of  a  transcendent  God,  or  the  nature  of  an 
immanent  God. 


Cosmologies  135 

This  unquestioned  belief  in  order,  with  this  chequered 
history — Plato  and  Epicurus,  the  Gnostics,  the  Alexandrian 
theologians,  the  rationalists  of  Antioch  and  Mopsuetia,  the 
Mamcheans,  Augustine,  Calvin — finally  started  the  first 
phase  of  the  modem  world  in  the  sixteenth  century  with 
the  unquestioning  presupposition  that  there  is  an  order  of 
nature  which  lies  open  in  every  detail  to  human  under¬ 
standing. 

:  This  belief  can  be  traced  back  to  the  initiation  of  Plato 
and  the  Jewish  prophets.  But,  in  all  probability,  it  is  more 
than  any  of  them  clearly  formulated  or  consistently  be¬ 
lieved.  Lucretius  gives  the  clearest  formulation  of  the  doc¬ 
trine  of  an  exact  detailed  order  of  nature.  But  even  he  has 
to  make  everything  depend  upon  swervings  of  atoms  which 
take  place  at  no  fixed  part  of  space  and  no  fixed  time.” 

Section  VII.  The  conclusion  of  the  seventeenth  century 
marks  a  new  stabilization  of  cosmological  doctrine  for  the 
next  two  hundred  years.  For  the  moment  the  extreme  Posi¬ 
tivistic  doctrine  was  eliminated.  But,  curiously  enough,  the 
three  great  figures,  Newton,  Leibniz,  Locke,  then  dominat- 
mg  the  world  of  thought,  gave  three  diverse  interpretations 
ot  the  Platonic  and  Lucretian  problems. 

Newton  s  position  was  the  more  useful  as  a  justification 
of  the  methodology  required  for  the  state  of  science,  then 
and  in  the  immediate  future.  He  held  the  most  simple- 
minded  version  of  the  Lucretian  doctrine  of  the  Void,  the 
most  simple-minded  version  of  the  Lucretian  doctrine  of 
material  atoms,  and  the  most  simple-minded  version  of 
Law  imposed  by  Divine  decree.  His  only  approach  to  any 
metaphysical  penetration  arises  from  his  way  of  connecting 
the  Void  with  the  Sensorium  of  the  Divine  Nature.  His 
cosmology  is  very  easy  to  understand  and  very  hard  to  be- 
heve.  Pragmatically  it  experienced  a  supreme  justification, 
tor  two  centuries.  Thus  its  truth  was  pragmatically  estab¬ 
lished,  for  the  same  period.  His  doctrine  will  stand  for  all 
time  as  a  clear  and  distinct  system  of  ideas,  with  large  ap¬ 
plications.  Any  cosmology  must  be  capable  of  interpreting 
this  system  and  of  expressing  its  limitations. 

The  monads  of  Leibniz  constitute  another  version  of  an 
atomic  doctrine  of  the  universe.  It  is  true  that  Newton 
adopted  without  question  some  of  the  main  positions  of  the 
Cartesian  physics.  But  Newton  was  entirely  innocent  of 
the  subjectivist  bias  of  thought  introduced  by  Descartes. 


136  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

Newton  found  himself  knowing  a  lot  of  things,  as  inter¬ 
preted  in  Cartesian  fashion;  and  he  successfully  introduced 
a  systematization  of  this  knowledge,  thus  interpreted.  But 
Descartes,  before  he  attacked  the  problem  of  physics, 
asked  the  momentous  questions — How  do  I  know,  and 
How  can  I  divest  my  knowledge  of  doubtful  interpretation? 
The  final  issue  of  this  subjective  train  of  thought  after  a 
century  of  philosophizing  is  given  by  Hume’s  mental  atom¬ 
ism,  already  mentioned  in  this  chapter. 

Leibniz  was  acutely  conscious  of  this  problem  of  the 
criticism  of  knowledge.  Thus  he  approached  the  problem 
of  cosmology  from  the  subjective  side,  whereas  Lucretius 
and  Newton  approach  it  from  the  objective  point  of  view. 
They  implicitly  ask  the  question,  What  does  the  world  of 
atoms  look  like  to  an  intellect  surveying  it?  What  would 
such  an  intellect  say  about  the  spectacle  of  an  atomic  uni¬ 
verse?  The  answer  is  contained  in  the  Epic  of  Lucretius 
and  the  Principia  of  Newton,  immortal  works. 

But  Leibniz  answered  another  question.  He  explained 
what  it  must  be  like  to  be  an  atom.  Lucretius  tells  us  what 
an  atom  looks  like  to  others,  and  Leibniz  tells  us  how  an 
atom  is  feeling  about  itself.  In  this  account  Leibniz 
wrestles  with  a  difficulty  which  infects  modem  cosmologies, 
a  difficulty  which  Plato,  Aristotle,  Lucretius,  and  Newton 
entirely  ignore — perhaps  because  they  would  have  declared 
it  to  be  founded  upon  a  mistake.  Descartes,  as  is  usual  with 
the  founders  of  new  schools  of  thought,  exactly  balanced 
himself  between  the  old  way  and  the  new  way  of  which 
he  was  the  founder.  The  modern  outlook  arises  from  the 
slow  influence  of  Aristotle’s  Logic,  during  a  period  of  two 
thousand  years.  Also  Aristotle’s  Logic  is  founded  upon 
an  analysis  of  the  simplest  form  of  a  verbal  sentence.  For 
example,  the  sentence  ‘This  water  is  hot’  attributes  the 
character  of  high  temperature  to  the  particular  mass  of 
water  in  the  particular  bathtub.  The  quality  of  ‘being  hot’ 
is  an  abstraction.  Many  different  things  can  be  hot,  and 
we  can  think  of  being  hot  without  thinking  of  any  particular 
thing  in  a  bathtub  which  is  hot.  But  in  the  real  physical 
world,  the  quality  of  ‘being  hot’  can  only  appear  as  a 
characteristic  of  concrete  things  which  are  hot. 

Again,  still  keeping  to  the  point  of  view  derived  from 
Aristotelian  Logic,  if  we  ask  for  a  complete  account  of  a 


Cosmologies  137 

real  particular  thing  in  the  physical  world,  the  adequate 
answer  is  expressed  in  terms  of  a  set  of  these  abstract 
characteristics,  which  are  united  into  an  individualized 
togetherness  which  is  the  real  thing  in  question. 

This  answer  is  beautifully  simple.  But  it  entirely  leaves 
out  of  account  the  interconnections  between  real  things. 
Each  substantial  thing  is  thus  conceived  as  complete  in 
itself,  without  any  reference  to  any  other  substantial  thing. 
Such  an  account  of  the  ultimate  atoms,  or  of  the  ultimate 
monads,  or  of  the  ultimate  subjects  enjoying  experience, 
renders  an  interconnected  world  of  real  individuals  unin¬ 
telligible.  The  universe  is  shivered  into  a  multitude  of 
disconnected  substantial  things,  each  thing  in  its  own  way 
exemplifying  its  private  bundle  of  abstract  characters 
which  have  found  a  common  home  in  its  own  substantial 
individuality.  But  substantial  thing  cannot  call  unto  sub¬ 
stantial  thing.  A  substantial  thing  can  acquire  a  quality,  a 
credit — but  real  landed  estate,  never.  In  this  way,  Aris¬ 
totle’s  doctrines  of  Predication  and  of  Primary  Substance 
have  issued  into  a  doctrine  of  the  conjunction  of  attributes 
and  of  the  disjunction  of  primary  substances. 

All  modem  epistemologies,  all  modem  cosmologies, 
wrestle  with  this  problem.  There  is,  for  their  doctrine,  a 
mysterious  reality  in  the  background,  intrinsically  un¬ 
knowable  by  any  direct  intercourse.  In  the  foreground  of 
direct  enjoyment,  there  is  the  play  and  interplay  of  various 
qualities  diversifying  the  surface  of  the  substantial  unity 
of  the  solitary  individual  in  question. 

But  one  characteristic  of  each  experiencing  subject  is  a 
mysterious  impulse  to  interpret  its  private  world  of  en¬ 
joyed  qualifications  as  indicating  and  symbolically  defining 
a  complex  of  communication  between  ultimate  realities. 
Yet,  according  to  the  doctrine  of  these  modem  cosmol¬ 
ogies,  the  how,  or  the  why,  of  such  communication  must 
for  ever  lie  beyond  reason :  for  reason  can  only  discern  the 
set  of  qualities  constituting  the  nature  of  an  individual 
substance. 

Such  has  been  the  long  slow  influence  of  Aristotelian 
Logic  upon  cosmological  theory.  Leibniz  was  the  first,  and 
by  far  the  greatest  philosopher,  who  both  accepted  the 
modern  doctrine  and  frankly  faced  its  difficulty.  He  boldly 
excepted  God  from  the  scope  of  the  doctrine.  God  and 


138  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

each  individual  monad  were  in  communication.  Thus  there 
is,  on  his  doctrine,  an  indirect  communication  between 
monads  by  the  mediation  of  God.  But  each  monad  inde¬ 
pendently  develops  its  own  experience  according  to  its 
character  which  is  imposed  on  it  aboriginally  by  com¬ 
munication  with  God.  This  Leibnizian  doctrine  of  Law  by 
pre-established  harmony  is  an  extreme  example  of  the 
doctrine  of  imposition,  capable  in  some  ways  of  being 
mitigated  by  the  notion  of  the  immanence  of  God.  But  no 
reason  can  be  given  why  the  supreme  monad,  God,  is 
exempted  from  the  common  fate  of  isolation.  Monads, 
according  to  this  doctrine,  are  windowless  for  each  other. 
Why  have  they  windows  towards  God,  and  Why  has  God 
windows  towards  them? 

It  is  interesting  to  enquire  how  the  ancient  cosmologists 
— Plato  and  Lucretius — evaded  this  difficulty. 

In  the  first  place  it  must  be  acknowledged  that  in  Plato’s 
Dialogues  many  unguarded  statements,  and  many  trains 
of  thought,  can  be  found  which  in  themselves  would  lead 
straight  to  the  modem  difficulty.  In  fact,  in  this  respect 
Aristotle’s  Logic  can  be  found  in  germ  in  Plato.  But  in 
the  ancient  cosmologies,  including  Aristotle’s  own  doctrine 
of  matter,  another  train  of  thought  can  be  found,  which  is 
in  fact  an  emphatic  doctrine  of  real  communication. 
Plato’s  doctrine  of  the  real  Receptacle  [WoSox»?  and 
and  Epicurus’  doctrine  of  the  real  Void  [to  xel-:0I'L  differ  in 
some  details.  But  both  doctrines  are  emphatic  assertions 
of  a  real  communication  between  ultimate  realities.  This 
communication  is  not  accidental.  It  is  part  of  the  essential 
nature  of  each  physical  actuality  that  it  is  itself  an  element 
qualifying  the  Receptacle,  and  that  the  qualifications  of 
the  Receptacle  enter  into  its  own  nature.  In  itself,  with 
the  various  actualities  abstracted  from  it,  the  Receptacle 
participates  in  no  forms,  according  to  Plato.  But  he  desig¬ 
nates  it  as  ‘the  fostermother  of  all  becoming.’  Later  in  the 
same  Dialogue  he  calls  it  ‘a  natural  matrix  for  all  things.’ 
It  receives  its  forms  by  reason  of  its  inclusion  of  actualities, 
and  in  a  way  not  to  be  abstracted  from  those  actualities. 
The  Receptacle,  as  discussed  in  the  Timceus,  is  the  way  in 
which  Plato  conceived  the  many  actualities  of  the  physical 
world  as  components  in  each  other’s  natures.  It  is  the 
doctrine  of  the  immanence  of  Law,  derived  from  the 


Cosmologies  139 


mutual  immanence  of  actualities.  It  is  Plato’s  doctrine  of 
the  medium  of  intercommunication.4 

Thus  finally  we  can  understand  that  the  Receptacle, 
according  to  Plato,  the  Void,  according  to  Lucretius,  and 
God,  according  to  Leibniz,  play  the  same  part  in  cos¬ 
mological  theory.  Also  in  his  general  scholium,  Newton 
definitely  connects  the  Lucretian  Void  with  the  Leibnizian 
God.  For  he  calls  Empty  space  the  ‘sensorium  of  God.’ 
We  have  here  a  formidable  display  of  men  and  diverse 
gemus,  Plato  and  Aristotle,  Epicurus  and  Lucretius,  New¬ 
ton  and  Leibniz.  The  modem  cosmologies  are  all  detailed 
variations  of  the  great  types  which  we  have  discussed. 
They  revolve  round  the  diverse  notions  of  Law,  the  diverse 
notions  of  the  communication  between  real  individuals 
the  diverse  notions  of  the  mediating  basis  in  virtue  of 
which  such  communication  is  attained.  One  other  problem 
derivative  from  these  general  principles,  but  of  major  im¬ 
portance  for  human  life  is  the  doctrine  of  the  status  of 
the  spirit  of  man  in  the  scheme  of  things. 

This  more  special  problem  of  cosmological  theory  was 
pie  theme  of  the  former  part  of  this  book.  Its  important 
influence  upon  the  course  of  human  history  was  illustrated. 
But  it  must  not  be  thought  that  the  more  general  problem 
of  cosmology  lies  outside  the  scope  of  practical  interest. 
The  directions  of  human  activities  in  various  epochs,  and 
the  clashings  of  such  directions  in  the  same  epoch,  are  the 
outcome  of  rough  and  ready  solutions  of  the  problem  of 
cosmology,  popularized  throughout  masses  of  mankind. 
Millions  of  men  have  marched  to  battle  fiercely  nerved  by 
intense  faith  in  Law  imposed  by  the  will  of  inflexible  Allah, 
Law.  sharing  out  to  each  human  his  inevitable  fate.  Law 
sharing  out  to  each  faithful  Mahometan  either  victory,  or 
death  and  Paradise.  Millions  of  Buddhists  have  shunned 
the  intrinsic  evils  of  such  fierce  Mahometan  emotion 
relying  on  the  impersonal  immanence  of  Law,  made  clear 
to  them  by  the  doctrines  of  the  Buddha.  Millions  of  hu¬ 
mans  have  shaped  their  lives  according  to  the  compromise 


,  *  °nJ!Lis  topic’  kJs  Cresting  to  note  the  extreme  difficulty  of  determin- 
no  ^esc^.rtes  heid  to  the  doctrine  of  one  individual  corporeal 
substance  with  many  modal  diversities  of  motion  or  to  the  doctrine  of  many 
in<j7ldu^  corporeal  substances  essentially  connected  by  extensive 
relations.  Almost  all  his  phrases  are  ambiguous  on  this  point,  with  the 
rmciPi!e  Part  his  Principles  of  Philosophy.  Here  he 

speaks  of  every  corporeal  substance,  thus — at  least  in  this 
hini6^^)50^”6  it*F  a  n^ikplicity  of  such  substances.  Either  alternative  leads 


140  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

between  these  two  doctrines  due  to  the  Platonism  of 
Christianity. 

Finally,  the  restless  modem  search  for  increased  ac¬ 
curacy  of  observation  and  for  increased  detailed  explana¬ 
tion  is  based  upon  unquestioning  faith  in  the  reign  of  Law. 
Apart  from  such  faith,  the  enterprise  of  science  is  foolish, 
hopeless. 

Section  VIII.  The  most  recent  of  the  four  doctrines 
of  the  Laws  of  Nature  still  remains  for  discussion — The 
Doctrine  of  Conventional  Interpretation.  This  doctrine 
certainly  expresses  the  procedure  by  which  free  speculation 
passes  into  an  interpretation  of  Nature.  We  elaborate  a 
system  of  ideas,  in  detachment  from  any  direct,  detailed 
observation  of  matter  of  fact.  For  example,  such  detach¬ 
ment  from  detailed  observation  seems,  on  the  surface,  to 
be  characteristic  of  Plato’s  Dialogues.  They  do  not  bear 
the  aspect  of  patient  induction  from  the  facts.  They  are 
dominated  by  speculation  and  dialectics.  Also  Mathematics 
has  developed,  especially  in  recent  years,  by  a  speculative 
interest  in  types  of  order,  without  any  determination  of 
particular  entities  illustrative  of  those  types.  But  Nature 
has  subsequently  been  interpreted  in  terms  of  such  mathe¬ 
matical  laws.  The  conclusion  seems  to  be,  that  Nature  is 
patient  of  interpretation  in  terms  of  Laws,  which  happen  to 
interest  us.  _ 

Yet  another  consideration  supports  this  point  of  view. 
There  is  an  element  of  arbitrary  choice  in  our  interpreta¬ 
tion  of  the  geometrical  character  of  the  physical  world. 
Mathematicians  have  proved  that  any  region  which  ex¬ 
emplifies  metrical  geometry  of  the  Euclidean  type,  also 
exemplifies  metrical  geometry  of  the  Elliptic  type,  and 
also  metrical  geometry  of  the  Hyperbolic  type.  Further, 
if  we  start  with  any  one  of  the  three  types,  we  can  prove 
that  both  the  remaining  types  are  severally  exemplified 
in  the  same  subject-matter. 

But  it  is  an  entire  misconception,  which  has  been  enter¬ 
tained  even  by  some  mathematicians,  to  deduce  that  this 
mathematical  truth  has  any  bearing  upon  the  notion  of 
the  Laws  of  Nature  as  arbitrary  convention.  For  in  the 
three  metrical  geometries  as  applying  to  the  same  subject- 
matter,  the  definitions  of  distance  are  different.  Thus 
mathematicians  have  proved  that  if  there  be  a  metrical 
geometry  of  the  Euclidean  type,  then  with  another  defini- 


Cosmologies  141 

tion  of  distance,  and  hence  with  another  definition  of 
congruence,  there  is  a  metrical  geometry  of  the  elliptic 
type  also  applying  to  the  same  subject-matter.  There  are 
three  diverse  systems  of  relationship  within  the  subject- 
matter,  so  related  that  if  one  be  present  then  the  others 
are  present.  Also,  of  course,  the  description  of  one  set  of 
relationships  can  be  achieved,  though  very  clumsily  in 
terms  of  any  one  of  the  other  two  sets.  There  is  nothing 
conventional’  in  this,  except  the  obvious  fact  that  we  can 
direct  attention  to  any  selected  group  of  facts.  Of  course 
the  question  remains,  What  set  of  geometrical  relationships 
are  we  referring  to,  when  we  say  that  we  have  walked 
thirty  miles  and  are  tired?  Are  they  thirty  Euclidean  miles, 
or  thirty  Elliptic  miles,  or  thirty  Hyperbolic  miles?  Here 
t  e  standard  of  reference  can  be  the  same  in  both  cases, 
namely,  the  interval  between  two  assigned  marks  fixed 
securely  m  Washington,  D.  C. 

Again  there  is  yet  another  geometrical  ambiguity.  For 
keeping  to  the  same  type  of  geometry — Euclidean,  say, 

but  either  of  the  other  two  would  serve  equally  well _ 

keeping  to  Euclidean  geometry,  there  are  an  infinite 
number  of  different  alternative  ways  of  defining  distance 
so  as  to  produce  alternative  systems  of  Euclidean  geometry. 
Thus  granting  that  one  Euclidean  system  holds,  an  infinite 
number  of  other  Euclidean  systems  also  hold.  Thus  when 
a  friend  says  that  he  has  motored  a  hundred  miles  to  see 
us,  we  should  enquire  what  particular  geometrical  system 
of  metrics  he  has  adopted.  And  he  had  not  settled  the 
question  by  merely  answering  Euclidean.  Also  the  dif¬ 
ferences  are  not  necessarily  slight.  A  thousand  miles  be¬ 
tween  particular  towns  on  one  system  may  be  two  miles 
on  another  system.  It  follows  that  every  legislature  should 
anxiously  settle  the  metric  system  that  it  means  to  adopt. 
This  question  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  difference  be¬ 
tween  miles  and  kilometers,  or  with  mere  imperfections  of 
measurement.  That  is  a  much  slighter  point. 

It  is  fairly  obvious  that,  apart  from  minor  inaccuracies 
of  perception,  we  all  do  in  fact  adopt  the  same  system.  It 
is  a  fact  of  nature  that  a  distance  of  thirty  miles  is  a  long 
walk  for  any  one.  There  is  no  convention  about  that. 
Thus  the  appeal  to  geometry  can  be  dismissed  when  we  are 
discussing  the  question  of  the  conventionality  of  the  Laws 
of  Nature, 


142  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

Section  IX.  But  the  analogy  of  Geometry  suggests  an 
important  reflection.  It  is  well-known  that  Geometry  can 
be  developed  without  any  reference  to  measurement, — 
and  thus  without  any  reference  to  distance,  and  without 
any  reference  to  numerical  coordinates  for  the  indication 
of  points.  Geometry,  developed  in  this  fashion  has  been 
termed  ‘Non-metrical  Projective  Geometry.’  Elsewhere5 
I  have  termed  it,  ‘the  science  of  cross-classification.’ 
Aristotle’s  science  of  classification  into  genera,  and  species, 
and  subspecies,  is  the  science  of  mutually  exclusive  classi¬ 
fication.  It  develops  Plato’s  suggestion  of  a  science  of 
‘Division.’  . 

Projective  Geometry  is  only  one  example  of  a  science  of 
cross-classification.  Other  such  sciences  have  not  been 
developed,  partly  because  no  obvious  applications  have 
obtruded  themselves,  and  partly  because  the  abstract  in¬ 
terest  of  such  sciences  has  not  engaged  the  interest  of  any 
large  group  of  mathematicians.  For  example,  in  Principia 
Mathematical  Section  93,  ‘On  the  Inductive  Analysis  of 
the  Field  of  a  Relation,’  is  a  suggestion  for  another  science 
of  that  type.  Indeed  the  whole  of  Vol.  I  is  devoted  to  the 
initiation  of  non-numerical  quasi-geometrical  sciences,  to¬ 
gether  with  a  technique  for  their  elaboration.  The  sub¬ 
sequent  parts  of  the  book  specialize  on  those  more  special 
mathematical  sciences  which  involve  number  and  quantity. 

This  reference  to  Principia  Mathematica  has  been  made 
to  remind  ourselves  that  numerical  relations  derived  from 
measurements  constitute  the  subject-matter  of  a  very 
special  development  of  mathematics.  This  development 
has  as  yet  constituted  the  only  really  important  part  of 
mathematics,  except  for  the  impressive  disclosure  of  the 
extent  to  which  ordinary  Geometry  is  independent  of 
measurement  and  number. 

It  follows  that  there  are  an  indefinite  number  of  purely 
abstract  sciences,  with  their  laws,  their  regularities,  and 
their  complexities  of  theorems — all  as  yet  undeveloped. 
We  can  hardly  avoid  the  conclusion  that  Nature  in  her 
procedures  illustrates  many  such  sciences.  We  are  blind 
to  such  illustration  because  we  are  ignorant  of  the  type  of 
regularities  to  look  for.  In  such  cases,  we  may  dimly  sense 

5  The  Axioms  of  Projective  Geometry ,  Cambridge  Tracts  in  Mathematics, 
No.  4,  Cambridge  University  Press,  1906.  The  reference  is  to  Chapter  I, 
Section  3. 

6  Cambridge  University  Press,  1910. 


Science  and  Philosophy  143 

a  sort  of  familiarity  attached  to  novel  circumstances, 
without  any  notion  how  to  proceed  in  the  analysis  of  the 
vague  feeling. 

There  is  thus  a  certain  amount  of  convention  as  to  the 
emergence  into  human  consciousness  of  sorts  of  Laws 
of  Natures.  The  order  of  emergence  depends  upon  the 
abstract  sciences  which  civilized  mankind  have  in  fact 
chosen  to  develop. 

But  such  ‘convention’  should  not  be  twisted  to  mean 
that  any  facts  of  nature  can  be  interpreted  as  illustrating 
any  laws  that  we  like  to  assign. 

Section  X.  This  discussion  of  the  possible  variety  of 
types  of  Laws  of  Nature  draws  attention  to  a  three-fold 
distinction  which  it  is  important  to  keep  in  mind  during 
philosophic  discussion.  There  are:  (i)  our  direct  intuitions 
which  we  enjoy  prior  to  all  verbalization:  (ii)  our  literary 
modes  of  verbal  expression  of  such  intuitions,  together 
with  the  dialectic  deductions  from  such  verbal  formulas: 
(iii)  the  set  of  purely  deductive  sciences,  which  have  been 
developed  so  that  the  network  of  possible  relations  with 
which  they  deal  are  familiar  in  civilized  consciousness. 

The  sciences  under  the  heading  (iii)  direct  attention 
for  the  exploration  of  the  recesses  of  experience,  and  also 
assist  in  providing  the  verbal  formulae  belonging  to  the 
heading  (ii).  The  chief  danger  in  philosophy  is  that  the 
dialectic  deductions  from  inadequate  formulae  should  ex¬ 
clude  direct  intuitions  from  explicit  attentions.  In  fact  the 
abstract  sciences  tend  to  correct  the  evil  effects  of  the  in¬ 
adequacy  of  language,  and  the  consequent  dangers  of  a 
logic  which  presupposes  linguistic  adequacy. 


9.  Science  and  Philosophy 

Section  I.  In  one  sense,  Science  and  Philosophy  are 
merely  different  aspects  of  one  great  enterprise  of  the 
human  mind.  We  will  dwell  upon  their  cooperation  in 
the  task  of  raising  humanity  above  the  general  level  of 
animal  life.  At  this  low,  animal  level,  flashes  of  aesthetic 
insight,  of  technological  attainment,  of  sociological  or- 


144  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

ganization,  of  affectionate  feeling,  display  themselves. 
Nightingales,  beavers,  ants,  the  kindly  nurture  of  the 
young,  all  witness  to  the  existence  of  this  level  of  life  in 
the  animal  world.  Of  course  all  these  modes  of  function¬ 
ing  are  carried  to  an  immeasurably  higher  level  among 
mankind.  In  human  beings  these  various  modes  of  func¬ 
tioning  exhibit  more  variety  of  adaptation  to  special  cir¬ 
cumstances,  they  are  more  complex,  and  they  are  more 
interwoven  with  each  other.  But  without  question,  among 
animals  they  are  there,  plainly  demonstrated  to  our  ob¬ 
servation. 

Among  living  things  on  this  planet,  so  far  as  direct  evi¬ 
dence  reaches,  Science  and  Philosophy  belong  to  men 
alone.  They  are  both  concerned  with  the  understanding 
of  individual  facts  as  illustrations  of  general  principles. 
The  principles  are  understood  in  the  abstract,  and  the 
facts  are  understood  in  respect  to  their  embodiment  of 
the  principles. 

For  example,  animals  seem  quite  familiar  with  the  habit 
of  bodies  to  fall  down.  They  show  no  surprise  at  such  an 
occurrence,  and  they  often  knock  things  over.  But  quite 
early  in  the  history  of  modern  European  science  we  find 
Aristotle  formulating  the  law  that  there  is  a  tendency  for 
material  bodies  to  seek  the  centre  of  the  Earth.  This  law 
was  almost  certainly  not  a  discovery  of  Aristotle’s.  It  was 
a  reigning  commonplace  of  Greek  thought,  although  not 
accepted  unanimously.  But  it  is  plainly  set  forth  in  his  writ¬ 
ings,  and  it  is  beside  our  point  to  indulge  further  in  ar¬ 
chaeological  conjectures.  This  scientific  law  seems  rather 
antiquated  to  us,  and  in  fact  not  quite  true.  It  is  over 
special,  and  yet  requires  severe  limitation  before  the 
quantitative  measurements  bear  out  its  statements  with 
any  exactness.  We  shall  find  that  the  subsequent  history 
of  this  law  and  of  its  successive  modifications  throws 
great  light  upon  the  relative  functions  of  Science  and 
Philosophy. 

But  let  us  first  examine  Aristotle’s  Law,  which  is  one 
of  the  earlier  doctrines  of  that  Western$Science  whose 
history  stretches  from  Thales  of  Miletus,  alive  at  the  date 
600  b.c.,  to  the  present  day.  Roughly  speaking,  it  is  a 
history  of  about  twenty-five  hundred  years.  Of  course 
there  were  anticipations  in  Egypt,  Mesopotamia,  India, 
and  China.  But  modern  science,  urged  onward  by  the 


Science  and  Philosophy  145 

curiosity  of  the  human  spirit,  permeated  with  criticism, 
and  divorced  from  hereditary  superstitions,  had  its  birth 
with  the  Greeks;  and  among  the  Greeks  Thales  was  the 
earliest  exponent  known  to  us. 

In  this  general  characterization  science  and  philosophy 
are  not  discriminated.  But  the  word  ‘curiosity’  somewhat 
trivializes  that  inward  motive  which  has  driven  men.  In 
the  greater  sense,  in  which  it  is  here  used,  ‘curiosity’ 
means  the  craving  of  reason  that  the  facts  discriminated 
in  experience  be  understood.  It  means  the  refusal  to  be 
satisfied  with  the  bare  welter  of  fact,  or  even  with  the 
bare  habit  of  routine.  The  first  step  in  science  and  phi¬ 
losophy  has  been  made  when  it  is  grasped  that  every 
routine  exemplifies  a  principle  which  is  capable  of  state¬ 
ment  in  abstraction  from  its  particular  exemplifications. 
The  curiosity,  which  is  the  gadfly  driving  civilization  from 
its  ancient  safeties,  is  this  desire  to  state  the  principles  in 
their  abstraction.  In  this  curiosity  there  is  a  ruthless 
element  which  in  the  end  disturbs.  We  are  American,  or 
French,  or  English;  and  we  love  our  modes  of  life,  with 
their  beauties  and  tendernesses.  But  curiosity  drives  us  to 
an  attempt  to  define  civilization;  and  in  this  generaliza¬ 
tion  we  soon  find  that  we  have  lost  our  beloved  America, 
our  beloved  France,  and  our  beloved  England.  The  gen¬ 
erality  stands  with  a  cold  impartiality,  where  our  affections 
cling  to  one  or  other  of  the  particulars. 

An  examination  of  Aristotle’s  Law  of  Gravitation  ex¬ 
emplifies  this  abstractive  process  inherent  in  science.  The 
Law  involves  a  classification  of  the  things  around  us. 
There  are  the  heavy  bodies  with  the  property  of  tending 
downwards,  and  there  are  the  other  elements  such  as 
flames,  with  the  intrinsic  nature  that  they  tend  upwards 
though  they  are  component  things  on  the  Earth’s  surface. 
These  upward  moving  things  tend  to  their  proper  place 
which  is  the  heavens.  The  stars  and  planets  form  yet  a 
third  class  of  things  which  by  their  own  nature  are  in  the 
heavens,  things  which  are  ingenerable  and  incorruptible. 
In  this  classification  of  the  components  of  physical  nature 
yet  a  fourth  component  remains  over,  in  its  character 
unique  and  thus  the  only  member  of  its  class.  This  com¬ 
ponent  is  the  Earth,  the  centre  of  the  Universe,  by  ref¬ 
erence  to  which  all  these  other  types  of  being  are  de¬ 
fined. 


146  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

In  this  classification  of  the  various  components  of 
physical  nature  Aristotle  has  given  to  Science  and  Philos¬ 
ophy  its  first  sweeping  analysis  of  the  facts  of  physical 
nature.  You  will  notice  that  the  classification  proceeds 
entirely  by  reference  to  function,  quite  in  the  modem 
spirit.  In  the  place  of  an  uninterpreted  swamp,  pestilen¬ 
tial  with  mystery  and  magic,  he  sets  before  our  under¬ 
standing  a  majestic,  coordinated  scheme,  lucid  to  the  un¬ 
derstanding  and  based  upon  the  obvious,  persistent  facts 
of  our  experience.  In  the  generality  of  its  scope,  it  is 
equally  philosophic  and  scientific,  and  later  on  it  pro¬ 
vided  the  physical  background  for  the  Christian  scheme 
of  salvation.  Its  overthrow,  eighteen  hundred  years  later, 
was  resisted  equally  by  Luther  and  the  Church  of  Rome. 
As  an  example  of  a  majestic  inductive  generalization,  ap¬ 
pealing  to  the  obvious  facts,  and  neglecting  the  welter  of 
minor  differences,  Aristotle’s  general  conception  of  the 
physical  universe  remains  unsurpassed.  For  every  feature 
in  it,  there  is  an  appeal  to  observation;  and  for  every  ob¬ 
servation  to  which  appeal  is  made,  there  is  the  possibility 
of  its  indefinite  repetition.  With  Aristotle  and  Epicurus, 
the  science  of  modern  civilization  reached  adolescence. 

Section  II.  There  is  a  clear-act  obviousness  about  Aris¬ 
totle’s  doctrines  which  is  entirely  lacking  to  Plato’s  cosmol¬ 
ogy.  Of  course  neither  Plato,  nor  Aristotle,  originated  his 
own  particular  line  of  thought.  There  was  a  history  be¬ 
hind  them  of  three  or  four  generations  of  thinkers,  back 
to  the  dim  figures  of  Thales  and  Pythagoras,  and  even  be¬ 
yond  them.  Also  Aristotle  worked  for  twenty  years  in 
the  Academy  of  Plato,  and  derived  ideas  from  that  active, 
speculative  group  of  thinkers,  to  whom  the  modern  world 
owes  its  speculation,  its  criticism,  its  deductive  and  in¬ 
ductive  sciences,  and  the  civilization  of  its  religious  con¬ 
cepts.  They  were  the  narrow  channel  through  which  passed 
thie  confused  traditions  of  Egypt,  Mesopotamia,  Syria,  and 
of  the  sea-borne  Greek  civilization.  From  this  Academy 
and  its  Aristotelian  off-shcot,  there  emerged  the  various 
lines  of  thought  which  the  subsequent  schools  of  Alex¬ 
andria  turned  into  the  first  phase  of  modem  science,  natural 
and  humane.  Undoubtedly  the  world  then  lost  pictur¬ 
esqueness.  For  prophets  were  superseded  by  professors. 
In  other  words,  as  the  movement  has  penetrated  into 
habits  of  thought,  intuitive  conviction  has  wilted  in  the 


Science  and  Philosophy  147 

face  of  criticism.  But  amid  all  the  limitations  of  humanity, 
wandering  dazed  in  the  abundant  universe,  knowledge  has 
re-conditioned  human  life,  and  has  made  possible  that 
virtue  which  requires  such  measure  of  intellectual  analysis. 

Between  them,  Plato  and  Aristotle  succeed  in  illustrat¬ 
ing  the  chief  connections  between  science  and  philosophy. 
The  emphasis  of  science  is  upon  observation  of  particular 
occurrences,  and  upon  inductive  generalization,  issuing  in 
wide  classifications  of  things  according  to  their  modes  of 
functioning,  in  other  words  according  to  the  laws  of  nature 
which  they  illustrate.  The  emphasis  of  philosophy, is  upon 
generalizations  which  almost  fail  to  classify  by  reason  of 
their  universal  application.  For  example,  all  things  are  in¬ 
volved  in  the  creative  advance  of  the  Universe,  that  is,  in 
the  general  temporality  which  affects  all  things,  even  if  at 
all  times  they  remain  self-identical.  Thus  the  consideration 
of  time  does  not  lead  to  classification  in  the  same  direct 
way  in  which  the  consideration  of  weight  led  Aristotle 
to  his  four-fold  classification. 

Now  Plato  had  already  emphasized  the  importance  of 
fhis  Aristotelian  notion  of  classification,  that  is  to  say,  of 
‘division’  as  he  called  it.  Perhaps  indeed  he  invented  the 
method.  It  would  have  been  quite  in  accordance  with  his 
clear-cut  intellectual  subtlety  to  have  done  so.  We  find  in 
his  dialogues  the  first  explicit  formulations  of  the  science 
of  Logic.  But  his  applications  of  the  method  are  feeble 
in  the  extreme,  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  advancement 
of  natural  science.  Whereas  Aristotle  in  his  life’s  work 
seized  upon  the  general  notion  of  classification,  he  gave  a 
masterly  analysis  of  the  complexities  inherent  in  the 
mutual  relation  of  classes.  He  also  applied  his  theoretical 
doctrine  to  the  immense  material  to  be  collected  by  direct 
observation  in  the  fields  of  zoology,  physics,  sociology. 
Indeed  we  must  trace  to  him  nearly  all  our  special  sci¬ 
ences,  both  the  natural  sciences,  and  those  concerning 
the  activities  of  the  spirit  of  mankind.  He  is  the  origin  of 
the  striving  towards  an  accurate  analysis  of  each  given 
situation  which  in  the  end  has  created  modern  European 
Science.  We  can  see  in  the  labours  of  his  life,  the  first 
clear  example  of  a  philosophic  intuition  passing  into  a 
scientific  method. 

Section  III.  This  transition  from  philosophic  intuitions 
to  scientific  methods  is  in  fact  the  whole  topic  of  this 


148  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

chapter.  A  philosophic  system,  viewed  as  an  attempt  to 
coordinate  all  such  intuitions,  is  rarely  of  any  direct  im¬ 
portance  for  particular  sciences.  Each  such  science  in 
tracing  its  ideas  backward  to  their  basic  notions  stops  at 
a  half-way  house.  It  finds  a  resting  place  amid  notions 
which  for  its  immediate  purposes  and  for  its  immediate 
methods  it  need  not  analyse  any  further.  These  basic 
notions  are  a  specialization  from  the  philosophic  intuitions 
which  form  the  background  of  the  civilized  thought  of 
the  epoch  in  question.  They  are  intuitions  which,  apart 
from  their  use  in  science,  ordinary  language  rarely  ex¬ 
presses  in  any  defined  accuracy,  but  habitually  presup¬ 
poses  in  its  current  words  and  expressions.  For  example, 
the  words  ‘tables,’  ‘chairs,’  ‘rocks,’  presuppose  the  >  cjtv 
tific  notion  of  material  bodies,  which  has  governed  ry' aral 
science  from  the  seventeenth  century  to  the  er.^  of  the 
nineteenth. 

But,  even  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  special  sciences,- 
philosophic  systems  with  their  ambitious  aims  at  full  com¬ 
prehensiveness  are  not  useless.  They  are  the  way  in  which 
the  human  spirit  cultivates  its  deeper  intuitions.  Such  sys¬ 
tems  give  life  and  motion  to  detached  thoughts.  Apart 
from  these  efforts  at  coordination,  detached  thoughts 
would  flash  out  in  idle  moments,  illuminate  a  passing 
phase  of  reflection,  and  would  then  perish  and  be  forgot¬ 
ten.  The  scope  of  an  intuition  can  only  be  defined  by  its 
coordination  with  other  notions  of  equal  generality.  Even 
the  discordance  of  competing  philosophic  systems  is  a 
factor  essential  for  progress.  The  history  of  European 
thought,  even  to  the  present  day,  has  been  tainted  by  a 
fatal  misunderstanding.  It  may  be  termed  The  Dogmatic 
Fallacy.  The  error  consists  in  the  persuasion  that  we  are 
capable  of  producing  notions  which  are  adequately  defined 
in  respect  to  the  complexity  of  relationship  required  for 
their  illustration  in  the  real  world.  Canst  thou  by  search¬ 
ing  describe  the  Universe?  Except  perhaps  for  the  simpler 
notions  of  arithmetic,  even  our  more  familiar  ideas,  seem¬ 
ingly  obvious,  are  infected  with  this  incurable  vagueness. 
Our  right  understanding  of  the  methods  of  intellectual 
progress  depends  on  keeping  in  mind  this  characteristic  of 
our  thoughts.  The  notions  employed  in  every  systematic 
topic  require  enlightenment  from  the  perspective  of  every 
standpoint.  They  must  be  criticized  from  the  standpoint 


Science  and  Philosophy  149 

of  their  own  internal  consistency  within  that  topic,  and 
from  the  standpoint  of  other  topics  of  analogous  general¬ 
ity,.  and  from  the  standpoint  of  so-called  philosophic 
topics  with  a  wider  range.  During  the  mediaeval  epoch  in 
Europe,  the  theologians  were  the  chief  sinners  in  respect 
to  dogmatic  finality.  During  the  last  three  centuries,  their 
bad  preeminence  in  this  habit  passed  to  the  men  of  sci¬ 
ence.  Our  task  is  to  understand  how  in  fact  the  human 
mind  can  successfully  set  to  work  for  the  gradual  definition 
of  its  habitual  ideas.  It  is  a  step  by  step  process,  achiev¬ 
ing  no  triumphs  of  finality.  We  cannot  produce  that  final 
adjustment  of  well-defined  generalities  which  constitute  a 
complete  metaphysics.  But  we  can  produce  a  variety  of 
partial  systems  of  limited  generality.  The  concordance  of 
ideas  within  any  one  such  system  shows  the  scope  and  vi¬ 
rility,  of  the  basic  notions  of  that  scheme  of  thought.  Also 
the  discordance  of  system  with  system,  and  success  of  each 
system  as  a  partial  mode  of  illumination,  warns  us  of  the 
limitations  within  which  our  intuitions  are  hedged.  These 
undiscovered  limitations  are  the  topics  for  philosophic 
research. 

This  doctrine  of  the  limitations  to  which  our  best  ideas 
are  subject  is  illustrated  by  that  very  notion  of  material 
bodies  which  has  just  been  mentioned.  That  notion  is  so 
obvious  that  it  has  haunted  language  so  far  as  we  can 
trace  history  backwards.  Finally  in  the  seventeenth  cen¬ 
tury  it  .was  given  a  new  precision  for  the  purposes  of  physi¬ 
cal  science.  Also  physical  science,  thus  re-conditioned, 
proved  an  overwhelming  success  for  three  centuries.  It  has 
transformed  thought,  and  has  transformed  the  physical  ac¬ 
tivities  of  mankind.  It  seemed  that  at  last  mankind  had 
achieved  the  fundamental  notion  for  all  practical  purposes, 
and  that  beyond  it  in  the  way  of  generality  there  lay  mere 
aimless  speculation.  But  in  the  twentieth  century  this  great 
notion,  as  shaped  for  us  by  Galileo  and  Newton,  has 
completely,  collapsed  so  far  as  concerns  its  use  as  a  funda¬ 
mental  notion  for  physical  science.  In  the  modem  science, 
it  is  a  limited  notion  confined  to  special  purposes. 

This  collapse  of  nineteenth-century  dogmatism  is  a  warn¬ 
ing  that  the  special  sciences  require  that  the  imaginations 
of  men  be  stored  with  imaginative  possibilities  as  yet  un¬ 
utilized  in  the  service  of  scientific  explanation.  The  near¬ 
est  analogy  is  to  be  seen  in  the  history  of  some  species  of 


150  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

animal,  or  plant,  or  microbe,  which  lurks  for  ages  as  an 
obscure  by-product  of  nature  in  some  lonely  jungle,  or 
morass,  or  island.  Then  by  some  trick  of  circumstance  it 
escapes  into  the  outer  world  and  transforms  a  civilization, 
or  destroys  an  empire  or  the  forests  of  a  continent.  Such 
is  the  potential  power  of  the  ideas  which  live  in  the  vari¬ 
ous  systems  of  philosophy. 

Of  course  in  this  action,  and  reaction,  between  science 
and  philosophy  either  helps  the  other.  It  is  the  task  of  phi¬ 
losophy  to  work  at  the  concordance  of  ideas  conceived  as 
illustrated  in  the  concrete  facts  of  the  real  world.  It  seeks 
those  generalities  which  characterize  the  complete,  reality 
of  fact,  and  apart  from  which  any  fact  must  sink  into  an 
abstraction.  But  science  makes  the  abstraction,  and  is  con¬ 
tent  to  understand  the  complete  fact  in  respect  to  only  some 
of  its  essential  aspects.  Science  and  Philosophy  mutually 
criticize  each  other,  and  provide  imaginative  material  for 
each  other.  A  philosophic  system  should  present  an  elu¬ 
cidation  of  concrete  fact  from  which  the  sciences  abstract. 
Also  the  sciences  should  find  their  principles  in  the  con¬ 
crete  facts  which  a  philosophic  system  presents.  The  his¬ 
tory  of  thought  is  the  story  of  the  measure  of  failure  and 
success  in  this  joint  enterprise. 

Section  IV.  Plato’s  contribution  to  the  basic  notions 
connecting  Science  and  Philosophy,  as  finally  settled  in  the 
later  portion  of  his  life,  has  virtues  entirely  different  from 
that  of  Aristotle,  although  of  equal  use  for  the  progress  of 
thought.  It  is  to  be  found  by  reading  together  the  Thecete - 
tus,  the  Sophist ,  the  Timceus,  and  the  fifth  and  tenth  books 
of  the  Laws;  and  then  by  recurrence  to  his  earlier  work, 
the  Symposium.  He  is  never  entirely  self-consistent,  and 
rarely  explicit  and  devoid  of  ambiguity.  He  feels  the  diffi¬ 
culties,  and  expresses  his  perplexities.  No  one  could  be 
perplexed  over  Aristotle’s  classifications;  whereas  Plato 
moves  about  amid  a  fragmentary  system  like  a  man  dazed 
by  his  own  penetration. 

A  few  main  doctrines  stand  out  and  they  are  of  price¬ 
less  importance  for  science,  in  the  largest  sense  of  that 
term.  As  to  their  coordination  into  a  system,  he  is  undog- 
matic  and  can  only  tell  ‘the  most  likely  tale.’  Indeed,  in 
his  seventh  Epistle1  he  denounces  the  notion  that  a  final 
system  can  be  verbally  expressed.  His  later  thought  circles 

l  Cf.  341,  C. 


Science  and  Philosophy  151 

round  the  interweaving  of  seven  main  notions  namely.  The 
Ideas,  The  Physical  Elements,  The  Psyche,  The  Eros,  The 
Harmony,  The  Mathematical  Relations,  The  Receptacle. 
These  notions  are  as  important  for  us  now,  as  they  were 
then  at  the  dawn  of  the  modem  world,  when  civilizations 
of  the  old  type  were  dying.  From  their  point  of  view  the 
Athenians  were  right  to  condemn  Socrates.  After  the 
coalescence  of  Greek  and  Semitic  thought  the  old  order  of 
life  was  doomed.  Western  Civilization  acquired  a  new  in¬ 
tellectuality,  clarified,  humanized,  moralized. 

Considering  the  Ideas  by  themselves,  Plato  points  out 
that  any  selections  are  either  compatible  for  joint  exem¬ 
plification,  or  are  incompatible.  It  thus  follows,  as  he  notes, 
that  the  determinations  of  compatibilities  and  incompati¬ 
bilities  are  the  key  to  coherent  thought,  and  to  the  under¬ 
standing  of  the  world  in  its  function  as  the  theatre  for  the 
temporal  realization  of  ideas.  The  Aristotelian  Logic  is 
only  a  specialized  derivative  from  this  general  notion. 

Plato  then  passes  on  to  the  agency  whereby  ideas  obtain 
efficiency  in  the  creative  advance.  As  he  conceives  them 
in  abstraction,  he  finds  ideas  to  be  static,  frozen,  and  life¬ 
less.  Tiey  obtain  ‘life  and  motion’  by  their  entertainment 
in  a  living  intelligence.  Such  a  living  intelligence  with  its 
‘gaze  fixed  upon  ideas’  was  what  Plato  termed  a  Psyche, 
a  word  we  can  translate  as  ‘soul.’  We  must,  however, 
be  careful  to  divest  the  associations  of  the  English  word 
from  the  accretions  due  to  centuries  of  Christianity.  He 
conceives  of  a  basic  Psyche  whose  active  grasp  of  ideas 
conditions  impartially  the  whole  process  of  the  Universe. 
This  is  the  Supreme  Craftsman,  on  whom  depends  that 
degree  of  orderliness  which  the  world  exhibits.  There  is  a 
perfection  in  this  Psyche,  which  Plato  finds  out  of  his 
power  to  explain.  There  are  also  finite  souls  of  varying 
grades,  including  human  souls,  all  playing  their  part  in 
conditioning  nature  by  the  inherent  persuasiveness  of  ideas. 

But  the  notion  of  mere  knowledge,  that  is  to  say,  of 
mere  understanding,  is  quite  alien  to  Plato’s  thought.  The 
age  of  professors  had  not  yet  arrived.  In  his  view,  the 
entertainment  of  ideas  is  intrinsically  associated  with  an 
inward  ferment,  an  activity  of  subjective  feeling,  which  is 
at  once  immediate  enjoyment,  and  also  an  appetition 
which  melts  into  action.  This  is  Plato’s  Eros,  which  he 
sublimates  into  the  notion  of  the  soul  in  the  enjoyment  of 


152  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

its  creative  function,  arising  from  its  entertainment  of 
ideas.  The  word  Eros  means  ‘Love,’  and  in  The  Symposium 
Plato  gradually  elicits  his  final  conception  of  the  urge 
towards  ideal  perfection.  It  is  obvious  that  he  should  have 
written  a  companion  dialogue  which  might  have  been 
named  The  Furies,  dwelling  on  the  horrors  lurking  within 
imperfect  realization.  .  . 

Plato,  although  he  neglected  to  write  this  missing 
dialogue,  did  not  overlook  the  confusion  and  disorder  in 
Nature.  He  expressly  denies  omnipotence  to  his  Supreme 
Craftsman.  The  influence  of  the  entertainment  of  ideas  is 
always  persuasive,  and  can  only  produce  such  order  as  is 
possible.  However,  on  this  point  he  wavers,  and  sometimes 
writes  as  if  the  Craftsman  were  disposing  the  world  ac¬ 
cording  to  his  supreme  will.  . 

This  notion  of  an  excellence,  partly  attained  and  partly 
missed,  raises  another  problem  which  greatly  exercised 
Greek  thought  at  the  time  of  Plato.  The  problem  can  take 
many  special  forms.  In  what  does  beauty  consist,  for  ex¬ 
ample,  the  beauty  of  a  musical  melody,  the  beauty  of  a 
statue,  or  of  a  building  such  as  the  Parthenon?  Also,  there 
is  that  other  form  of  beauty,  which  is  rightness  of  conduct. 
Probably,  in  this  naive  shape,  the  question  has  no  answer; 
since  ‘The  Good’  is  an  ultimate  qualification  not  to  be 
analysed  in  terms  of  any  things  more  final  than  itself.  But 
an  analogous  question  can  be  asked,  to  which  Greek 
thought  was  unanimous  as  to  its  answer.  To  what  sort  of 
tilings  does  the  concept  apply,  and  in  particular  what  sort 
of  conditions  are  requisite  for  its  evocation?  The  Greek 
answer  to  this  latter  pair  of  questions  was  that  beauty  be¬ 
longed  to  composite  things,  and  that  the  composition  is 
beautiful  when  the  many  components  have  obtained  m 
some  sense  their  proper  proportions.  This  was  the  Greek 
doctrine  of  Harmony,  in  respect  to  which  neither  Plato 
nor  Aristotle  ever  wavers. 

In  respect  to  Harmony,  the  Greeks  made  a  discovery 
which  is  a  landmark  in  the  history  of  thought.  They  found 
out  that  exact  Mathematical  Relationships,  as  they  exist  in 
Geometry  and  in  the  numerical  proportions  of  measure¬ 
ments,  are  realized  in  various  outstanding  examples  of 
beautiful  composition.  For  instance  Archytas  discovered 
that,  other  circumstances  being  equal,  the  note  given  out 
by  a  stretched  string  depends  on  the  length  of  the  string. 


Science  and  Philosophy  153 

and  that  beautiful  compositions  of  notes  correspond  to 
certain  simple  laws  as  to  the  proportional  lengths  of  the 
strings.  Also  they  investigated  the  dependence  of  the  beauty 
of  architecture  upon  the  preservation  of  the  proper  pro¬ 
portions  in  the  various  dimensions.  This  was  an  immense 
discovery,  the  dependence  of  the  qualitative  elements  in 
the  world  upon  mathematical  relations.  The  facts  had 
gradually  accumulated  through  thousands  of  years.  The 
early  Babylonians  knew  that  the  qualitative  fact  of  the 
succession  of  seasons  depended  upon  the  lapse  of  definite 
numbers  of  days.  In  fact,  they  constructed  very  creditable 
calendars.  But  the  Greeks,  with  their  power  of  generaliza¬ 
tion,  grasped  the  full  law  of  the  interweaving  of  qualitative 
fact  with  geometrical  and  quantitative  composition.  They 
had  the  genius  to  be  astonished. 

Plato  drew  the  conclusion  that  the  key  to  the  understand¬ 
ing  of  the  natural  world,  and  in  particular  of  the  physical 
elements,  was  the  study  of  mathematics.  There  is  good 
reason  to  believe  that  the  greater  part  of  the  studies  of  his 
Academy  was  devoted  to  mathematics.  The  mathematicians 
of  the  succeeding  generation,  and  indeed  of  the  next  two 
hundred  years,  ending  with  the  astronomers  Ptolemy  and 
Hipparchus,  are  the  product  of  the  systematic  tradition 
shaped  by  the  example  and  the  doctrine  of  Plato.  Of  course 
the  Academy  inherited  the  Pythagorean  tradition  of 
Mathematics. 

Thus  with  Plato  and  Aristotle,  a  new  epoch  commences. 
Science  acquires  the  cleansing  of  logical  and  mathematical 
lucidity.  Aristotle  established  the  importance  of  scientific 
classification  into  species  and  genera;  Plato  divined  the 
future  scope  of  applied  mathematics.  Unfortunately,  later 
on,  the  explicit  development  of  Plato’s  doctrines  has  been 
exclusively  in  the  hands  of  religious  mystics,  of  literary 
scholars,  and  of  literary  artists.  Plato,  the  mathematician, 
for  long  intervals  disappeared  from  the  explicit  Platonic 
tradition. 

The  notions  of  Harmony  and  of  Mathematical  Relations 
are  only  special  exemplifications  of  a  yet  more  general 
philosophic  concept,  namely,  that  of  the  general  intercon¬ 
nectedness  of  things,  which  transforms  the  manifoldness 
of  the  many  into  the  unity  of  the  one.  We  speak  in  the 
singular  of  The  Universe,  of  Nature,  of  < Shots  which  can  be 
translated  as  Process.  There  is  the  one  all-embracing  fact 


154  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

which  is  the  advancing  history  of  the  one  Universe*  This 
community  of  the  world,  which  is  the  matrix  for  all  be¬ 
getting,  and  whose  essence  is  process  with  retention  of 
connectedness, — this  community  is  what  Plato  terms  The 
Receptacle  [Wo8oXt?].  In  our  effort  to  divine  his  meaning, 
we  must  remember  that  Plato  says  that  it  is  an  obscure  and 
difficult  concept,  and  that  in  its  own  essence  the  Receptacle 
is  devoid  of  all  forms.  It  is  thus  certainly  not  the  ordinary 
geometrical  space  with  its  mathematical  relations.  Plato 
calls  his  Receptacle,  The  foster-mother  of  all  becoming.’ 
He  evidently  conceived  it  as  a  necessary  notion  without 
which  our  analysis  of  Nature  is  defective.  It  is  dangerous  to 
neglect  Plato’s  intuitions.  He  carefully  varies  his  phrases 
in  referring  to  it,  and  implies  that  what  he  says  is  to  be 
taken  in  its  most  abstract  sense.  The  receptacle  imposes 
a  common  relationship  on  all  that  happens,  but  does  not 
impose  what  that  relationship  shall  be.  It  seems  to  be  a 
somewhat  more  subtle  notion  than  Aristotle  s  matter 
which,  of  course,  is  not  the  ‘matter’  of  Galileo  and  Newton. 
Plato’s  Receptacle  may  be  conceived  as  the  necessary 
community  within  which  the  course  of  history  is  set,  in 
abstraction  from  all  the  particular  historical  facts.  I  have 
directed  attention  to  Plato’s  doctrine  of  The  Receptacle 
because,  at  the  present  moment,  physical  science  is  nearer 
to  it  than  at  any  period  since  Plato’s  death.  The  space¬ 
time  of  modem  mathematical  physics,  conceived  in  ab¬ 
straction  from  the  particular  mathematical  formulae  which 
applies  to  the  happenings  in  it,  is  almost  exactly  Plato’s 
Receptacle.  It  is  to  be  noted  that  mathematical  physicists 
are  extremely  uncertain  as  to  what  these  formulae  are 
exactly,  nor  do  they  believe  that  any  such  formulae  can  be 
derived  from  the  mere  notion  of  space- time.  Thus,  as 
Plato  declares,  space-time  in  itself  is  bare  of  all  forms. 

Section  V.  In  the  preceding  sketch  only  one  incidental 
generalization,  selected  from  one  topic  comprised  in  the 
enormous  labours  of  Aristotle’s  life,  has  been  brought 
forward.  Aristotle  was  at  once  a  man  of  science,  a  phi¬ 
losopher,  a  literary  critic,  and  a  student  of  political  theory. 
This  particular  classification  of  the  things  constitutive  of 
the  visible  universe  has  been  dwelt  upon  because  it  is  an 
almost  perfect  example  of  a  scientific  induction  satisfying 
all  the  conditions  insisted  on  by  the  modem  philosophy  of 
science.  It  was  a  generalization  from  observed  fact,  and 


Science  and  Philosophy  155 

could  be  confirmed  by  repeated  observation.  In  its  day _ 

and  its  day  lasted  for  eighteen  hundred  years — it  was  ex¬ 
tremely  useful;  and  now  that  it  is  dead,  it  is  stone-dead, 
an  archaeological  curiosity.  This  is  the  fate  of  scientific 
generalizations,  so  long  as  they  are  considered  in  relation 
to  their  strict  scientific  purpose.  Towards  the  end  of  its 
long  life,  the  doctrine  lost  its  utility  and  turned  into  an 
obstructive  agency. 

.  The  Platonic  group  of  notions  which  have  been  con¬ 
sidered  have  none  of  the  merits  of  the  Aristotelian  set.  In 
fact,  they  are  philosophic,  and  in  the  narrow  sense  are  not 
scientific.  They  suggest  no  detailed  observation.  Indeed 
it  has  always  been  a  reproach  to  Plato  that  he  diverted 
interest  from  observation  of  the  particular  facts.  So  far 
as  concerns  political  theory,  and  in  particular  juris¬ 
prudence,  this  accusation  is  certainly  untrue,  and  arises 
from  the  habit  of  concentrating  interest  on  his  Dialogues 
m  proportion  to  their  literary  brilliance.  Nevertheless  the 
assertion  is  undoubtedly  true  in  respect  to  physical  science. 
But  Plato  had  another  message.  Where  Aristotle  said 
observe  and  ‘classify,’  the  moral  of  Plato’s  teaching  is  the 
importance  of  the  study  of  mathematics.  Of  course,  neither 
of  them  was  so  stupid  as  to  dissuade  from  observation  or, 
on  the  other  hand,  to  deny  the  utility  of  mathematics. 
Probably  Aristotle  thought  that  the  mathematical  knowl- 
edge  of  his  day  was  about  as  much  as  was  wanted  for  the 
purposes  of  physical  science.  Any  further  progress  could 
only  minister  to  an  unpractical  curiosity  about  subtle  ab¬ 
stractions. 

An  intense  belief  that  a  knowledge  of  mathematical 
relations  would  prove  the  key  to  unlock  the  mysteries  of 
the  relatedness  within  Nature  was  ever  at  the  back  of 
Plato  s  cosmological  speculations.  In  one  passage  he 
reprobates  the  swinish2  ignorance  of  those  who  have  failed 
to  study  the  doctrine  of  proportions  incapable  of  expres¬ 
sion  as  numerical  ratios.  He  evidently  feels  that  the  chance 
of  some  subtle  elucidation  of  the  nature  of  Harmony  is 
being  crassly  lost.  His  own  speculations  as  to  the  course  of 
nature  are  all  founded  upon  the  conjectural  application  of 
some  mathematical  construction.  So  far  as  I  can  remember, 

2  VT]VO<s  cf.  Laws,  Bk.  VII,  819  D. 


156  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

in  every  case  he  made  a  sensible  shot  which,  in  fact,  went 

wide  of  the  mark.  . 

Although  the  Timceus  was  widely  influential,  yet  tor 
about  eighteen  hundred  years  after  their  epoch,  it  seemed 
that  Aristotle  was  right  and  Plato  wrong.  Some  mathe¬ 
matical  formulas  were  interwoven  with  scientific  ideas,  but 
no  more  than  would  have  been  perfectly  familiar  to 
Aristotle  apart  from  what  were  in  his  day  the  latest  re¬ 
finements.  The  cosmological  scheme  of  the  active  scientists 
was  in  fact  that  of  Aristotle.  But  Plato’s  divination  ex¬ 
emplifies  another  important  function  for  philosophy.  It 
evokes  interest  in  topics  as  yet  remote  from  our  erode 
understanding  of  the  interplay  of  natural  forces.  The 
science  of  the  future  depends  for  its  ready  progress  upon 
the  antecedent  elucidation  of  hypothetical  complexities  ot 
connection,  as  yet  unobserved  in  nature.  Plato  s  mathe¬ 
matical  speculations  have  been  treated  as  sheer  mysticism 
by  scholars  who  follow  the  literary  traditions  ot  the 
Italian  Renaissance.  In  troth,  they  are  the  products  of 
genius  brooding  on  the  future  of  intellect  exploring  a  world 

of  mystery.  ,  „  , 

Greeks,  Egyptians,  Arabs,  Jews,  and  Mesopotamians 
advanced  the  science  of  mathematics  beyond  the  wildest 
dreams  of  Plato.  Unfortunately  this  side  of  Plato’s  interest 
was  notably  absent  among  the  Christian  populations.  I 
believe  it  to  be  true  that  no  Christian  made  any  original 
contribution  to  mathematical  science  before  the  revival 
of  science  at  the  time  of  the  Renaissance.  Pope  Silvester 
II — Gerbert,  who  reigned  in  the  year  1000  a.d. — studied 
mathematics.  But  he  added  nothing.  Roger  Bacon  pro¬ 
claimed  the  importance  of  mathematics  and  named  con¬ 
temporary  mathematicians.  In  the  thirteenth  and  fourteenth 
centuries  the  University  of  Oxford  cherished  mathematics. 
But  none  of  these  mediaeval  Europeans  advanced  the 
subject.  An  exception  must  be  made  in  favour  of  Leonardo 
of  Pisa  who  flourished  at  the  beginning  of  the  thirteenth 
century.  He  was  the  first  Christian  to  make  an  advance  in 
the  science  which  in  its  early  history  illustrates  the  cultural 
union  of  the  Hellenistic  Greeks  with  the  Near  East.  But, 
subject  to  this  qualification,  sixteenth-century  mathematics 
was  entirely  based  upon  non-Christian  sources.  Among 
the  Christians  mathematics  and  magic  were  confused.  The 
Pope  himself  hardly  escaped.  We  can  hardly  hope  for  a 


Science  and  Philosophy  157 

better  illustration  of  the  curious  limitations  of  epochs  and 
schools  of  civilization.  It  is  especially  interesting  in  view  of 
the  dominant  influence  of  Plato  upon  Christian  thought. 

But  the  Platonic  doctrine  of  the  interweaving  of  Har¬ 
mony  with  mathematical  relations  has  been  triumphantly 
vindicated.  The  Aristotelian  classifications  based  upon 
qualitative  predicates  have  a  very  restricted  application 
apart  from  the  introduction  of  mathematical  formulae.  In¬ 
deed,  Aristotelian  Logic,  by  its  neglect  of  mathematical 
notions,  has  done  almost  as  much  harm  as  good  for  the 
advancement  of  science.  We  can  never  get  away  from  the 
questions: — How  much, — In  what  proportions, — and  In 
what  pattern  of  arrangement  with  other  things.  The  exact 
laws  of  chemical  proportions  make  all  the  difference;  CO 
will  kill  you,  when  COa  will  only  give  you  a  headache. 
Also  C02  is  a  necessary  element  for  the  dilution  of  oxygen 
in  the  atmosphere;  but  too  much  or  too  little  is  equally 
harmful.  Arsenic  deals  out  either  health  or  death,  accord¬ 
ing  to  its  proportions  amid  a  pattern  of  circumstances. 
Also  when  the  health-giving  proportion  of  C02  to  free 
oxygen  has  been  obtained,  a  rearrangement  of  these  pro¬ 
portional  quantities  of  carbon  and  oxygen  into  carbon 
monoxide  and  free  oxygen  will  provide  a  poisonous 
mixture.  In  Political  Economy,  the  Law  of  Diminishing 
Returns  points  to  the  conditions  for  the  maximum 
efficiency  of  a  dose  of  capital.  In  fact,  there  is  hardly  a 
question  to  be  asked  which  should  not  be  fenced  round 
with  qualifications  as  to  how  much,  and  as  to  what  pattern 
of  circumstances.  Aristotelian  Logic,  apart  from  the 
guardianship  of  mathematics,  is  the  fertile  matrix  of  fal¬ 
lacies.  It  deals  with  propositional  forms  only  adapted  for 
the  expression  of  high  abstractions,  the  sort  of  abstractions 
usual  in  current  conversation  where  the  presupposed  back¬ 
ground  is  ignored. 

But  it  is  evident  that  even  the  appeal  to  mathematics  is 
too  narrow,  at  least  if  mathematics  is  taken  to  mean  those 
branches  hitherto  developed.  The  general  science  of  mathe¬ 
matics  is  concerned  with  the  investigation  of  patterns  of 
connectedness,  in  abstraction  from  the  particular  relata 
and  the  particular  modes  of  connection.  It  is  only  in  some 
special  branches  of  mathematics  that  notions  of  quantity 
and  number  are  dominant  themes.  The  real  point  is  that 
the  essential  connectedness  of  things  can  never  be  safely 


158  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

omitted.  This  is  the  doctrine  of  the  thoroughgoing  relativity 
which  infects  the  universe  and  which  makes  the  totality  of 
things  as  it  were  a  Receptacle  uniting  all  that  happens. 

The  Greek  doctrine  of  Composition  and  Harmony  has 
been  vindicated  by  the  progress  of  thought.  Yet  the  vivid 
fancy  of  the  Greeks  was  also  apt  to  invest  each  factor  in 
the  Universe  with  an  independent  individuality,  for  ex¬ 
ample,  the  self-sufficient  realm  of  ideas  which  dominated 
Plato’s  earlier  thought,  and  which  intermittently  intrudes 
into  his  later  dialogues.  But  we  must  not  blame  the  Greeks 
for  this  excess  of  individualization.  All  language  witnesses 
to  the  same  error.  We  habitually  speak  of  stones,  and 
planets,  and  animals,  as  though  each  individual  thing  could 
exist,  even  for  a  passing  moment,  in  separation  from  an 
environment  which  is  in  truth  a  necessary  factor  in  its  own 
nature.  Such  an  abstraction  is  a  necessity  of  thought,  and 
the  requisite  background  of  systematic  environment  can 
be  presupposed.  That  is  true.  But  it  also  follows  that,  in 
the  absence  of  some  understanding  of  the  final  nature  of 
things,  and  thus  of  the  sorts  of  backgrounds  presupposed  in 
such  abstract  statements,  all  science  suffers  from  the  vice 
that  it  may  be  combining  various  propositions  which  tacitly 
presuppose  inconsistent  backgrounds.  No  science  can  be 
more  secure  than  the  unconscious  metaphysics  which 
tacitly  it  presupposes.  The  individual  thing  is  necessarily 
a  modification  of  its  environment,  and  cannot  be  under¬ 
stood  in  disjunction.  All  reasoning,  apart  from  some  meta¬ 
physical  reference,  is  vicious. 

Section  VI.  Thus  the  Certainties  of  Science  are  a  delu¬ 
sion.  They  are  hedged  around  with  unexplored  limitations. 
Our  handling  of  scientific  doctrines  is  controlled  by  the 
diffused  metaphysical  concepts  of  our  epoch.  Even  so,  we 
are  continually  led  into  errors  of  expectation.  Also,  when¬ 
ever  some  new  mode  of  observational  experience  is  ob¬ 
tained  the  old  doctrines  crumble  into  a  fog  of  inaccuracies. 

Our  coordinated  knowledge,  which  in  the  general  sense 
of  the  term  is  Science,  is  formed  by  the  meeting  of  two 
orders  of  experience.  One  order  is  constituted  by  the  direct, 
immediate  discriminations  of  particular  observations.  The 
other  order  is  constituted  by  our  general  way  of  conceiv¬ 
ing  the  Universe.  They  will  be  called,  the  Observational 
Order,  and  the  Conceptual  Order.  The  first  point  to  re¬ 
member  is  that  the  observational  order  is  invariably  inter- 


Science  and  Philosophy  159 

preted  in  terms  of  the  concepts  supplied  by  the  conceptual 
order.  The  question  as  to  the  priority  of  one  or  the  other 
is,  for  the  purpose  of  this  discussion,  academic.  We  inherit 
an  observational  order,  namely  types  of  things  which  we 
do  in  fact  discriminate;  and  we  inherit  a  conceptual  order, 
namely  a  rough  system  of  ideas  in  terms  of  which  we  do  in 
fact  interpret.  We  can  point  to  no  epoch  in  human  history, 
or  even  in  animal  history,  at  which  this  interplay  began. 
Also  it  is  true  that  novel  observations  modify  the  concep¬ 
tual  order.  But  equally,  novel  concepts  suggest  novel  possi¬ 
bilities  of  observational  discrimination. 

The  history  of  thought  cannot  be  understood  unless  we 
take  account  of  a  grave  weakness  in  the  observational  or¬ 
der.  Observational  discrimination  is  not  dictated  by  the 
impartial  facts.  It  selects  and  discards,  and  what  it  retains 
is  rearranged  in  a  subjective  order  of  prominence.  This 
order  of  prominence  in  observation  is  in  fact  a  distortion 
of  the  facts.  Thus  we  have  to  rescue  the  facts  as  they  are 
from  the  facts  as  they  appear.  We  have  to  rescue  the  facts 
in  the  discard,  and  we  have  to  discard  the  subjective  order 
of  prominence  which  is  itself  a  fact  of  observation.  For 
example,  consider  the  observed  facts  in  early  stages  of 
civilization.  The  observed  fact  was  a  flat  Earth  with  the 
arched  dome  of  the  Sky.  Even  to  the  contemporaries  of 
Pope  Silvester  the  antipodes  were  inconceivable,  and  his 
reputed  belief  in  them  did  no  credit  to  the  old  wizard  of  a 
Pope. 

Again  we  view  the  sky  at  noon  on  a  fine  day.  It  is  blue, 
flooded  by  the  light  of  the  Sun.  The  direct  fact  of  observa¬ 
tion  is  the  sun  as  the  sole  origin  of  light,  and  the  bare 
heavens.  Conceive  the  myth  of  Adam  and  Eve  in  the 
Garden  on  the  first  day  of  human  life.  They  watch  the  sun¬ 
set,  the  stars  appear: — 

‘And,  Lo!  creation  widened  to  man’s  view.’ 

The  excess  of  light  discloses  and  also  conceals  them. 
It  distorts  the  facts  for  human  observation.  It  is  one  task  of 
speculation  to  urge  observation  beyond  the  boundaries  of 
its  delusive  completeness,  and  to  urge  the  doctrines  of  sci¬ 
ence  beyond  their  delusive  air  of  finality. 

We  can  now  briefly  characterize  the  history  of  the  trans¬ 
formation  of  mediaeval  cosmology  into  our  modern  stand¬ 
point.  The  effective  agency  in  this  transformation  has  a 
history  of  about  eighteen  hundred  years  entirely  divorced 


160  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

from  physical  observation.  It  is  a  history  of  abstract 
thought,  namely,  of  the  development  of  mathematics .  The 
interest,  which  was  the  motive  in  its  development,  was  the 
interest  in  the  coordination  of  theoretical  notions  and  in 
the  theoretical  constructions  arising  from  the  domination 
of  such  notions.  Yet,  if  many  modem  philosophers  and 
men  of  science  could  have  had  their  way,  they  would  have 
been  dissuading  Greeks,  Jews,  and  Mohammedans  from 
such  useless  studies,  from  such  pure  abstractions  for  which 
no  foresight  could  divine  the  ghost  of  an  application.  Luck¬ 
ily  they  could  not  get  at  their  ancestors. 

Section  VII.  The  services  to  mankind  rendered  by  the 
Newtonian  System  of  Nature  are  incalculable.  It  combines 
ideas  derived  from  Plato,  Aristotle,  and  Epicurus,  into  a 
consistent  scheme  of  thought  which  elucidates  an  incredible 
number  of  observed  facts.  Thereby  it  has  enabled  men  to 
obtain  a  new  command  over  Nature.  Where  we  formerly 
obeyed,  we  now  direct.  But  at  last  the  Newton  cosmology 
has  broken  down. 

The  story  of  the  breakdown  extends  over  more  than  a 
century.  For  by  far  the  greater  part  of  that  period  men  of 
science  were  quite  unaware  that  the  ideas  which  they  were 
introducing,  slowly,  one  after  the  other,  were  finally  to 
accumulate  into  a  body  of  thought  inconsistent  with  the 
Newtonian  ideas  dominating  their  thoughts  and  shaping 
their  modes  of  expression.  The  story  commences  with  the 
wave-theory  of  light  and  ends  with  the  wave-theory  of  mat¬ 
ter.  It  finally  leaves  us  with  the  philosophic  question,  What 
are  the  concrete  facts  which  exhibit  this  mathematical 
attribute  of  wave-vibration? 

The  story  in  detail  is  the  history  of  modem  physics, 
which  lies  beyond  the  scope  of  this  discussion.  We  merely 
require  to  understand  the  contrast  between  the  most  gen¬ 
eral  notions  respectively  underlying  Newtonian  physics  and 
modem  physics.  Newtonian  physics  is  based  upon  the  in¬ 
dependent  individuality  of  each  bit  of  matter.  Each  stone 
is  conceived  as  fully  describable  apart  from  any  reference 
to  any  other  portion  of  matter.  It  might  be  alone  in  the 
Universe,  the  sole  occupant  of  uniform  space.  But  it  would 
still  be  that  stone  which  it  is.  Also  the  stone  could  be 
adequately  described  without  any  reference  to  past  or  fu¬ 
ture.  It  is  to  be  conceived  fully  and  adequately  as  wholly 
constituted  within  the  present  moment. 


Science  and  Philosophy  161 

This  is  the  full  Newtonian  concept,  which  bit  by  bit  was 
given  away,  or  dissolved,  by  the  advance  of  modem  physics, 
it  is  the  thorough-going  doctrine  of  ‘simple  location’  and 
of  external  relations.’  There  was  some  divergence  of 
opinion  as  to  the  external  relations.  Newton  himself  was 
inclined  to  construe  them  in  terms  of  shock  and  of  stress  be¬ 
tween  contiguous  bodies.  But  his  immediate  followers,  such 
as  Roger  Cotes,  added  the  notion  of  force  at  a  distance. 
But  either  alternative  was  wholly  and  completely  a  fact  in 
the  present,  namely,  the  fact  of  that  external  relation  be¬ 
tween  two  bits  of  matter  either  contiguous  or  distant.  The 
opposed  doctrine  of  internal  relations  has  been  distorted 
by  reason  of  its  description  in  terms  of  language  adapted 
to  the  presupposition  of  external  relations  of  the  New¬ 
tonian  type.  Even  its  adherents,  such  as  F.  H.  Bradley  for 
instance,  fall  into  this  pitfall.  It  must  be  remembered  that 
just  as  the  relations  modify  the  natures  of  the  relata,  so  the 
relata  modify  the  nature  of  the  relation.  The  relationship  is 
not  a  universal.  It  is  a  concrete  fact  with  the  same  con¬ 
creteness  as  the  relata.  The  notion  of  the  immanence  of 
the  cause  in  the  effect  illustrates  this  truth.  We  have  to  dis¬ 
cover  a  doctrine  of  nature  which  expresses  the  concrete 
relatedness  of  physical  functionings  and  mental  function¬ 
ings,  of  the  past  with  the  present,  and  also  expresses  the 
concrete  composition  of  physical  realities  which  are  in¬ 
dividually  diverse. 

Modem  physics  has  abandoned  the  doctrine  of  Simple 
Location.  The  physical  things  which  we  term  stars,  planets, 
lumps  of  matter,  molecules,  electrons,  protons,  quanta  of 
energy,  are  each  to  be  conceived  as  modifications  of  con¬ 
ditions  within  space-time,  extending  throughout  its  whole 
range.  There  is  a  focal  region,  which  in  common  speech  is 
where  the  thing  is.  But  its  influence  streams  away  from  it 
with  finite  velocity  throughout  the  utmost  recesses  of  space 
and  time.  Of  course,  it  is  natural,  and  for  certain  purposes 
entirely  proper,  to  speak  of  the  focal  region,  thus  modified, 
as  the  thing  itself  situated  there.  But  difficulties  arise  if  we 
press  this  way  of  thought  too  far.  For  physics,  the  thing 
itself  is  what  it  does,  and  what  it  does  is  this  divergent 
stream  of  influence.  Again  the  focal  region  cannot  be  sepa¬ 
rated  from  the  external  stream.  It  obstinately  refuses  to  be 
conceived  as  an  instantaneous  fact.  It  is  a  state  of  agitation, 
only  differing  from  the  so-called  external  stream  by  its’. 


162  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

superior  dominance  within  the  focal  region.  Also  we  are 
puzzled  how  to  express  exactly  the  existence  of  these  physi¬ 
cal  things  at  any  definite  moment  of  time.  For  at  every  in¬ 
stantaneous  point-event,  within  or  without  the  focal  region, 
the  modification  to  be  ascribed  to  this  thing  is  antecedent 
to,  or  successive  to,  the  corresponding  modification  intro¬ 
duced  by  that  thing  at  another  point-event.  Thus  if  we  en¬ 
deavor  to  conceive  a  complete  instance  of  the  existence  of 
the  physical  thing  in  question,  we  cannot  confine  ourselves 
to  one  part  of  space  or  to  one  moment  of  time.  The  physi¬ 
cal  thing  is  a  certain  coordination  of  spaces  and  times  and 
of  conditions  in  those  spaces  at  those  times,  this  coordina¬ 
tion  illustrating  one  exemplification  of  a  certain  general 
rule,  expressible  in  terms  of  mathematical  relations.  Here 
we  have  returned  to  a  fundamental  Platonic  doctrine. 

Again,  with  the  denial  of  simple  location  we  must  admit 
that  within  any  region  of  space-time  the  innumerable  mul¬ 
titude  of  these  physical  things  are  in  a  sense  superposed. 
Thus  the  physical  fact  at  each  region  of  space-time  is  a 
composition  of  what  the  physical  entities  throughout  the 
Universe  mean  for  that  region.  But  a  complete  existence 
is  not  a  composition  of  mathematical  formulae,  mere  formu¬ 
lae.  It  is  a  concrete  composition  of  things  illustrating 
formulae.  There  is  an  interweaving  of  qualitative  and 
quantitative  elements.  For  example,  when  a  living  body 
assimilates  food,  the  fact  cannot  be  merely  that  one  mathe¬ 
matical  formula  assimilates  another  mathematical  formula. 
The  fact  cannot  be  merely  that  the  equality  of  two  and 
three  with  five  assimilates  the  fact  of  the  equality  of  thrice 
three  with  nine,  nor  can  the  number  eleven  assimilate  the 
number  sixteen.  Any  of  these  mathematical  notions  may  be 
illustrated,  but  the  fact  is  more  than  the  formulae  illus¬ 
trated. 

Section  VIII.  The  final  problem  is  to  conceive  a  com¬ 
plete  [TravrcA ijs]  fact.3  We  can  only  form  such  a  conception 
in  terms  of  fundamental  notions  concerning  the  nature  of 
reality.  We  are  thrown  back  upon  philosophy.  Centuries 
ago  Plato  divined  the  seven  main  factors  interwoven  in 
fact; — The  Ideas,  The  Physical  Elements,  The  Psyche, 
The  Eros,  The  Harmony,  The  Mathematical  Relations, 

8  Cf.  Sophist,  248  E.  t<3  sraVTeXwi  Here  orrt.  TravreAw?  Is  often 
wrongly  translated  by  ‘absolute.’  For  Plato’s  reference  to  ‘absolute’  and 
‘relative’  cf.  Sophist,  255  C. 


The  New  Reformation  163 

The  Receptacle.  All  philosophical  systems  are  endeavours 
to  express  the  interweaving  of  these  components.  Of  course 
it  is  most  unscholarly  to  identify  our  modem  notions  with 
these  archaic  thoughts  of  Plato.  For  us  everything  has  a 
subtle  difference.  But  for  all  these  differences,  human 
thought  is  now  endeavouring  to  express  analogous  ele¬ 
ments  in  the  composition  of  nature.  It  only  dimly  discerns, 
it  misdescribes,  and  it  wrongly  associates.  But  always  there 
remain  the  same  beacons  that  lure.  Systems,  scientific  and 
philosophic,  come  and  go.  Each  method  of  limited  under¬ 
standing  is  at  length  exhausted.  In  its  prime  each  system 
is  a  triumphant  success:  in  its  decay  it  is  an  obstructive 
nuisance.  The  transitions  to  new  fruitfulness  of  understand¬ 
ing  are  achieved  by  recurrence  to  the  utmost  depths  of  in- 
tmtion  for  the  refreshment  of  imagination.  In  the  end— 
though  there  is  no  end — what  is  being  achieved,  is  width 
or  view,  issuing  in  greater  opportunities.  But  opportunity 
leads  upwards  or  downwards.  In  unthinking  Nature  ‘natural 
selection  is  a  synonym  for  ‘waste.’  Philosophy  should  now 
perform  its  final  service.  It  should  seek  the  insight,  dim 
though  it  be,  to  escape  the  wide  wreckage  of  a  race  of 
beings  sensitive  to  values  beyond  those  of  mere  animal 
enjoyment. 


10.  The  New  Reformation 

Section  I.  The  theme  of  this  chapter  can  be  introduced 
by  directing  attention  to  a  contrast.  Protestant  Christianity, 
so  far  as  concerns  the  institutional  and  dogmatic  forms  in 
which  it  flourished  for  three  hundred  years  as  derived  from 
Luther,  Calvin,  and  the  Anglican  Settlement,  is  showing 
all  the  signs  of  a  steady  decay.  Its  dogmas  no  longer 
dominate:  its  divisions  no  longer  interest:  its  institutions 
no  longer  direct  the  patterns  of  life.  That  is  one  side  of  the 
contrast. 

The  other  side  is  that  the  religious  spirit  as  an  effective 
element  in  the  affairs  of  men  has  just  [April,  1931] 
obtained  one  of  its  most  signal  triumphs.  In  India  the 
forces  of  violence  and  strife,  between  rulers  and  people, 


164  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

between  races,  between  religions,  between  social  grades,— 
forces  threatening  to  overwhelm  with  violence  hundreds 
of  millions  of  mankind— these  forces  have  for  the  moment 
been  halted  by  two  men  acting  with  the  moral  authority 
of  religious  conviction,  the  Mahatma  Gandhi  and  the 
Viceroy  of  India  [Lord  Irwin]. 

They  may  fail.  More  than  two  thousand  years  ago,  the 
wisest  of  men  proclaimed  that  the  divine  persuasion  is  the 
foundation  of  the  order  of  the  world,  but  that  it  could  only 
produce  such  a  measure  of  harmony  as  amid  brute  forces 
it  was  possible  to  accomplish.  This,  I  suggest,  is  a  plam 
anticipation  by  Plato  of  a  doctrine  of  Grace,  seven 
hundred  years  before  the  age  of  Pelagius  and  Augustine. 

But  the  dramatic  halt  effected  by  Gandhi  and  the 
Viceroy,  requiring  as  it  does  an  effective  response  from 
uncounted  millions  in  India,  in  England,  in  Europe,  and 
America,  witnesses  that  the  religious  motive,  I  mean  the 
response  to  the  divine  persuasion,  still  holds  its  old  power, 
even  more  than  its  old  power,  over  the  minds  and  the  con¬ 
sciences  of  men.  In  this  response  the  protestant  populations 
of  the  British  Empire,  and  importantly,  though  more  re¬ 
motely,  that  of  the  United  States,  have  sustained  their 
part.  We  stand  at  a  moment  when  the  course  of  history 
depends  upon  the  calm  reasonableness  arising  from  a 
rengious  public  opinion.  An  initial  triumph  has  already 

been  gained.  . 

There  is  the  contrast,  decay  and  survival.  We  have  to 
estimate  what  has  decayed,  and  what  has  survived.  My 
thesis  is  that  a  new  Reformation  is  in  full  progress.  It  is  a 
re-formation;  but  whether  its  issue  be  fortunate  or  unfor¬ 
tunate  depends  largely  on  the  actions  of  comparatively 
few  men,  and  notably  upon  the  leaders  of  the  protestant 
clergy. 

I  do  not  hold  it  to  be  possible,  or  even  desirable,  that 
identity  of  detailed  belief  can  be  attained.  But  it  is  possible 
that  amid  diversities  of  belief,  arising  from  differences  of 
stress  exhibited  in  metaphysical  insight  and  from  differences 
of  sympathetic  intuition  respecting  historical  events, — that 
it  is  possible,  amid  these  differences,  to  reach  a  general 
agreement  as  to  those  elements,  in  intimate  human  ex¬ 
perience  and  in  general  history,  which  we  select  to 
exemplify  that  ultimate  theme  of  the  divine  immanence, 
as  a  completion  required  by  our  cosmological  outlook.  In 


The  New  Reformation  165 

other  words,  we  may  agree  as  to  the  qualitative  aspects  of 
religious  facts,  and  as  to  their  general  way  of  coordination 
in  metaphysical  theory,  while  disagreeing  in  various  ex¬ 
planatory  formulations. 

The  problem,  however,  is  not  nearly  so  simple  as  this 
exordium  suggests.  We  are  dealing  with  a  topic,  complex 
and  many-sided.  It  comprises  the  deliverances  of  the  under¬ 
standing  as  it  harmonizes  our  deepest  intuitions.  It  com¬ 
prises  emotional  responses  to  formulations  of  thought 
and  to  modes  of  behaviour.  It  comprises  the  direction  of 
purposes  and  the  modifications  of  behaviour.  It  cuts  into 
every  aspect  of  human  existence.  So  far  as  concerns 
religious  problems,  simple  solutions  are  bogus  solutions. 
It  is  written,  that  he  who  runs,  may  read.  But  it  is  not 
said,  that  he  provides  the  writing. 

For  religion  is  concerned  with  our  reactions  of  purpose 
and  emotion  due  to  our  personal  measure  of  intuition  into 
the  ultimate  mystery  of  the  universe.  We  must  not  postulate 
simplicity.  The  witness  of  history  and  of  common  sense 
tells  us  that  systematic  formulations  are  potent  engines 
of  emphasis,  of  purification,  and  of  stability.  Christianity 
would  long  ago  have  sunk  into  a  noxious  superstition, 
apart  from  the  Levantine  and  European  intellectual  move¬ 
ment,  sustained  from  the  very  beginning  until  now.  This 
movement  is  the  effort  of  Reason  to  provide  an  accurate 
system  of  theology.  Indeed,  in  outlying  districts  where  this 
effort  at  rationalization  died  away,  the  religion  has  in  fact 
sunk  into  the  decrepitude  of  failure. 

Section  II.  Thus  the  attack  of  the  liberal  clergy  and 
laymen,  during  the  eighteenth  and  nineteenth  centuries, 
upon  systematic  theology  was  entirely  misconceived.  They 
were  throwing  away  the  chief  safeguard  against  the  wild 
emotions  of  superstition.  A  civilized  religion  should  aim  at 
the  training  of  such  emotions  as  naturally  arise  from  a 
civilized  rational  criticism  of  the  metaphysical  intuitions 
powerfully  influential  in  great  epochs  of  human  history. 
The  appeal  to  history  is  the  appeal  to  summits  of  attain¬ 
ment  beyond  any  immediate  clarity  in  our  own  individual 
existence.  It  is  an  appeal  to  authority.  The  appeal  to  reason 
is  the  appeal  to  the  ultimate  judge,  universal  and  yet  in¬ 
dividual  to  each,  to  which  all  authority  must  bow.  History 
has  authority  so  far,  and  exactly  so  far,  as  it  admits  of 
some  measure  of  rational  interpretation. 


166  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

Thus  an  attack  upon  systematic  thought  is  treason  to 
civilization.  Yet  the  great  minds  who  laid  the  foundations 
of  our  modem  mentality — John  Locke,  for  example — had 
reason  for  their  dissatisfaction  with  the  traditional  dogmatic 
theology,  though  they  partially  misconceived  the  grounds 
upon  which  they  should  base  their  attitude.  Their  true 
enemy  was  the  doctrine  of  dogmatic  finality,  a  doctrine 
which  flourished  and  is  flourishing  with  equal  vigor 
throughout  Theology,  Science,  and  Metaphysics.  The 
methodology  of  rational  thought  from  the  Greeks  to  our 
own  times  has  been  vitiated  by  this  fundamental  miscon¬ 
ception.  These  errors  are  not  confined  to  religious  thought. 
They  have  infected  all  departments.  Their  total  effect  has 
been  to  introduce  in  each  age  a  dogmatic  sense  of  finality. 
The  emphasis  of  certainty  has  been  wrongly  placed,  and 
with  equal  error  dogmatic  rejection. 

From  the  very  beginning  of  critical  thought,  we  find 
the  distinction  between  topics  susceptible  of  certain 
knowledge,  and  topics  about  which  only  uncertain  opinions 
are  available.  The  dawn  of  this  distinction,  explicitly  enter¬ 
tained,  is  the  dawn  of  modem  mentality.  It  introduces 
criticism.  Such  a  notion  hardly  enters  into  any  book  of  the 
Bible,  either  in  the  mind  of  Jehovah,  or  of  any  of  his 
worshippers.  The  first  effect  of  this  new  distinction  was 
very  unfortunate.  For  it  was  much  too  simple-minded, 
and  the  area  of  certainty  was  misconceived.  For  example, 
we  find  Plato  in  his  old  age  advocating  religious  persecu¬ 
tion,  and  justifying  himself  by  the  importance  of  the  topic 
and  the  certainty  of  his  own  demonstrations.1 

I  suggest  that  the  development  of  systematic  theology 
should  be  accompanied  by  a  critical  understanding  of  the 
relation  of  linguistic  expression  to  our  deepest  and  most 
persistent  intuitions.  Language  was  developed  in  response 
to  the  excitements  of  practical  actions.  It  is  concerned  with 
the  prominent  facts.  Such  facts  are  those  seized  upon  by 
consciousness  for  detailed  examination,  with  the  view  of 
emotional  response  leading  to  immediate  purposeful  action. 
These  prominent  facts  are  the  variable  facts, — the  appear¬ 
ance  of  a  tiger,  of  a  clap  of  thunder,  or  of  a  spasm  of  pain. 
They  are  the  facts  entering  into  experience  by  the  medium 
of  our  sense-organs.  Hence  the  sensationalist  doctrine 


l  Cf.  Plato’s  Laws,  Book  X. 


The  New  Reformation  167 

concerning  the  data  which  are  the  origin  of  experience. 

But  the  prominent  facts  are  the  superficial  facts.  They 
vary  because  they  are  superficial;  and  they  enter  into  con¬ 
scious  discrimination  because  they  vary.  There  are  other 
elements  in  our  experience,  on  the  fringe  of  consciousness, 
and  yet  massively  qualifying  our  experience.  In  regard  to 
these  other  facts,  it  is  our  consciousness  that  flickers,  and 
not  the  facts  themselves.  They  are  always  securely  there, 
barely  discriminated,  and  yet  inescapable.  For  example, 
consider  our  derivation  from  our  immediate  past  of  a 
quarter  of  a  second  ago.  We  are  continuous  with  it,  we 
are  the  same  as  it,  prolonging  its  affective  tone,  enjoying 
its  data.  And  yet  we  are  modifying  it,  deflecting  it,  chang¬ 
ing  its  purposes,  altering  its  tone,  re-conditioning  its  data 
with  new  elements. 

We  reduce  this  past  to  a  perspective,  and  yet  retain  it  as 
the  basis  of  our  present  moment  of  realization.  We  are 
different  from  it,  and  yet  we  retain  our  individual  identity 
with  it.  This  is  the  mystery  of  personal  identity,  the  mystery 
of  the  immanence  of  the  past  in  the  present,  the  mystery 
of  transience.  All  our  science,  all  our  explanations  require 
concepts  originating  in  this  experience  of  derivation.  In 
respect  to  such  intuitions,  language  is  peculiarly  inadequate. 
Our  powers  of  analysis,  and  of  expression,  flicker  with  our 
consciousness.  It  is  not  true  that  there  is  a  definite  area 
of  human  consciousness,  within  which  there  is  clear  dis¬ 
crimination  and  beyond  which  mere  darkness.  Nor  is  it 
true  that  elements  of  experience  are  important  in  propor¬ 
tion  to  their  clarity  in  consciousness. 

The  appeal  to  history  gains  its  importance  by  reason  of 
this  complex  character  of  human  experience.  Metaphysics 
and  theology  alike  require  it.  The  requisite  evidence  can¬ 
not  be  gained  by  mere  acts  of  direct  introspection  con¬ 
ducted  at  one  epoch  by  a  few  clear-sighted  individuals.  If 
a  flood  of  oblivion  should  overwhelm  human  memory,  we 
could  in  this  way  of  introspection  recover  the  multiplica- 
tion  table.  But  not  much  else.  In  each  age  of  the  world,  the 
actions  of  men  and  their  interpretations  of  feelings, 
motives,  and  purposes,  throw  light  upon  the  recesses  of 
their  experience.  In  this  elucidation  of  what  it  means  to 
live,  to  act,  and  feel,  age  differs  from  age.  In  the  dis¬ 
crimination  of  this  historical  evidence,  there  is  required  a 


168  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

criticism  founded  upon  taste,  and  a  criticism  founded 
upon  logical  analysis  and  inductive  probability. 

The  two  grounds  of  criticism,  aesthetic  and  logical,  are 
welded  together  in  the  final  judgment  of  reason  as  to  the 
comparison  of  historical  periods,  one  with  the  other.  Each 
age  deposits  its  message  as  to  the  secret  character  of  the 
nature  of  things.  Civilizations  can  only  be  understood  by 
those  who  are  civilized.  And  they  have  this  property,  that 
the  appropriation  of  them  in  the  understanding  unveils 
truths  concerning  our  own  natures.  It  has  been  said  that 
the  great  dramatic  tragedies  in  their  representations  before 
audiences  act  as  a  purification  of  the  passions.  In  the  same 
way,  the  great  periods  of  history  act  as  an  enlightenment. 
They  reveal  ourselves  to  ourselves. 

Section  III.  Christianity  bases  itself  upon  an  intensive 
study  of  the  significance  of  certain  historical  occasions  scat¬ 
tered  irregularly  within  a  period  of  about  twelve  hundred 
years,  from  the  earlier  Hebrew  prophets  and  historians  to 
the  stabilization  of  Western  theology  by  Augustine.  The 
story  wanders  around  the  shores  of  the  Eastern  Mediter¬ 
ranean,  from  the  Palestine  of  the  prophets  to  the  Athens 
of  Plato:  it  culminates  in  Galilee  and  Jerusalem:  the  main 
interest  then  fluctuates  uncertainly  backwards  and  for¬ 
wards  between  Antioch,  Ephesus,  Egypt,  Rome,  Con¬ 
stantinople  and  Africa.  When  Augustine  died  at  Hippo  in 
the  year  430,  the  religion  of  the  European  races  was  in  its 
main  outlines  settled.  All  its  capacities  for  variant  forms 
were  already  inherent  in  it.  The  Papal  Church,  the  Eastern 
Church,  Wycliffe  and  Huss,  Luther  and  Calvin,  Archbishop 
Cranmer,  Jonathan  Edwards  and  John  Wesley,  Erasmus, 
Ignatius  Loyola,  the  Socinians,  George  Fox,  and  the  Vati¬ 
can  Council  could  with  equal  right  appeal  to  history. 
The  conclusion  to  be  drawn  from  the  appeal  entirely 
depends  upon  the  value-judgments  guiding  your  selection, 
and  upon  the  metaphysical  presuppositions  dictating  your 
notions  of  a  coherent  theology.  The  appeal  is  to  the  actions, 
thoughts,  emotions,  and  institutions,  which  great  persons 
and  great  occasions  had  made  effective  on  the  shores  of  the 
Mediterranean  within  that  earlier  period  of  time. 

In  this  appeal  to  history  we  must  remember  the  gaps  in 
time  between  the  extant  written  Gospels  and  the  events 
which  they  relate:  the  discordances  in  accounts,  the  transla¬ 
tions  of  tradition  from  language  to  language,  the  suspicious 


The  New  Reformation  169 

passages:  also  the  seeming  indifference  to  direct  historical 
evidence,  notably  in  the  case  of  St.  Paul,  who  retired  to 
Arabia  when  we  should  have  expected  him  to  have  recourse 
to  the  disciples  who  had  seen  his  Lord.  I  mention  these 
latter  points,  upon  which  whole  libraries  have  been  written, 
merely  to  draw  the  unquestioned  conclusion  that  any 
modem  re-formation  of  the  religion  must  first  concentrate 
upon  the  moral  and  metaphysical  intuitions  scattered 
throughout  the  whole  epoch.  This  conclusion  is  a  common¬ 
place  of  modern  thought. 

I  suggest,  with  the  diffidence  due  to  my  entire  lack  of 
expertness  in  the  literature  of  this  immense  stretch  of 
history,  that  even  now  there  is  room  for  a  new  appeal  to 
the  lesson  to  be  derived  from  it.  In  this  chapter  I  shall 
deal  wholly  in  general  principles.  My  personal  conclusions 
as  to  the  details  of  reconstruction  have  none  of  the  im¬ 
portance  to  be  ascribed  to  scholarship.  Also  to  speak  with 
complete  candour,  I  cannot  place  any  of  the  events  within 
that  period  as  out  of  scale  in  type  of  happenings  with 
analogous  occurrences  elsewhere.  I  do  hold,  however, 
that  the  culminating  points  of  the  period  embody  the 
greatest  advances  in  the  expression  of  moral  and  intellectual 
intuitions  which  mark  the  growth  of  recent  civilization. 

The  period  as  a  whole  begins  in  barbarism  and  ends  in 
failure.  The  failure  consisted  in  the  fact  that  barbaric  ele¬ 
ments  and  the  defects  in  intellectual  comprehension  had 
not  been  discarded,  but  remained  as  essential  elements  in 
the  various  formulations  of  Christian  theology,  orthodox 
and  heretical  alike.  Also  the  later  Protestant  Reformation 
was,  in  this  respect,  an  even  more  complete  failure,  in  no 
way  improving  Catholic  theology.  The  Quakers  perhaps 
form  a  minor  exception  to  this  statement.  But  George  Fox 
lived  a  hundred  years  after  the  age  of  Luther.  The  issue 
of  these  failures  is  the  tragic  history  of  Christianity. 

Section  IV.  I  suggest  that  in  the  whole  period  there 
are  three  culminating  phases  which,  in  theological  language, 
constitute  its  threefold  revelation.  The  first  and  the  last 
phases  were  primarily  intellectual  with  a  sufficient  back¬ 
ground  of  moral  insight.  The  middle  phase,  which  forms 
the  driving  power  of  the  religion,  is  primarily  an  exhibition 
in  life  of  moral  intuition,  with  a  sufficiency  of  intellectual 
insight  to  give  an  articulate  expression  of  singular  beauty. 
The  three  phases  are  bound  together  as  intellectual  dis- 


170  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

covery, — then  exemplification, — finally  metaphysical  in¬ 
terpretation.  The  discovery  and  the  exemplification  are 
historically  independent. 

The  first  phase  is  constituted  by  Plato’s  publication  of 
his  final  conviction,  towards  the  end  of  his  life,2  that  the 
divine  element  in  the  world  is  to  be  conceived  as  a  per¬ 
suasive  agency  and  not  as  a  coercive  agency.  This  doctrine 
should  be  looked  upon  as  one  of  the  greatest  intellectual 
discoveries  in  the  history  of  religion.  It  is  plainly  enunciated 
by  Plato,  though  he  failed  to  coordinate  it  systematically 
with  the  rest  of  his  metaphysical  theory.  Indeed,  Plato 
always  failed  in  his  attempts  at  systematization,  and  always 
succeeded  in  displaying  depth  of  metaphysical  intuition — 
the  greatest  metaphysician,  the  poorest  systematic  thinker. 
The  alternative  doctrine,  prevalent  then  and  now,  sees 
either  in  the  many  gods  or  in  the  one  God,  the  final 
coercive  forces  wielding  the  thunder.  By  a  metaphysical 
sublimation  of  this  doctrine  of  God  as  the  supreme  agency 
of  compulsion,  he  is  transformed  into  the  one  supreme 
reality,  omnipotently  disposing  a  wholly  derivative  world. 
Plato  wavered  inconsistently  between  these  diverse  con¬ 
ceptions.  But  he  does  finally  enunciate  without  qualification 
the  doctrine  of  the  divine  persuasion,  by  reason  of  which 
ideals  are  effective  in  the  world  and  forms  of  order  evolve. 

The  second  phase  is  the  supreme  moment  in  religious 
history,  according  to  the  Christian  religion.  The  essence 
of  Christianity  is  the  appeal  to  the  life  of  Christ  as  a 
revelation  of  the  nature  of  God  and  of  his  agency  in  the 
world.  The  record  is  fragmentary,  inconsistent,  and  un¬ 
certain.  It  is  not  necessary  for  me  to  express  any  opinion 
as  to  the  proper  reconstruction  of  the  most  likely  tale  of 
historic  fact.  Such  a  procedure  would  be  useless,  without 
value,  and  entirely  out  of  place  in  this  book.  But  there  can 
be  no  doubt  as  to  what  elements  in  the  record  have  evoked 
a  response  from  all  that  is  best  in  human  nature.  The 
Mother,  the  Child,  and  the  bare  manger:  the  lowly  man, 
homeless  and  self-forgetful,  with  his  message  of  peace, 
love,  and  sympathy:  the  suffering,  the  agony,  the  tender 
words  as  life  ebbed,  the  final  despair:  and  the  whole  with 
the  authority  of  supreme  victory. 

I  need  not  elaborate.  Can  there  be  any  doubt  that  the 


2Cf.  The  Sophist  and  the  Timaeus, 


The  New  Reformation  171 

power  of  Christianity  lies  in  its  revelation  in  act,  of  that 
which  Plato  divined  in  theory? 

The  third  phase  is  again  intellectual.  It  is  the  first  period 
in  the  formation  of  Christian  theology  by  the  schools  of 
thought  mainly  associated  with  Alexandria  and  Antioch. 
The  originality  and  value  of  their  contribution  to  the 
thought  of  the  world  have  been  greatly  underestimated.  This 
is  partly  their  own  fault.  For  they  persisted  in  declaring 
that  they  were  only  stating  the  faith  once  delivered  to  the 
saints;  whereas  in  fact  they  were  groping  after  the  solu¬ 
tion  of  a  fundamental  metaphysical  problem,  although 
presented  to  them  in  a  highly  special  form. 

These  Christian  theologians  have  the  distinction  of  being 
the  only  thinkers  who  in  a  fundamental  metaphysical  doc¬ 
trine  have  improved  upon  Plato.  It  is  true  that  this  period 
of  Christian  theology  was  Platonic.  But  it  is  also  true  that 
Plato  is  the  originator  of  the  heresies  and  of  the  feeblest 
side  of  Christian  Theology.  When  Plato  is  faced  with  the 
problem  of  expressing  the  relationship  of  God  to  the 
World,  and  of  the  relation  to  the  World  of  those  Ideas 
which  it  is  in  God’s  nature  to  contemplate,  Plato’s  answer 
is  invariably  framed  in  terms  of  mere  dramatic  imitation. 
When  Plato  turns  to  the  World,  after  considering  God  as 
giving  life  and  mdtion  to  the  ideas  by  the  inclusion  of  them 
in  the  divine  nature,  he  can  find  only  second-rate  substitutes 
and  never  the  originals.  For  Plato  there  is  a  derivative 
second-rate  God  of  the  World,  who  is  a  mere  Icon,  that  is 
to  say  an  image.  Also  when  he  looks  for  the  ideas,  he  can 
only  find,  in  the  World,  imitations.  Thus  the  World,  for 
Plato,  includes  only  the  image  of  God,  and  imitations  of 
his  ideas,  and  never  God  and  his  ideas. 

Plato  has  definite  reasons  for  this  gap  between  the 
transient  world  and  the  eternal  nature  of  God.  He  is 
avoiding  difficulties,  although  he  only  achieves  the  feeblest 
of  solutions.  What  metaphysics  requires  is  a  solution  ex¬ 
hibiting  the  plurality  of  individuals  as  consistent  with  the 
unity  of  the  Universe,  and  a  solution  which  exhibits  the 
World  as  requiring  its  union  with  God,  and  God  as  re¬ 
quiring  his  union  with  the  World.  Sound  doctrine  also 
requires  an  understanding  how  the  Ideals  in  God’s  nature, 
by  reason  of  their  status  in  his  nature,  are  thereby  per¬ 
suasive  elements  in  the  creative  advance.  Plato  grounded 
these  derivations  from  God  upon  his  will;  whereas  meta- 


172  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

physics  requires  that  the  relationship  of  God  to  the  World 
should  lie  beyond  the  accidents  of  will,  and  that  they  be 
founded  upon  the  necessities  of  the  nature  of  God  and  the 
nature  of  the  World. 

These  problems  came  before  the  Christian  theologians 
in  highly  special  forms.  They  had  to  consider  the  nature  of 
God.  On  this  topic,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  Arian 
solution,  involving  a  derivative  Image,  is  orthodox  Plato¬ 
nism,  though  it  be  heterodox  Christianity.  The  accepted 
solution  of  a  multiplicity  in  the  nature  of  God,  each  com¬ 
ponent  being  unqualifiedly  Divine,  involves  a  doctrine  of 
mutual  immanence  in  the  divine  nature.  I  am  not  in  any 
way  venturing  upon  a  decision  upon  the  correctness  of  the 
original  assumption  of  this  multiplicity.  The  point  is  the 
recourse  to  a  doctrine  of  mutual  immanence. 

Again,  the  theologians  had  also  to  construct  a  doctrine 
of  the  person  of  Christ.  And  again  they  rejected  the  doc¬ 
trine  of  an  association  of  the  human  individual  with  a 
divine  individual,  involving  responsive  imitations  in  the 
human  person.  They  decided  for  the  direct  immanence  of 
God  in  the  one  person  of  Christ.  They  also  decided  for 
some  sort  of  direct  immanence  of  God  in  the  World 
generally.  This  was  their  doctrine  of  the  third  person  of 
the  Trinity.  I  am  not  making  any  judgment  about  the 
details  of  their  theology,  for  example,  about  the  Trinitarian 
doctrine.  My  point  is  that  in  the  place  of  Plato’s  solution  of 
secondary  images  and  imitations,  they  demanded  a  direct 
doctrine  of  immanence.  It  is  in  this  respect  that  they  made 
a  metaphysical  discovery.  They  pointed  out  the  way  in 
which  Platonic  metaphysics  should  develop,  if  it  was  to 
give  a  rational  account  of  the  role  of  the  persuasive  agency 
of  God. 

Unfortunately,  the  theologians  never  made  this  advance 
into  general  metaphysics.  The  reason  for  this  check  was 
another  unfortunate  presupposition.  The  nature  of  God 
was  exempted  from  all  the  metaphysical  categories  which 
applied  to  the  individual  things  in  this  temporal  world.  The 
concept  of  him  was  a  sublimation  from  its  barbaric  origin. 
He  stood  in  the  same  relation  to  the  whole  World  as  early 
Egyptian  or  Mesopotamian  kings  stood  to  their  subject 
populations.  Also  the  moral  characters  were  very  anal¬ 
ogous.  In  the  final  metaphysical  sublimation,  he  became 
the  one  absolute,  omnipotent,  omniscient  source  of  all 


The  New  Reformation  173 

being,  for  his  own  existence  requiring  no  relations  to  any¬ 
thing  beyond  himself.  He  was  internally  complete.  Such  a 
conception  fitted  on  very  well  to  the  Platonic  doctrine  of 
subordinate  derivations.  The  final  insistence,  after  much 
wavering,  on  the  immanence  of  God  was  therefore  all  the 
more  a  fine  effort  of  metaphysical  imagination  on  the  part 
of  the  theologians  of  the  early  Christian  ages.  But  their 
general  concept  of  the  Deity  stopped  all  further  generaliza¬ 
tion.  They  made  no  effort  to  conceive  the  World  in  terms 
of  the  metaphysical  categories  by  means  of  which  they 
interpreted  God,  and  they  made  no  effort  to  conceive  God 
in  terms  of  the  metaphysical  categories  which  they  applied 
to  the  World.  For  them,  God  was  eminently  real,  and  the 
World  was  derivatively  real.  God  was  necessary  to  the 
World,  but  the  World  was  not  necessary  to  God.  There  was 
a  gulf  between  them. 

The  worst  of  a  gulf  is,  that  it  is  very  difficult  to  know 
what  is  happening  on  the  further  side  of  it.  This  has  been 
the  fate  of  the  God  of  traditional  theology.  It  is  only  by 
drawing  the  long  bow  of  mysticism  that  evidences  for  his 
existence  can  be  collected  from  our  temporal  World.  Also 
the  worst  of  unqualified  omnipotence  is  that  it  is  accom¬ 
panied  by  responsibility  for  every  detail  of  every  happening. 
This  whole  topic  is  discussed  by  Hume  in  his  famous 
Dialogues. 

Section  V.  I  am  suggesting  that  Protestant  theology 
should  develop  as  its  foundation  an  interpretation  of  the 
Universe  which  grasps  its  unity  amid  its  many  diversities. 
The  interpretation  to  be  achieved  is  a  reconciliation  of 
seeming  incompatibilities.  But  these  incompatibilities  are 
not  hypothetical.  They  are  there  on  the  stage  of  history, 
undoubted  and  claiming  interpretation.  There  stand  in  the 
public  view  the  persuasiveness  of  the  eternal  ideals,  the 
same  today  as  when  realized  in  the  Founder  of  Christianity 
and  the  compulsoriness  of  physical  nature,  which  passes 
and  yet  remains,  and  the  compulsoriness  of  that  realized 
urge  toward  social  union,  such  as  the  Roman  Empire, 
which  was  then,  and  is  now  as  it  were  a  dream.  Nature 
changes  and  yet  remains.  The  ideals  declare  themselves  as 
timeless;  and  yet  they  pass  on,  as  it  were  the  flicker  of  a 
brightness. 

It  is  the  business  of  philosophical  theology  to  provide  a 
rational  understanding  of  the  rise  of  civilization,  and  of 


174  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

the  tendernesses  of  mere  life  itself,  in  a  world  which 
superficially  is  founded  upon  the  clashings  of  senseless 
compulsion.  I  am  not  disguising  my  belief  that  in  this  task, 
theology  has  largely  failed.  The  notion  of  the  absolute 
despot  has  stood  in  the  way.  The  doctrine  of  Grace  has 
been  degraded,  and  the  doctrines  of  the  Atonement  are 
mostly  crude.  The  defect  of  the  liberal  theology  of  the 
last  two  hundred  years  is  that  it  has  confined  itself  to  the 
suggestion  of  minor,  vapid  reasons  why  people  should 
continue  to  go  to  church  in  the  traditional  fashion. 

The  last  book  in  the  Bible  illustrates  the  barbaric  ele¬ 
ments  which  have  been  retained  to  the  undoing  of  Christian 
intuition.  In  itself  and  apart  from  its  bearing  upon  religious 
sentiment,  it  is  one  of  the  finest  examples  of  imaginative 
literature  as  it  stands  translated  in  King  James’s  Bible. 
Also,  as  an  historical  document,  whether  its  origin  be 
Christian  or  Jewish,  it  is  of  priceless  value  for  the  under¬ 
standing  of  strains  of  thought  prevalent  when  the  Christian 
religion  was  in  process  of  formation.  Finally,  the  book 
only  states,  more  pointedly  and  more  vividly,  ideas  spread 
throughout  the  Old  Testament  and  the  New  Testament, 
even  in  the  Gospels  themselves.  Yet  it  is  shocking  to  think 
that  this  book  has  been  retained  for  the  formation  of  re¬ 
ligious  sentiment,  while  the  speech  of  Pericles,  descriptive 
of  the  Athenian  ideal  of  civilization,  has  remained  neglected 
in  this  connection.  What  I  am  advocating  can  be  sym¬ 
bolized  by  this  shift  in  the  final  book  of  the  authoritative 
collection  of  religious  literature,  namely,  the  replacement 
of  the  book  of  the  Revelation  of  St.  John  the  Divine  by 
the  imaginative  account  given  by  Thucydides  of  the  Speech 
of  Pericles  to  the  Athenians.  Neither  of  them  is  history: 
St.  John  never  received  just  that  revelation,  nor  did  Pericles 
ever  make  just  that  speech. 

Section  VI.  There  remains  for  discussion  one  final 
question.  I  wish  to  emphasize  the  importance  that,  amid 
many  divergencies  of  interpretation,  the  leaders  of  religious 
thought  should  today  concentrate  upon  the  Christian 
tradition  and  more  particularly  upon  its  historical  origins. 
In  the  case  of  the  more  conservative  schools  of  thought 
such  advice  is,  of  course,  unnecessary,  and  indeed  im¬ 
pertinent.  But  it  is  a  question  for  discussion  why  the  more 
radical  schools  should  not  cut  entirely  free  from  any  appeal 
to  the  past,  and  concentrate  entirely  upon  the  contemporary 


The  New  Reformation  175 

world  and  contemporary  examples.  The  summary  answer 
is  that  in  so  far  as  such  an  appeal  to  tradition  can  be  made 
with  complete  honesty,  without  any  shadow  of  evasion, 
there  is  an  enormous  gain  in  popular  effectiveness. 

Civilization  is  constituted  out  of  four  elements,  (1)  Pat¬ 
terns  of  Behaviour,  (2)  Patterns  of  Emotion,  (3)  Patterns 
of  Belief,  and  (4)  Technologies.  We  can  at  once  dismiss 
Technologies  as  beyond  our  topic,  though  all  four  con¬ 
stitutive  elements  interact  upon  each  other.  Also  patterns 
of  behaviour  are  in  the  long  run  sustained  or  modified  by 
patterns  of  emotion  and  patterns  of  belief.  It  is  the  primary 
business  of  religion  to  concentrate  upon  emotion  and  belief. 

Now,  so  far  as  concerns  beliefs  of  a  general  character, 
it  is  much  easier  for  them  to  destroy  emotion  than  to 
generate  it.  In  any  survey  of  the  adventure  of  ideas  nothing 
is  more  surprising  than  the  ineffectiveness  of  novel  general 
ideas  to  acquire  for  themselves  an  appropriate  emotional 
pattern  of  any  intensity.  Profound  flashes  of  insight  remain 
ineffective  for  centuries,  not  because  they  are  unknown, 
but  by  reason  of  dominant  interests  which  inhibit  reaction 
to  that  type  of  generality.  The  history  of  religion  is  the 
history  of  the  countless  generations  required  for  interest  to 
attach  itself  to  profound  ideas.  For  this  reason  religions  are 
so  often  more  barbarous  than  the  civilizations  in  which 
they  flourish. 

This  faintness  of  impress  of  general  ideas  upon  the 
human  mind  has  another  effect.  It  is  difficult  even  for  acute 
thinkers  to  understand  the  analogies  between  ideas  ex¬ 
pressed  in  diverse  phraseologies  and  illustrated  by  different 
sorts  of  examples.  Desperate  intellectual  battles  have  been 
fought  by  philosophers  who  have  expressed  the  same  idea 
in  different  ways.  For  both  these  reasons,  if  you  want  to 
make  a  new  start  in  religion,  based  upon  ideas  of  profound 
generality,  you  must  be  content  to  wait  a  thousand  years. 
Religions  are  like  species  of  animals:  they  do  not  originate 
from  special  creations. 

Finally,  if  there  be  any  truth  in  the  contention  that 
dogmatic  finality  of  verbal  expression  is  a  mistaken  notion, 
there  is  an  enormous  advantage  in  keeping  together,  with 
common  modes  of  procedure,  religious  opinions  of 
analogous  types.  They  can  learn  from  each  other,  borrow 
from  each  other,  and  individuals  can  make  imperceptible 


176  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

transitions.  Above  all,  they  can  learn  to  understand  each 
other  and  to  love. 

Must  ‘religion’  always  remain  as  a  synonym  for  ‘hatred’? 
The  great  social  ideal  for  religion  is  that  it  should  be  the 
common  basis  for  the  unity  of  civilization.  In  that  way  it 
justifies  its  insight  beyond  the  transient  clash  of  brute 
forces . 

This  discussion  has  concentrated  upon  three  culminating 
phases,  the  thought  of  Plato,  the  life  of  Christ,  and  the  first 
formative  period  of  Christian  theology.  But  this  whole 
period  of  twelve  centuries,  with  its  legendary  antecedents 
and  its  modem  successors,  is  required  to  complete  the  tale 
of  the  Christian  religion.  The  story  is  wholly  concerned 
with  the  interplay  of  ideas  belonging  to  different  levels  ot 
insight.  The  religious  spirit  is  always  in  process  of  being 
explained  away,  distorted,  buried.  Yet,  since  the  travel  ot 
mankind  toward  civilization,  it  is  always  there.  < 

The  task  of  Theology  is  to  show  how  the  World  is 
founded  on  something  beyond  mere  transient  fact,  and  how 
it  issues  in  something  beyond  the  perishing  of  occasions. 
The  temporal  World  is  the  stage  of  finite  accomplishment. 
We  ask  of  Theology  to  express  that  element  in  perishing 
lives  which  is  undying  by  reason  of  its  expression  of  perfec¬ 
tions  proper  to  our  finite  natures.  In  this  way  we  shall 
understand  how  life  includes  a  mode  of  satisfaction  deeper 
than  joy  or  sorrow. 


PART  THREE 


Philosophical 


11.  Objects  and  Subjects 

,  •  ,  To  7 raobv  J^aora)  7ra$os,  wv  at  atcr$?7<T€is  at  xara 

vavras  8o£a t  ytyvovrat,  .  .  .  Theaetetus,  179  C. 

§1.  Prefatory . — When  Descartes,  Locke,  and  Hume  un¬ 
dertake  the  analysis  of  experience,  they  utilize  those  ele¬ 
ments  in  their  own  experience  which  lie  clear  and  distinct, 
fit  for  the  exactitude  of  intellectual  discourse.  It  is  tacitly 
assumed,  except  by  Plato,  that  the  more  fundamental 
factors  will  ever  lend  themselves  for  discrimination  with 
peculiar  clarity.  This  assumption  is  here  directly  chal¬ 
lenged. 

§2.  Structure  of  Experience. — No  topic  has  suffered  more 
from  this  tendency  of  philosophers  than  their  account  of 
the  object-subject  structure  of  experience.  In  the  first  place, 
this  structure  has  been  identified  with  the  bare  relation  of 
knower  to  known.  The  subject  is  the  knower,  the  object  is 
the  known.  Thus,  with  this  interpretation,  the  object-sub¬ 
ject  relation  is  the  known-knower  relation.  It  then  follows 
that  the  more  clearly  any  instance  of  this  relation  stands 
out  for  discrimination,  the  more  safely  we  can  utilize  it  for 
the  interpretation  of  the  status  of  experience  in  the  uni¬ 
verse  of  things.  Hence  Descartes’  appeal  to  clarity  and 
distinctness. 

This  deduction  presupposes  that  the  subject-object  rela¬ 
tion  is  the  fundamental  structural  pattern  of  experience.  I 
agree  with  this  presupposition,  but  not  in  the  sense  in 
which  subject-object  is  identified  with  knower-known.  I 
contend  that  the  notion  of  mere  knowledge  is  a  high  ab¬ 
straction,  and  that  conscious  discrimination  itself  is  a  vari¬ 
able  factor  only  present  in  the  more  elaborate  examples  of 

177 


178  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

occasions  of  experience.  The  basis  of  experience  is  emo¬ 
tional.  Stated  more  generally,  the  basic  fact  is  the  rise  of 
an  effective  tone  originating  from  things  whose  relevance 
is  given. 

§3.  Phraseology. — Thus  the  Quaker  word  ‘concern,’  di¬ 
vested  of  any  suggestion  of  knowledge,  is  more  fitted  to 
express  this  fundamental  structure.  The  occasion  as  subject 
has  a  ‘concern’  for  the  object.  And  the  ‘concern’  at  once 
places  the  object  as  a  component  in  the  experience  of  the 
subject,  with  an  effective  tone  drawn  from  this  object  and 
directed  towards  it.  With  this  interpretation  the  subject- 
object  relation  is  the  fundamental  structure  of  experience. 

Quaker  usages  of  language  are  not  widely  spread.  Also 
each  phraseology  leads  to  a  crop  of  misunderstandings. 
The  subject-object  relation  can  be  conceived  as  Recipient 
and  Provoker,  where  the  fact  provoked  is  an  affective  tone 
about  the  status  of  the  provoker  in  the  provoked  experi¬ 
ence.  Also  the  total  provoked  occasion  is  a  totality  involv¬ 
ing  many  such  examples  of  provocation.  Again  this 
phraseology  is  unfortunate;  for  the  word  ‘recipient’  sug¬ 
gests  a  passivity  which  is  erroneous. 

§4.  Prehensions. — A  more  formal  explanation  is  as  fol¬ 
lows.  An  occasion  of  experience  is  an  activity,  analysable 
into  modes  of  functioning  which  jointly  constitute  its  proc¬ 
ess  of  becoming.  Each  mode  is  analysable  into  the  total 
experience  as  active  subject,  and  into  the  thing  or  object 
with  which  the  special  activity  is  concerned.  This  thing  is  a 
datum,  that  is  to  say,  is  describable  without  reference  to  its 
entertainment  in  that  occasion.  An  object  is  anything  per¬ 
forming  this  function  of  a  datum  provoking  some  special 
activity  of  the  occasion  in  question.  Thus  subject  and  ob¬ 
ject  are  relative  terms.  An  occasion  is  a  subject  in  respect 
to  its  special  activity  concerning  an  object;  and  anything  is 
an  object  in  respect  to  its  provocation  of  some  special 
activity  within  a  subject.  Such  a  mode  of  activity  is  termed 
a  ‘prehension.’  Thus  a  prehension  involves  three  factors. 
There  is  the  occasion  of  experience  within  which  the  pre¬ 
hension  is  a  detail  of  activity;  there  is  the  datum  whose  rele¬ 
vance  provokes  the  origination  of  this  prehension;  this 
datum  is  the  prehended  object;  there  is  the  subjective  form, 
which  is  the  affective  tone  determining  the  effectiveness  of 
that  prehension  in  that  occasion  of  experience.  How  the 


Objects  and  Subjects  179 

experience  constitutes  itself  depends  on  its  complex  of 
subjective  forms. 

§5.  Individuality . — The  individual  immediacy  of  an 
occasion  is  the  final  unity  of  subjective  form,  which  is  the 
occasion  as  an  absolute  reality.  This  immediacy  is  its  mo¬ 
ment  of  sheer  individuality,  bounded  on  either  side  by 
essential  relativity.  The  occasion  arises  from  relevant  ob¬ 
jects,  and  perishes  into  the  status  of  an  object  for  other 
occasions.  But  it  enjoys  its  decisive  moment  of  absolute 
self-attainment  as  emotional  unity.  As  used  here  the  words 
‘individual’  and  ‘atom’  have  the  same  meaning,  that  they 
apply  to  composite  things  with  an  absolute  reality  which 
their  components  lack.  These  words  properly  apply  to  an 
actual  entity  in  its  immediacy  of  self-attainment  when  it 
stands  out  as  for  itself  alone,  with  its  own  effective  self¬ 
enjoyment.  The  term  ‘monad’  also  expresses  this  essential 
unity  at  the  decisive  moment,  which  stands  between  its 
birth  and  its  perishing.  The  creativity  of  the  world  is  the 
throbbing  emotion  of  the  past  hurling  itself  into  a  new 
transcendent  fact.  It  is  the  flying  dart,  of  which  Lucretius 
speaks,  hurled  beyond  the  bounds  of  the  world. 

§6.  Knowledge. — All  knowledge  is  conscious  discrim¬ 
ination  of  objects  experienced.  But  this  conscious  dis¬ 
crimination,  which  is  knowledge,  is  nothing  more  than  an 
additional  factor  in  the  subjective  form  of  the  interplay  of 
subject  with  object.  This  interplay  is  the  stuff  constituting 
those  individual  things  which  make  up  the  sole  reality  of 
the  Universe.  These  individual  things  are  the  individual 
occasions  of  experience,  the  actual  entities. 

But  we  do  not  so  easily  get  rid  of  knowledge.  After  all, 
it  is  knowledge  that  philosophers  seek.  And  all  knowledge 
is  derived  from,  and  verified  by,  direct  intuitive  observation. 
I  accept  this  axiom  of  empiricism  as  stated  in  this  general 
form.  The  question  then  arises  how  the  structure  of  experi¬ 
ence  outlined  above  is  directly  observed.  In  answering  this 
challenge  I  remind  myself  of  the  old  advice  that  the  doc¬ 
trines  which  best  repay  critical  examination  are  those 
which  for  the  longest  period  have  remained  unquestioned. 

§7.  Sense-Perception. — The  particular  agelong  group  of 
doctrines  which  I  have  in  mind  is:  (1)  that  all  perception  is 
by  the  mediation  of  our  bodily  sense-organs,  such  as  eyes, 
palates,  noses,  ears,  and  the  diffused  bodily  organization 
furnishing  touches,  aches,  and  other  bodily  sensations; 


180  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

(2)  that  all  percepta  are  base  sensa,  in  patterned  connec¬ 
tions,  given  in  the  immediate  present;  (3)  that  our  experi¬ 
ence  of  a  social  world  is  an  interpretative  reaction  wholly 
derivative  from  this  perception;  (4)  that  our  emotional  and 
purposive  experience  is  a  reflective  reaction  derived  from 
the  original  perception,  and  intertwined  with  the  interpreta¬ 
tive  reaction  and  partly  shaping  it.  Thus  the  two  reactions 
are  different  aspects  of  one  process,  involving  interpreta¬ 
tive,  emotional,  and  purposive  factors.  Of  course,  we  are 
all  aware  that  there  are  powerful  schools  of  philosophy 
which  explicitly  reject  this  doctrine.  Yet  I  cannot  persuade 
myself  that  this  rejection  has  been  taken  seriously  by 
writers  belonging  to  the  schools  in  question.  When  the 
direct  question  as  to  things  perceived  arises,  it  seems  to  me 
that  the  answer  is  always  returned  in  terms  of  sensa 
•perceived . 

§8.  Perceptive  Functions. — In  the  examination  of  the 
sensationalist  doctrine,  the  first  question  to  be  asked  con¬ 
cerns  the  general  definition  of  what  we  mean  by  those  func¬ 
tions  of  experience  which  we  term  ‘perceptions.’  If  we  de¬ 
fine  them  as  those  experiential  functions  which  arise  directly 
from  the  stimulation  of  the  various  bodily  sense-organs, 
then  argument  ceases.  The  traditional  doctrine  then  be¬ 
comes  a  mere  matter  of  definition  of  the  use  of  the  word 
‘perception.’  Indeed,  having  regard  to  long-standing  usage, 
I  am  inclined  to  agree  that  it  may  be  advisable  for  philoso¬ 
phers  to  confine  the  word  ‘perception’  to  this  limited  mean¬ 
ing.  But  the  point  on  which  I  am  insisting  is  that  this 
meaning  is  limited,  and  that  there  is  a  wider  meaning  with 
which  this  limited  use  of  the  term  ‘perception’  has  been 
tacitly  identified. 

§9.  Objects. — The  process  of  experiencing  is  constituted 
by  the  reception  of  entities,  whose  being  is  antecedent  to 
that  process,  into  the  complex  fact  which  is  that  process 
itself.  These  antecedent  entities,  thus  received  as  factors 
into  the  process  of  experiencing,  are  termed  ‘objects’ for 
that  experiential  occasion.  Thus  primarily  the  term  ‘ob¬ 
ject’  expresses  the  relation  of  the  entity,  thus  denoted,  to 
one  or  more  occasions  of  experiencing.  Two  conditions 
must  be  fulfilled  in  order  that  an  entity  may  function  as  an 
object  in  a  process  of  experiencing:  (1)  the  entity  must 
be  antecedent,  and  (2)  the  entity  must  be  experienced  in 
virtue  of  its  antecedence;  it  must  be  given.  Thus  an  object 


Objects  and  Subjects  181 

must  be  a  thing  received,  and  must  not  be  either  a  mode 
of  reception  or  a  thing  generated  in  that  occasion.  Thus 
the  process  of  experiencing  is  constituted  by  the  reception 
of  objects  into  the  unity  of  that  complex  occasion  which 
is  the  process  itself.  The  process  creates  itself,  but  it  does 
not  create  the  objects  which  it  receives  as  factors  in  its 
own  nature. 

‘Objects’  for  an  occasion  can  also  be  termed  the  ‘data’ 
for  that  occasion.  The  choice  of  terms  entirely  depends  on 
the  metaphor  which  you  prefer.  One  word  carries  the 
literal  meaning  of  Tying  in  the  way  of,’  and  the  other  word 
carries  the  literal  meaning  of  ‘being  given  to.’  But  both 
words  suffer  from  the  defect  of  suggesting  that  an  occasion 
of  experiencing  arises  out  of  a  passive  situation  which  is  a 
mere  welter  of  many  data. 

§10.  Creativity . — The  exact  contrary  is  the  case.  The 
initial  situation  includes  a  factor  of  activity  which  is  the 
reason  for  the  origin  of  that  occasion  of  experience.  This 
factor  of  activity  is  what  I  have  called  ‘Creativity.’  The 
initial  situation  with  its  creativity  can  be  termed  the  initial 
phase  of  the  new  occasion.  It  can  equally  well  be  termed 
the  ‘actual  world’  relative  to  that  occasion.  It  has  a  certain 
unity  of  its  own,  expressive  of  its  capacity  for  providing  the 
objects  requisite  for  a  new  occasion,  and  also  expressive  of 
its  conjoint  activity  whereby  it  is  essentially  the  primary 
phase  of  a  new  occasion.  It  can  thus  be  termed  a  ‘real  po¬ 
tentiality.’  The  ‘potentiality’  refers  to  the  passive  capacity, 
the  term  ‘real’  refers  to  the  creative  activity,  where  the 
Platonic  definition  of  ‘real’  in  the  Sophist  is  referred  to. 
This  basic  situation,  this  actual  world,  this  primary  phase, 
this  real  potentiality — however  you  characterize  it — as  a 
whole  is  active  with  its  inherent  creativity,  but  in  its  details 
it  provides  the  passive  objects  which  derive  their  activity 
from  the  creativity  of  the  whole.  The  creativity  is  the  ac¬ 
tualization  of  potentiality,  and  the  process  of  actualiza¬ 
tion  is  an  occasion  of  experiencing.  Thus  viewed  in 
abstraction  objects  are  passive,  but  viewed  in  conjunction 
they  carry  the  creativity  which  drives  the  world.  The 
process  of  creation  is  the  form  of  unity  of  the  Universe. 

§11.  Perception. — In  the  preceding  sections,  the  dis¬ 
covery  of  objects  as  factors  in  experience  was  explained. 
The  discussion  was  phrased  in  terms  of  an  ontology  which 
goes  beyond  the  immediate  purpose,  although  the  status 


182  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


of  objects  cannot  be  understood  in  the  absence  of  some 
such  ontology  explaining  their  function  in  experience, 
that  is  to  say,  explaining  why  an  occasion  of  experience  by 
reason  of  its  nature  requires  objects. 

The  objects,  are  the  factors  in  experience  which  function 
so  as  to  express  that  that  occasion  originates  by  including 
a  transcendent  universe  of  other  things.  Thus  it  belongs  to 
the  essence  of  each  occasion  of  experience  that  it  is  con¬ 
cerned  with  an  otherness  transcending  itself.  The  occasion 
is  one  among  others,  and  including  the  others  which  it  is 
among.  Consciousness  is  an  emphasis  upon  a  selection  of 
these  objects.  Thus  perception  is  consciousness  analysed 
in  respect  to  those  objects  selected  for  this  emphasis.  Con¬ 
sciousness  is  the  acme  of  emphasis. 

It  is  evident  that  this  definition  of  perception  is  wider 
than  the  narrow  definition  based  upon  sense-perception, 
sensa,  and  the  bodily  sense-organs. 

§12.  N on-Sensuous  Perception . — This  wider  definition 
of  perception  can  be  of  no  importance  unless  we  can  de¬ 
tect  occasions  of  experience  exhibiting  modes  of  function¬ 
ing  which  fall  within  its  wider  scope.  If  we  discover  such 
instances  of  non-sensuous  perception,  then  the  tacit  iden¬ 
tification  of  perception  with  sense-perception  must  be  a 
fatal  error  barring  the  advance  of  systematic  metaphysics. 

Our  first  step  must  involve  the  clear  recognition  of  the 
limitations  inherent  in  the  scope  of  sense-perception.  This 
special  mode  of  functioning  essentially  exhibits  percepta  as 
here ,  now ,  immediate ,  and  discrete .  Every  impression  of 
sensation  is  a  distinct  existence,  declares  Hume;  and  there 
can  be  no  reasonable  doubt  of  this  doctrine.  But  even 
Hume  clothes  each  impression  with  force  and  liveliness. 
It  must  be  distinctly  understood  that  no  prehension,  even 
of  bare  sensa,  can  be  divested  of  its  affective  tone,  that  is 
to  say,  of  its  character  of  a  ‘concern’  in  the  Quaker  sense. 
Concemedness  is  of  the  essence  of  perception. 

Gaze  at  a  patch  of  red.  In  itself  as  an  object,  and  apart 
from  other  factors  of  concern,  this  patch  of  red,  as  the 
mere  object  of  that  present  act  of  perception,  is  silent  as 
to  the  past  or  the  future.  How  it  originates,  how  it  will  van¬ 
ish,  whether  indeed  there  was  a  past,  and  whether  there  will 
be  a  future,  are  not  disclosed  by  its  own  nature.  No  ma¬ 
terial  for  the  interpretation  of  sensa  is  provided  by  the 
sensa  themselves,  as  they  stand  starkly,  barely,  present  and 


Objects  and  Subjects  183 

immediate.  We  do  interpret  them;  but  no  thanks  for  the 
feat  is  due  to  them.  The  epistemologies  of  the  last  two 
hundred  years  are  employed  in  the  tacit  introduction  of 
alien  considerations  by  the  uncritical  use  of  current  forms 
of  speech.  A  copious  use  of  simple  literary  forms  can  thus 
provide  a  philosophy  delightful  to  read,  easy  to  under¬ 
stand,  and  entirely  fallacious.  Yet  the  usages  of  language 
do  prove  that  our  habitual  interpretations  of  these  barren 
sensa  are  in  the  main  satisfying  to  common  sense,  though 
in  particular  instances  liable  to  error.  But  the  evidence  on 
which  these  interpretations  are  based  is  entirely  drawn 
from  the  vast  background  and  foreground  of  non-sensuous 
perception  with  which  sense-perception  is  fused,  and  with¬ 
out  which  it  can  never  be.  We  can  discern  no  clean-cut 
sense-perception  wholly  concerned  with  present  fact. 

In  human  experience,  the  most  compelling  example  of 
non-sensuous  perception  is  our  knowledge  of  our  own 
immediate  past.  I  am  not  referring  to  our  memories  of  a 
day  past,  or  of  an  hour  past,  or  of  a  minute  past.  Such 
memories  are  blurred  and  confused  by  the  intervening  oc¬ 
casions  of  our  personal  existence.  But  our  immediate  past 
is  constituted  by  that  occasion,  or  by  that  group  of  fused 
occasions,  which  enters  into  experience  devoid  of  any  per¬ 
ceptible  medium  intervening  between  it  and  the  present 
immediate  fact.  Roughly  speaking,  it  is  that  portion  of  our 
past  lying  between  a  tenth  of  a  second  and  half  a  second 
ago.  It  is  gone,  and  yet  it  is  here.  It  is  our  indubitable  self, 
the  foundation  of  our  present  existence.  Yet  the  present 
occasion  while  claiming  self-identity,  while  sharing  the 
very  nature  of  the  bygone  occasion  in  all  its  living  activi¬ 
ties,  nevertheless  is  engaged  in  modifying  it,  in  adjusting 
it  to  other  influences,  in  completing  it  with  other  values,  in 
deflecting  it  to  other  purposes.  The  present  moment  is 
constituted  by  the  influx  of  the  other  into  that  self-identity 
which  is  the  continued  life  of  the  immediate  past  within 
the  immediacy  of  the  present. 

§13.  Illustration. — Consider  a  reasonably  rapid  speaker 
enunciating  the  proper  name  ‘United  States.’  There  are 
four  syllables  here.  When  the  third  syllable  is  reached, 
probably  the  first  is  in  the  immediate  past;  and  certainly 
during  the  word  ‘States’  the  first  syllable  of  the  phrase  lies 
beyond  the  immediacy  of  the  present.  Consider  the  speak¬ 
er’s  own  occasions  of  existence.  Each  occasion  achieves 


184  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

for  him  the  immediate  sense-presentation  of  sounds,  the 
earlier  syllables  in  the  earlier  occasions,  the  word  ‘States’  in 
the  final  occasion.  As  mere  sensuous  perception,  Hume 
is  right  in  saying  that  the  sound  ‘United’  as  a  mere  sensum 
has  nothing  in  its  nature  referent  to  the  sound  ‘States,’  yet 
the  speaker  is  carried  from  ‘United’  to  ‘States,’  and  the  two 
conjointly  live  in  the  present,  by  the  energizing  of  the  past 
occasion  as  it  claims  its  self-identical  existence  as  a  living 
issue  in  the  present.  The  immediate  past  as  surviving  to  be 
again  lived  through  in  the  present  is  the  palmary  instance 
of  non-sensuous  perception. 

The  Humian  explanation,  involving  the  ‘association  of 
ideas,’  has  its  importance  for  this  topic.  But  it  is  not  to  the 
point  for  this  example.  The  speaker,  a  citizen  of  the  United 
States  and  therefore  dominated  by  an  immense  familiarity 
with  that  phrase,  may  in  fact  have  been  enunciating  the 
phrase  ‘United  Fruit  Company’ — a  corporation  which,  for 
all  its  importance,  he  may  not  have  heard  of  till  half  a 
minute  earlier.  In  his  experience  the  relation  of  the  later 
to  the  earlier  parts  of  this  phrase  is  entirely  the  same  as 
that  described  above  for  the  phrase  ‘United  States.’  In 
this  latter  example  it  is  to  be  noted  that  while  association 
would  have  led  him  to  ‘States,’  the  fact  of  the  energizing  of 
the  immediate  past  compelled  him  to  conjoin  ‘Fruit’  in 
the  immediacy  of  the  present.  He  uttered  the  word  ‘United’ 
with  the  non-sensuous  anticipation  of  an  immediate  future 
with  the  sensum  ‘Fruit,’  and  he  then  uttered  the  word 
‘Fruit’  with  the  non-sensuous  perception  of  the  immediate 
past  with  the  sensum  ‘United.’  But,  unfamiliar  as  he  was 
with  the  United  Fruit  Company,  he  had  no  association 
connecting  the  various  words  in  the  phrase  ‘United  Fruit 
Company’;  while,  patriot  as  he  was,  the  orator  had  the 
strongest  association  connecting  the  words  ‘United’  and 
‘States.’  Perhaps,  indeed,  he  was  the  founder  of  the  Com¬ 
pany,  and  also  invented  the  name.  He  then  uttered  the 
mere  sounds  ‘United  Fruit  Company’  for  the  first  time  in 
the  history  of  the  English  language.  There  could  not  have 
been  the  vestige  of  an  association  to  help  him  along.  The 
final  occasion  of  his  experience  which  drove  his  body  to 
the  utterance  of  the  sound  ‘Company’  is  only  explicable 
by  his  concern  with  the  earlier  occasions  with  their  subjec¬ 
tive  forms  of  intention  to  procure  the  utterance  of  the  com¬ 
plete  phrase.  Also,  in  so  far  as  there  was  consciousness, 


Objects  and  Subjects  185 

there  was  direct  observation  of  the  past  with  its  intention 
finding  its  completion  in  the  present  fact.  This  is  an  instance 
of  direct  intuitive  observation  which  is  incapable  of  re¬ 
duction  to  the  sensationalist  formula.  Such  observations 
have  not  the  clear  sharp-cut  precision  of  sense-perception. 
But  surely  there  can  be  no  doubt  about  them.  For  instance, 
if  the  speaker  had  been  interrupted  after  the  words  ‘United 
Fruit,’  he  might  have  resumed  his  speech  with  the  words 
‘I  meant  to  add  the  word  Company.’  Thus  during  the 
interruption,  the  past  was  energizing  in  his  experience  as 
carrying  in  itself  an  unfulfilled  intention. 

§14.  Conformation  of  Feeling. — Another  point  emerges 
in  this  explanation,  namely,  the  doctrine  of  the  continuity 
of  nature.  This  doctrine  balances  and  limits  the  doctrine  of 
the  absolute  individuality  of  each  occasion  of  experience. 
There  is  a  continuity  between  the  subjective  form  of  the 
immediate  past  occasion  and  the  subjective  form  of  its 
primary  prehension  in  the  origination  of  the  new  occasion. 
In  the  process  of  synthesis  of  the  many  basic  prehensions 
modifications  enter.  But  the  subjective  forms  of  the  imme¬ 
diate  past  are  continuous  with  those  of  the  present.  I  will 
term  this  doctrine  of  continuity,  the  Doctrine  of  Conforma¬ 
tion  of  Feeling. 

Suppose  that  for  some  period  of  time  some  circumstance 
of  his  life  has  aroused  anger  in  a  man.  How  does  he  now 
know  that  a  quarter  of  a  second  ago  he  was  angry?  Of 
course,  he  remembers  it;  we  all  know  that.  But  I  am  en¬ 
quiring  about  this  very  curious  fact  of  memory,  and  have 
chosen  an  overwhelmingly  vivid  instance.  The  mere  word 
‘memory’  explains  nothing.  The  first  phase  in  the  imme¬ 
diacy  of  the  new  occasion  is  that  of  the  conformation  of 
feelings.  The  feeling  as  enjoyed  by  the  past  occasion  is 
present  in  the  new  occasion  as  datum  felt,  with  a  subjective 
form  conformal  to  that  of  the  datum.  Thus  if  A  be  the  past 
occasion,  D  the  datum  felt  by  A  with  subjective  form 
describable  as  A  angry,  then  this  feeling — namely,  A 
feeling  D  with  subjective  form  of  anger — is  initially  felt 
by  the  new  occasion  B  with  the  same  subjective  form  of 
anger.  The  anger  is  continuous  throughout  the  successive 
occasions  of  experience.  This  continuity  of  subjective  form 
is  the  initial  sympathy  of  B  for  A.  It  is  the  primary  ground 
for  the  continuity  of  nature. 

Let  us  elaborate  the  consideration  of  the  angry  man. 


186  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

His  anger  is  the  subjective  form  of  his  feeling  some  datum 
D.  A  quarter  of  a  second  later  he  is,  consciously,  or  un¬ 
consciously,  embodying  his  past  as  a  datum  in  the  present, 
and  maintaining  in  the  present  the  anger  which  is  a  datum 
from  the  past.  In  so  far  as  that  feeling  has  fallen  within 
the  illumination  of  consciousness,  he  enjoys  a  non-sensuous 
perception  of  the  past  emotion.  He  enjoys  this  emotion 
both  objectively,  as  belonging  to  the  past,  and  also  formally 
as  continued  in  the  present.  This  continuation  is  the  con¬ 
tinuity  of  nature.  I  have  labored  this  point,  because  tra¬ 
ditional  doctrines  involve  its  denial. 

Thus  non-sensuous  perception  is  one  aspect  of  the  con¬ 
tinuity  of  nature. 

§15.  Hume s  Doctrine  of  Custom . — Hume  appeals  to  a 
doctrine  of  force  and  liveliness  as  an  essential  factor  in  an 
impression  of  sensation.  This  doctrine  is  nothing  but  a 
special  case  of  the  doctrine  of  subjective  forms.  Again  he 
holds  that  the  force  and  liveliness  of  one  occasion  of  ex¬ 
perience  enter  into  the  character  of  succeeding  occasions. 
The  whole  doctrine  of  ‘custom’  depends  on  this  assump¬ 
tion.  If  the  occasions  be  entirely  separate,  as  Hume  con¬ 
tends,  this  transition  of  character  is  without  any  basis  in 
the  nature  of  things.  What  Hume,  in  his  appeal  to  memory, 
is  really  doing  is  to  appeal  to  an  observed  immanence  of 
the  past  in  the  future,  involving  a  continuity  of  subjective 
form. 

With  this  addition,  every  argument  of  Part  III  of  Hume’s 
Treatise  can  be  accepted.  But  the  conclusion  follows  that 
there  is  an  observed  relation  of  causation  between  such 
occasions.  The  general  character  of  this  observed  relation  . 
explains  at  once  memory  and  personal  identity.  They  are 
all  different  aspects  of  the  doctrine  of  the  immanence  of 
occasions  of  experience.  The  additional  conclusion  can 
also  be  derived,  that  in  so  far  as  we  apply  notions  of 
causation  to  the  understanding  of  events  in  nature,  we 
must  conceive  these  events  under  the  general  notions  which 
apply  to  occasions  of  experience.  For  we  can  only  under¬ 
stand  causation  in  terms  of  our  observations  of  these 
occasions.  This  appeal  to  Hume  has  the  sole  purpose  of 
illustrating  the  common-sense  obviousness  of  the  present 
thesis. 

§16.  The  Flux  of  Energy . — An  occasion  of  experience 
which  includes  a  human  mentality  is  an  extreme  instance, 


Objects  and  Subjects  187 

at  one  end  of  the  scale,  of  those  happenings  which  con¬ 
stitute  nature.  As  yet  this  discussion  has  fixed  attention 
upon  this  extreme.  But  any  doctrine  which  refuses  to  place 
human  experience  outside  nature,  must  find  in  descriptions 
of  himian  experience  factors  which  also  enter  into  the 
descriptions  of  less  specialized  natural  occurrences  If 
there  be  no  such  factors,  then  the  doctrine  of  human  ex¬ 
perience  as  a  fact  within  nature  is  mere  bluff,  founded 
upon  vague  phrases  whose  sole  merit  is  a  comforting 
iamiliarity.  We  should  either  admit  dualism,  at  least  as  a 
provisional  doctrine,  or  we  should  point  out  the  identical 
elements  connecting  human  experience  with  physical 
science.  r 

The  science  of  physics  conceives  a  natural  occasion  as 
a  locus  of  energy.  Whatever  else  that  occasion  may  be  it 
is  an  individual  fact  harboring  that  energy.  The  words  elec¬ 
tron,  proton,  photon,  wave-motion,  velocity,  hard  and  soft 
radiation,  chemical  elements,  matter,  empty  space,  tem¬ 
perature,  degradation  of  energy,  all  point  to  the  fact  that 
physical  science  recognizes  qualitative  differences  between 
occasions  in  respect  to  the  way  in  which  each  occasion 
entertains  its  energy. 

These  differences  are  entirely  constituted  by  the  flux  of 
energy,  that  is  to  say,  by  the  way  in  which  the  occasions 
m  question  have  inherited  their  energy  from  the  past  of 
nature,  and  in  which  they  are  about  to  transmit  their  energy 
to  the  future.  The  discussion  of  the  Poynting  Flux  of 
Energy  is  one  of  the  most  fascinating  chapters  of  Elec¬ 
trodynamics.  Forty-seven  years  ago,  when  a  young  graduate 
student,  I  first  heard  of  it  in  a  lecture  delivered  by  Sir 
J.  J.  Thomson.  It  was  then  a  new  discovery  recently 
published  by  Poynting.  But  its  father  was  the  great  Clerk- 
Maxwell  who  had  expounded  all  the  requisite  principles. 
The  sole  conclusion  with  which  we  are  concerned  is  that 
energy  has  recognizable  paths  through  time  and  space. 
Energy  passes  from  particular  occasion  to  particular 
occasion.  At  each  point  there  is  a  flux,  with  a  quantitative 
flow  and  a  definite  direction. 

This  is  a  conception  of  physical  nature  in  terms  of  con¬ 
tinuity.  In  fact,  the  concept  of  continuity  was  dominant  in 
Clerk-Maxwell’s  thought.  But  the  alternative  concept  of 
distinguishable  individualities  has  again  emerged  into 
importance  in  the  more  recent  physics.  Electrons  and 


188  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

protons  and  photons  are  unit  charges  of  electricity;  also 
there  are  the  quanta  of  the  flux  of  energy.  These  contrasted 
aspects  of  nature,  continuity  and  atomicity,  have  a  long 
history  in  European  thought,  reaching  back  to  the  origin 
of  science  among  the  Greeks.  The  more  probable  con¬ 
clusion  is  that  neither  can  be  dispensed  with,  and  that  we 
are  only  witnessing  that  modem  phase  of  the  contrast 
which  is  relevant  to  the  present  stage  of  science. 

§17.  Mind  and  Nature  Compared. — The  doctrine  of 
human  experience  which  I  have  outlined  above,  also  for  its 
own  purposes  preserves  a  doctrine  of  distinguishable  indi¬ 
vidualities  which  are  the  separate  occasions  of  experience, 
and  a  doctrine  of  continuity  expressed  by  the  identity  of 
subjective  form  inherited  conformally  from  one  occasion 
to  the  other.  The  physical  flux  corresponds  to  the  con¬ 
formal  inheritance  at  the  base  of  each  occasion  of  experi¬ 
ence.  This  inheritance,  in  spite  of  its  continuity  of  subjective 
form,  is  nevertheless  an  inheritance  from  definite  individual 
occasions.  Thus,  if  the  analogy  is  to  hold,  in  the  account 
of  the  general  system  of  relations  binding  the  past  to  the 
present,  we  should  expect  a  doctrine  of  quanta,  where  the 
individualities  of  the  occasions  are  relevant,  and  a  doctrine 
of  continuity  where  the  conformal  transference  of  subjec¬ 
tive  form  is  the  dominating  fact. 

The  notion  of  physical  energy,  which  is  at  the  base  of 
physics,  must  then  be  conceived  as  an  abstraction  from  the 
complex  energy,  emotional  and  purposeful,  inherent  in 
the  subjective  form  of  the  final  synthesis  in  which  each 
occasion  completes  itself.  It  is  the  total  vigor  of  each  ac¬ 
tivity  of  experience.  The  mere  phrase  that  ‘physical  science 
is  an  abstraction,’  is  a  confession  of  philosophic  failure.  It 
is  the  business  or  rational  thought  to  describe  the  more 
concrete  fact  from  which  that  abstraction  is  derivable. 

§18.  Personality. — In  our  account  of  human  experience 
we  have  attenuated  human  personality  into  a  genetic  rela¬ 
tion  between  occasions  of  human  experience.  Yet  personal 
unity  is  an  inescapable  fact.  The  Platonic  and  Christian 
doctrines  of  the  Soul,  the  Epicurean  doctrine  of  a  Con¬ 
cilium  of  subtle  atoms,  the  Cartesian  doctrine  of  Thinking 
Substance,  the  Humanitarian  doctrine  of  the  Rights  of 
man,  the  general  Common  Sense  of  civilized  mankind, — 
these  doctrines  between  them  dominate  the  whole  span  of 
Western  thought.  Evidently  there  is  a  fact  to  be  accounted 


Objects  and  Subjects  189 

for.  Any  philosophy  must  provide  some  doctrine  of  per¬ 
sonal  identity.  In  some  sense  there  is  a  unity  in  the  life  of 
each  man,  from  birth  to  death.  The  two  modem  philoso¬ 
phers  who  most  consistently  reject  the  notion  of  a  self¬ 
identical  Soul-Substance  are  Hume  and  William  James. 
But  the  problem  remains  for  them,  as  it  does  for  the  phi¬ 
losophy  of  organism,  to  provide  an  adequate  account  of 
this  undoubted  personal  unity,  maintaining  itself  amidst 
the  welter  of  circumstance. 

§19.  Plato’s  Receptacle. — In  mathematical  studies, 
where  there  is  a  problem  to  be  solved  it  is  a  sound  method 
to  generalize,  so  as  to  divest  the  problem  of  details  irrele¬ 
vant  to  the  solution.  Let  us  therefore  give  a  general  descrip¬ 
tion  of  this  personal  unity,  divesting  it  of  minor  details  of 
humanity.  For  this  purpose  it  is  impossible  to  improve  upon 
a  passage  from  one  of  Plato’s  dialogues.  I  summarize  it 
with  the  insertion  of  such  terms  as  ‘personal  unity,’  ‘events,’ 
‘experience,’  and  ‘personal  identity,’  for  two  or  three  of  its 
own  phrases: — “In  addition  to  the  notions  of  the  welter 
of  events  and  of  the  forms  which  they  illustrate,  we  require 
a  third  term,  personal  unity.  It  is  a  perplexed  and  obscure 
concept.  We  must  conceive  it  the  receptacle,  the  foster- 
mother  as  I  might  say,  of  the  becoming  of  our  occasions  of 
experience.  This  personal  identity  is  the  thing  which  re¬ 
ceives  all  occasions  of  the  man’s  existence.  It  is  there  as  a 
natural  matrix  for  all  transitions  of  life,  and  is  changed 
and  variously  figured  by  the  things  that  enter  it;  so  that  it 
differs  in  its  character  at  different  times.  Since  it  receives 
all  manner  of  experiences  into  its  own  unity,  it  must  itself 
be  bare  of  all  forms.  We  shall  not  be  far  wrong  if  we 
describe  it  as  invisible,  formless,  and  all-receptive.  It  is  a 
lucus  which  persists,  and  provides  an  emplacement  for  all 
the  occasions  of  experience.  That  which  happens  in  it  is 
conditioned  by  the  compulsion  of  its  own  past,  and  by  the 
persuasion  of  its  immanent  ideals.” 

You  will  have  recognized  that  in  this  description  I  have 
been  adapting  from  Plato’s  Timceus’  with  the  slightest  of 
changes.  But  this  is  not  Plato’s  description  of  the  Soul.  It  is 
his  doctrine  of  the  receptacle  [i-roSo^]  or  Locus  [Xwoa] 
whose  sole  function  is  the  imposition  of  a  unity  upon  the 

1 1  have  used  A.  E.  Taylor’s  translation,  with  compression  and  changes  of 


190  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


events  of  Nature.  These  events  are  together  by  reason  of 
their  community  of  locus,  and  they  obtain  their  actuality  by 
reason  of  emplacement  within  this  community. 

820.  Immanence. — This  is  at  once  the  doctrine  of  the 

unity  of  nature,  and  of  the  unity  of  each  human  life.  The 
conclusion  follows  that  our  consciousness  of  the  self- 
identity  pervading  our  life-thread  of  occasions,  is  nothing 
other  than  knowledge  of  a  special  strand  of  unity  within 
the  general  unity  of  nature.  It  is  a  locus  within  the  whole, 
marked  out  by  its  own  peculiarities,  but  otherwise  exhibit- 
in0  the  general  principle  which  guides  the  constitution  of 
the  whole.  This  general  principle  is  the  object-to-subject 
structure  of  experience.  It  can  be  otherwise  stated  as  the 
vector-structure  of  nature.  Or  otherwise,  it  can  be  con¬ 
ceived  as  the  doctrine  of  the  immanence  of  the  past  ener¬ 
gizing  in  die  present.  .  ,  .  . 

This  doctrine  of  immanence  is  practically  that  doctrine 
adumbrated  by  the  Hellenistic  Christian  theologians  of 
Egypt  But  they  applied  the  doctrine  only  to  the  relation 
of  God  to  the  World,  and  not  to  all  actualities. 

821.  Space  and  Time . — The  notion  of  Space-Time 
represents  a  compromise  between  Plato’s  basic  Receptacle, 
imposing  no  forms,  and  the  Actual  World  imposing  its  own 
variety  of  forms.  This  imposition  of  foms  is  subject  to  the 
perspective  elimination  required  by  incompatibilities  ot 
affective  tone.  Geometry  is  the  doctrine  of  loci  of  inter¬ 
mediaries  imposing  perspective  in  the  process  of  inhent“ 
ance.  In  geometry  this  doctrine  is  restricted  to  its  barest 
generalities  of  coordination  prevailing  for  this  epoch  ot  the 
Universe.  These  generalities  solely  concern  the  complex 
of  serial  relations  persistently  illustrated  in  the  connection 


of  events.  • 

Our  perception  of  this  geometrical  order  of  the  Universe 
brings  with  it  the  denial  of  the  restriction  of  inheritance 
to  mere  personal  order.  For  personal  order  means .  one¬ 
dimensional  serial  order.  And  space  is  many-dimensional. 
Spatiality  involves  separation  by  reason  of  the  diversity  or 
intermediate  occasions,  and  also  it  involves  connection  by 
reason  of  the  immanence  involved  in  the  derivation  of  pres¬ 
ent  from  past.  There  is  thus  an  analogy  between  the  trans¬ 
ference  of  energy  from  particular  occasion  to  particular 
occasion  in  physical  nature  and  the  transference  of  affective 
tone,  with  its  emotional  energy,  from  one  occasion  to  an- 


Objects  and  Subjects  191 

other  in  any  human  personality.  The  object-to-subject 
structure  of  human  experience  is  reproduced  in  physical 
nature  by  this  vector  relation  of  particular  to  particular. 
It  was  the  defect  of  the  Greek  analysis  of  generation  that 
it  conceived  it  in  terms  of  the  bare  incoming  of  novel  ab¬ 
stract  form.  This  ancient  analysis  failed  to  grasp  the  real 
operation  of  the  antecedent  particulars  imposing  them¬ 
selves  on  the  novel  particular  in  process  of  creation.  Thus 
the  geometry  exemplified  in  fact  was  disjoined  from  their 
account  of  the  generation  of  fact. 

§22.  The  Human  Body. — But  this  analogy  of  physical 
nature  to  human  experience  is  limited  by  the  fact  of  the 
linear  seriality  of  human  occasions  within  any  one  person¬ 
ality  and  of  the  many-dimensional  seriality  of  the  occasions 
in  physical  Space-Time. 

In  order  to  prove  that  this  discrepancy  is  only  superficial, 
it  now  remains  for  discussion  whether  the  human  experi¬ 
ence  of  direct  inheritance  provides  any  analogy  to  this 
many-dimensional  character  of  space.  If  human  occasions 
of  experience  essentially  inherit  in  one-dimensional  per¬ 
sonal  order,  there  is  a  gap  between  human  occasions  and 
the  physical  occasions  of  nature. 

The  peculiar  status  of  the  human  body  at  once  presents 
itself  as .  negating  this  notion  of  strict  personal  order  for 
human  inheritance.  Our  dominant  inheritance  from  our 
immediately  past  occasion  is  broken  into  by  innumerable 
inheritances  through  other  avenues.  Sensitive  nerves,  the 
functionings  of  our  viscera,  disturbances  in  the  composition 
of  our  blood,  break  in  upon  the  dominant  line  of  inherit¬ 
ance.  In  this  way,  emotions,  hopes,  fears,  inhibitions,  sense- 
perceptions  arise,  which  physiologists  confidently  ascribe  to 
the  bodily  functionings.  So  intimately  obvious  is  this  bodily 
inheritance  that  common  speech  does  not  discriminate  the 
human  body  from  the  human  person.  Soul  and  body  are 
fused  together.  Also  this  common  identification  has  sur¬ 
vived  the  scientific  investigation  of  physiologists,  who  are 
apt  to  see  more  body  than  soul  in  human  beings. 

But  the  human  body  is  indubitably  a  complex  of  occa¬ 
sions  which  are  part  of  spatial  nature.  It  is  a  set  of  occa¬ 
sions  miraculously  coordinated  so  as  to  pour  its  inheritance 
into  various  regions  within  the  brain.  There  is  thus  every 
reason  to  believe  that  our  sense  of  unity  with  the  body  has 
the  same  original  as  our  sense  of  unity  with  our  immediate 


192  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

past  of  personal  experience.  It  is  another  case  of  non- 
sensuous  perception,  only  now  devoid  of  the  strict  personal 
order. 

But  physiologists  and  physicists  are  equally  agreed  that 
the  body  inherits  physical  conditions  from  the  physical  en¬ 
vironment  according  to  the  physical  laws.  There  is  thus  a 
general  continuity  between  human  experience  and  physical 
occasions.  The  elaboration  of  such  a  continuity  is  one  most 
obvious  task  for  philosophy. 

§23.  Dualism. — This  discussion  has  begged  attention  to 
a  complex  argument.  I  will  conclude  it  by  drawing  atten¬ 
tion  to  a  general  question  which  is  relevant. 

Is  this  discussion  to  be  looked  upon  as  another  example 
of  The  Revolt  against  Dualism?  We  have  all  read  with 
high  appreciation  Professor  Lovejoy’s  brilliant  book  in 
criticism  of  this  revolt.  Now  superficially  the  position  which 
I  have  here  put  forward  is  certainly  an  instance  of  the  revolt 
which  he  criticizes.  But  in  another  sense,  I  have  endeavored 
to  put  forward  a  defence  of  dualism,  differently  interpreted. 
Plato,  Descartes,  Locke,  prepared  the  way  for  Hume;  and 
Kant  followed  upon  Hume.  The  point  of  this  discussion 
is  to  show  an  alternative  line  of  thought  which  evades 
Hume’s  deduction  from  philosophical  tradition,  and  at  the 
same  time  preserves  the  general  trend  of  thought  received 
from  his  three  great  predecessors.  The  dualism  in  the  later 
Platonic  dialogues  between  the  Platonic  ‘souls’  and  the 
Platonic  ‘physical’  nature,  the  dualism  between  the  Car¬ 
tesian  ‘thinking  substances’  and  the  Cartesian  ‘extended 
substances,’  the  dualism  between  the  Lockian  ‘human 
understanding’  and  the  Lockian  ‘external  things’  described 
for  him  by  Galileo  and  Newton — all  these  kindred  dualisms 
are  here  found  within  each  occasion  of  actuality.  Each 
occasion  has  its  physical  inheritance  and  its  mental  reaction 
which  drives  it  on  to  its  self-completion.  The  world  is  not 
merely  physical,  nor  is  it  merely  mental.  Nor  is  it  merely 
one  with  many  subordinate  phases.  Nor  is  it  merely  a  com¬ 
plete  fact,  in  its  essence  static  with  the  illusion  of  change. 
Wherever  a  vicious  dualism  appears,  it  is  by  reason  of  mis¬ 
taking  an  abstraction  for  a  final  concrete  fact. 

The  universe  is  dual  because,  in  the  fullest  sense,  it  is 
both  transient  and  eternal.  The  universe  is  dual  because 
each  final  actuality  is  both  physical  and  mental.  The  uni¬ 
verse  is  dual  because  each  actuality  requires  abstract 


Past,  Present,  Future  193 

character.  The  universe  is  dual  because  each  occasion 
unites  its  formal  immediacy  with  objective  otherness.  The 
universe  is  many  because  it  is  wholly  and  completely  to  be 
analysed  into  many  final  actualities — or  in  Cartesian  lan¬ 
guage,  into  many  res  verae.  The  Universe  is  one ,  because 
of  the  universal  immanence.  There  is  thus  a  dualism  in  this 
contrast  between  the  unity  and  multiplicity.  Throughout 
the  universe  there  reigns  the  union  of  opposites  which  is 
the  ground  of  dualism. 


12.  Past,  Present,  Future 

Section  I.  The  doctrine  of  the  immanence  of  past  occa¬ 
sions  in  the  occasions  which  are  future,  relatively  to  them, 
has  been  sufficiently  discussed  in  the  previous  chapter.  The 
past  has  an  objective  existence  in  the  present  which  lies  in 
the  future  beyond  itself.  But  the  sense  in  which  the  future 
can  be  said  to  be  immanent  in  occasions  antecedent  to  it¬ 
self,  and  the  sense  in  which  contemporary  occasions  are 
immanent  in  each  other,  are  not  so  evident  in  terms  of  the 
doctrine  of  the  subject-object  structure  of  experience.  It 
will  be  simpler  first  to  concentrate  upon  the  relation  of  the 
future  to  the  present.  It  is  evident  that  the  future  certainly 
is  something  for  the  present.  The  most  familiar  habits  of 
mankind  witness  to  this  fact.  Legal  contracts,  social  under¬ 
standings  of  every  type,  ambitions,  anxieties,  railway  time¬ 
tables,  are  futile  gestures  of  consciousness  apart  from  the 
fact  that  the  present  bears  in  its  own  realized  constitution 
relationships  to  a  future  beyond  itself.  Cut  away  the  future, 
and  the  present  collapses,  emptied  of  its  proper  content. 
Immediate  existence  requires  the  insertion  of  the  future  in 
the  crannies  of  the  present. 

Here  again  the  habits  of  a  literary  training  with  its  long- 
range  forecast  and  back-cast  of  critical  thought  exercise 
an  unfortunate  effect  upon  philosophy.  We  think  of  the 
future  in  time-spans  of  centuries,  or  of  decades,  or  of  years, 
or  of  days.  We  dwell  critically  upon  the  mass  of  fables 
termed  history.  As  a  result  we  conceive  ourselves  as  related 
to  past  or  to  future  by  a  mere  effort  of  purely  abstract 


194  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

imagination,  devoid  of  direct  observation  of  particular  fact. 
If  we  admit  this  conclusion,  there  is  no  real  evidence  that 
there  was  a  past,  or  that  there  will  be  a  future.  Our  igno¬ 
rance  on  this  point  is  complete.  All  that  we  can  observe 
consists  of  conceptual  persuasions  in  the  present.  Such  is 
the  outcome  of  the  literary  habit  of  dwelling  upon  the  long 
future  or  upon  the  long  past.  Literature  preserves  the  wis¬ 
dom  of  the  human  race;  but  in  this  way  it  enfeebles  the 
emphasis  of  first-hand  intuition.  In  considering  our  direct 
observation  of  past,  or  of  future,  we  should  confine  our¬ 
selves  to  time-spans  of  the  order  of  magnitude  of  a  second, 
or  even  of  fractions  of  a  second. 

Section  II.  If  we  keep  ourselves  to  this  short-range  in¬ 
tuition,  assuredly  the  future  is  not  nothing.  It  lives  actively 
in  its  antecedent  world.  Each  moment  of  experience  con¬ 
fesses  itself  to  be  a  transition  between  two  worlds,  the 
immediate  past  and  the  immediate  future.  This  is  the  per¬ 
sistent  delivery  of  common-sense.  Also  this  immediate 
future  is  immanent  in  the  present  with  some  degree  of 
structural  definition.  The  difficulty  lies  in  the  explanation 
of  this  immanence  in  terms  of  the  subject-object  structure 
of  experience.  In  the  present,  the  future  occasions,  as  indi¬ 
vidual  realities  with  their  measure  of  absolute  completeness, 
are  non-existent.  Thus  the  future  must  be  immanent  in  the 
present  in  some  different  sense  to  the  objective  immortality 
of  the  individual  occasions  of  the  past.  In  the  present  there 
are  no  individual  occasions  belonging  to  the  future.  The 
present  contains  the  utmost  verge  of  such  realized  in¬ 
dividuality.  The  whole  doctrine  of  the  future  is  to  be 
understood  in  terms  of  the  account  of  the  process  of  self¬ 
completion  of  each  individual  actual  occasion. 

This  process  can  be  shortly  characterized  as  a  passage 
from  re-enaction  to  anticipation.  The  intermediate  stage  in 
this  transition  is  constituted  by  the  acquisition  of  novel 
content,  which  is  the  individual  contribution  of  the  im¬ 
mediate  subject  for  the  re-shaping  of  its  primary  phase  of 
re-enaction  into  its  final  phase  of  anticipation.  This  final 
phase  is  otherwise  termed  the  ‘satisfaction,’  since  it  marks 
the  exhaustion  of  the  creative  urge  for  that  individuality. 
This  novel  content  is  composed  of  positive  conceptual  pre¬ 
hensions,  that  is  to  say,  of  conceptual  feelings.  These 
conceptual  feelings  become  integrated  with  the  physical 
prehensions  of  antecedent  occasions,  and  thus  yield  propo- 


Past ,  Present ,  Future  195 

sitions  concerning  the  past.  These  propositions  are  again 
integrated  and  re-integrated  with  each  other  and  with  con¬ 
ceptual  feelings,  and  yield  other  propositions. 

Finally  propositions  emerge  concerning  the  constitution 
of  the  immediate  subject.  It  belongs  to  the  essence  of  this 
subject  that  it  pass  into  objective  immortality.  Thus  its  own 
constitution  involves  that  its  own  activity  in  ^/-formation 
passes  into  its  activity  of  oJ/zer-formation.  It  is  by  reason 
of  this  constitution  of  the  present  subject  that  the  future 
will  embody  the  present  subject  and  will  re-enact  its  pat¬ 
terns  of  activity.  But  the  future  individual  occasions  are 
non-existent.  The  sole  immediate  actuality  is  the  constitu¬ 
tion  of  the  present  subject  which  embodies  its  own  neces¬ 
sity  for  objective  immortality  beyond  its  own  immediacy 
of  self-formation.  This  objective  immortality  is  a  stubborn 
fact  for  the  future,  involving  its  pattern  of  perspective 
re-enaction. 

The  final  phase  of  anticipation  is  a  propositional  realiza¬ 
tion  of  the  essence  of  the  present-subject,  in  respect  to  the 
necessities  which  it  lays  upon  the  future  to  embody  it  and 
to  re-enact  it  so  far  as  compatibility  may  permit.  Thus 
the  self -enjoyment  of  an  occasion  of  experience  is  initiated 
by  an  enjoyment  of  the  past  as  alive  in  itself  and  is  ter¬ 
minated  by  an  enjoyment  of  itself  as  alive  in  the  future. 
This  is  the  account  of  the  creative  urge  of  the  universe  as  it 
functions  in  each  single  individual  occasion.  In  this  sense, 
the  future  is  immanent  in  each  present  occasion,  with  its 
particular  relations  to  the  present  settled  in  various  degrees 
of  dominance.  But  no  future  individual  occasion  is  in 
existence.  The  anticipatory  propositions  all  concern  the 
constitution  of  the  present  occasion  and  the  necessities  in¬ 
herent  in  it.  This  constitution  necessitates  that  there  be  a 
future,  and  necessitates  a  quota  of  contribution  for  re¬ 
enaction  in  the  primary  phases  of  future  occasions. 

The  point  to  remember  is  that  the  fact  that  each  indi¬ 
vidual  occasion  is  transcended  by  the  creative  urge,  belongs 
to  the  essential  constitution  of  each  such  occasion.  It  is  not 
an  accident  which  is  irrelevant  to  the  completed  constitu¬ 
tion  of  any  such  occasion. 

In  the  formation  of  each  occasion  of  actuality  the  swing 
over  from  re-enaction  to  anticipation  is  due  to  the  inter¬ 
vening  touch  of  mentality.  Whether  the  ideas  thus  intro¬ 
duced  by  the  novel  conceptual  prehensions  be  old  or  new, 


196  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

they  have  this  decisive  result,  that  the  occasion  arises  as  an 
effect  facing  its  past  and  ends  as  a  cause  facing  its  future. 
In  between  there  lies  the  teleology  of  the  Universe. 

If  the  mental  activity  involves  no  introduction  of  ideal 
novelty,  the  data  of  the  conceptual  feelings  are  merely 
eternal  objects  already  illustrated  in  the  initial  phase  of  re¬ 
enaction.  In  that  case,  the  reintegration  with  the  primary 
phase  merely  converts  the  initial  conformal  reception  into 
the  anticipation  of  preservation  of  types  of  order  and  of 
patterns  of  feeling  already  dominant  in  the  inheritance. 
There  is  a  reign  of  acquiescence.  In  this  way,  a  region  of 
such  occasions  assumes  the  aspect  of  passive  submission  to 
imposed  laws  of  nature.  But  when  there  is  conceptual 
novelty  made  effective  by  its  re-iteration  and  by  the  added 
emphasis  on  it  throughout  a  chain  of  coordinated  occa¬ 
sions,  we  have  the  aspect  of  an  enduring  person  with  a 
sustained  purpose  originated  by  that  person  and  made 
effective  in  that  person’s  environment.  Thus  in  this  case  the 
anticipation  of  kinship  with  the  future  assumes  the  form  of 
purpose  to  transform  concept  into  fact.  In  either  case, 
whether  or  no  there  be  conceptual  novelty,  the  subjective 
forms  of  the  conceptual  prehensions  constitute  the  drive  of 
the  Universe,  whereby  each  occasion  precipitates  itself  into 
the  future. 

Section  III.  It  is  now  possible  to  determine  the  sense  in 
which  the  future  is  immanent  in  the  present.  The  future  is 
immanent  in  the  present  by  reason  of  the  fact  that  the  pres¬ 
ent  bears  in  its  own  essence  the  relationships  which  it  will 
have  to  the  future.  It  thereby  includes  in  its  essence  the 
necessities  to  which  the  future  most  conform.  The  future 
is  there  in  the  present,  as  a  general  fact  belonging  to  the 
nature  of  things.  It  is  also  there  with  such  general  deter¬ 
minations  as  it  lies  in  the  nature  of  the  particular  present 
to  impose  on  the  particular  future  which  must  succeed  it. 
All  this  belongs  to  the  essence  of  the  present,  and  consti¬ 
tutes  the  future,  as  thus  determined,  an  object  for  prehen¬ 
sion  in  the  subjective  immediacy  of  the  present.  In  this 
way  each  present  occasion  prehends  the  general  meta¬ 
physical  character  of  the  universe,  and  thereby  it  prehends 
its  own  share  in  that  character.  Thus  the  future  is  to  the 
present  as  an  object  for  a  subject.  It  has  an  objective 
existence  in  the  present.  But  the  objective  existence  of  the 
future  in  the  present  differs  from  the  objective  existence  of 


Fast,  Present,  Future  197 

the  past  in  the  present.  The  various  particular  occasions 
of  the  past  are  in  existence,  and  are  severally  functioning 
as  objects  for  prehension  in  the  present.  This  individual 
objective  existence  of  the  actual  occasions  of  the  past,  each 
functioning  in  each  present  occasion,  constitutes  the  causal 
relationship  which  is  efficient  causation.  But  there  are  no 
actual  occasions  in  the  future,  already  constituted.  Thus 
there  are  no  actual  occasions  in  the  future  to  exercise 
efficient  causation  in  the  present.  What  is  objective  in  the 
present  is  the  necessity  of  a  future  of  actual  occasions,  and 
the  necessity  that  these  future  occasions  conform  to  the 
conditions  inherent  in  the  essence  of  the  present  occasion. 
The  future  belongs  to  the  essence  of  present  fact,  and  has 
no  actuality  other  than  the  actuality  of  present  fact.  But  its 
particular  relationships  to  present  fact  are  already  realized 
in  the  nature  of  present  fact. 

Section  IV.  It  is  the  definition  of  contemporary  events 
that  they  happen  in  causal  independence  of  each  other. 
Thus  two  contemporary  occasions  are  such  that  neither 
belongs  to  the  past  of  the  other.  The  two  occasions  are  not 
in  any  direct  relation  of  efficient  causation.  The  vast  causal 
independence  of  contemporary  occasions  is  the  preservative 
of  the  elbow-room  within  the  Universe.  It  provides  each 
actuality  with  a  welcome  environment  for  irresponsibility. 
‘Am  I  my  brother’s  keeper?’  expresses  one  of  the  earliest 
gestures  of  self-consciousness.  Our  claim  for  freedom  is 
rooted  in  our  relationship  to  our  contemporary  environ¬ 
ment.  Nature  does  provide  a  field  for  independent  activities. 
The  understanding  of  the  Universe  requires  that  we  con¬ 
ceive  in  their  proper  relations  to  each  other  the  various 
roles,  of  efficient  causation,  of  teleological  self-creation, 
and  of  contemporary  independence.  This  adequate  concep¬ 
tion  requires  also  understanding  of  perspective  elimination, 
and  of  types  of  order  dominating  vast  epochs,  and  of  minor 
endurances  with  their  own  additional  modes  of  order 
diversifying  each  larger  epoch  within  which  they  find  them¬ 
selves. 

The  mutual  independence  of  contemporary  occasions  lies 
strictly  within  the  sphere  of  their  teleological  self -creation. 
The  occasions  originate  from  a  common  past  and  their 
objective  immortality  operates  within  a  common  future. 
Thus  indirectly,  via  the  immanence  of  the  past  and  the  im¬ 
manence  of  the  future,  the  occasions  are  connected.  But 


198  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

the  immediate  activity  of  self -creation  is  separate  and  pri¬ 
vate,  so  far  as  contemporaries  are  concerned. 

There  is  thus  a  certain  indirect  immanence  of  contempo¬ 
rary  occasions  in  each  other.  For  if  A  and  B  be  contempo¬ 
raries,  and  C  be  in  the  past  of  both  of  them,  then  A  and  B 
are  each  in  a  sense  immanent  in  C,  in  the  way  in  which  the 
future  can  be  immanent  in  its  past.  But  C  is  objectively 
immortal  in  both  A  and  B.  Thus,  in  this  indirect  sense,  A 
is  immanent  in  B,  and  B  is  immanent  in  A.  But  the  objec¬ 
tive  immortality  of  A  does  not  operate  in  B,  nor  does  that 
of  B  operate  in  A.  As  individual  complete  actualities,  A  is 
shrouded  from  B,  and  B  is  shrouded  from  A.  It  is  not 
wholly  true  that  two  contemporaries  A  and  B  enjoy  a  com¬ 
mon  past.  In  the  first  place,  even  if  the  occasions  in  the  past 
of  A  be  identical  with  the  occasions  in  the  past  of  B,  yet  A 
and  B  by  reason  of  their  difference  of  status,  enjoy  that  past 
under  a  difference  of  perspective  elimination.  Thus  the 
objective  immortality  of  the  past  in  A  differs  from  the  ob¬ 
jective  immortality  of  that  same  past  in  B.  Thus  two  con¬ 
temporary  occasions,  greatly  remote  from  each  other,  are 
in  effect  derived  from  different  pasts. 

Again,  according  to  the  notions  of  time  recently  de¬ 
veloped  in  modern  physics,  if  A  and  B  are  contemporaries 
and  P  is  contemporary  with  A,  then  it  is  not  necessarily 
true  that  P  is  contemporary  with  B.  It  is  possible  that  P 
may  be  earlier  than  B,  or  that  it  may  be  later  than  B.  Thus 
even  the  occasions  in  the  past  of  A  are  not  wholly  identical 
with  those  in  the  past  of  B.  When  A  and  B  are  neighbour¬ 
ing,  then  this  distinction  between  their  pasts  may  be 
negligible.  But  when  they  are  remote  from  each  other,  the 
distinction  may  be  of  major  importance. 

It  follows  from  this  discussion  that  in  so  far  as  the  rele¬ 
vant  environment  is  dominated  by  any  uniform  type  of 
coordination,  any  occasion  will  experience  its  past  as  ‘an¬ 
ticipating’  the  prolongation  of  that  type  of  order  into  the 
future  beyond  that  past.  But  this  future  includes  the  occa¬ 
sion  in  question  and  its  contemporary  environment.  In  this 
way  there  is  an  indirect  immanence  of  its  contemporary 
world  in  that  occasion;  not  in  respect  to  its  particular 
individual  occasions,  but  as  the  general  substratum  for  that 
relation  of  order.  This  type  of  order  will  both  relate  the 
various  parts  of  the  contemporary  world  among  themselves, 
and  will  also  relate  these  parts  to  the  occasion  in  question. 


Past,  Present,  Future  199 

But  the  parts  of  the  contemporary  world  will  only  belong 
to  the  experience  of  the  occasion  in  their  function  of  relata 
for  this  type  of  order.  This  is  the  general  explanation  why 
the  contemporary  world  should  be  perceived  as  the  field 
of  the  uniform  spatial  relations.  It  gives  no  reason  why  any 
special  system  of  relationships  should  dominate  this  epoch. 
But  the  explanation  does  give  a  reason  why  some  system 
of  uniform  relations  should  dominate  our  perceptions  of  the 
contemporary  world.  Also  the  intrinsic  activity  has  been 
lost.  The  contemporary  world  enters  into  experience  as  the 
passive  subject  of  relations  and  qualities. 

Section  V .  The  actualities  of  the  Universe  are  processes 
of  experience,  each  process  an  individual  fact.  The  whole 
Universe  is  the  advancing  assemblage  of  these  processes. 
The  Aristotelian  doctrine,  that  all  agency  is  confined  to 
actuality,  is  accepted.  So  also  is  the  Platonic  dictum  that 
the  very  meaning  of  existence  is  ‘to  be  a  factor  in  agency,’ 
or  in  other  words  ‘to  make  a  difference.’  Thus,  ‘to  be  some¬ 
thing’  is  to  be  discoverable  as  a  factor  in  the  analysis  of 
some,  actuality.  It  follows  that  in  one  sense  everything  is 
‘real,’  according  to  its  own  category  of  being.  In  this  sense 
the  word  ‘real’  can  only  mean  that  some  sound  or  mark  is  a 
word  with  a  denotation.  But  the  term  ‘realization’  refers  to 
the  actual  entities  which  include  the  entity  in  question  as 
a  positive  factor  in  their  constitutions.  Thus  though  every¬ 
thing  is  real,  it  is  not  necessarily  realized  in  some  particular 
set  of  actual  occasions.  But  it  is  necessary  that  it  be  dis¬ 
coverable  somewhere,  realized  in  some  actual  entity.  There 
is  not  anything  which  has  failed  in  some  sense  to  be  real¬ 
ized,  physically  or  conceptually.  The  term  ‘real’  can  also 
mark  the  differences  arising  in  the  contrast  between  physi¬ 
cal  and  conceptual  realization. 

Section  VI.  Any  set  of  actual  occasions  are  united  by 
the  mutual  immanence  of  occasions,  each  in  the  other.  To 
the  extent  that  they  are  united  they  mutually  constrain  each 
other.  Evidently  this  mutual  immanence  and  constraint  of 
a  pair  of  occasions  is  not  in  general  a  symmetric  relation. 
For,  apart  from  contemporaries,  one  occasion  will  be  in  the 
future  of  the  other.  Thus  the  earlier  will  be  immanent  in 
the  later  according  to  the  mode  of  efficient  causality,  and 
the  later  in  the  earlier  according  to  the  mode  of  anticipa¬ 
tion,  as  explained  above.  Any  set  of  occasions,  conceived  as 
thus  combined  into  a  unity,  will  be  termed  a  nexus.  The 


200  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

unity  of  such  a  nexus  may  be  of  a  trivial  description,  if  the 
various  occasions  are  dispersed  through  the  Universe,  each 
with  a  widely  different  status  from  the  other.  When  the 
unity  of  the  nexus  is  of  dominating  importance,  nexus  of 
different  types  emerge,  which  may  be  respectively  termed 
Regions,  Societies,  Persons,  Enduring  Objects,  Corporal 
Substances,  Living  Organisms,  Events,  with  other  analo¬ 
gous  terms  for  the  various  shades  of  complexity  of  which 
Nature  is  capable.  It  will  be  sufficient  in  the  next  chapter 
to  indicate  a  few  of  these  special  types  of  nexus. 

Section  VII.  We  think  of  Constraint  and  Freedom  in 
terms  of  values  realized  in  connection  with  them,  and 
also  in  terms  of  the  antithesis  between  them.  But  there  is 
another  way  of  considering  them.  We  can  ask  what  there 
is  in  the  physical  nature  of  things  constituting  the  physical 
realization  either  of  freedom,  or  of  constraint,  or  of  a  com¬ 
patible  association  of  both  in  a  suitable  pattern. 

In  fact  we  do  habitually  interpret  human  history  in  terms 
of  freedom  and  constraint.  Apart  from  the  realization  of 
this  antithesis  in  physical  occurrences,  the  history  of  civi¬ 
lized  humanity  is  a  meaningless  succession  of  events,  in¬ 
volving  a  play  of  emotions  concerned  with  concepts  entirely 
irrelevant  to  the  physical  facts. 

The  causal  independence  of  contemporary  occasions  is 
the  ground  for  the  freedom  within  the  Universe.  The  novel¬ 
ties  which  face  the  contemporary  world  are  solved  in  isola¬ 
tion  by  the  contemporary  occasions.  There  is  complete 
contemporary  freedom.  It  is  not  true  that  whatever  happens 
is  immediately  a  condition  laid  upon  everything  else.  Such 
a  conception  of  complete  mutual  determination  is  an  exag¬ 
geration  of  the  community  of  the  Universe.  The  notions  of 
‘sporadic  occurrences’  and  of  ‘mutual  irrelevance’  have  a 
real  application  to  the  nature  of  things.  Again  the  perspec¬ 
tive  imposed  by  incompatibilities  of  subjective  form  in 
another  way  provides  for  freedom.  The  antecedent  environ¬ 
ment  is  not  wholly  efficacious  in  determining  the  initial 
phase  of  the  occasion  which  springs  from  it.  There  are 
factors  in  the  environment  which  are  eliminated  from  any 
function  as  explicit  facts  in  the  new  creation.  The  running 
stream  purifies  itself,  or  perhaps  loses  some  virtue  which  in 
happier  circumstances  might  have  been  retained.  The  initial 
phase  of  each  fresh  occasion  represents  the  issue  of  a 
struggle  within  the  past  for  objective  existence  beyond  it- 


Past,  Present,  Future  201 

self.  The  determinant  of  the  struggle  is  the  supreme  Eros 
incarnating  itself  as  the  first  phase  of  the  individual  sub¬ 
jective  aim  in  the  new  process  of  actuality.  Thus  in  any 
two  occasions  of  the  Universe  there  are  elements  in  either 
one  which  are  irrelevant  to  the  constitution  of  the  other. 
The  forgetfulness  of  this  doctrine  leads  to  an  over-moraliza- 
tion  in  the  view  of  the  nature  of  things.  Fortunately  there 
are  a  great  many  things  which  do  not  much  matter,  and  we 
can  have  them  how  we  will.  The  opposite  point  of  view  has 
been  the  nursery  of  fanaticism,  and  has  tinged  history  with 
ferocity. 

Section  VIII.  The  understanding  of  the  Universe,  in 
terms  of  the  type  of  metaphysic  here  put  forward,  requires 
that  the  various  roles  of  efficient  causation,  of  teleological 
self-creation,  of  perspective  elimination,  of  contemporary 
independence,  of  the  laws  of  order  dominating  vast  epochs, 
and  of  the  minor  endurances  within  each  epoch,  be  con¬ 
ceived  in  their  various  relations  to  each  other.  Another 
summary  expression  of  this  type  of  understanding  is  con¬ 
tained  in  the  phrases,  Constraint  and  Freedom,  Survival 
and  Destruction,  Depth  of  Feeling  and  Triviality  of  Feeling, 
Conceptual  realization  and  physical  realization,  Appear¬ 
ance  and  Reality.  Any  account  of  the  Adventure  of  Ideas 
is  concerned  with  Ideas  threading  their  way  among  the 
alternatives  presented  by  these  various  phrases. 

When  we  examine  the  structure  of  the  epoch  of  the  Uni¬ 
verse  in  which  we  find  ourselves,  this  structure  exhibits  suc¬ 
cessive  layers  of  types  of  order,  each  layer  introducing  some 
additional  type  of  order  within  some  limited  region  which 
shares  in  the  more  general  type  of  order  of  some  larger 
environment.  Also  this  larger  environment  in  its  turn  is  a 
specialized  region  within  the  general  epoch  of  creation  as 
we  know  it.  Each  one  of  these  regions,  with  its  dominant 
set  of  ordering  relations,  can  either  be  considered  from  the 
point  of  view  of  the  mutual  relations  of  its  parts  to  each 
other,  or  it  can  be  considered  from  the  point  of  view  of  its 
impact,  as  a  unity,  upon  the  experience  of  an  external  per¬ 
cipient.  There  is  yet  a  third  mode  of  consideration  which 
combines  the  other  two.  The  percipient  may  be  an  occasion 
within  the  region,  and  may  yet  grasp  the  region  as  one,  in¬ 
cluding  the  percipient  itself  as  a  member  of  it. 

A  region,  analysed  in  the  first  way,  is  thereby  conceived 
as  subject  to  certain  Laws  of  Nature,  which  laws  are  its 


202  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

dominant  set  of  ordering  relations.  In  the  second  mode  of 
consideration,  synthesis  replaces  analysis.  The  region  in 
question  assumes  the  guise  of  an  enduring  unity,  of  which 
the  essence  is  a  certain  complex  internal  character.  This  es¬ 
sential  character,  as  it  appears  in  the  second  approach,  is 
nothing  other  than  the  set  of  Laws  of  Nature  reigning 
within  the  region,  as  they  appear  in  the  first  approach. 
Either  mode  of  approach  simply  lays  stress  upon  the  domi¬ 
nant  identity  of  character  pervading  the  concrete  connexity 
of  the  many  occasions  constituting  the  region.  The  unity  of 
the  region  is  two-fold: — first,  by  reason  of  the  sheer  con¬ 
nexity  arising  from  the  mutual  immanence  of  the  various 
occasions  included  in  it,  and  secondly,  by  reason  of  a  perva¬ 
sive  identity  of  character  whereby  the  various  parts  play 
an  analogous  role  in  any  external  occasion.  Thus  the  region 
with  its  Laws  of  Nature  is  a  synonym  for  the  enduring 
substance  with  its  Essential  Character. 


13.  The  Grouping  of  Occasions 

Section  I.  The  Grouping  of  Occasions  is  the  outcome  of 
some  common  function  performed  by  those  occasions  in  the 
percipient  experience.  The  grouped  occasions  then  acquire 
a  unity;  they  become,  for  the  experience  of  the  percipient, 
one  thing  which  is  complex  by  reason  of  its  divisibility  into 
many  occasions,  or  into  many  subordinate  groups  of  occa¬ 
sions.  The  subordinate  groups  are  then  complex  unities, 
each  belonging  to  the  same  metaphysical  category  of  exist¬ 
ence  as  the  total  group.  This  characteristic,  namely  divisi¬ 
bility  into  groups  of  analogous  type  of  being,  is  the  general 
notion  of  extensiveness.  The  peculiar  relationships  (if  any) 
diffused  systematically  between  the  extensive  groups  of  an 
epoch  constitute  the  system  of  geometry  prevalent  in  that 
epoch. 

The  general  common  function  exhibited  by  any  group  of 
actual  occasions  is  that  of  mutual  immanence.  In  Platonic 
language,  this  is  the  function  of  belonging  to  a  common 
Receptacle.  If  the  group  be  considered  merely  in  respect  to 
this  basic  property  of  mutual  immanence,  however  other- 


The  Grouping  of  Occasions  203 

wise  lacking  in  common  relevance,  then — conceived  as  ex¬ 
emplifying  this  general  connectedness — the  group  is  termed 
a  Nexus. 

Thus  the  term  Nexus  does  not  presuppose  any  special 
type  of  order,  nor  does  it  presuppose  any  order  at  all  per¬ 
vading  its  members  other  than  the  general  metaphysical 
obligation  of  mutual  immanence.  But  in  fact  the  teleology 
of  the  Universe,  with  its  aim  at  intensity  and  variety,  pro¬ 
duces  epochs  with  various  types  of  order  dominating  sub¬ 
ordinate  nexus  interwoven  with  each  other.  A  nexus  can 
spread  itself  both  spatially  and  temporally.  In  other  words, 
it  can  include  sets  of  occasions  which  are  contemporary 
with  each  other,  and  it  can  include  sets  which  are  relatively 
past  and  future.  If  the  nexus  be  purely  spatial,  then  it  will 
include  no  pair  of  occasions  such  that  one  of  the  pair  is 
antecedent  to  the  other.  The  mutual  immanence  between 
the  occasions  of  the  nexus,  will  then  be  of  the  indirect  type 
proper  to  contemporary  occasions.  It  is  for  this  reason  that 
the  notion  of  externality  dominates  our  intuition  of  space. 
If  the  nexus  be  purely  temporal,  then  it  will  include  no  pair 
of  contemporary  occasions.  It  is  to  be  a  mere  thread  of 
temporal  transition  from  occasion  to  occasion.  The  idea 
of  temporal  transition  can  never  be  wholly  disengaged  from 
that  of  ‘causation.5  This  latter  notion  is  merely  a  special 
way  of  considering  direct  immanence  of  the  past  in  its 
future. 

Section  II.  The  notion  of  the  contiguity  of  occasions  is 
important.  Two  occasions,  which  are  not  contemporary,  are 
contiguous  in  time  when  there  is  no  occasion  which  is 
antecedent  to  one  of  them  and  subsequent  to  the  other.  A 
purely  temporal  nexus  of  occasions  is  continuous  when, 
with  the  exception  of  the  earliest  and  the  latest  occasions, 
each  occasion  is  contiguous  with  an  earlier  occasion  and  a 
later  occasion.  The  nexus  will  then  form  an  unbroken 
thread  in  temporal  or  serial  order.  The  first  and  the  last 
occasions  of  the  thread  will,  of  course,  only  enjoy  a  one¬ 
sided  contiguity  with  the  thread. 

Spatial  contiguity  is  more  difficult  to  define.  It  requires  a 
reference  to  the  temporal  dimension.  It  can  be  defined  by 
the  aid  of  the  doctrine  that  no  two  contemporary  occasions 
are  derived  from  a  past  wholly  in  common.  Thus  if  A  and 
B  be  two  contemporary  occasions,  the  past  of  A  includes 
some  occasions  not  belonging  to  the  past  of  B,  and  that  of 


204  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

B  includes  occasions  not  belonging  to  the  past  of  A.  Then 
A  and  B  are  contiguous  when  there  is  no  occasion  (i)  con¬ 
temporary  with  both  A  and  B,  and  (ii)  such  that  its  past 
includes  all  occasions,  each  belonging  both  to  the  past  of  A 
and  the  past  of  B.  The  particular  form  of  this  definition  is 
of  no  great  importance.  But  the  principle  that  the  inter¬ 
relations  of  the  present  are  derived  from  a  reference  to  the 
past  is  fundamental.  It  gives  the  reason  why  the  con¬ 
temporary  world  is  experienced  as  a  display  of  lifeless  sub¬ 
stances  passively  illustrating  imposed  characters. 

Anyhow  contiguity,  temporal  and  spatial,  is  definable  in 
terms  of  the  doctrine  of  immanence.  By  the  aid  of  the  no¬ 
tion  of  contiguity,  the  notion  of  a  region  can  be  defined  as 
denoting  a  nexus  in  which  certain  conditions  of  contiguity 
are  preserved.  The  logical  details  of  such  a  definition  are 
irrelevant  to  this  discussion. 

So  far  we  have  been  considering  various  species  of  nexus, 
whose  sole  principle  of  unity  is  derived  from  the  bare  fact 
of  mutual  immanence.  We  will  term  this  genus  of  nexus, 
the  genus  whose  species  are  discriminated  by  differences  of 
bare  extensive  pattern.  More  briefly,  it  will  be  termed  the 
Genus  of  Patterned  Nexus.  Every  nexus  belongs  to  some 
species  of  this  genus,  if  we  abstract  from  the  qualitative 
factors  which  are  interwoven  in  its  patterns. 

Section  III.  We  now  pass  on  to  the  general  notion  of  a 
Society.  This  notion  introduces  the  general  consideration 
of  types  of  order,  and  the  genetic  propagation  of  order.  The 
definition  depends  upon  taking  into  account  factors  which 
are  omitted  in  the  analysis  of  the  Genus  of  Patterned 
Nexus. 

A  Society  is  a  nexus  which  ‘illustrates’  or  ‘shares  in,’ 
some  type  of  ‘Social  Order.’  ‘Social  Order’  can  be  defined1 
as  follows: — ‘A  nexus  enjoys  “social  order”  when  (i)  there 
is  a  common  element  of  form  illustrated  in  the  definiteness 
of  each  of  its  included  actual  entities,  and  (ii)  this  common 
element  of  form  arises  in  each  member  of  the  nexus  by 
reason  of  the  conditions  imposed  upon  it  by  its  prehensions 
of  some  other  members  of  the  nexus,  and  (iii)  these  pre¬ 
hensions  impose  that  condition  of  reproduction  by  reason 
of  their  inclusion  of  positive  feelings  involving2  that  com¬ 
mon  form.  Such  a  nexus  is  called  a  “society,”  and  the 

3  Cf.  Process  and  Reality,  Part  I,  Ch.  Ill,  Sect.  II. 

2  In  the  original,  Process  and  Reality,  ‘of  that’  in  place  of  ‘Involving.* 


The  Grouping  of  Occasions  205 

common  form  is  the  “defining  characteristic”  of  that 
society.’ 

Another  rendering3  of  the  same  definition  is  as  follows: 
— ‘The  point  of  a  “society”  as  the  term  is  here  used,  is  that 
it  is  self-sustaining;  in  other  words,  that  it  is  its  own  reason. 
Thus  a  society  is  more  than  a  set  of  [actual]  entities  to 
which  the  same  class-name  applies:  that  is  to  say,  it  in¬ 
volves  more  than  a  merely  mathematical  conception  of 
‘order.’  To  constitute  a  society,  the  class-name  has  got  to 
apply  to  each  member,  by  reason  of  genetic  derivation 
from  other  members  of  that  same  society.  The  members 
of  the  society  are  alike  because,  by  reason  of  their  common 
character,  they  impose  on  other  members  of  the  society  the 
conditions  which  lead  to  that  likeness.’ 

It  is  evident  from  this  description  of  the  notion  of  a 
‘Society,’  as  here  employed,  that  a  set  of  mutually  con¬ 
temporary  occasions  cannot  form  a  complete  society.  For 
the  genetic  condition  cannot  be  satisfied  by  such  a  set  of 
contemporaries.  Of  course  a  set  of  contemporaries  may 
belong  to  a  society.  But  the  society,  as  such,  must  involve 
antecedents  and  subsequents.  In  other  words,  a  society 
must  exhibit  tire  peculiar  quality  of  endurance.  The  real 
actual  things  that  endure  are  all  societies.  They  are  not 
actual  occasions.  It  is  the  mistake  that  has  thwarted  Euro¬ 
pean  metaphysics  from  the  time  of  the  Greeks,  namely,  to 
confuse  societies  with  the  completely  real  things  which  are 
the  actual  occasions.  A  society  has  an  essential  character, 
whereby  it  is  the  society  that  it  is,  and  it  has  also  accidental 
qualities  which  vary  as  circumstances  alter.  Thus  a  society, 
as  a  complete  existence  and  as  retaining  the  same  meta¬ 
physical  status,  enjoys  a  history  expressing  its  changing 
reactions  to  changing  circumstances.4  But  an  actual  occa¬ 
sion  has  no  such  history.  It  never  changes.  It  only  becomes 
and  perishes.  Its  perishing  is  its  assumption  of  a  new  meta¬ 
physical  function  in  the  creative  advance  of  the  universe. 

The  self-identity  of  a  society  is  founded  upon  the  self- 
identity  of  its  defining  characteristic,  and  upon  the  mutual 
immanence  of  its  occasions.  But  there  is  no  definite  nexus 
which  is  the  nexus  underlying  that  society,  except  when  the 
society  belongs  wholly  to  the  past.  For  the  realized  nexus 

3  Cf.  Process  and  Reality,  Part  II,  Ch.  Ill,  Sect.  II. 

4  This  notion  of  ‘society’  has  analogies  to  Descartes’  notion  of  'substance,* 
cf.  Descartes’  Principles  of  Philosophy,  Part  I,  Principles  LI-LVII. 


206  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

which  underlies  the  society  is  always  adding  to  itself,  with 
the  creative  advance  into  the  future.  For  example,  the  man 
adds  another  day  to  his  life,  and  the  earth  adds  another 
millennium  to  the  period  of  its  existence.  But  until  the 
death  of  the  man  and  the  destruction  of  the  earth,  there  is 
no  determinate  nexus  which  in  an  unqualified  sense  is  either 
the  man  or  the  earth. 

Section  IV.  Though  there  is  no  one  nexus  which  can 
claim  to  be  the  society,  so  long  as  that  society  is  in  exist¬ 
ence,  there  is  a  succession  of  nexus  each  of  which  is  the 
whole  realized  society  up  to  that  stage  of  its  existence.  The 
extensive  patterns  of  the  various  nexus  of  the  succession 
for  a  given  society  may  be  different.  In  such  a  case  the 
extensive  patterns,  so  far  as  they  differ,  cannot  be  any  ele¬ 
ment  in  the  defining  characteristic  of  the  society.  But  the 
extensive  patterns  of  the  various  nexus  of  the  succession 
may  be  identical,  or  at  least  they  may  have  in  common 
some  feature  of  their  pattern.  In  this  case  the  common 
pattern,  or  the  common  feature,  can  be  one  element  in  the 
defining  characteristic  of  the  society  in  question. 

The  simplest  example  of  a  society  in  which  the  successive 
nexus  of  its  progressive  realization  have  a  common  exten¬ 
sive  pattern  is  when  each  such  nexus  is  purely  temporal  and 
continuous.  The  society,  in  each  stage  of  realization,  then 
consists  of  a  set  of  contiguous  occasions  in  serial  order.  A 
man,  defined  as  an  enduring  percipient,  is  such  a  society. 
This  definition  of  a  man  is  exactly  what  Descartes  means 
by  a  thinking  substance.  It  will  be  remembered  that  in  his 
Principles  of  Philosophy  [Part  I,  Principle  XXI;  also  Medi¬ 
tation  III]  Descartes  states  that  endurance  is  nothing  else 
than  successive  re-creation  by  God.  Thus  the  Cartesian 
conception  of  the  human  soul  and  that  here  put  forward 
differ  only  in  the  function  assigned  to  God.  Both  concep¬ 
tions  involve  a  succession  of  occasions,  each  with  its 
measure  of  immediate  completeness. 

Societies  of  the  general  type,  that  their  realized  nexus  are 
purely  temporal  and  continuous,  will  be  termed  ‘personal.’ 
Any  society  of  this  type  may  be  termed  a  ‘person.’  Thus,  as 
defined  above,  a  man  is  a  person. 

But  a  man  is  more  than  a  serial  succession  of  occasions 
of  experience.  Such  a  definition  may  satisfy  philosophers — 
Descartes,  for  example.  It  is  not  the  ordinary  meaning  of 
the  term  ‘man.’  There  are  animal  bodies  as  well  as  animal 


The  Grouping  of  Occasions  207 

minds;  and  in  our  experience  such  minds  always  occur 
incorporated.  Now  an  animal  body  is  a  society  involving 
a  vast  number  of  occasions,  spatially  and  temporally  co¬ 
ordinated.  It  follows  that  a  ‘man/  in  the  full  sense  of  ordi¬ 
nary  usage,  is  not  a  ‘person’  as  here  defined.  He  has  the 
unity  of  a  wider  society,  in  which  the  social  coordination 
is  a  dominant  factor  in  the  behaviours  of  the  various  parts. 

Also,  when  we  survey  the  living  world,  animal  and  vege¬ 
table,  there  are  bodies  of  all  types.  Each  living  body  is  a 
society,  which  is  not  personal.  But  most  of  the  animals,  in¬ 
cluding  all  the  vertebrates,  seem  to  have  their  social  system 
dominated  by  a  subordinate  society  which  is  ‘personal/ 
This  subordinate  society  is  of  the  same  type  as  ‘man,’  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  personal  definition  given  above,  though  of 
course  the  mental  poles  in  the  occasions  of  the  dominant 
personal  society  do  not  rise  to  the  height  of  human  men¬ 
tality.  Thus  in  one  sense  a  dog  is  a  ‘person,’  and  in  another 
sense  he  is  a  non-personal  society.  But  the  lower  forms  of 
animal  life,  and  all  vegetation,  seem  to  lack  the  dominance 
of  any  included  personal  society.  A  tree  is  a  democracy. 
Thus  living  bodies  are  not  to  be  identified  with  living  bodies 
under  personal  dominance.  There  is  no  necessary  connec¬ 
tion  between  ‘life’  and  ‘personality.’  A  ‘personal’  society 
need  not  be  ‘living,’  in  the  general  sense  of  the  term;  and 
a  ‘living’  society  need  not  be  ‘personal.’ 

Section  V.  The  Universe  achieves  its  values  by  reason 
of  its  coordination  into  societies  of  societies,  and  into 
societies  of  societies  of  societies.  Thus  an  army  is  a  society 
of  regiments,  and  regiments  are  societies  of  men,  and  men 
are  societies  of  cells,  and  of  blood,  and  of  bones,  together 
with  the  dominant  society  of  personal  human  experience, 
and  cells  are  societies  of  smaller  physical  entities  such  as 
protons,  and  so  on,  and  so  on.  Also  all  of  these  societies 
presuppose  the  circumambient  space  of  social  physical 
activity. 

It  is  evident  that  the  previous  definition  of  ‘society’  has 
been  phrased  so  as  to  suggest  an  over-simplified  concept  of 
the  meaning.  For  the  notion  of  a  defining  characteristic 
must  be  construed  to  include  the  notion  of  the  coordination 
of  societies.  Thus  there  are  societies  at  different  levels.  For 
instance,  the  army  is  a  society  at  a  level  different  from  that 
of  a  regiment,  and  similarly  for  a  regiment  and  a  man. 
Nature  is  a  complex  of  enduring  objects,  functioning  as 


208  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

subordinate  elements  in  a  larger  spatial-physical  society. 
This  larger  society  is  for  us  the  natural  universe.  There  is 
however  no  reason  to  identify  it  with  the  boundless  totality 
of  actual  things. 

Also  each  of  these  enduring  objects,  such  as  tables, 
animal  bodies,  and  stars,  is  itself  a  subordinate  universe 
including  subordinate  enduring  objects.  The  only  strictly 
personal  society  of  which  we  have  direct  discriminative 
intuition  is  the  society  of  our  own  personal  experiences. 
We  also  have  a  direct,  though  vaguer,  intuition  of  our 
derivation  of  experience  from  the  antecedent  functioning 
of  our  bodies,  and  a  still  vaguer  intuition  of  our  bodily 
derivation  from  external  nature. 

Nature  suggests  for  our  observation  gaps,  and  then  as  it 
were  withdraws  them  upon  challenge.  For  example,  ordi¬ 
nary  physical  bodies  suggest  solidity.  But  solid s  turn  to 
liquids,  and  liquids  to  gases.  And  from  the  gas  the  solid 
can  again  be  recovered.  Also  the  most  solid  of  solids  is  for 
certain  purposes  a  viscous  fluid.  Again  impenetrability  is  a 
difficult  notion.  Salt  dissolves  in  water,  and  can  be  re¬ 
covered  from  it.  Gases  interfuse  in  liquids.  Molecules  arise 
from  a  patterned  interfusion  of  atoms.  Food  interfuses  with 
the  body,  and  produces  an  immediate  sense  of  diffused 
bodily  vigour.  This  is  especially  the  case  with  liquid  stimu¬ 
lants.  Thus  the  direct  immediate  experience  of  impene¬ 
trability  loses  upon  challenge  its  sharp-cut  status. 

Section  VI.  Another  gap  is  that  between  lifeless  bodies 
and  living  bodies.  Yet  the  living  bodies  can  be  pursued 
down  to  the  edge  of  lifelessness.  Also  the  functionings  of 
inorganic  matter  remain  intact  amid  the  functionings  of 
living  matter.  It  seems  that,  in  bodies  that  are  obviously 
living,  a  coordination  has  been  achieved  that  raises  into 
prominence  some  functions  inherent  in  the  ultimate  occa¬ 
sions.  For  lifeless  matter  these  functionings  thwart  each 
other,  and  average  out  so  as  to  produce  a  negligible  total 
effect.  In  the  case  of  living  bodies  die  coordination  inter¬ 
venes,  and  the  average  effect  of  these  intimate  functionings 
has  to  be  taken  into  account. 

Those  activities  in  the  self -formation  of  actual  occasions 
which,  if  coordinated,  yield  living  societies  are  the  interme¬ 
diate  mental  functionings  transforming  the  initial  phase 
of  reception  into  the  final  phase  of  anticipation.  In  so  far  as 
the  mental  spontaneities  of  occasions  do  not  thwart  each 


The  Grouping  of  Occasions  209 

other,  but  are  directed  to  a  common  objective  amid  varying 
circumstances,  there  is  life.  The  essence  of  life  is  the  tele¬ 
ological  introduction  of  novelty,  with  some  conformation 
of  objectives.  Thus  novelty  of  circumstance  is  met  with 
novelty  of  functioning  adapted  to  steadiness  of  purpose. 

Life  may  characterize  a  set  of  occasions  diffused 
throughout  a  society,  though  not  necessarily  including  all, 
or  even  a  majority  of,  the  occasions  of  that  society.  The 
common  element  of  purpose  which  characterizes  these 
various  occasions  must  be  reckoned  as  one  element  of  the 
determining  characteristic  of  the  society.  It  is  evident  that 
according  to  this  definition  no  single  occasion  can  be  called 
living.  Life  is  the  coordination  of  the  mental  spontaneities 
throughout  the  occasions  of  a  society. 

But  apart  from  life  a  high  grade  of  mentality  in  indi¬ 
vidual  occasions  seems  to  be  impossible.  A  personal  society, 
itself  living  and  dominantly  influencing  a  living  society 
wider  than  itself,  is  the  only  type  of  organization  which  pro¬ 
vides  occasions  of  high-grade  mentality.  Thus  in  a  man, 
the  living  body  is  permeated  by  living  societies  of  low-grade 
occasions  so  far  as  mentality  is  concerned.  But  the  whole 
is  coordinated  so  as  to  support  a  personal  living  society  of 
high-grade  occasions.  This  personal  society  is  the  man 
defined  as  a  person.  It  is  the  soul  of  which  Plato  spoke. 

How  far  this  soul  finds  a  support  for  its  existence  beyond 
the  body  is: — another  question.  The  everlasting  nature  of 
God,  which  in  a  sense  is  non-temporal  and  in  another  sense 
is  temporal,  may  establish  with  the  soul  a  peculiarly  intense 
relationship  of  mutual  immanence.  Thus  in  some  important 
sense  the  existence  of  the  soul  may  be  freed  from  its 
complete  dependence  upon  the  bodily  organization. 

But  it  is  to  be  noticed  that  the  personality  of  an  animal 
organism  may  be  more  or  less.  It  is  not  a  mere  question  of 
having  a  soul  or  of  not  having  a  soul.  The  question  is,  How 
much,  if  any?  Any  tendency  to  a  high-grade  multiple  per¬ 
sonality  would  be  self-destructive  by  the  antagonism  of 
divergent  aims.  In  other  words,  such  multiple  personality 
is  destructive  of  the  very  essence  of  life,  which  is  conforma¬ 
tion  of  purpose. 


14.  Appearance  and  Reality 

Section  I.  The  objective  content  of  an  occasion  of  ex¬ 
perience  sorts  itself  out  under  two  contrasted  characters — 
Appearance  and  Reality.  It  is  to  be  noticed  that  this  is  not 
the  only  dichotomy  exhibited  in  experience.  There  are  the 
physical  and  the  mental  poles,  and  there  are  the  objects 
prehended  and  the  subjective  forms  of  the  prehensions.  In 
fact  this  final  pair  of  opposites,  Appearance  and  Reality, 
is  not  quite  so  fundamental  metaphysically  as  the  other 
two  pairs. 

In  the  first  place  the  division  between  appearance  and 
reality  does  not  cover  the  whole  of  experience.  It  only  con¬ 
cerns  the  objective  content,  and  omits  the  subjective  form 
of  the  immediate  occasion  in  question.  In  the  second  place, 
its  importance  is  negligible  except  in  the  functionings  of  the 
higher  phases  of  experience,  when  the  mental  functionings 
have  achieved  a  peculiar  complexity  of  synthesis  with  the 
physical  functionings.  But  in  these  higher  phases,  the  con¬ 
trast  Appearance  and  Reality  dominates  those  factors  of 
experience  which  are  discriminated  in  consciousness  with 
peculiar  distinctness.  Thus  the  foundation  of  metaphysics 
should  be  sought  in  the  understanding  of  the  subject-object 
structure  of  experience,  and  in  the  respective  roles  of  the 
physical  and  mental  fimctionings. 

Unfortunately  the  superior  dominance  in  consciousness 
of  the  contrast  ‘Appearance  and  Reality’  has  led  metaphysi¬ 
cians  from  the  Greeks  onwards  to  make  their  start  from 
the  more  superficial  characteristic.  This  error  has  warped 
modern  philosophy  to  a  greater  extent  than  ancient  or 
mediaeval  philosophy.  The  warping  has  taken  the  form  of  a 
consistent  reliance  upon  sensationalist  perception  as  the 
basis  of  all  experiential  activity.  It  has  had  the  effect  of  de¬ 
cisively  separating  ‘mind’  from  ‘nature,’  a  modem  separa¬ 
tion  which  found  its  first  exemplification  in  Cartesian 
dualism.  But  it  must  be  remembered  that  this  modern 
development  was  only  the  consistent  carrying  out  of  prin- 

210 


Appearance  and  Reality  211 

ciples  already  present  in  the  older  European  philosophy. 
It  required  two  thousand  years  for  the  full  implication  of 
those  principles  to  dawn  upon  men’s  minds  in  the  seven¬ 
teenth  and  the  eighteenth  centuries  after  Christ. 

Section  II.  The  distinction  between  ‘appearance  and 
reality’  is  grounded  upon  the  process  of  self-formation  of 
each  actual  occasion.  The  objective  content  of  the  initial 
phase  of  reception  is  the  real  antecedent  world,  as  given  for 
that  occasion.  This  is  the  ‘reality’  from  which  that  creative 
advance  starts.  It  is  the  basic  fact  of  the  new  occasion,  with 
its  concordances  and  discordances  awaiting  coordination  in 
the  new  creature.  There  is  nothing  there  apart  from  the 
real  agency  of  the  actual  past,  exercising  its  function  of 
objective  immortality.  This  is  reality,  at  that  moment,  for 
that  occasion.  Here  the  term  ‘reality’  is  used  in  the  sense 
of  the  opposite  to  ‘appearance.’ 

The  intermediate  phase  of  self -formation  is  a  ferment  of 
qualitative  valuation.  These  qualitative  feelings  are  either 
derived  directly  from  qualities  illustrated  in  the  primary 
phase,  or  are  indirectly  derived  by  their  relevance  to  them. 
These  conceptual  feelmgs  pass  into  novel  relations  to  each 
other,  felt  with  a  novel  emphasis  of  subjective  form.  The 
ferment  of  valuation  is  integrated  with  the  physical  prehen¬ 
sions  of  the  physical  pole.  Thus  the  initial  objective  content 
is  still  there.  But  it  is  overlaid  by,  and  intermixed  with,  the 
novel  hybrid  prehensions  derived  from  integration  with 
the  conceptual  ferment.  In  the  higher  types  of  actual  occa¬ 
sions,  propositional  feelings  are  now  dominant.  This  en¬ 
larged  objective  content  obtains  a  coordination  adapting  it 
to  the  enjoyments  and  purposes  fulfilling  the  subjective  aim 
of  the  new  occasion. 

The  mental  pole  has  derived  its  objective  content  alike  by 
abstraction  from  the  physical  pole  and  by  the  immanence  of 
the  basic  Eros  which  endows  with  agency  all  ideal  possibili¬ 
ties.  The  content  of  the  objective  universe  has  passed  from 
the  function  of  a  basis  for  a  new  individuality  to  that  of  an 
instrument  for  purposes.  The  individual  process  is  now 
feeling  its  own  completion: — Cogito,  ergo  sum.  And  in 
Descartes’  phraseology,  ‘cogitatio’  is  more  than  mere  intel¬ 
lectual  understanding. 

This  difference  between  the  objective  content  of  the  in¬ 
itial  phase  of  the  physical  pole  and  the  objective  content 
of  the  final  phase,  after  the  integration  of  physical  and 


212  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

mental  poles,  constitutes  ‘appearance’  for  that  occasion.  In 
other  words,  ‘appearance’  is  the  effect  of  the  activity  of  the 
mental  pole,  whereby  the  qualities  and  coordinations  of 
the  given  physical  world  undergo  transformation.  It  results 
from  the  fusion  of  the  ideal  with  the  actual: — The  light  that 
never  was,  on  sea  or  land. 

Section  III.  There  can  be  no  general  metaphysic  prin¬ 
ciples  which  determine  how  in  any  occasion  appearance 
differs  from  the  reality  out  of  which  it  originates.  The 
divergencies  between  reality  and  appearance  depend  on  the 
type  of  social  order  dominating  the  environment  of  the 
occasion  in  question.  All  our  information  on  this  topic, 
direct  and  inferential,  concerns  this  general  epoch  of  the 
Universe  and,  more  particularly,  animal  life  on  the  surface 
of  the  Earth. 

In  respect  to  the  occasions  which  compose  the  societies 
of  inorganic  bodies  or  of  the  so-called  empty  spaces,  there 
is  no  reason  to  believe  that  in  any  important  way  the  mental 
activities  depart  from  functionings  which  are  strictly  con¬ 
formal  to  those  inherent  in  the  object  datum  of  the  first 
phase.  Thus  no  novelty  is  introduced.  The  perspective 
elimination  is  effected  according  to  the  ‘laws  of  nature’ 
inherent  in  the  epoch.  This  composition  of  activities  consti¬ 
tutes  the  laws  of  physics.  There  is  no  effective  ‘appearance.’ 

But  the  case  is  very  different  for  the  high-grade  occasions 
which  are  components  in  the  animal  fife  on  the  Earth’s 
surface.  Each  animal  body  is  an  organ  of  sensation.  It  is 
a  living  society  which  may  include  in  itself  a  dominant 
‘personal’  society  of  occasions.  This  ‘personal’  society  is 
composed  of  occasions  enjoying  the  individual  experiences 
of  the  animals.  It  is  the  soul  of  man.  The  whole  body  is 
organized,  so  that  a  general  coordination  of  mentality  is 
finally  poured  into  the  successive  occasions  of  this  personal 
society.  Thus  in  the  constitutions  of  these  occasions,  ap¬ 
pearance  is  sufficiently  coordinated  to  be  effective.  Also 
consciousness  arises  in  the  subjective  forms  in  these  experi¬ 
ences  of  the  higher  animals.  It  arises  peculiarly  in  connec¬ 
tion  with  the  mental  functions,  and  has  to  do  primarily 
with  their  product.  Now  appearance  is  one  product  of 
mentality.  Thus  in  our  conscious  perceptions  appearance 
is  dominant.  It  possesses  a  clear  distinctness,  which  is  ab¬ 
sent  from  our  vague  massive  feeling  of  derivation  from  our 
actual  world.  Appearance  has  shed  the  note  of  derivation. 


Appearance  and  Reality  213 

It  lives  in  our  consciousness  as  the  world  presented  to  us 
for  our  enjoyment  and  our  purposes.  It  is  the  world  in  the 
guise  of  a  subject-matter  for  an  imposed  activity.  The 
occasion  has  gathered  the  creativity  of  the  Universe  into 
its  own  completeness,  abstracted  from  the  real  objective 
content  which  is  the  source  of  its  own  derivation. 

This  status  of  ‘appearance’  in  the  constitution  of  experi¬ 
ence  is  the  reason  for  the  disastrous  metaphysical  doctrine 
of  physical  matter  passively  illustrating  qualities,  and  de¬ 
void  of  self-enjoyment.  As  soon  as  clarity  and  distinctness 
are  made  the  test  of  metaphysical  importance,  an  entire 
misapprehension  of  the  metaphysical  status  of  appearance 
is  involved. 

Section  IV.  When  the  higher  functionings  of  mentality 
are  socially  stabilized  in  an  organism,  appearance  merges 
into  reality.  To  take  the  most  conspicuous  example,  con¬ 
sider  the  personal  succession  of  experiences  in  the  life  of  a 
human  being.  The  present  occasion  in  this  personal  life 
inherits  with  peculiar  dominance  the  antecedent  experiences 
in  this  succession.  But  these  antecedent  experiences  include 
the  ‘appearances’  as  in  those  occasions.  These  antecedent 
appearances  are  part  of  the  real  functioning  of  the  real 
actual  world  as  it  stands  in  the  primary  phase  of  the  im¬ 
mediately  present  occasion.  It  is  a  real  fact  of  nature  that 
the  world  has  appeared  thus  from  the  standpoint  of  these 
antecedent  occasions  of  the  personal  life.  And  more  gen¬ 
erally  dropping  the  special  case  of  personality,  the  objective 
reality  of  the  past,  as  it  now  functions  in  the  present,  in  its 
day  was  appearance.  They  may  be  strengthened  in  empha¬ 
sis,  embroidered  upon,  and  otherwise  modified  by  the  novel 
appearances  of  the  new  occasion.  In  this  way,  there  is  an 
intimate,  inextricable  fusion  of  appearance  with  reality,  and 
of  accomplished  fact  with  anticipation.  In  truth,  we  have 
been  describing  the  exact  situation  which  human  experience 
presents  for  philosophic  analysis. 

We  are  apt  to  think  of  this  fusion  from  the  point  of  view 
of  the  higher  grades  of  human  beings.  But  it  is  a  fusion 
proceeding  throughout  nature.  It  is  the  essential  mode  in 
which  novelty  enters  into  the  functionings  of  the  world. 

Section  V.  It  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that,  at  the  level 
of  human  intellect,  the  role  of  mental  functionings  is  to 
add  subtlety  to  the  content  of  experience.  The  exact  op¬ 
posite  is  the  case.  Mentality  is  an  agent  of  simplification; 


214  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

and  for  this  reason  appearance  is  an  incredibly  simplified 
edition  of  reality.  There  should  be  no  paradox  in  this 
statement.  A  moment’s  introspection  assures  one  of  the 
feebleness  of  human  intellectual  operations,  and  of  the 
Him  massive  complexity  of  our  feelings  of  derivation.  The 
point  for  discussion  is  how  in  animal  experience  this 
simplification  is  effected. 

The  best  example  of  this  process  of  simplification  is 
afforded  by  the  perception  of  a  social  nexus  as  a  unity, 
characterized  by  qualities  derived  from  its  individual 
members  and  their  interconnections.  With  some  elimina¬ 
tion,  the  defining  characteristic  of  the  nexus  is  directly 
perceived  to  be  qualifying  that  nexus  as  a  unity.  It  often 
happens  that  in  this  perception  of  the  nexus  as  thus 
qualified  there  is  a  wavering  between  the  ascription  of  the 
quality  to  the  group  as  one,  and  to  its  individual  com¬ 
ponents  as  many.  Thus,  the  orchestra  is  loud  as  one  entity, 
and  also  in  virtue  of  the  perceived  loudness  of  the  individual 
members  with  their  musical  instruments.  The  transference 
of  the  characteristic  from  the  individuals  to  the  group  as 
one  can  be  explained  by  the  mental  operations.  There  is 
the  conceptual  entertainment  of  the  qualities  illustrated 
by  the  individual  actualities.  The  qualities  shared  by  many 
individuals  are  fused  into  one  dominating  impression.  This 
dominating  prehension  is  integrated  with  die  nexus,  or 
with  some  portion  of  it,  perceived  as  a  unity  illustrating 
that  quality.  The  association  of  a  nexus  as  one  with  a 
quality  will,  for  the  experient  subject,  be  in  general  a  mode 
of  exemplification  which  differs  from  the  mode  in  which 
the  respective  individuals  illustrate  it.  The  discipline  of  a 
regiment  inheres  in  the  regiment  in  a  different  mode  from 
its  inherence  in  the  individual  soldiers.  This  difference 
of  mode  of  illustration  may  be  more  or  less  evident.  But 
it  is  there.  It  gives  another  reason  for  the  aspect  of  the 
passive  inherence  of  quality  in  substance.  The  composite 
group  illustrates  its  qualities  passively.  The  activity  be¬ 
longs  to  the  individual  actualities.  This  whole  question  of 
the  transference  of  quality  from  the  many  individuals  to 
the  nexus  as  one  is  discussed  at  length  in  Process  and 
Reality,  Part  III,  Chapter  III,  Section  IV,  where  it  is 
termed  ‘Transmutation.’  Obviously  the  transmuted  percept 
belongs  to  Appearance.  But  as  it  occurs  in  animal  ex¬ 
perience,  it  belongs  to  appearance  merged  with  reality. 


Appearance  and  Reality  215 

For  it  is  inherited  from  the  past.  It  is  thus  a  fact  of  nature 
that  the  world  so  appears.  It  is  a  structural  relationship 
of  animate  nature  on  the  Earth’s  surface.  In  all  Appearance 
there  is  an  element  of  Transmutation. 

Section  VI.  For  animal  life  on  Earth  by  far  the  most 
important  example  of  Transmutation  is  afforded  by  Sense- 
Perception.  No  doctrine  of  sense-perception  can  neglect 
the  teaching  of  physiology.  The  decisive  factor  in  sense- 
perception  is  the  functioning  of  the  brain,  and  the  function¬ 
ing  of  the  brain  is  conditioned  by  the  antecedent  function¬ 
ings  of  the  other  parts  of  the  animal  body.  Given  requisite 
bodily  functionings,  the  sense-perception  results.  The  ac¬ 
tivities  of  nature  external  to  the  animal  body  are  irrelevant 
as  to  their  details,  so  long  as  they  have  the  general  character 
of  supporting  the  existence  of  the  total  animal  organism. 
The  human  body  is  the  self-sufficient  organ  of  human  sense- 
perception. 

There  are  external  events,  such  as  the  transmission  of 
light  or  the  movements  of  material  bodies  which  respec¬ 
tively  are  the  normal  modes  of  exciting  sense-percepts  of 
particular  types.  But  in  the  first  place  these  external  events 
are  only  the  normal  modes.  A  diet  of  drugs  will  do  equally 
well,  though  its  issue  in  perception  is  not  so  definitely  to 
be  predicted.  Thus  no  one  type  of  external  event  is  neces¬ 
sarily  associated  with  one  type  of  sense-percept.  Hardly 
any  percept  is  strictly  normal.  Gross  illusions  are  plentiful, 
and  some  element  of  illusion  almost  universal.  An  ordinary 
looking-glass  produces  illusive  percepts  in  almost  every 
room. 

Secondly,  confining  ourselves  to  the  normal  modes  of 
excitation,  the  only  important  factor  in  the  external  event 
is  how  it  affects  the  functionings  of  the  surface  of  the  body. 
How  the  light  enters  the  eye,  and  a  normal  healthy  state 
of  the  body,  are  the  only  important  factors  in  normal  visual 
sensation.  The  light  may  have  come  from  a  nebula  distant 
by  a  thousand  light-years,  or  it  may  have  its  origin  in  an 
electric  lamp  two  feet  off  and  have  suffered  a  complex 
arrangement  of  reflections  and  refractions.  Nothing  matters 
except  how  it  enters  the  eye,  as  to  its  composition,  its 
intensity,  and  its  geometric  ordering.  The  body  is  supremely 
indifferent  as  to  the  past  history  of  its  exciting  agents,  and 
requires  no  certificate  of  character.  The  peculiar  bodily 
excitement  is  all  that  matters. 


216  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

The  conclusion  is  that  the  direct  information  to  be  de¬ 
rived  from  sense-perception  wholly  concerns  the  function¬ 
ings  of  the  animal  body.  The  sense  of  unity  with  the  body 
does  in  fact  dominate  our  sense-experiences.  But  the 
bodily  organization  is  such  as  finally  to  promote  a  whole¬ 
sale  transmutation  of  sensa,  inherited  from  antecedent 
bodily  functionings,  into  characteristics  of  regions  with 
well-marked  geometrical  relations  to  the  geometrical 
structures  of  these  functionings.  In  this  transmutation  the 
experient  occasion  in  question  belongs  to  the  personal  suc¬ 
cession  of  occasions  which  is  the  soul  of  the  animal.  The 
bodily  functionings  and  the  nexus  relevant  to  them  by 
geometrical  relationship  are  immanent  in  the  experient 
occasion.  The  qualitative  inheritance  from  the  individual 
occasions  implicated  in  these  functionings  is  transmuted 
into  the  characteristics  of  regions  conspicuously  indicated 
by  their  geometrical  connections.  This  doctrine  is  plainly 
indicated  in  the  analysis  of  optical  vision,  where  the  image 
occupies  the  region  indicated  by  geometrical  relations 
within  the  eyes.  It  is  more  obscurely  evident  in  the  case 
of  other  species  of  sensa. 

It  is  to  be  remembered  also  that  along  the  personal 
succession  of  the  soul’s  experiences,  there  is  an  inheritance 
of  sense-perception  from  the  antecedent  members  of  the 
personal  succession.  Also  incipient  sense-percepta  may 
be  forming  themselves  in  the  nerve-routes,  or  in  the 
neighbouring  regions  of  the  brain.  But  the  final  synthesis, 
with  its  production  of  appearance,  is  reserved  for  the 
occasions  belonging  to  the  personal  soul. 

Section  VII.  The  question  of  the  proper  description  of 
the  species  of  qualities  termed  ‘sensa’  is  important.  Unfor¬ 
tunately  the  learned  tradition  of  philosophy  has  missed  their 
main  characteristic,  which  is  their  enormous  emotional 
significance.  The  vicious  notion  has  been  introduced  of 
mere  receptive  entertainment,  which  for  no  obvious  reason 
by  reflection  acquires  an  affective  tone.  The  very  opposite 
is  the  true  explanation.  The  true  doctrine  of  sense-percep¬ 
tion  is  that  the  qualitative  characters  of  affective  tones 
inherent  in  the  bodily  functionings  are  transmuted  into 
the  characters  of  regions.  These  regions  are  then  perceived 
as  associated  with  those  character-qualities,  but  also  these 
same  qualities  are  shared  by  the  subjective  forms  of  the 
prehensions.  This  is  the  reason  of  the  definite  aesthetic 


Appearance  and  Reality  217 

attitude  imposed  by  sense-perception.  The  pattern  of  sensa 
characterizing  the  object— that  is,  those  sensa  in  that 
pattern  of  contrast — enters  also  into  the  subjective  form 
of  the  prehension.  Thus  art  is  possible.  For  not  only  can 
the  objects  be  prescribed.,  but  also  the  corresponding  affec¬ 
tive  tones  of  their  prehensions.  This  is  the  aesthetic  ex¬ 
perience  so  far  as  it  is  based  upon  sense-perception. 

Section  VIII.  Another  point  to  be  noticed  is  that  in 
sense-perception  a  region  in  the  contemporary  world  is 
the  substratum  supporting  the  sensa.  It  is  the  region 
straight-away  in  such-and-such  a  direction.  But  this  geo¬ 
metrical  relation  of  being  ‘straight-away  in  such-and-such 
a  direction’  is  defined  by  the  operations  of  the  brain.  It  has 
nothing  to  do  with  any  physical  transmission  from  the  sub¬ 
strate  region  to  the  brain.  To  judge  from  some  descriptions 
of  perception  in  terms  of  modem  scientific  theories,  it 
might  be  concluded  that  we  perceive  along  the  track  of  a 
ray  of  light.  There  is  not  the  slightest  warrant  for  such  a 
notion.  The  track  of  light  in  the  world  external  to  the 
animal  body  is  irrelevant.  The  coloured  region  is  per¬ 
ceived  straight-away  in  such-and-such  a  direction.  This  is 
the  fundamental  notion  of  ‘straightness.’ 

It  therefore  becomes  necessary  for  the  self-consistency 
of  this  doctrine  to  enquire  whether  the  dominant  structure 
of  geometrical  relations  includes  a  determination  of 
straightness.  The  theory  requires  that  a  prehension  of  a 
nexus  within  the  brain  as  exhibiting  straightness  in  the 
mutual  relations  of  its  parts  should  thereby  determine 
the  prolongation  of  those  relations  into  regions  beyond 
the  brain.  In  simpler  language,  a  segment  of  a  straight  line 
as  prehended  within  the  brain  should  necessarily  determine 
its  prolongation  externally  to  the  body,  irrespective  of  the 
particular  characters  of  the  external  events.  The  possibility 
of  ‘Transmutation’  involving  the  ‘Projection’  of  sensa  is 
then  secured. 

I  have  discussed  this  question  elsewhere1  and  have  given 
a  definition  of  straight  lines — and,  more  generally,  of  flat¬ 
ness — which  satisfies  the  requirements.  The  necessity  of 
basing  straightness  upon  measurement,  and  measurement 
upon  particular  happenings  is  thereby  avoided.  The  notions 

l  Cf.  Process  and  Reality,  Part  IV,  Chapters  III,  IV,  and  V.  The  required 
definition  is  given  in  Chapter  III,  and  the  theory  of  the  projection  of  sensa  is 
discussed  in  Chapters  IV  and  V. 


218  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

of  straightness  and  of  congruence,  and  thence  of  distance, 
can  be  derived  from  those  underlying  a  uniform  systematic 
non-metrical  geometry. 

It  may  be  noticed  in  passing  that,  if  straightness  depends 
upon  measurement,  there  can  be  no  perception  of  straight¬ 
ness  in  the  unmeasured.  The  notion  of  ‘straight  in  front’ 
must  then  be  meaningless. 

Section  IX.  In  this  way,  the  inheritance  from  the  past 
is  precipitated  upon  the  present.  It  becomes  sense-per¬ 
ception,  which  is  the  ‘appearance’  of  the  present. 

The  ‘mutual  immanence’  of  contemporary  occasions  to 
each  other  is  allied  to  the  immanence  of  the  future  in  the 
present,  though  it  presents  some  features  of  its  own.  This 
immanence  exhibits  a  symmetrical  relation  of  causal  inde¬ 
pendence.  In  human  experience,  the  prehensions  of  the 
contemporary  world  exhibit  themselves  as  sense-percep¬ 
tions,  effected  by  means  of  the  bodily  organs  of  sensation. 
The  subjective  forms  of  these  sense-perceptions  involve 
conscious  discrimination,  with  varying  degrees  of  clarity 
and  distinctness.  Indeed  sense-perceptions  can  exhibit 
themselves  as  clear  and  distinct  in  consciousness  to  a 
degree  unrivalled  by  any  other  type  of  prehension.  The 
result  is  that  all  attempts  at  an  exact  systematic  doctrine 
of  the  nature  of  things  seeks  its  most  obvious  verification 
in  the  conformity  of  its  theory  with  sense-perception.  The 
unfortunate  effect  has  been,  that  all  direct  observation  has 
been  identified  with  sense-perception.  This  assumption  has 
been  criticized  in  Chapter  XI. 

But  sense-perception,  as  conceived  in  the  isolation  of 
its  ideal  purity,  never  enters  into  human  experience.  It  is 
always  accompanied  by  so-called  ‘interpretation.’  This 
‘interpretation’  does  not  seem  to  be  necessarily  the  product 
of  any  elaborate  train  of  intellectual  cogitation.  We  find 
ourselves  ‘accepting’2  a  world  of  substantial  objects, 
directly  presented  for  our  experience.  Our  habits,  our 
states  of  mind,  our  modes  of  behaviour,  all  presuppose  this 
‘interpretation.’  In  fact  the  concept  of  mere  sensa  is  the 
product  of  high-grade  thinking.  It  required  Plato  to  frame 
the  myth  of  the  Shadows  in  the  Cave,  and  it  required  Hume 

2  Cf.  Perception,  by  H.  H.  Price,  especially  Chapter  VI,  ‘Perceptual 
Assurance,  Perceptual  Acceptance Published  by  Methuen,  London,  1932. 
Price  in  his  valuable  work  gives  to  sense-perception  a  more  fundamental 
role  in  experience  than  my  doctrine  allows  to  it.  Cf.  also.  Santayana’s 
doctrine  of  ‘Animal  Faith.’ 


Appearance  and  Reality  219 

to  construct  the  doctrine  of  pure  sensationalist  perception. 
Yet  even  animals  share  in  some  ‘interpretation.’  There  is 
eveiy  evidence  that  animals  enjoy  a  sensationalist  ex¬ 
perience.  Dogs  smell,  eagles  see,  and  noises  attract  the 
attention  of  most  of  the  higher  animals.  Also  their  conse¬ 
quent  modes  of  behaviour  suggest  their  immediate  assump¬ 
tion  of  a  substantial  world  around  them.  In  fact  the 
hypothesis  of  a  mere  sensationalist  perception  does  not 
account  for  our  direct  observation  of  the  contemporary 
world.  There  is  some  other  factor  present,  which  is  equally 
primitive  with  our  perception  of  sensa.  This  factor  is  pro¬ 
vided  by  the  immanence  of  the  past  in  the  immediate 
occasion  whose  percipience  is  under  discussion.  The  im¬ 
manence  of  the  past  in  this  percipient  occasion  cannot  be 
fully  understood  apart  from  due  attention  to  the  doctrine 
of  die  immanence  of  the  future  in  the  past.  Thus  the  past 
as  an  objective  constituent  in  the  experience  of  the  per¬ 
cipient  occasion  carries  its  own  prehension  of  the  future 
beyond  itself.  This  prehension  survives  objectively  in  the 
primary  phase  of  the  percipient.  Accordingly  there  is  an 
indirect  prehension  of  contemporary  occasion,  via  the 
efficient  causation,  from  which  they  arise.  For  the  im¬ 
mediate  future  of  the  immediate  past  constitutes  the  set 
of  contemporary  occasions  for  the  percipient.  Also  these 
prehensions  of  immediate  past  and  of  immediate  future 
operate  dominantly  in  their  experience  of  their  respective 
subjects.  Thus  the  prehension  of  contemporary  occasions 
is  the  prehension  of  those  occasions  in  so  far  as  they  are 
conditioned  by  the  occasions  in  the  immediate  past  of  the 
prehending  subject.  Thus  the  present  is  perceivable  in  so 
far  as  it  is  conditioned  by  the  efficient  causation  from  the 
past  of  the  perceiver.  The  great  dominant  relationships, 
fundamental  for  the  epochal  order  of  nature,  thereby  stand 
out  with  overwhelming  distinctness.  These  are  the  general, 
all-pervasive,  obligations  of  perspective.  Such  relationships 
are  what  we  term  the  spatial  relationships  as  perceivable 
from  the  standpoint  of  the  observer. 

But  the  particular  occasions  of  the  contemporary  world, 
each  with  its  own  individual  spontaneity,  are  veiled  from 
the  observer.  In  this  respect,  the  contemporary  world  in 
the  experience  of  the  percipient  shares  the  characteristics 
of  the  future.  The  relevant  environment,  which  is  the  im¬ 
mediate  past  of  the  human  body,  is  peculiarly  sensitive  to 


220  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

its  geometrical  experiences  and  to  the  synthesis  of  its 
qualitative  prehensions  with  these  experiences  of  geometri¬ 
cal  relations.  In  this  way,  there  is  a  basis  in  fact  for  the 
association  of  derivates  from  significant  regions  in  the  past 
with  the  geometrical  representatives  of  those  regions  in  the 
present.  [Cf.  Process  and  Reality ,  Part  III,  Chap.  Ill, 
Section  IV,  and  Part  IV,  Chaps.  IV  and  V.] 

The  conclusion  is  that  the  contemporary  world  is  not 
perceived  in  virtue  of  its  own  proper  activity,  but  in  virtue 
of  activities  derived  from  the  past,  the  past  which  con¬ 
ditions  it  and  which  also  conditions  the  contemporary  per¬ 
cipient.  These  activities  are  primarily  in  the  past  of  the 
human  body,  and  more  remotely  in  the  past  of  the  environ¬ 
ment  within  which  the  body  is  functioning.  This  environ¬ 
ment  includes  those  occasions  dominantly  conditioning  the 
perceived  contemporary  regions.  This  theory  of  the  per¬ 
ception  of  contemporaries  allows  for  our  habitual  belief 
that  we  perceive  the  contemporary  world  with  a  general 
qualitative  relevance  to  the  essences  of  the  occasions 
making  up  its  various  regions;  and  also  with  a  bias  of 
qualitative  distortion  due  to  the  functioning  of  the  animal 
body  of  the  percipient. 

One  distortion  stands  out  immediately.  Each  actual 
occasion  is  in  truth  a  process  of  activity.  But  the  con¬ 
temporary  regions  are  mainly  perceived  in  terms  of  their 
passive  perspective  relationship  to  the  percipient  and  to 
each  other.  They  are  thus  perceived  merely  as  passive  re¬ 
cipients  of  the  qualities  with  which  in  sense-perception 
they  are  associated.  Hence  the  false  notion  of  a  substratum 
with  vacuously  inherent  qualities.  Here  the  term  ‘vacuous5 
means  ‘devoid  of  any  individual  enjoyment  arising  from 
the  mere  fact  of  realization  in  that  context.5  In  other  words, 
the  substratum  with  its  complex  of  inherent  qualities  is 
wrongly  conceived  as  bare  realization,  devoid  of  self¬ 
enjoyment,  that  is  to  say,  devoid  of  intrinsic  worth.  In 
this  way,  the  exclusive  reliance  on  sense-perception  pro¬ 
motes  a  false  metaphysics.  This  error  is  the  result  of  high- 
grade  intellectuality.  The  instinctive  interpretations  which 
govern  human  life  and  animal  life  presuppose  a  con¬ 
temporary  world  throbbing  with  energetic  values.  It 
requires  considerable  ability  to  make  the  disastrous  abstrac¬ 
tion  of  our  bare  sense-perceptions  from  the  massive 
insistency  of  our  total  experiences.  Of  course,  whatever 


Philosophic  Method  221 

we  can  do  in  the  way  of  abstraction  is  for  some  purposes 
useful — provided  that  we  know  what  we  are  about. 


15.  Philosophic  Method 

Section  I.  In  this  final  chapter  of  Part  III  my  aim  is  a 
discussion  of  some  methods  which  can  usefully  be  em¬ 
ployed  in  the  pursuit  of  speculative  philosophy.  In  illustra¬ 
tion,  and  as  a  subsidiary  aim,  I  shall  refer  to  some  doc¬ 
trines  of  my  own,1  and  to  some  comments  upon  them.  In 
this  chapter  the  transient  aspect  of  nature  will  be  mainly 
emphasized. 

So  far  as  concerns  methodology,  the  general  issue  of 
the  discussion  will  be  that  theory  dictates  method,  and 
that  any  particular  method  is  only  applicable  to  theories 
of  one  correlate  species.  An  analogous  conclusion  holds 
for  the  technical  terms.  This  close  relation  of  theory  to 
method  partly  arises  from  the  fact  that  the  relevance  of 
evidence  depends  on  the  theory  which  is  dominating  the 
discussion.  This  fact  is  the  reason  why  dominant  theories 
are  also  termed  ‘working  hypotheses.’ 

An  example  is  afforded  when  we  interrogate  experience 
for  direct  evidence  of  the  interconnectedness  of  things.  If 
we  hold  with  Hume,  that  the  sole  data  originating  re¬ 
flective  experience  are  impressions  of  sensation,  and  also 
if  we  also  admit  with  him  the  obvious  fact  that  no  one 
such  impression  by  its  own  individual  nature  discloses 
any  information  as  to  another  such  impression,  then  on 
that  hypothesis  the  direct  evidence  for  interconnectedness 
vanishes.  Again,  if  we  hold  the  Cartesian  doctrine  of 
substantial  souls  with  many  adventures  of  experience,  and 
of  substantial  material  bodies,  then  on  that  hypothesis  the 
relations  between  two  occasions  of  experience  qualifying 
one  soul  are  no  evidence  as  to  the  connectedness  of  two 
such  occasions  respectively  qualifying  two  different  souls, 
and  are  no  evidence  as  to  the  connectedness  of  a  soul  and  a 
material  body,  and  are  no  evidence  as  to  the  connected¬ 
ness  of  two  occasions  of  agitation  of  one  material  body, 

l  Cf.  Process  and  Reality,  subsequently  cited  under  the  abbreviation  P.  R. 
Also,  Science  and  The  Modern  World,  cited  as  S.  M.  W. 


222  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

or  of  two  such  occasions  respectively  belonging  to  different 
material  bodies.  But  if  we  hold,  as  for  example  in  Process 
and  Reality ,  that  all  final  individual  actualities  have  the 
metaphysical  character  of  occasions  of  experience,  then 
on  that  hypothesis  the  direct  evidence  as  to  the  con¬ 
nectedness  of  one’s  immediate  present  occasion  of  ex¬ 
perience  with  one’s  immediate  past  occasions,  can  be 
validly  used  to  suggest  categories  applying  to  the  con¬ 
nectedness  of  all  occasions  in  nature.  A  great  deal  of 
confused  philosophical  thought  has  its  origin  in  oblivious¬ 
ness  to  the  fact  that  the  relevance  of  evidence  is  dictated 
by  theory.  For  you  cannot  prove  a  theory  by  evidence 
which  that  theory  dismisses  as  irrelevant.  This  is  also  the 
reason  that  in  any  science  which  has  failed  to  produce 
any  theory  with  a  sufficient  scope  of  application,  progress 
is  necessarily  very  slow.  It  is  impossible  to  know  what  to 
look  for,  and  how  to  connect  the  sporadic  observations. 
Philosophical  discussion  in  the  absence  of  a  theory  has 
no  criterion  of  the  validity  of  evidence.  For  example, 
Hume  assumes  that  his  doctrine  of  association  holds  for 
all  types  of  impressions  of  sensation  and  of  ideas  of  them 
indiscriminately.  This  assumption  is  part  of  his  theory.  In 
divorce  from  the  theory,  a  separate  appeal  to  experience 
is  required  for  each  type  of  impression,  for  example,  tastes, 
sounds,  sights,  etc.,  and  likewise,  not  only  for  the  associa¬ 
tion  of  tastes  inter  se  and  of  sounds  inter  se,  but  for  the 
association  of  tastes  with  sounds,  and  so  on  for  every 
possible  type,  and  for  every  possible  conjunction  of  types. 

To  sum  up  this  preface,  every  method  is  a  happy 
simplification.  But  only  truths  of  a  congenial  type  can  be 
investigated  by  any  one  method,  or  stated  in  the  terms 
dictated  by  the  method.  For  every  simplification  is  an 
over-simplification.  Thus  the  criticism  of  a  theory  does 
not  start  from  the  question,  True  or  false?  It  consists  in 
noting  its  scope  of  useful  application  and  its  failure  be¬ 
yond  that  scope.  It  is  an  unguarded  statement  of  a  partial 
truth.  Some  of  its  terms  embody  a  general  notion  with  a 
mistaken  specialization,  and  others  of  its  terms  are  too 
general  and  require  discrimination  of  their  possibilities 
of  specialization. 

Section  II.  Philosophy  is  a  difficult  subject,  from  the 
days  of  Plato  to  the  present  time  haunted  by  subtle  per¬ 
plexities.  The  existence  of  such  perplexities  arising  from 


Philosophic  Method  223 

the  common  obviousness  of  speech  is  the  reason  why  the 
topic  exists.  Thus  the  very  purpose  of  philosophy  is  to 
delve  below  the  apparent  clarity  of  common  speech.  In  this 
connection,  it  is  only  necessary  to  refer  to  Socrates.  An¬ 
other  illustration  is  to  be  found  in  the  Sophist ,  where  Plato 
states  that  ‘not-being’  is  a  form  of  ‘being.’  This  statement 
is  at  once  an  extreme  instance  of  the  breakdown  of 
language,  and  the  enunciation  of  a  profound  metaphysical 
truth  which  lies  at  the  foundation  of  this  discussion. 

Section  III.  Speculative  Philosophy  can  be  defined2 
as  the  endeavour  to  frame  a  coherent,  logical,  necessary 
system  of  general  ideas  in  terms  of  which  every  element 
of  our  experience  can  be  interpreted.  Here  ‘interpretation’ 
means  that  each  element  shall  have  the  character  of  a  par¬ 
ticular  instance  of  the  general  scheme. 

Thus  speculative  philosophy  embodies  the  method  of 
the  ‘working  hypothesis.’  The  purpose  of  this  working 
hypothesis  for  philosophy  is  to  coordinate  the  current  ex¬ 
pressions  of  human  experience,  in  common  speech,  in 
social  institutions,  in  actions,  in  the  principles  of  the  var¬ 
ious  special  sciences,  elucidating  harmony  and  exposing 
discrepancies.  No  systematic  thought  has  made  progress 
apart  from  some  adequately  general  working  hypothesis, 
adapted  to  its  special  topic.  Such  an  hypothesis  directs  ob¬ 
servation,  and  decides  upon  the  mutual  relevance  of  var¬ 
ious  types  of  evidence.  In  short,  it  prescribes  method.  To 
venture  upon  productive  thought  without  such  an  explicit 
theory  is  to  abandon  oneself  to  the  doctrines  derived 
from  one’s  grandfather. 

In  the  preliminary  stages  of  knowledge  a  haphazard 
criterion  is  all  that  is  possible.  Progress  is  then  very  slow, 
and  most  of  the  effort  is  wasted.  Even  an  inadequate  work¬ 
ing  hypothesis  with  some  conformation  to  fact  is  better 
than  nothing.  It  coordinates  procedure. 

The  advance  of  any  reasonably  developed  science  is 
two-fold.  There  is  the  advance  of  detailed  knowledge  with¬ 
in  the  method  prescribed  by  the  reigning  working  hypoth¬ 
esis;  and  there  is  the  rectification  of  the  working 
hypothesis  dictated  by  the  inadequacies  of  the  current 
orthodoxy. 

Sometimes  it  is  necessary  for  a  science  to  entertain  con- 


2  Cf.  P.  R.  Pt.  I,  Ch.  I,  Sect.  I. 


224  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

currently  two — or  more — working  hypotheses,  each  with 
its  own  success  and  its  own  failure.  Such  hypotheses  are 
contradictory  as  stated;  and  science  awaits  their  concilia¬ 
tion  by  the  production  of  a  working  hypothesis  with  a 
wider  sweep.  When  a  new  working  hypothesis  is  pro¬ 
posed,  it  must  be  criticized  from  its  own  point  of  view. 
For  example,  it  is  futile  to  object  to  the  Newtonian  dy¬ 
namics  that,  on  the  Aristotelian  system,  the  loose  things 
on  the  earth’s  surface  must  be  left  behind  by  the  earth’s 
motion. 

Philosophy  has  been  afflicted  by  the  dogmatic  fallacy, 
which  is  the  belief  that  the  principles  of  its  working 
hypotheses  are  clear,  obvious,  and  irreformable.  Then,  as 
a  reaction  from  this  fallacy,  it  has  swayed  to  the  other 
extreme  which  is  the  fallacy  of  discarding  method.  Phi¬ 
losophers  boast  that  they  uphold  no  system.  They  are  then 
a  prey  to  the  delusive  clarities  of  detached  expressions 
which  it  is  the  very  purpose  of  their  science  to  surmount. 
Another  type  of  reaction  is  to  assume,  often  tacitly,  that 
if  there  can  be  any  intellectual  analysis  it  must  proceed 
according  to  some  one  discarded  dogmatic  method,  and 
thence  to  deduce  that  intellect  is  intrinsically  tied  to  er¬ 
roneous  fictions.  This  type  is  illustrated  by  the  anti-intel- 
lectualism  of  Nietzsche  and  Bergson,  and  tinges  American 
Pragmatism. 

Section  IV.  A  method  is  a  way  of  dealing  with  data, 
with  evidence.  What  are  the  evidences  to  which  philosophy 
appeals? 

It  is  customary  to  contrast  the  objective  approach  of 
the  ancient  Greeks  with  the  subjective  approach  of  the 
moderns,  initiated  by  Descartes,  and  further  emphasized 
by  Locke  and  Hume. 

But,  whether  we  be  ancient  or  modem,  we  can  only 
deal  with  things,  in  some  sense,  experienced.  The  Greeks 
dealt  with  things  that  they  thought  they  experienced,  and 
Hume  merely  asked,  What  do  we  experience?  This  is 
exactly  the  question  which  Plato  and  Aristotle  thought 
that  they  were  answering. 

To  speak  of  anything,  is  to  speak  of  something  which, 
by  reason  of  that  very  speech,  is  in  some  way  a  component 
in  that  act  of  experience.  In  some  sense  or  other,  it  is 
thereby  known  to  exist.  This  is  what  Plato  pointed  out 
when  he  wrote,  Not-being  is  itself  a  sort  of  being. 


Philosophic  Method  225 

Speech  consists  of  noises,  or  visible  shapes,  which  elicit 
an  experience  of  things  other  than  themselves.  In  so  far  as 
vocables  fail  to  elicit  a  stable  coordination  of  sound-char¬ 
acter,  or  shape-character,  to  meaning,  those  vocables  fail 
to  function  as  speech.  And  in  so  far  as  some  meaning  is 
not  in  some  sense  directly  experienced,  there  is  no  mean¬ 
ing  conveyed.  To  point  at  nothing  is  not  to  point. 

To  speak  of  the  same  thing  twice  is  to  demonstrate  that 
the  being  of  that  thing  is  independent  of  either  singular 
act  of  speech,  unless  we  believe  that  the  two  acts  presup¬ 
pose  each  other  or  are  both  presupposed  by  the  thing 
spoken  of.  If  we  cannot  speak  of  the  same  thing  twice, 
knowledge  vanishes  taking  philosophy  with  it.  Thus,  since 
speech  can  be  repeated,  things  spoken  of  have  a  deter¬ 
mined  being  in  abstraction  from  the  occasion  of  experi¬ 
ence  which  includes  that  act  of  speech. 

The  difference  between  ancients  and  moderns  is  that 
the  ancients  asked  what  have  we  experienced,  and  the 
moderns  asked  what  can  we  experience.  But  in  both  cases, 
they  asked  about  things  transcending  the  act  of  experi¬ 
ence  which  is  the  occasion  of  asking. 

Section  V.  The  translation  of  Hume’s  question  from 
‘What  do  we  experience’  to  ‘What  can  we  experience’ 
makes  all  the  difference,  though  in  his  ‘Treatise’  Hume 
makes  the  transition,  time  and  again,  without  explicit  com¬ 
ment.  For  modem  epistemology  the  latter  form  of  the 
question — with  its  substitution  of  can  for  do — is  accom¬ 
panied  by  the  implicit  presupposition  of  a  method,  namely 
that  of  placing  ourselves  in  an  introspective  attitude  of 
attention  so  as  to  determine  the  given  components  of  ex¬ 
perience  in  abstraction  from  our  private  way  of  subjective 
reaction,  by  reflexion,  conjecture,  emotion,  and  purpose. 

In  this  attitude  of  strained  attention,  there  can  be  no 
doubt  as  to  the  answer.  The  data  are  the  patterns  of  sensa 
provided  by  the  sense  organs.  This  is  the  sensationalist 
doctrine  of  Locke  and  Hume.  Later,  Kant  has  interpreted 
the  patterns  as  forms  introduced  by  the  mode  of  reception 
provided  by  the  recipient.  Here  Kant  introduces  the 
Leibnizian  notion  of  the  self-development  of  the  experi¬ 
encing  subject.  Thus  for  Kant  the  data  are  somewhat  nar¬ 
rower  than  for  Hume:  they  are  the  sensa  devoid  of  their 
patterns.  Hume’s  general  analysis  of  the  consequences  of 
this  doctrine  stands  unshaken.  So  also  does  his  final  re- 


226  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

flection,  that  the  philosophic  doctrine  fails  to  justify  the 
practice  of  daily  life.  The  justification  of  this  procedure  of 
modern  epistemology  is  twofold,  and  both  of  its  branches 
are  based  upon  mistakes.  The  mistakes  go  back  to  the 
Greek  philosophers.  What  is  modem,  is  the  exclusive  re¬ 
liance  upon  them. 

Section  VI.  The  first  error  is  the  assumption  of  a  few 
definite  avenues  of  communication  with  the  external  world, 
the  five  sense-organs.  This  leads  to  the  pre-supposition 
that  the  search  for  the  data  is  to  be  narrowed  to  the  ques¬ 
tion,  what  data  are  directly  provided  by  the  activity  of  the 
sense-organs — preferably  the  eyes.  This  doctrine  of  sense- 
organs  has  a  vague,  general  tmth,  very  important  for  prac¬ 
tical  affairs.  In  particular  all  exact  scientific  observation 
is  derived  from  such  data.  The  scientific  categories  of 
thought  are  obtained  elsewhere. 

But  the  living  organ  of  experience  is  the  living  body  as 
a  whole.  Every  instability  of  any  part  of  it — be  it  chemical, 
physical,  or  molar — imposes  an  activity  of  readjustment 
throughout  the  whole  organism.  In  the  course  of  such 
physical  activities  human  experience  has  its  origin.  The 
plausible  interpretation  of  such  experience  is  that  it  is  one 
of  the  natural  activities  involved  in  the  functioning  of  such 
a  high-grade  organism.  The  actualities  of  nature  must  be 
so  interpreted  as  to  be  explanatory  of  this  fact.  This  is  one 
desideratum  to  be  aimed  at  in  a  philosophic  scheme. 

Such  experience  seems  to  be  more  particularly  related 
to  the  activities  of  the  brain.  But  how  far  an  exact  doc¬ 
trine  can  be  based  upon  this  presumption  lies  beyond  our 
powers  of  observation.  We  cannot  determine  with  what 
molecules  the  brain  begins  and  the  rest  of  the  body  ends. 
Further,  we  cannot  tell  with  what  molecules  the  body  ends 
and  the  external  world  begins.  The  truth  is  that  the  brain 
is  continuous  with  the  body,  and  the  body  is  continuous 
with  the  rest  of  the  natural  world.  Human  experience  is 
an  act  of  self-origination  including  the  whole  of  nature, 
limited  to  the  perspective  of  a  focal  region,3  located  within 
the  body,  but  not  necessarily  persisting  in  any  fixed  co¬ 
ordination  with  a  definite  part  of  the  brain. 

Section  VII.  The  second  error  is  the  presupposition 
that  the  sole  way  of  examining  experience  is  by  acts  of 

3  Cf.  P.  R.  Pt.  II,  Ch.  Ill,  especially  sects.  IV-XI,  and  Pt.  IV,  Chs.  IV 
and  V. 


Philosophic  Method  227 

conscious  introspective  analysis.  Such  a  doctrine  of  the 
exclusive  primacy  of  introspection  is  already  discredited 
in  psychology.  Each  occasion  of  experience  has  its  own 
individual  pattern.  Each  occasion  lifts  some  components 
into  primacy  and  retreats  others  into  a  background  en¬ 
riching  the  total  enjoyment.  The  attitude  of  introspection 
shares  this  characteristic  with  all  other  experiential  occa¬ 
sions.  It  lifts  the  clear-cut  data  of  sensation  into  primacy, 
and  cloaks  the  vague  compulsions  and  derivations  which 
form  the  main  stuff  of  experience.  In  particular  it  rules 
out  that  intimate  sense  of  derivation  from  the  body,  which 
is  the  reason  for  our  instinctive  identification  of  our  bodies 
with  ourselves. 

In  order  to  discover  some  of  the  major  categories  under 
which  we  can  classify  the  infinitely  various  components 
of  experience,  we  must  appeal  to  evidence  relating  to 
every  variety  of  occasion.  Nothing  can  be  omitted,  experi¬ 
ence  drunk  and  experience  sober,  experience  sleeping  and 
experience  waking,  experience  drowsy  and  experience  wide¬ 
awake,  experience  self-conscious  and  experience  self- 
forgetful,  experience  intellectual  and  experience  physical, 
experience  religious  and  experience  sceptical,  experience 
anxious  and  experience  care-free,  experience  anticipatory 
and  experience  retrospective,  experience  happy  and  ex¬ 
perience  grieving,  experience  dominated  by  emotion  and 
experience  under  self-restraint,  experience  in  the  light 
and  experience  in  the  dark,  experience  normal  and  ex¬ 
perience  abnormal. 

Section  VIII.  We  have  now  reached  the  heart  of  our 
topic.  What  is  the  store-house  of  that  crude  evidence  on 
which  philosophy  should  base  its  discussion,  and  in  what 
terms  should  its  discussion  be  expressed? 

The  main  sources  of  evidence  respecting  this  width  of 
human  experience  are  language,  social  institutions,  and  ac¬ 
tion,  including  thereby  the  fusion  of  the  three  which  is 
language  interpreting  action  and  social  institutions. 

Language  delivers  its  evidence  in  three  chapters,  one 
on  the  meanings  of  words,  another  on  the  meanings  en¬ 
shrined  in  grammatical  forms,  and  the  third  on  meanings 
beyond  individual  words  and  beyond  grammatical  forms, 
meanings  miraculously  revealed  in  great  literature. 

Language  is  incomplete  and  fragmentary,  and  merely 
registers  a  stage  in  the  average  advance  beyond  ape- 


228  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

mentality.  But  all  men  enjoy  flashes  of  insight  beyond 
meanings  already  stabilized  in  etymology  and  grammar. 
Hence  the  role  of  literature,  the  role  of  the  special  sciences, 
and  the  role  of  philosophy: — in  their  various  ways  en¬ 
gaged  in  finding  linguistic  expressions  for  meanings  as  yet 
unexpressed. 

As  a  special  example,  consider  the  line  and  a  half  of 
poetry  in  which  Euripides4  compresses  the  main  phil¬ 
osophical  problems  which  have  tortured  European  thought 
from  this  day  to  the  present: — “Zeus,  whether  thou  art 
Compulsion  of  Nature  or  Intelligence  of  Mankind,  to  thee 
I  prayed.”  Consider  the  ideas  involved,  ‘Zeus,’  ‘necessity 
[compulsion]  of  nature,’  ‘intelligence  of  mankind,’  ‘prayer.’ 
These  lines  have  survived  the  ages  with  a  modem  appeal 
vivid  as  when  first  they  thrilled  an  Athenian  audience.  The 
biographer5  of  a  modem  statesman  cites  them  to  express 
the  solemnity  of  the  spectacle  of  life  passing  into  religious 
emotion. 

Yet  Hume  would  be  able  to  find  no  ‘impression  of  sensa¬ 
tion’  from  which  to  derive  ‘Zeus,’  or  ‘compulsion,’  or  ‘in¬ 
telligence,’  or  the  would-be  ‘persuasiveness’  which  we  term 
‘prayer.’  John  Morley  himself  selected  the  quotation  in 
spite  of  his  own  positivistic  bias  which  should  trivialize 
these  meanings.  Also,  perhaps  even  for  their  original  au¬ 
thor,  the  lines  represent  a  triumph  of  dramatic  intuition 
over  temperamental  scepticism. 

The  common  practice,  interpreted  by  the  common  lan¬ 
guage  of  mankind,  tells  the  same  tale.  A  statesman,  or  a 
president  of  a  business  corporation,  assumes  the  ‘compul¬ 
sion  of  recent  events’  [avayxv  Suo-ca)?]  as  laying  down  in¬ 
exorable  conditions  for  the  future.  He  frames  a  ‘policy’ 
upon  this  assumption  and  advises  that  it  be  ‘acted  on,’ 
thereby  also  assuming  that  the  imposed  conditions  leave 
room  for  the  effectiveness  of  ‘choice’  and  ‘intelligence’ 
[vov?].  He  assumes  alternatives  in  contrast  to  the  immedi¬ 
ate  fact.  He  conceives  an  ideal,  to  be  attained  or  to  be 
missed.  He  conceives  such  ideals  as  effective  in  propor¬ 
tion  as  they  are  entertained.  He  praises  and  he  blames  by 
reason  of  this  belief. 

In  the  world,  there  are  elements  of  order  and  disorder, 
which  thereby  presuppose  an  essential  interconnectedness 

4  Trojan  Women,  886-7. 

6  Cf.  John  Morley’s  Life  of  Gladstone,  Ch.  X. 


Philosophic  Method  229 

of  things.  For  disorder  shares  with  order  the  common 
characteristic  that  they  imply  many  things  interconnected. 

Each  experient  enjoys  a  perspective  apprehension  of 
the  world,  and  equally  is  an  element  in  the  world  by  rea¬ 
son  of  this  very  prehension,  which  anchors  him  to  a  world 
transcending  his  own  experience.  For,  it  belongs  to  the 
nature  of  this  perspective  derivation,  that  the  world  thus 
disclosed  proclaims  its  own  transcendence  of  that  dis¬ 
closure.  To  every  shield,  there  is  another  side,  hidden. 

Thus  an  appeal  to  literature,  to  common  language, 
to  common  practice,  at  once  carries  us  away  from  the 
narrow  basis  for  epistemology  provided  by  the  sense-data 
disclosed  in  direct  introspection.  The  world  within  experi¬ 
ence  is  identical  with  the  world  beyond  experience,  the 
occasion  of  experience  is  within  the  world  and  the  world 
is  within  the  occasion.  The  categories  have  to  elucidate 
this  paradox  of  the  connectedness  of  things: — the  many 
things,  the  one  world  without  and  within. 

Section  IX.  European  philosophy  is  founded  upon 
Plato’s  dialogues,  which  in  their  methods  are  mainly  an 
endeavour  to  elicit  philosophic  categories  from  a  dialectic 
discussion  of  the  meanings  of  language  taken  in  combina¬ 
tion  with  shrewd  observation  of  the  actions  of  man  and 
of  the  forces  of  nature. 

But  in  one  dialogue,  the  Sophist,  Plato  explicitly  con¬ 
siders  the  methods  of  philosophy.  One  of  his  conclusions 
is  to  point  out  the  limitations  of  common  speech.  Mere 
dialectic,  uncriticized,  is  a  fallacious  instrument,  the  mark 
of  the  Sophist.  For  example,  Plato  insists  that  not-being  is 
itself  a  form  of  being.  Thus  in  philosophy  linguistic  dis¬ 
cussion  is  a  tool,  but  should  never  be  a  master.  Language 
is  imperfect  both  in  its  words  and  in  its  forms.  Thus  we 
discover  two  main  errors  to  which  philosophic  method  is 
liable,  one  is  the  uncritical  trust  in  the  adequacy  of 
language,  and  the  other  is  the  uncritical  trust  in  the 
strained  attitude  of  introspection  as  the  basis  for  episte¬ 
mology. 

But  since  the  life-time  of  Plato  nearly  two  and  a  half 
thousand  years  have  intervened,  including  the  continuous 
activity  of  European  philosophic  thought,  pagan,  Chris¬ 
tian,  secular.  It  is  widely  held  that  a  stable,  well-known 
philosophic  vocabulary  has  been  elaborated,  and  that  in 
philosophic  discussion  any  straying  beyond  its  limits  in- 


230  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

troduces  neologisms,  unnecessary  and  therefore  to  be  re¬ 
gretted. 

This  alleged  fact  requires  examination.  In  the  first  place, 
if  the  allegation  be  true,  it  is  very  remarkable.  It  decisively 
places  philosophy  apart  from  the  more  special  sciences. 
Modern  mathematics,  most  secure  and  authoritative  of  sci¬ 
ences,  is  largely  written  in  verbal  and  symbolic  phrases 
which  would  have  been  unintelligible  eighty  years  ago.  In 
modern  physics  the  old  words,  where  they  are  still  used, 
convey  different  meanings,  and  the  new  words  are  abund¬ 
ant.  But  it  is  futile  to  make  a  catalogue  of  the  sciences 
accompanied  by  this  refrain.  The  conclusion  is  obvious  to 
the  most  cursory  inspection. 

Section  X.  Undoubtedly,  philosophy  is  dominated  by 
its  past  literature  to  a  greater  extent  than  any  other  science. 
And  rightly  so.  But  the  claim  that  it  has  acquired  a  set  of 
technical  terms  sufficient  for  its  purposes,  and  exhaustive 
of  its  meanings,  is  entirely  unfounded.  Indeed  its  literature 
is  so  vast,  and  the  variations  of  its  schools  of  thought  so 
large,  that  there  is  abundant  evidence  of  most  excusable 
ignorance  respecting  verbal  usages. 

A  recent  instance  illustrates  the  vagueness  of  philo¬ 
sophical  terminology.  Logic  is,  by  far,  that  branch  of  phi¬ 
losophy  best  systematized  with  the  aid  of  a  stable  technical 
language.  Consider  the  terms  Judgment  and  Proposition. 
I  am  not  writing  a  preface  to  Logic,  so  I  will  confine  my¬ 
self  to  the  assertion  that  there  is  considerable  variation  in 
the  usages  of  these  terms  among  logicians. 

Also  we  may  well  ask  whether  there  are  not  subtle 
variations  of  meaning  stretching  far  beyond  the  competence 
of  the  two-term  vocabulary — Judgment,  Proposition.  For 
example,  Mr.  Joseph6  has  been  examining  Mr.  W.  E. 
Johnson’s  use  of  the  term  Proposition  in  his  well-known 
Logical  Treatise.  Mr.  Joseph  finds  twenty  distinct  mean¬ 
ings.  It  is  to  be  remembered  that  we  are  here  referring  to 
two  of  the  most  acute  of  modern  logicians.  Whether  Mr. 
Joseph  has  rightly  interpreted  Mr.  Johnson’s  phrases  is  not 
to  the  point.  If  Mr.  Joseph  has  found  twenty  distinct, 
though  allied,  meanings  closely  connected  with  the  term 
Proposition,  there  are  twenty  such  meanings,  even  though 
for  the  moment  their  divergencies  may  seem  unimportant  to 
Mr.  Johnson  or  to  Mr.  Joseph.  Importance  depends  on 

6  Cf.  Mind,  Vols.  36,  37,  New  Series. 


Philosophic  Method  231 

purpose  and  on  point  of  view.  So  at  any  moment  twenty 
new  terms  may  be  required  by  some  advance  in  the 
subtlety  of  logical  theory.  Again,  if  Mr.  Johnson  has 
employed  twenty  distinct  meanings,  it  is  because  they 
were  relevant  to  his  argument,  even  though  his  argument 
may  require  further  completion  by  reason  of  their  unnoted 
distinction. 

It  is  safe  to  affirm  that  this  situation  can  be  repeated 
over  every  technical  term  in  philosophy. 

Section  XI.  Another  illustration,  in  which  my  use  of 
the  words7  Prehension,  Feeling,  Satisfaction,  is  partly  con¬ 
cerned,  can  be  drawn  from  the  terms  expressive  of  the 
connectedness  of  things.  For  this  topic,  the  reigning  philo¬ 
sophical  term  is  the  word  Relation.  There  are  various  con¬ 
troversies  about  relations  which  need  not  be  explicitly 
referred  to.  But  there  is  one  discussion  which  illustrates 
our  immediate  topic. 

It  is  generally  held  that  relations  are  universals,  so  that  A 
can  have  the  same  relation  to  B  as  C  has  to  D.  For  example 
‘loving,’  ‘believing,’  ‘between,’  ‘greater  than,’  are  relations. 
There  can  be  no  objection  to  this  doctrine.  For  it  is  a 
mere  definition.  Universals  which  require  two  or  more 
particulars  for  their  illustration  need  some  term  to  indicate 
them,  and  Relation  is  the  word  chosen. 

But  with  this  meaning  to  the  term,  a  relation  cannot  sig¬ 
nify  the  actual  connectedness  of  the  actual  individual  things 
which  constitute  the  actual  course  of  history.  For  example, 
New  York  lies  between  Boston  and  Philadelphia.  But  the 
connectedness  of  the  three  towns  is  a  real  particular  fact  on 
the  earth’s  surface  involving  a  particular  part  of  the  eastern 
seaboard  of  the  United  States.  It  is  not  the  universal 
‘between.’  It  is  a  complex  actual  fact  which,  among  other 
things,  exemplifies  the  abstract  universal  ‘betweenness.’ 

This  consideration  is  the  basis  of  Bradley’s  objection 
that  relations  do  not  relate.  Three  towns  and  an  abstract 
universal  are  not  three  connected  towns.  A  doctrine  of 
connectedness  is  wanted.  Bradley8  writes  ‘Is  there,  in  the 
end,  such  a  thing  as  relation  which  is  merely  between 


7  Cf.  S .  M.  W Ch.  IV  and  passim  and  P.  R.  Part  I,  Ch.  II  and  passim. 

8  Cf.  Essays  on  Truth  and  Reality,  Ch.  VI,  On  Our  Knowledge  of  Imme¬ 
diate  Experience,  Appendix,  p.  193. 

,  p£ie  refefences  are  to  the  Oxford  edition  of  1914.  Also  cf.  Appendix 
to  Ch.  VI,  passim ,  and  Supplementary  Note  to  the  same. 


232  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

terms?  Or,  on  the  other  hand,  does  not  a  relation  imply  an 
underlying  unity  and  an  inclusive  whole?’ 

Bradley’s  ‘inclusive  whole’  is  the  connectedness  of  which 
we  are  in  search.  Throughout  this  chapter  [loc.  cit.]  Bradley 
uses  the  term  Feeling  to  express  the  primary  activity  at 
the  basis  of  experience.  It  is  experience  itself  in  its  origin 
and  with  the  minimum  of  analysis.  The  analysis  of  Feeling 
can  never  disclose  anything  lying  beyond  the  essence  of 
the  occasion  of  experience.  Hence  Bradley  terms  it  ‘non¬ 
relational.’  There  are  of  course  grave  differences  between 
my  own  doctrine  and  that  of  Bradley.  This  was  a  reason9 
for  expounding  my  point  of  view  in  some  independence  of 
Bradley,  with  due  acknowledgement.  Surely  the  proper 
method  of  choosing  technical  terms  is  to  adopt  terms  from 
some  outstanding  exposition  of  an  analogous  doctrine.  It 
throws  an  interesting  light  on  the  belief  in  a  well-understood 
technical  phraseology  reigning  in  philosophy,  that  an  ac¬ 
complished  philosopher  censured  in  print,  my  use  of  the 
word  Feeling  as  being  in  a  sense  never  before  employed  in 
philosophy. 

I  may  add  that  William  James  also  employs  the  word  in 
much  the  same  sense  in  his  Psychology.  For  example  in 
the  first  chapter  he  writes,  “Sensation  is  the  feeling  of  first 
things.”  And  in  the  second  chapter  he  writes,  “In  general, 
this  higher  consciousness  about  things  is  called  Perception, 
the  mere  inarticulate  feeling  of  their  presence  is  Sensation, 
so  far  as  we  have  it  at  all.  To  some  degree  we  seem  able 
to  lapse  into  this  inarticulate  feeling  at  moments  when  our 
attention  is  entirely  dispersed.”  It  is  interesting  to  make  a 
few  citations  from  Bradley,  illustrating  my  general  adher¬ 
ence  to  his  doctrine  of  Feeling,  as  expressed  in  his  Chapter. 
“In  my  general  feeling  at  any  moment  there  is  more  than 
the  objects  before  me,  and  no  perception  of  objects  will 
exhaust  the  sense  of  a  living  emotion.”10 

In  accordance  with  this  doctrine  of  Bradley’s,  I  analyze 
a  feeling  [or  prehension]  into  the  ‘datum,’  which  is  Brad¬ 
ley’s  ‘object  before  me,’  into  the  ‘subjective  form’  which  is 
Bradley’s  ‘living  emotion,’  and  into  the  ‘subject’  which  is 
Bradley’s  ‘me.’  My  reason  for  using  the  term  ‘subjective 
form’  is  that  I  stretch  its  meaning  beyond  ‘emotion.’  For 
example  consciousness,  if  it  be  present,  is  an  element  in  the 


9  Cf.  P.  R.  passim. 

10  Bradley,  p.  159. 


Philosophic  Method  233 

subjective  form.  This  is,  of  course,  a  grave  divergence  from 
Bradley.  Subjective  form  is  the  character  assumed  by  the 
subject  by  reason  of  some  prehended  datum. 

But  on  the  whole  I  conform  to  Bradley’s  conception  of 
the  function  of  subjective  form.  For  example,  “These 
puzzles  are  insoluble  unless  that  which  I  feel,  and  which  is 
not  an  object  before  me,  is  present  and  active.  This  felt 
element  is  used  and  it  must  be  used  in  the  constitution  of 
that  object  which  satisfies  me.”11 

From  my  point  of  view  there  is  an  ambiguity  in  this 
statement,  but  I  adhere  to  either  alternative  meaning 

The  component  of  feeling  ‘which  is  not  an  object  before 
me  is  the  subjective  form.  If  Bradley  is  stating  that  the 
subjective  forms  of  feelings  determine  the  process  of 
integration,  I  entirely  agree.  The  result,  as  Bradley  states, 
is  the  satisfaction’  which  is  the  final  feeling  terminating 
the  unrest  of  the  creative  process. 

Bradley,  however,  may  mean  by  his  phrase  “that  which 
1  leel,  and  which  is  not  an  object  before  me”  what  I  term 
a  negative  prehension.”  Such  a  prehension  is  active  via 
its  contribution  of  its  subjective  form  to  the  creative 
process,  but  it  dismisses  its  ‘object’  from  the  possibility  of 
entering  into  the  datum  of  the  final  satisfaction.  This  final 
complex  datum  will  be  what  Bradley  calls  “that  object 
that  satisfies  me.”  Again  I  agree. 

The  doctrine  of  the  ‘living  emotion’  which  necessarily 
clothes  each  concrete  exhibition  of  the  subject-object 
situation  is  far  older  than  Bradley.  We  find  its  germ  in 
Plato,  who  insists  that  the  whole  character  is  conformed 
to  the  adequate  knowledge.  He  implicitly  refuses  to  ab¬ 
stract  the  living  emotion’  from  the  bare  intellectual  percep¬ 
tion,  and  thereby  identifies  virtue  with  knowledge.  The 
advance  in  psychology  has  added  to  our  conscious  dis¬ 
crimination,  but  it  has  not  altered  the  fact  that  inevitably 
perception  is  clothed  with  emotion. 

The  historical  importance  of  the  doctrine  is  stated  by 
George  Foot  Moore:12 — “Civilization  develops  only  where 
considerable  numbers  of  men  work  together  for  common 
ends.  Such  unity  is  brought  about,  not  so  much  by  com¬ 
munity  of  bare  ideas  as  by  community  of  the  feelings  by 

HP.  161. 

12  In  the  Prefatory  Note  to  Emotion  as  the  Basts  of  Civilization  bv  J  H 
Denison.  New  York,  1928  (Scribner’s):  a  work  of  taportanS 


234  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

which  ideas  are  ‘emotionalized’  and  become  beliefs  and 

motives.”  . 

The  conventionalized  abstractions  prevalent  m  epistemo¬ 
logical  theory  are  very  far  from  the  concrete  facts  of  ex¬ 
perience.  The  word  ‘feeling’  has  the  merit  of  preservmg 
this  double  significance  of  subjective  form  and  of  the  appre¬ 
hension  of  an  object.  It  avoids  the  disjecta  membra  pro¬ 
vided  by  abstraction.13 

Section  XII.  Thus  an  occasion  of  human  experience  is 
one  illustration  of  the  required  doctrine  of  connectedness. 

Bradley’s  authority  can  be  quoted  in  support.  He 
writes:14  “At  every  moment  my  stage  of  experience,  what¬ 
ever  else  it  is,  is  a  whole  of  which  I  am  immediately  aware. 
It  is  an  experienced  non-relational  unity  of  many  in  one. 
Here  Bradley  by  ‘non-relational’  apparently  means  that  ex¬ 
perience  is  not  a  relation  of  an  experient  to  something 
external  to  it,  but  is  itself  the  ‘inclusive  whole’  which  is 
the  required  connectedness  of  ‘many  in  one.’ 

In  this  I  thoroughly  agree,  holding  that  the  connected¬ 
ness  of  things  is  nothing  else  than  the  togetherness  of 
tilings  in  occasions  of  experience.  Of  course,  such  oc¬ 
casions  are  only  rarely  occasions  of  human  experience. 

Curiously  enough  Hume  also  agrees.  For  his  only  to¬ 
getherness  of  the  stream  of  impressions  of  sensation,  which 
in  his  doctrine  are  distinct  existences  at  distinct  times,  lies 
in  the  ‘gentle  force’  of  association  which  must  lie  wholly 
within  an  occasion  of  experience.  This  is  also  one  aspect  of 
Kant’s  doctrine,  that  the  occasions  of  experience  provide 
the  forms  of  connectedness. 

Of  course  there  are  important  differences  between  all 
these  doctrines.  But  they  agree  in  their  general  principle — 
to  look  on  occasions  of  experience  as  die  ground  of  con¬ 
nectedness. 

Section  XIII.  Also  Leibniz  can  find  no  other  con¬ 
nectedness  between  reals  except  that  lying  wholly  within 
the  individual  experiences  of  the  monads,  including  the 
Supreme  Monad.  He  employed  the  terms  ‘perception’  and 
‘apperception’  for  the  lower  and  higher  ways  in  which  one 
monad  can  take  account  of  another,  namely  for  ways  of 

13  The  genetic  description  of  the  process  of  ‘emotionalization’  is  considered 
in  my  ‘ Symbolism ,  Its  Meaning  and  Effect '  and  also  in  P.  R.  Pt.  II,  Ch. 
VIII,  and  throughout  Pt.  III. 

14  Loc.  cit.,  p.  175. 


Philosophic  Method  235 

awareness.  But  these  terms  are  too  closely  allied  to  the 
notion  of  consciousness  which  in  my  doctrine  is  not  a 
necessary  accompaniment.  Also  they  are  all  entangled  in 
the  notion  of  representative  perception  which  I  reject.  But 
there  is  the  term15  ‘apprehension’  with  the  meaning  of 
‘thorough  understanding.’  Accordingly,  on  the  Leibnizian 
model,  I  use  the  term  ‘prehension’  for  the  general  way  in 
which  the  occasion  of  experience  can  include,  as  part  of 
its  own  essence,  any  other  entity,  whether  another  occasion 
of  experience  or  an  entity  of  another  type.  This  term  is 
devoid  of  suggestion  either  of  consciousness  or  of  repre¬ 
sentative  perception.  Feelings  are  the  positive  type  of  pre¬ 
hensions.  In  positive  prehensions  the  ‘datum’  is  preserved 
as  part  of  the  final  complex  object  which  ‘satisfies’  the 
process  of  self-formation  and  thereby  completes  the 
occasion. 

This  nomenclature  has  been  made  up  to  conform  to  the 
condition,  that,  as  a  theory  develops,  its  technical  phrase¬ 
ology  should  grow  out  of  the  usages  of  the  great  masters 
who  laid  its  foundations.  The  immediate  verbal  usages  at 
any  moment  prevalent  in  any  school  of  philosophy  are  but 
a  small  selection  from  the  total  vocabulary  of  the  philo¬ 
sophic  tradition.  This  is  rightly  the  case  having  regard  to 
the  variations  of  doctrine. 

The  current  usage  can  express  the  doctrine  of  the  reign¬ 
ing  school  of  thought  and  of  certain  accredited  variations 
from  it.  The  demand  that  an  alternative  doctrine  with  other 
roots  in  the  historic  tradition  should  confine  itself  to  this 
selection  of  terms  amounts  to  the  dogmatic  claim  that 
certain  preliminary  assumptions  should  never  be  revised. 
Only  those  schools  of  thought  are  to  be  allowed  which 
can  be  expressed  in  the  sacred  terms.  What  can  reasonably 
be  asked,  is  that  each  doctrine  should  ground  its  vocabulary 
on  its  own  proper  tradition.  If  this  precaution  has  been 
taken,  an  outcry  as  to  neologisms  is  a  measure  of  un¬ 
conscious  dogmatism. 

Section  XIV.  The  main  method  of  philosophy  in 
dealing  with  its  evidence  is  that  of  descriptive  generaliza¬ 
tion.  Social  institutions  exemplify  a  welter  of  characteristics. 
No  fact  is  merely  such-and-such.  It  exemplifies  many 
characters  at  once,  all  rooted  in  the  specialities  of  its 

15  This  term  is  used  by  L.  T.  Hobhouse,  Theory  of  Knowledge.  Chs.  I 


236  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

epoch.  Philosophic  generalization  seizes  on  those  characters 
of  abiding  importance,  dismissing  the  trivial  and  the 
evanescent.  There  is  an  ascent  from  a  particular  fact,  or 
from  a  species,  to  the  genus  exemplified.  #  . 

It  is  to  be  noted  that  the  converse  procedure  is  im¬ 
possible.  There  can  be  no  descent  from  a  mere  genus  to  a 
particular  fact,  or  to  a  species.  For  facts  and  species  are 
the  product  of  the  mingling  of  genera.  No  genus  in  its  own 
essence  indicates  the  other  genera  with  which  it  is  com¬ 
patible.  For  example,  the  notion  of  a  backbone  does  not 
indicate  the  notions  of  suckling  the  young  or  of  swimming 
in  water.  Thus  no  contemplation  of  the  genus  vertebrate, 
take n  by  itself,  can  suggest  mammals  or  fishes,  even  as 
abstract  possibilities.  Neither  the  species  nor  the  instance 
are  to  be  discovered  by  the  genus  alone,  since  both  include 
forms  not  ‘given’  by  the  genus.  A  species  is  a  potential 
mingling  of  genera,  and  an  individual  instance  involves, 
among  other  things,  an  actual  mingling  of  many  species. 
A  syllogism  is  a  scheme  for  demonstration  of  ways  of 
mingling. 

Thus  the  business  of  Logic  is  not  the  analysis  of  gener- 
alities  but  their  mingling.18 

Philosophy  is  the  ascent  to  the  generalities  with  the 
view  of  understanding  their  possibilities  of  combination. 
The  discovery  of  new  generalities  thus  adds  to  file  fruit¬ 
fulness  of  those  already  known.  It  lifts  into  view  new 
possibilities  of  combination. 

Section  XV.  Even  the  dim  apprehension  of  some 
great  principle  is  apt  to  clothe  itself  with  tremendous 
emotional  force.  The  welter  of  particular  actions  arising 
out  of  such  complex  feelings  with  their  core  of  deep 
intuition  are  in  primitive  times  often  brutish  and  nasty. 
Finally  civilized  language  provides  a  whole  group  of 
words,  each  embodying  the  general  idea  under  its  own 
specialization.  If  we  desire  to  reach  the  generality  com¬ 
mon  to  these  various  specializations,  we  must  gather 
together  the  whole  group  of  words  with  the  hope  of  dis¬ 
cerning  their  common  element.  This  is  a  necessary  pro¬ 
cedure  for  the  purpose  of  philosophical  generalization.  The 
premature  use  of  one  familiar  word  inevitably  limits  the 
required  generalization  by  importing  the  familiar  special 
connotation  of  that  word. 


16  Cf.  Plato’s  Sophist,  253. 


Philosophic  Method  237 

For  example,17  let  the  working  hypothesis  be  that  the 
ultimate  realities  are  the  events  in  their  process  of  origina¬ 
tion.  Then  each  event,  viewed  in  its  separate  individuality, 
is  a  passage  between  two  ideal  termini,  namely,  its  compo¬ 
nents  in  their  ideal  disjunctive  diversity  passing  into  these 
same  components  in  their  concrete  togetherness.  There 
are  two  current  doctrines  as  to  this  process.  One  is  that  of 
the  external  Creator,  eliciting  this  final  togetherness  out 
of  nothing.  The  other  doctrine  is  that  it  is  a  metaphysical 
principle  belonging  to  the  nature  of  things,  that  there  is 
nothing  in  the  Universe  other  than  instances  of  this  pas¬ 
sage  and  components  of  these  instances.  Let  this  latter 
doctrine  be  adopted.  Then  the  word  Creativity  expresses 
the  notion  that  each  event  is  a  process  issuing  in  novelty. 
Also  if  guarded  in  the  phrases  Immanent  Creativity,  or 
Self-Creativity,  it  avoids  the  implication  of  a  transcendent 
Creator.  But  the  mere  word  Creativity  suggests  Creator, 
so  that  the  whole  doctrine  acquires  an  air  of  paradox,  or 
of  pantheism.  Still  it  does  convey  the  origination  of 
novelty.  The  word  Concrescence  is  a  derivative  from  the 
familiar  latin  verb,  meaning  ‘growing  together.’  It  also 
has  the  advantage  that  the  participle  ‘concrete’  is  familiarly 
used  for  the  notion  of  complete  physical  reality.  Thus 
Concrescence  is  useful  to  convey  the  notion  of  many 
things  acquiring  complete  complex  unity.  But  it  fails  to 
suggest  the  creative  novelty  involved.  For  example,  it 
omits  the  notion  of  the  individual  character  arising  in  the 
concrescence  of  the  aboriginal  data.  The  event  is  not 
suggested  as  ‘emotionalized,’  that  is,  as  with  its  ‘subjective 
form.’ 

Again  the  term  ‘together’  is  one  of  the  most  misused 
terms  in  philosophy.  It  is  a  generic  term  illustrated  by  an 
endless  variety  of  species.  Thus  its  use  as  though  it  con¬ 
veyed  one  definite  meaning  in  diverse  illustrations  is  en¬ 
tirely  sophistical.  Every  meaning  of  ‘together’  is  to  be 
found  in  various  stages  of  analysis  of  occasions  of  ex¬ 
perience.  No  things  are  ‘together’  except  in  experience; 
and  no  things  are,  in  any  sense  of  ‘are,’  except  as  com¬ 
ponents  in  experience  or  as  immediacies  of  process  which 
are  occasions  in  self-creation. 

Section  XVI.  Thus  to  arrive  at  the  philosophic  gen- 

17  Cf.  P.  R.  passim,  where  the  second  of  the  doctrines  stated  below  is 
developed. 


238  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

eralization  which  is  the  notion  of  a  final  actuality  con¬ 
ceived  in  the  guise  of  a  generalization  of  an  act  of 
experience,  an  apparent  redundancy  of  terms  is  required. 
The  words  correct  each  other.  We  require18  ‘together,’ 
‘creativity,’  ‘concrescence,’  ‘prehension,’  ‘feeling,’  ‘subjec¬ 
tive  form,’  ‘data,’  ‘actuality,’  ‘becoming,’  ‘process.’ 

Section  XVII.  At  this  stage  of  the  generalization  a 
new  train  of  thought  arises.  Events  become  and  perish.  In 
their  becoming  they  are  immediate  and  then  vanish  into 
the  past.  They  are  gone;  they  have  perished;  they  are  no 
more  and  have  passed  into  not-being.  Plato  terms19  them 
things  that  are  ‘always  becoming  and  never  really  are.’  But 
before  he  wrote  this  phrase,  Plato  had  made  his  great 
metaphysical  generalization,  a  discovery  which  forms  the 
basis  of  the  present  discussion.  He  wrote  in  the  Sophist, 
not-being  is  itself  a  form  of  being.  He  only  applied  this 
doctrine  to  his  eternal  forms.  He  should  have  applied  the 
same  doctrine  to  the  things  that  perish.  He  would  then 
have  illustrated  another  aspect  of  the  method  of  philosophic 
generalization.  When  a  general  idea  has  been  obtained,  it 
should  not  be  arbitrarily  limited  to  the  topic  of  its  origina¬ 
tion. 

In  framing  a  philosophic  scheme,  each  metaphysical 
notion  should  be  given  the  widest  extension  of  which  it 
seems  capable.  It  is  only  in  this  way  that  the  true  adjust¬ 
ment  of  ideas  can  be  explored.  More  important  even  than 
Occam’s  doctrine  of  parsimony — if  it  be  not  another  aspect 
of  the  same — is  this  doctrine  that  the  scope  of  a  meta¬ 
physical  principle  should  not  be  limited  otherwise  than  by 
the  necessity  of  its  meaning. 

Thus  we  should  balance  Aristotle’s — or,  more  rightly, 
Plato’s — doctrine  of  becoming  by  a  doctrine  of  perishing. 
Vftien  they  perish,  occasions  pass  from  the  immediacy  of 
being  into  the  not-being  of  immediacy.  But  that  does  not 
mean  that  they  are  nothing.  They  remain  ‘stubborn  fact’: — 

Pereunt  et  imputantur. 

The  common  expressions  of  mankind  fashion  the  past 
for  us  in  three  aspects, — Causation,  Memory,  and  our 
active  transformation  of  our  immediate  past  experience 
into  the  basis  of  our  present  modification  of  it.  Thus 
‘perishing’  is  the  assumption  of  a  role  in  a  transcendent 


18  Cf.  P.  R.  passim,  also  S.  M.  W. 

19  Cf.  Timaeus. 


Philosophic  Method  239 

future.  The  not-being  of  occasions  is  their  ‘objective  im¬ 
morality.’  A  pure  physical  prehension  is  how  an  occasion 
in  its  immediacy  of  being  absorbs  another  occasion  which 
has  passed  into  the  objective  immortality  of  its  not-being. 
It  is  how  the  past  lives  in  the  present.  It  is  causation.  It  is 
memory.  It  is  perception  of  derivation.  It  is  emotional 
conformation  to  a  given  situation,  an  emotional  con¬ 
tinuity  of  past  with  present.  It  is  a  basic  element  from 
which  springs  the  self-creation  of  each  temporal  occasion. 
Thus  perishing  is  the  initiation  of  becoming.  How  the  past 
perishes  is  how  the  future  becomes. 


PART  FOUR 


Civilisation 


16.  Truth 

Section  I.  Truth  and  Beauty  are  the  great  regulative  prop¬ 
erties  in  virtue  of  which  Appearance  justifies  itself  to  the 
immediate  decision  of  the  experient  subject.  The  justifica¬ 
tion  determines  its  status  in  the  immediate  occasion.  The 
subjective  form  of  the  prehension  can  include  immediate 
emphasis  or  attenuation,  and  it  can  include  purpose  of  pro¬ 
longation  into  the  future  or  purpose  of  exclusion.  Truth 
and  Beauty  are  the  ultimate  grounds  for  emphasis  and  for 
prolongation.  Of  course  the  present  can  be  sacrificed  to 
the  future,  so  that  Truth  or  Beauty  in  the  future  can  be 
the  reason  for  the  immediate  attenuation  of  either. 

Section  II.  Truth  is  a  qualification  which  applies  to 
Appearance  alone.  Reality  is  just  itself,  and  it  is  nonsense 
to  ask  whether  it  be  true  or  false.  Truth  is  the  conforma¬ 
tion  of  Appearance  to  Reality.  This  conformation  may  be 
more  or  less,  also  direct  or  indirect.  Thus  Truth  is  a  generic 
quality  with  a  variety  of  degrees  and  modes.  In  the  Law- 
Courts,  the  wrong  species  of  Truth  may  amount  to  per¬ 
jury.  For  example,  a  portrait  may  be  so  faithful  as  to 
deceive  the  eye.  Its  very  truthfulness  then  amounts  to  de¬ 
ception.  A  reflexion  in  a  mirror  is  at  once  a  truthful  ap¬ 
pearance  and  a  deceptive  appearance.  The  smile  of  a 
hypocrite  is  deceptive,  and  that  of  a  philanthropist  may  be 
truthful.  But  both  of  them  were  truly  smiling. 

Section  III.  The  notion  of  Truth  can  be  generalized, 
so  as  to  avoid  any  explicit  reference  to  Appearance.  Two 
objects  may  be  such  that  ( 1 )  neither  may  be  a  component 
of  the  other,  and  (2)  their  composite  natures  may  include 
a  common  factor,  although  in  the  full  sense  of  the  term 

240 


Truth  241 

their  essences’  are  different.  The  two  objects  can  then  be 
said  to  have  a  truth-relation  to  each  other.  The  examina¬ 
tion  of  one  of  them  can  disclose  some  factor  belonging 
to  the  essence  of  the  other.  In  other  words,  an  abstraction 
can  be  made  and  some  elements  of  the  complete  pattern 
can  be  omitted.  The  partial  pattern  thus  obtained  will  be 
said  to  be  abstracted  from  the  original.  A  truth-relation 
will  be  said  to  connect  the  objective  contents  of  two  pre¬ 
hensions  when  one  and  the  same  identical  partial  pattern 
can  be  abstracted  from  both  of  them.  They  each  exhibit 
s  sam®  Pa.r^a  pattern,  though  their  omitted  elements 
involve  the  differences  which  belong  to  their  diverse  in¬ 
dividualities.  Plato  uses  the  term  ‘participation’ 
to  express  the  relation  of  a  composite  fact  to  some  partial 

tPhe  n^fWl  o11  dluStrateS'  °n,y  he  limits  the  notion  of 
the  partia1  pattern  to  some  purely  abstract  pattern  of  quali¬ 
tative  elements,  to  the  exclusion  of  the  notion  of  concrete 
particuter  realities  as  components  in  a  composite  reality. 

It'imUatl0n-iS,  ™slfadin8-  Thus  we  will  speak  of  a 
fa”e™  as  P°sslbly  including  concrete  particulars  among 
its  patterned  elements.  With  this  enlargement  of  meaning! 
wi?aVfay  thau  objective  contents  are  united  in  a 

nnitrl  p1?!,"  W^fn  they  severally  participate  in  the  same 
pattern.  Either  illustrates  what  in  part  the  other  is.  Thus 
they  interpret  each  other.  But  if  we  ask  what  is  meant  by 
truth,  we  can  only  answer  that  there  is  a  truth-relation 
when  two  composite  facts  participate  in  the  same  pattern, 
then  knowledge  about  one  of  the  facts  involves  knowl- 
e<a§?,  about  the  other,  so  far  as  the  truth-relation  extends. 

the  truth-relation  as  realized  in  experience  always  in¬ 
volves  some  element  of  Appearance.  For  the  separate  pre¬ 
hensions  of  the  two  composite  facts  have  been  integrated 
so  that  the  two  objects  stand  in  the  unity  of  a  contrast 
with  each  other.  There  is  an  intuition  of  a  limited  identity 
of  pattern  involved  in  the  contrast  of  the  diverse  essences, 
in  virtue  of  this  identity  there  is  a  transference  of  sub¬ 
jective  form  from  the  feeling  of  one  objedt  to  that  of  the 
°!u‘  t?  •*  .  appropriate  to  one  is  appropriate  to  the 

other.  The  intuitive  recognition  of  ‘that  is  so’  is  the  subjec¬ 
tive  form  including  in  itself  justification  of  its  own  trans¬ 
ference  from  the  object  on  one  side  of  the  contrast  to  the 
object  on  the  other  side. 

In  this  way  one  object  as  a  real  fact  obtains  a  re- 


242  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

adjustment  of  the  relative  values  of  its  factors  by  reason  of 
its  analogies  to  another  object.  In  other  words,  it  be¬ 
comes  a  real  fact  tinged  with  Appearance.  By  itself,  its 
factors  would  not  be  felt  in  those  proportions.  To  know  the 
truth  partially  is  to  distort  the  Universe.  For  example,  the 
savage  who  can  only  count  up  to  ten  enormously  exagger¬ 
ates  the  importance  of  the  small  numbers,  and  so  do  we 
whose  imaginations  fail  when  we  come  to  millions.  It  is 
an  erroneous  moral  platitude,  that  it  is  necessarily  good  to 
know  the  truth.  The  minor  truth  may  beget  the  major  evil. 
And  this  major  evil  may  take  the  form  of  the  major  error. 
Henri  Poincare  points  out  that  instruments  of  precision, 
used  unseasonably,  may  hinder  the  advance  of  science. 
For  example,  if  Newton’s  imagination  had  been  dominated  _ 
by  the  errors  in  Kepler’s  Laws  as  disclosed  by  modem  ob¬ 
servation,  the  world  might  still  be  waiting  for  the  Law  of 
Gravitation.  The  Truth  must  be  seasonable. 

Section  III.  The  two  conspicuous  examples  of  the 
truth-relation  in  human  experience  are  afforded  by  propo¬ 
sitions  and  by  sense-perception.  A  proposition  is  the  ab¬ 
stract  possibility  of  some  specified  nexus  of  actualities 
realizing  some  eternal  object,  which  may  either  be  simple, 
or  may  be  a  complex  pattern  of  simpler  objects.  The  reali¬ 
zation  may  (1)  concern  the  complete  nexus  with  its  com¬ 
ponent  occasions  in  assigned  functions,  or  (2)  it  may 
concern  the  individual  realization  of  the  eternal  object  by 
some  or  all,  of  the  component  occasions,  or  (3)  it  may 
concern  the  joint  realization  by  some  unspecified  sub¬ 
ordinate  nexus.  All  of  these  alternatives  merely  concern 
the  possibility  of  propositions  of  the  various  types,  so 
important  for  the  purposes  of  Formal  Logic. 

But  for  the  present  discussion  we  need  simply  consider 
the  broad  fact  that  a  proposition  is  the  abstract  possibility 
of  an  assigned  nexus  illustrating  an  assigned  pattern. 

No  verbal  sentence  merely  enunciates  a  proposition.  It 
always  includes  some  incitement  for  the  production  of  an 
assigned  psychological  attitude  in  the  prehension  of  the 
proposition  indicated.  In  other  words,  it  endeavours  to 
fix  the  subjective  form  which  clothes  the  feeling  of  the 
proposition  as  a  datum.  There  may  be  an  incitement  to 
believe,  or  to  doubt,  or  to  enjoy,  or  to  obey.  This  incite¬ 
ment  is  conveyed  partly  by  the  grammatical  mood  and 
tense  of  the  verb,  partly  by  the  whole  suggestion  of  the 


Truth  243 

sentence,  partly  by  the  whole  content  of  the  book,  partly 
by  the  material  circumstances  of  the  book,  including  its 
cover,  partly  by  the  names  of  the  author  and  of  the  pub¬ 
lisher.  In  the  discussion  of  the  nature  of  a  proposition,  a 
great  deal  of  confusion  has  been  introduced  by  confusing 
this  psychological  incitement  with  the  proposition  itself. 

A  proposition  is  a  notion  about  actualities,  a  suggestion, 
a  theory,  a  supposition  about  things.  Its  entertainment  in 
experience  subserves  many  purposes.  It  is  an  extreme  case 
of  Appearance.  For  actualities  which  are  the  logical  sub¬ 
jects  are  conceived  in  the  guise  of  illustrating  the  predicate. 
The  unconscious  entertainment  of  propositions  is  a  stage  in 
the  transition  from  the  Reality  of  the  initial  phase  of  ex¬ 
perience  to  the  Appearance  of  the  final  phase.  In  the  low- 
est  types  of  actualities  in  whose  processes  propositions 
hardly  arise,  there  is  practically  no  Appearance  differen¬ 
tiating  the  final  and  initial  phases. 

It  is  more  important  that  a  proposition  be  interesting 
than  that  it  be  true.  This  statement  is  almost  a  tautology. 
For  the  energy  of  operation  of  a  proposition  in  an  oc¬ 
casion  of  experience  is  its  interest,  and  is  its  importance. 
But  of  course  a  true  proposition  is  more  apt  to  be  inter¬ 
esting  than  a  false  one.  Also  action  in  accordance  with 
the  emotional  lure  of  a  proposition  is  more  apt  to  be  suc¬ 
cessful  if  the  proposition  be  true.  And  apart  from  action, 
the  contemplation  of  truth  has  an  interest  of  its  own.  But, 
after  all  this  explanation  and  qualification,  it  remains  true 
that  the  importance  of  a  proposition  lies  in  its  interest. 
Nothing  illustrates  better  the  danger  of  specialist  sciences 
than  the  confusion  due  to  handing  over  propositions  for 
theoretical  consideration  by  logicians,  exclusively.  The 
truth  of  a  proposition  lies  in  its  truth-relation  to  the  nexus 
which  is  its  logical  subject.  A  proposition  is  true  when  the 
nexus  does  in  reality  exemplify  the  pattern  which  is  the 
predicate  of  the  proposition.  Thus  in  the  analysis  of 
the  various  component  factors  involved  the  proposition,  if 
true,  seems  to  be  identical  with  the  nexus.  For  there  are 
the  same  actual  occasions  and  the  same  eternal  objects  in¬ 
volved.  But  in  all  analysis  there  is  one  supreme  factor 
which  is  apt  to  be  omitted,  namely,  the  mode  of  together¬ 
ness.  The  nexus  includes  the  eternal  object  in  the  mode  of 
realization.  Whereas  in  the  true  proposition  the  together¬ 
ness  of  the  nexus  and  the  eternal  object  belongs  to  the 


244  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

mode  of  abstract  possibility.  The  eternal  object  is  then 
united  to  the  nexus  as  a  mere  ‘predicate.’  Thus  a  nexus 
and  a  proposition  belong  to  different  categories  of  being. 
Their  identification  is  mere  nonsense.  It  is  the  nonsense 
of  the  same  sort  as  the  fashionable  identification  of  physi¬ 
cal  fact  with  formulae  of  pure  mathematics. 

Propositions,  like  everything  else  except  experience  in 
its  own  immediacy,  only  exist  as  entertained  in  experience. 
It  is  the  peculiar  function  of  the  mental  pole  that  the  ob¬ 
jective  content  of  its  prehensions  only  exists  in  the  mode 
of  possibility.  But  matter  of  fact  essentially  involves  a  men¬ 
tal  pole.  Thus  in  the  analysis  of  an  actual  occasion,  we 
necessarily  find  components  belonging  to  the  mode  of  pos¬ 
sibility.  The  most  conspicuous  example  of  truth  and  false¬ 
hood  arises  in  the  comparison  of  existences  in  the  mode 
of  possibility  with  existences  in  the  mode  of  actuality. 

Section  IV.  For  animals  on  this  Earth,  sense-perception 
is  the  culmination  of  Appearance.  The  sensa  derived  from 
bodily  activities  in  the  past  are  precipitated  upon  the  re¬ 
gions  in  the  contemporary  world.  The  note  of  hypothesis, 
the  note  of  mere  suggested  possibility  is  eliminated.  The 
regions  appear  to  the  percipient  as  in  their  own  right  asso¬ 
ciated  with  the  sensa.  The  Appearance  now  is,  that  the 
sensa  qualify  the  regions. 

The  question  then  arises,  Do  the  sensa  in  fact  qualify  the 
regions?  The  answer  depends  on  what  is  meant  by  ‘in 
fact,’  and  what  is  meant  by  ‘qualification.’  It  is  here  that 
the  notion  of  truth  and  falsehood  applies  to  sense-percep¬ 
tion.  But  in  the  realm  of  truth  there  are  many  mansions; 
and  we  have  to  analyse  the  types  of  truth  and  of  falsehood 
which  sense-perception  is  capable  of. 

In  the  first  place,  the  primary  status  of  the  sensa  as 
qualifications  of  affective  tone  must  be  kept  in  mind.  They 
are  primarily  inherited  as  such  qualifications  and  then  by 
‘transmutation’  are  objectively  perceived  as  qualifications 
of  regions.  The  immense  aesthetic  importance  of  sensa  is 
due  to  this  status  of  sensa.  For  the  sensum  as  a  factor  in 
the  datum  of  a  prehension  imposes  itself  as  a  qualifica¬ 
tion  of  the  affective  tone  which  is  the  subjective  form  of 
that  prehension.  Thus  a  pattern  of  affective  tone  is  con¬ 
formally  produced  by  a  pattern  of  sensa  as  datum.  Now 
when  a  region  appears  as  red  in  sense-perception,  the 
question  arises  whether  red  is  qualifying  in  any  dominant 


Truth  245 

manner  the  affective  tones  of  the  actualities  which  in  fact 
make  up  the  region. 

If  so,  there  is  in  this  sense  a  truth-relation  between  the 
reality  of  the  region  and  its  appearance  for  the  contempo¬ 
rary  percipient.  For  example,  if  the  light  has  undergone 
reflexions  in  a  mirror,  the  appearance  of  the  region  be¬ 
hind  the  mirror  affords  no  ground  for  conjecture  as  to  the 
affective  tones  of  its  component  actualities. 

This  notion  of  the  sensa  as  qualifications  of  affective 
tone  is  a  paradox  for  philosophy,  though  it  is  fairly  obvious 
to  common  sense.  A  red-irritation  is  prevalent  among 
nerve-racked  people  and  among  bulls.  The  affective  tone  of 
perception  of  a  green  woodland  in  spring  can  only  be  de¬ 
fined  by  the  delicate  shades  of  the  green.  It  is  a  strong 
aesthetic  emotion  with  the  qualification  of  green  in  spring¬ 
time.  The  intellect  fastens  on  smell  as  a  datum:  the  animal 
experiences  it  as  a  qualification  of  his  subjective  feelings. 
Our  developed  consciousness  fastens  on  the  sensum  as 
datum:  our  basic  animal  experience  entertains  it  as  a  type 
of  subjective  feeling.  The  experience  starts  as  that  smelly 
feeling,  and  is  developed  by  mentality  into  the  feeling  of 
that  smell. 

We  can  also  observe  qualifications  of  moods  hovering 
on  the  verge  of  becoming  sensa,  in  fact  functioning  as  sensa 
for  the  infant,  and  being  dismissed  from  that  category  by 
the  developed  intellect  of  the  grown-up  person.  For  ex¬ 
ample,  the  emotional  moods  of  the  mother  nursing  the  in¬ 
fant,  moods  of  love,  or  gaiety,  or  depression,  or  irritation, 
are  directly  perceived  on  the  mother’s  face  by  the  infant, 
and  are  responded  to.  It  certainly  is  in  the  highest  degree 
improbable  that  the  subtle  trains  of  thought  by  which  our 
epistemologists  obtain  their  knowledge  should  have  occur¬ 
red  to  speechless  infants,  or  to  dogs  and  horses.  Direct 
perceptions  of  such  moods  in  these  cases  must  enter  on 
equal  terms  with  the  other  sensa.  But  in  respect  to  the  per¬ 
ception  of  such  moods,  the  animal  body  functions  vary 
differently  from  its  functionings  in  the  conveyance  of  sensa. 
Hence  for  the  educated  intellect  there  is  a  distinction  of 
type. 

But  in  any  case  the  infant  feels  its  mother’s  cheerfulness 
as  a  datum,  and  feels  it  conformally,  with  that  affective 
tone.  The  datum  is  derived  from  the  past,  the  immediate 
past.  It  is  precipitated  upon  that  present  region  occupied 


246  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

by  the  nexus  of  occasions  which  constitute  the  complex  fact 
of  the  mother’s  existence,  body  and  soul.  For  the  infant, 
the  Appearance  includes  the  qualification  of  cheerfulness. 
And  in  this  respect  it  may  have — it  often  does  have — to 
the  contemporary  real  mother  a  truth-relation  in  the  full¬ 
est  sense  of  the  term  ‘truth.’ 

Section  V.  The  relation  of  sense-perception  to  con¬ 
temporary  occasions  can  also  exemplify  another  type  of 
truth-relation  between  Appearance  and  Reality. 

The  sense-perception  may  result  from  the  normal  func¬ 
tioning  of  the  healthy  animal  body.  The  consequent  in¬ 
heritance  from  the  antecedent  occasions  of  the  personal 
soul  may  likewise  share  in  this  healthy  normality.  Also  the 
particular  body  and  soul  in  question  may  share  in  that  con¬ 
formation  of  their  reactions  to  those  main  external  activi¬ 
ties  of  fluent  energy  which  is  normally  required  for  the 
preservation  of  that  species  of  animal.  Given  these  condi¬ 
tions  of  normality,  the  resulting  appearance  will  be  that 
proper  to  that  species  of  animal  under  circumstances  of 
that  type.  This  is  a  fact  of  nature,  and  the  Appearance 
expresses  the  issue  of  a  Law  of  Nature,  belonging  to  that 
cosmic  epoch  and  to  those  more  special  conditions  within 
that  epoch.  This  is  a  truth-relation  between  Appearance 
and  Reality  of  a  more  indirect  character  than  the  first 
sort  of  truth-relation.  It  is  wider,  vaguer,  and  more  diffuse 
in  its  reference.  We  have  perceived  what  well-conditioned 
individuals  of  our  own  type  would  perceive  under  those 
circumstances. 

Section  VI.  Within  any  type  of  truth-relation  a  distinc¬ 
tion  arises.  The  Reality  functions  in  the  past,  the  Appear¬ 
ance  is  perceived  in  the  present.  On  a  moonless  night,  the 
faintly  luminous  stretch  of  the  sky  which  is  the  Milky  Way 
is  an  Appearance  of  the  contemporary  world,  namely,  it  is 
a  great  region  within  the  ‘Receptacle’  of  that  world  as  it 
appears.  But  the  Reality  whose  functioning  issues  in  that 
Appearance,  is  a  flux  of  light-energy  travelling  through  the 
utmost  depths  ,of  space  and,  to  our  imaginations,  through 
illimitable  time. 

Beyond  that  Milky  Way  as  it  stands  in  sight,  at  a  finite 
ill-defined  distance,  a  barrier  separating  us  from  the  con¬ 
temporary  space  beyond: — Does  that  remote  activity  of  the 
transference  of  light-energy  still  persist  as  a  contemporary 
fact?  Perhaps  the  occasions  whose  interconnections  con- 


Truth  247 

stitute  that  distant  region  have  changed  the  ordering  of 
their  goings-on.  Stars  flare  out  in  a  few  days,  and  in  a  few 
years,  their  light  has  died.  The  Appearance  of  the  con¬ 
temporary  regions  has  its  truth-relations  to  the  past,  and 
its  truth-relations  to  contemporary  Reality.  These  latter 
truth-relations  can  only  be  estimated  by  an  imaginative 
leap,  which  has  as  its  basis  for  justification  the  truth- 
relations  to  the  past  and  our  experience  of  the  stability  of 
the  types  of  order  involved. 

Perhaps  in  the  mutual  immanence  of  occasions,  al¬ 
though  the  antecedence  and  the  consequence — the  past, 
the  present  and  the  future — still  hold  equally  for  physical 
and  mental  poles,  yet  the  relations  of  the  mental  poles  to 
each  other  are  not  subject  to  the  same  laws  of  perspective 
as  are  those  of  the  physical  poles.  Measurable  time  and 
measurable  space  are  then  irrelevant  to  their  mutual  con¬ 
nections.  Thus  in  respect  to  some  types  of  Appearance 
there  may  be  an  element  of  immediacy  in  its  relations  to 
the  mental  side  of  the  contemporary  world.  Other  types 
of  Appearance,  such  as  the  located  sensa  in  sense-percep¬ 
tion,  may  depend  on  the  time  and  space  which  express  the 
perspective  arising  in  the  mutual  immanence  of  the  physi¬ 
cal  poles. 

If  such  be  the  case,  some  types  of  Appearance  will  have 
a  more  direct  relation  than  others  to  contemporary  Reality. 

Section  VII.  There  is  a  third  type  of  truth-relation 
which  is  even  vaguer  and  more  indirect  than  the  second 
type  considered  above.  It  may  be  termed  the  type  of  ‘sym¬ 
bolic  truth.’  This  species  of  truth  may  be  included  under 
the  second  type,  as  an  extreme  instance  of  it.  But  on  the 
whole,  it  is  clearer  to  consider  it  as  a  distinct  species. 

The  relation  of  Appearance  to  Reality,  when  there  is 
symbolic  truth,  is  that  for  certain  sets  of  percipients  the 
prehension  of  the  Appearance  leads  to  the  prehension  of 
the  Reality,  such  that  the  subjective  forms  of  the  two  pre¬ 
hensions  are  conformal.  There  is  however  no  direct  causal 
relation  between  the  Appearance  and  the  Reality;  so  that 
in  no  direct  sense  is  the  Appearance  the  cause  of  the 
Reality,  or  the  Reality  the  cause  of  the  Appearance.  A  set 
of  adventitious  circumstances  has  brought  about  this  con¬ 
nection  between  those  Appearances  and  those  Realities  as 
prehended  in  the  experiences  of  those  percipients.  In  their 
own  natures  the  Appearances  throw  no  light  upon  the 


248  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

Realities,  nor  do  the  Realities  upon  the  Appearances,  ex¬ 
cept  in  the  experiences  of  a  set  of  peculiarly  conditioned 
percipients.  Languages  and  their  meanings  are  examples  of 
this  third  type  of  truth.  There  is  an  indirect  truth-relation 
of  the  sounds  or  of  the  visual  marks  on  paper  to  the  propo¬ 
sitions  conveyed.  We  are  confining  the  discussion  to  the 
relation  of  written  or  spoken  sentences  to  propositions. 
There  is  a  right  and  a  wrong  use  of  any  particular  language 
among  the  group  of  people  who  are  properly  conditioned. 
Also,  having  regard  to  the  aesthetics  of  literature,  language 
not  only  conveys  objective  meaning,  but  also  involves  a 
conveyance  of  subjective  form. 

Music,  ceremonial  clothing,  ceremonial  smells,  and  cere¬ 
monial  rhythmic  visual  appearances,  also  have  symbolic 
truth,  or  symbolic  falsehood.  In  these  latter  instances,  the 
conveyance  of  objective  meaning  is  at  a  minimum,  while 
the  conveyance  of  suitable  subjective  form  is  at  its  height. 
Music  provides  an  example  when  it  interprets  some  strong 
sentiment,  patriotic,  martial,  or  religious,  by  providing  the 
emotion  which  the  votaries  dumbly  feel  ought  to  be  at¬ 
tached  to  the  apprehension  of  national  life,  or  of  the  clash 
of  nations,  or  of  the  activities  of  God.  Music  elicits  some 
confused  feeling  into  distinct  apprehension.  It  performs 
this  service,  or  dis-service,  by  introducing  an  emotional 
clothing  which  changes  the  dim  objective  reality  into  a 
clear  Appearance  matching  the  subjective  form  provided 
for  its  prehension. 

There  is  then  the  vague  truth-relation,  via  community 
of  subjective  form,  between  the  music  and  the  resulting 
Appearance.  There  is  also  the  truth-relation  between  the 
Appearance  and  the  Reality — the  Reality  of  National  Life, 
or  of  Strife  between  nations,  or  of  the  Essence  of  God. 
This  complex  fusion  of  truth-relations,  with  their  false¬ 
hoods  intermixed,  constitutes  the  indirect  interpretative 
power  of  Art  to  express  the  truth  about  the  nature  of 
things.  Of  course  a  somewhat  gross,  almost  vulgar,  instance 
has  been  given,  for  the  sake  of  easy  explanation.  But  the 
delicate  inner  truth  of  Art  is  mostly  of  this  sort. 

Section  VIII.  This  discussion  suggests  an  illustrative 
digression  on  the  origins  of  socially  diffused  habits  of  be¬ 
haviour  and  of  habits  of  interpretation,  among  human  be¬ 
ings.  An  idea  arises  from  the  antecedent  establishment  of 
modes  of  human  functioning  which  are  germane  to  it.  In 


Truth  249 

the  infancy  of  its  incarnation  in  human  history,  it  lurks  in 
the  penumbra  of  consciousness,  undiscriminated  and  un¬ 
expressed.  For  the  historian  in  later  ages  it  discloses  itself 
by  the  dim  growth  of  the  sense  of  importance  attached  to 
those  functionings  of  the  tribe  which  dimly  elicit  its  dis¬ 
crimination.  But  soon  an  inversion  takes  place.  These 
modes  of  functioning  are  interpreted  by  some  restless  in¬ 
tellects  of  the  tribe.  The  behaviour  patterns  then,  in  addi¬ 
tion  to  their  own  intrinsic  value  for  tribal  life,  take  on  the 
role  of  an  apparatus  of  expression.  They  become  linked 
to  an  intellectual  construction.  The  behaviour  patterns, 
with  their  entwined  emotions,  evoke  the  apprehension  of 
the  construction.  Conversely,  the  entertainment  of  the  con¬ 
struction  constitutes  an  urge  towards  the  modes  of  be¬ 
haviour.  In  this  way,  the  ceremonies  with  their  output  of 
emotion  become  the  mode  of  expression  for  the  ideas;  and 
the  ideas  become  an  interpretation  of  the  ceremonies.  This 
is  the  account  of  the  primitive  origination  of  the  linkage 
of  an  idea  to  an  apparatus  of  expression. 

The  linkage  between  an  idea  and  its  expression  has  been 
described  above  as  being  ‘interpretation.’  Some  analysis  of 
this  concept  of  ‘interpretation’  has  now  to  be  made.  Two 
behaviour  patterns  mutually  interpret  each  other,  only 
when  some  common  factor  of  experience  is  realized  in  the 
enactment  of  either  pattern.  The  common  factor  consti¬ 
tutes  the  reason  for  the  transition  from  one  pattern  to  the 
other  patterns.  Each  pattern  interprets  the  other  as  ex¬ 
pressive  of  that  common  factor.  Here  a  behaviour-pattern 
is  merely  another  phrase  for  a  mode  of  experience.  Thus, 
in  this  sense,  the  entertainment  of  a  myth  is  one  behaviour- 
pattern,  and  a  tribal  dance,  or  a  Court  ceremonial,  is  an¬ 
other  behaviour-pattern. 

Section  IX.  But  after  all,  it  is  the  blunt  truth  that  we 
want.  The  final  contentment  of  our  aims  requires  some¬ 
thing  more  than  vulgar  substitutes,  or  subtle  evasions,  how¬ 
ever  delicate.  The  indirections  of  truth  can  never  satisfy  us. 
Our  purposes  seek  their  main  justification  in  sheer  matter- 
of-fact.  All  the  rest  is  addition,  however  important,  to 
this  foundation.  Apart  from  blunt  truth,  our  lives  sink 
decadently  amid  the  perfume  of  hints  and  suggestions. 

The  blunt  truth  that  we  require  is  the  conformal  corre¬ 
spondence  of  clear  and  distinct  Appearance  to  Reality.  In 
human  experience,  clear  and  distinct  Appearance  is  pri- 


250  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

marily  sense-perception.  The  blunt  truth  required  for  sense- 
perception  is  the  truth  of  the  first  type,  already  partially 
discussed  in  Section  IV  of  this  Chapter.  In  that  section  the 
doctrine  was  developed  that  the  prehension  of  a  sensum, 
as  an  apparent  object  qualifying  a  region,  involved  for  that 
prehension  a  subjective  form  also  involving  that  sensum  as 
a  factor.  We  enjoy  the  green  foliage  of  the  spring  greenly: 
we  enjoy  the  sunset  with  an  emotional  pattern  including 
among  its  elements  the  colours  and  the  contrasts  of  the 
vision.  It  is  this  that  makes  Art  possible:  it  is  this  that  pro¬ 
cures  the  glory  of  perceived  nature.  For  if  the  subjective 
form  of  reception  be  not  conformal  to  the  objective  sensa, 
then  the  values  of  the  percept  would  be  at  the  mercy  of  the 
chance  make-up  of  the  other  components  in  that  experi¬ 
ence.  For  example,  in  the  intuition  of  a  multiplicity  of  three 
or  four  objects,  the  mere  number  imposes  no  subjective 
form.  It  is  merely  a  condition  regulating  some  pattern  of 
effective  components.  In  abstraction  from  those  compon¬ 
ents,  mere  triplicity  can  dictate  no  subjective  form  for  its 
prehension.  But  green  can.  And  there  lies  the  difference  be¬ 
tween  the  sensa  and  the  abstract  mathematical  forms. 

The  steady  values  derived  from  sense-perception,  which 
are  there  even  when  disregarded  and  even  when  jarring 
with  other  emotions,  exist  because  the  sensa  themselves 
enter  into  the  subjective  forms  of  their  physical  prehen¬ 
sions. 

Section  X.  The  point  to  be  decided  is  whether  the 
green  meadow  in  spring-time,  as  it  appears  to  us,  in  any 
direct  way  conforms  to  the  happenings  within  the  region  of 
the  meadow,  and  more  particularly  within  the  regions  of 
the  blades  of  grass.  Have  we  any  grounds  for  the  belief 
that  in  some  way  things  really  are  in  those  regions  as  our 
senses  perceive  those  regions?  In  the  first  place,  such  con¬ 
formation  evidently  cannot  arise  from  the  necessities  of  na¬ 
ture.  The  delusive  perceptions  prove  that.  Double  vision, 
and  images  due  to  reflexion  and  refraction  of  light,  show 
that  the  appearance  of  regions  may  be  quite  irrelevant  to 
the  happenings  within  regions.  Appearances  are  finally  con¬ 
trolled  by  the  functionings  of  the  animal  body.  These  func¬ 
tionings  and  the  happenings  within  the  contemporary 
regions  are  both  derived  from  a  common  past,  highly  rele¬ 
vant  to  both.  It  is  thereby  pertinent  to  ask,  whether  the 
animal  body  and  the  external  regions  are  not  attuned  to- 


Beauty  251 

gether,  so  that  under  normal  circumstances,  the  appear¬ 
ances  conform  to  natures  within  the  regions. 

The  attainment  of  such  conformation  would  belong  to 
the  perfection  of  nature  in  respect  to  the  higher  types  of 
its  animal  life.  There  is  no  necessity  about  it.  Evidently 
there  is  failure,  interference,  and  only  partial  adjustment. 
But  we  have  to  ask  whether  nature  does  not  contain  within 
itself  a  tendency  to  be  in  tune,  an  Eros  urging  towards 
perfection.  This  question  cannot  be  discussed  without  pass¬ 
ing  beyond  the  narrow  grounds  of  the  truth-relation. 


17.  Beauty 

Section  I.  Beauty  is  the  mutual  adaptation  of  the  several 
factors  in  an  occasion  of  experience.  Thus  in  its  primary 
sense  Beauty  is  a  quality  which  finds  its  exemplification  in 
actual  occasions:  or  put  conversely,  it  is  a  quality  in  which 
such  occasions  can  severally  participate.  There  are  grada¬ 
tions  in  Beauty  and  in  types  of  Beauty. 

“Adaptation”  implies  an  end.  Thus  Beauty  is  only  de¬ 
fined  when  the  aim  of  the  ‘adaptation’  has  been  analysed. 
This  aim  is  twofold.  It  is  in  the  first  place,  the  absence  of 
mutual  inhibition  among  the  various  prehensions,  so  that 
the  intensities  of  subjective  form,  which  naturally  and 
properly — or  in  one  word,  conformally — arise  from  the 
objective  contents  of  the  various  prehensions,  do  not  in¬ 
hibit  each  other.  When  this  aim  is  secured,  there  is  the 
minor  form  of  beauty,  the  absence  of  painful  clash,  the  ab¬ 
sences  of  vulgarity.  In  the  second  place,  there  is  the  major 
form  of  Beauty.  This  form  presupposes  the  first  form, 
and  adds  to  it  the  condition  that  the  conjunction  in  one 
synthesis  of  the  various  prehensions  introduces  new  con¬ 
trasts  of  objective  content  with  objective  content.  These 
contrasts  introduce  new  conformal  intensities  of  feelings 
natural  to  each  of  them,  and  by  so  doing  raise  the  intensi¬ 
ties  of  conformal  feeling  in  the  primitive  component  feel¬ 
ings.  Thus  the  parts  contribute  to  the  massive  feeling  of 
the  whole,  and  the  whole  contributes  to  the  intensity  of 
feeling  of  the  parts.  Thus  the  subjective  forms  of  these 


252  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

prehensions  are  severally  and  jointly  interwoven  in  pat¬ 
terned  contrasts.  In  other  words,  the  perfection  of  Beauty 
is  defined  as  being  the  perfection  of  Harmony;  and  the 
perfection  of  Harmony  is  defined  in  terms  of  the  perfection 
of  Subjective  Form  in  detail  and  in  final  synthesis.  Also 
the  perfection  of  Subjective  Form  is  defined  in  terms  of 
‘Strength.’  In  the  sense  here  meant,  Strength  has  two  fac¬ 
tors,  namely,  variety  of  detail  with  effective  contrast,  which 
is  Massiveness,  and  Intensity  Proper  which  is  comparative 
magnitude  without  reference  to  qualitative  variety.  But  the 
maximum  of  intensity  proper  is  finally  dependent  upon 
massiveness. 

Section  II.  In  order  to  understand  this  definition  of 
Beauty,  it  is  necessary  to  keep  in  mind  three  doctrines 
which  belong  to  the  metaphysical  system  in  terms  of  which 
the  World  is  being  interpreted  in  these  chapters.  These 
three  doctrines  respectively  have  regard  to  the  mutual  re¬ 
lations  (a)  between  the  objective  content  of  a  prehension 
and  the  subjective  form  of  that  prehension,  and  (b)  be¬ 
tween  the  subjective  forms  of  various  prehensions  in  the 
same  occasion,  and  (c)  between  the  subjective  form  of 
a  prehension  and  the  spontaneity  involved  in  the  subjective 
aim  of  the  prehending  occasion.  These  doctrines  are  inter¬ 
connected;  but  each  of  them  introduces  a  principle  which 
is  not  made  explicit  by  the  other  two.  They  will  now  be 
successively  explained: — 

(a)  It  is  held  that  every  qualitative  factor  in  the  Uni¬ 
verse  is  primarily  a  qualification  of  subjective  form,  so  that 
the  infinite  variety  of  qualities  involves  the  possibility  of 
an  infinite  variety  of  subjective  forms  exemplifying  those 
qualities.  This  does  not  mean  that  the  subjective  forms  ex¬ 
emplifying  various  qualities  are  all  equally  prominent  in 
human  consciousness.  Consciousness  is  a  variable  uncer¬ 
tain  element  which  flickers  uncertainly  on  the  surface  of 
experience.  But  it  is  part  of  the  doctrine  that  the  qualita¬ 
tive  content  of  the  object  prehended  enters  into  the  qualities 
exemplified  in  the  subjective  form  of  that  prehension.  This 
is  the  general  principle  underlying  (1)  the  doctrine  of 
conformal1  feelings,  constituting  the  primary  phase  of  the 
occasion,  and  (2)  the  doctrine  of  the  qualitative  valuations 
forming  the  activities  of  the  mental  pole,  and  (3)  the 


l  Cf.  Part  III,  above,  and  Process  and  Reality,  passim,  as  indexed. 


Beauty  253 

doctrine  of  the  valuations  involved  in  the  Primordial  Na¬ 
ture  of  God,  here  also  termed  the  Eros  of  the  Universe. 
It  follows  that  the  subjective  form  of  a  prehension  is  partly 
dictated  by  the  qualitative  element  in  the  objective  con¬ 
tent  of  that  prehension.  There  is  in  fact  initial  conforma¬ 
tion.  It  has  been  repeatedly  stated  above  that  this  is  what 
makes  Art  possible.  Also  the  factor  of  compulsive  de¬ 
terminism  in  the  Universe  depends  on  this  principle. 

This  doctrine  of  conformation  only  holds  for  the  quali¬ 
tative  side  of  the  content  of  the  objective  datum.  It  follows 
that  two  exceptions  arise  to  the  more  general  statement 
that  subjective  form  conforms  to  the  objective  datum.  Both 
exceptions  arise  when  abstraction  has  reached  its  extreme 
limit.  The  extremity  of  abstraction  from  all  qualitative  ele¬ 
ments  reduces  pattern  to  bare  mathematical  form — for 
example,  triplicity  or  the  abstract  relationship  of  sets  of 
numbers,  such  as  the  squareness  of  the  number  four.  Such 
forms  by  their  very  natures  cannot  qualify  subjective  form. 
For  example,  there  is  not  a  square-ness  of  emotion.  Thus, 
except  in  an  indirect  fashion — such  as  the  qualitative  feel¬ 
ings  of  smoothness  of  a  sphere,  of  spikeyness  of  a  square, 
of  amplitude  of  a  volume — the  doctrine  of  conformation 
does  not  apply  to  mathematical  pattern.  Here  pure  mathe¬ 
matics  in  its  strictest  modern  sense  is  in  question. 

Again  the  notion  of  an  actual  occasion — that  is,  of  indi¬ 
vidual  actuality — can  be  entertained  in  abstraction  from 
any  qualitative  or  mathematical  components  which  in  any 
sense  are  realized  in  its  essence,  either  as  objective  data, 
or  as  subjective  forms,  or  as  relations  between  prehen¬ 
sions.  A  particular  actuality  can  also  be  abstracted  from 
the  mode  of  its  initial  indication,  so  that  in  a  later  phase 
of  experience  it  is  entertained2  as  a  bare  ‘It.’  Only  the 
qualitative  components  of  an  actuality  in  the  datum  can 
pass  into  the  subjective  form.  The  only  actuality  impli¬ 
cated  in  the  subjective  form  is  the  immediate  occasion 
in  process  of  self-formation.  The  subjective  form  is  that 
immediate  subject  in  that  state  of  subjective  feeling.  In 
the  sense  in  which  an  actuality  can  be  indicated  as  a  bare 
It  for  objective  prehension — in  that  sense  it  does  not  enter 
into  the  subjective  form  of  the  prehension. 

(b)  The  second  doctrine  expresses  the  unity  of  the  im- 


2  Cf.  The  Concept  of  Nature,  Chapter  I,  and  Process  and  Realitv  Part  TT 
Section  III,  Chapter  IX,  and  Part  III,  Chapter  IV.  V’  ’ 


254  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

mediate  occasion  in  process  of  formation.  The  subjective 
forms  are  merely  contributions  to  the  one  fact  which  is 
the  subjective  feeling  of  the  one  occasion.  There  is  a  cer¬ 
tain  distribution  among  the  various  prehensions,  by  rea¬ 
son  of  the  fact  that  each  part  of  the  total  objective  datum 
dictates  its  conformal  qualitative  reproduction  in  the  sub¬ 
jective  form.  In  so  far  as  identical  qualities  occur  in  di¬ 
verse  objective  data,  then  the  efficiency  of  that  quality  in 
the  subjective  form  must  be  dictated  by  a  process  of  in¬ 
tegration,  and  also  by  compatibility  with  the  other  quali¬ 
tative  feelings.  Thus  the  distribution  of  subjective  form 
among  the  separate  prehensions  refers  primarily  to  the 
conformal  origins  of  subjective  form  derived  from  the 
various  components  of  the  total  objective  datum. 

(c)  The  third  doctrine  expresses  the  final  autonomy  of 
the  process.  This  process  of  the  synthesis  of  subjective 
forms  derived  conformally  is  not  settled  by  the  antecedent 
fact  of  the  data.  For  these  data  in  their  own  separate 
natures  do  not  carry  any  regulative  principle  for  their 
synthesis.  The  regulative  principle  is  derived  from  the 
novel  unity  which  is  imposed  on  them  by  the  novel  crea¬ 
ture  in  process  of  constitution.  Thus  the  immediate  occa¬ 
sion  from  the  spontaneity  of  its  own  essence  must  supply 
the  missing  determination  for  the  synthesis  of  subjective 
form.  Thus  the  future  of  the  Universe,  though  conditioned 
by  the  immanence  of  its  past,  awaits  for  its  complete  de¬ 
termination  the  spontaneity  of  the  novel  individual  occa¬ 
sions  as  in  their  season  they  come  into  being. 

Section  III.  A  distinction  must  now  be  made  between 
two  meanings  of  the  term  Beauty.  There  is  the  primary 
meaning  which  has  been  given  in  Section  I  of  this  chapter. 
This  is  Beauty  realized  in  actual  occasions  which  are  the 
completely  real  things  in  the  Universe.  But  in  the  analysis 
of  an  occasion,  some  parts  of  its  objective  content  may  be 
termed  Beautiful  by  reason  of  their  conformal  contribu¬ 
tion  to  the  perfection  of  the  subjective  form  of  the  com¬ 
plete  occasion.  This  secondary  sense  of  the  term  Beauty 
is  more  accurately  to  be  considered  as  a  definition  of  the 
term  ‘Beautiful.’  The  Beauty  realized  in  an  occasion  de¬ 
pends  both  on  the  objective  content  from  which  that  oc¬ 
casion  originates  and  also  on  the  spontaneity  of  the  occa¬ 
sion.  The  objective  content  is  ‘beautiful’  by  reason  of  the 
Beauty  that  would  be  realized  in  that  occasion  by  a 


Beauty  255 

fortunate  exercise  of  its  spontaneity.  In  the  same  way  any 
part  of  the  objective  content  is  ‘beautiful5  in  a  still  more 
indirect  sense,  capable  of  slight  variations  in  meaning.  It 
may  be  beautiful  by  reason  of  the  Beauty  that  would  be 
realized  by  a  fortunate  association  with  other  data  com¬ 
bined  with  a  fortunate  exercise  of  spontaneity  by  the 
occasion  prehending  it.  But  such  supreme  fortune  is  an 
ideal,  not  for  this  world.  By  the  term  ‘beautiful5  we 
usually  mean  the  presupposition  of  the  sort  of  objective 
environment  which  in  that  general  social  setting  may  be 
presupposed,  and  the  sort  of  spontaneity  which  may  be 
hoped  for  from  the  percipient  occasions  in  question.  We 
may  be  thinking  of  artists,  or  of  cultivated  men  of  the 
modern  world,  or  of  the  ruck  of  mankind  in  a  given  city 
at  a  given  time.  But  in  all  its  senses,  ‘beautiful5  means 
the  inherent  capability  for  the  promotion  of  Beauty  when 
functioning  as  a  datum  in  a  percipient  occasion.  When 
‘Beauty5  is  ascribed  to  any  component  in  a  datum,  it  is  in 
this  secondary  sense. 

Section  IV.  In  the  initial  definition  of  Beauty,  the  no¬ 
tion  of  ‘perfection5  was  tacitly  introduced.  The  ‘perfection5 
of  subjective  form  means  the  absence  from  it  of  com¬ 
ponent  feelings  which  mutually  inhibit  each  other  so  that 
neither  rises  to  the  strength  proper  to  it.  But  there  are  two 
meanings  to  ‘inhibition5  which  must  be  carefully  dis¬ 
tinguished,  since  only  one  of  them  involves  a  derogation 
from  perfection.  Complete  inhibition  is  an  example  of 
the  finiteness  of  subjective  form.  It  does  not  derogate  from 
‘perfection.5  There  is  then  ‘perfection5  in  its  kind — that  is 
to  say,  in  its  type  of  finiteness  with  such-and-such  exclu¬ 
sions.  But  then  the  completely  inhibited  component  sub¬ 
jective  feeling  is  not  properly  a  component  of  that  sub¬ 
jective  form.  It  is  merely  what  would  have  been  a 
component  under  other  conditions.  This  sense  of  inhibition 
will  be  termed  ‘anaesthesia.5 

The  other  meaning  of  inhibition — the  meaning  which 
derogates  from  perfection — involves  the  true  active  pres¬ 
ence  of  both  component  feelings.  In  this  case  there  is  a 
third  feeling  of  mutual  destructiveness,  so  that  one  or 
other — or  both — of  the  component  feelings  fails  to  attain 
the  strength  properly  belonging  to  the  prehension  of  the 
datum  from  which  it  arises.  This  is  the  feeling  of  evil  in 
the  most  general  sense,  namely  physical  pain  or  mental 


256  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

evil,  such  as  sorrow,  horror,  dislike.  This  type  of  inhibi¬ 
tion  will  be  termed  ‘aesthetic  destruction.’  Esthetic  destruc¬ 
tion  is  a  positive  component  in  subjective  form,  and  is  in¬ 
consistent  with  perfection.  The  subjective  experience  of 
aesthetic  destruction  will  be  termed  a  ‘discordant  feeling.’ 
Such  a  feeling  is  a  factor  in  the  subjective  form  of  the 
percipient  occasion.  The  more  intense  the  discordant  feel¬ 
ing,  the  further  the  retreat  from  perfection.  A  complex 
datum  is  ‘objectively  discordant’  when  among  the  type  of 
percipients  in  question  it  will  normally  produce  discordant 
feelings. 

It  follows  from  this  discussion  that  in  the  definition  of 
Beauty  a  distinction  has  been  overlooked.  The  subjective 
feelings  which  are  of  the  type  of  an  emotional  experience 
of  aesthetic  destruction  must  be  excepted — or  rather,  as 
we  shall  find,  belong  to  a  class  requiring  special  treat¬ 
ment.  ‘Perfection,’  properly  so  called,  requires  the  ex¬ 
clusion  of  feelings  of  this  class.  On  further  consideration 
we  shall  find  that  always  there  are  imperfect  occasions 
better  than  occasions  which  realize  some  given  type  of 
perfection.  There  are  in  fact  higher  and  lower  perfections, 
and  an  imperfection  aiming  at  a  higher  type  stands  above 
lower  perfections.  The  most  material  and  the  most  sen¬ 
suous  enjoyments  are  yet  types  of  Beauty.  Progress  is 
founded  upon  the  experience  of  discordant  feelings.  The 
social  value  of  liberty  lies  in  its  production  of  discords. 
There  are  perfections  beyond  perfections.  All  realization 
is  finite,  and  there  is  no  perfection  which  is  the  infinitude 
of  all  perfections.  Perfections  of  diverse  types  are  among 
themselves  discordant.  Thus  the  contribution  to  Beauty 
which  can  be  supplied  by  Discord — in  itself  destructive 
and  evil — is  the  positive  feeling  of  a  quick  shift  of  aim 
from  the  tameness  of  outworn  perfection  to  some  other 
ideal  with  its  freshness  still  upon  it.  Thus  the  value  of  Dis¬ 
cord  is  a  tribute  to  the  merits  of  Imperfection. 

Section  V.  A  consideration  of  ancient  Greek  civiliza¬ 
tion  illustrates  the  value  of  discordance.  The  race  was 
awakened  into  progress  by  a  great  ideal  of  perfection. 
This  ideal  was  an  immense  advance  upon  the  ideals  which 
the  surrounding  civilizations  had  produced.  It  was  effective 
and  realized  in  a  civilization  which  attained  its  proper 
beauty  in  human  lives  to  an  extent  not  surpassed  before 
or  since.  Its  art,  its  theoretic  sciences,  its  modes  of  life, 


Beauty  257 

its  literature,  its  philosophic  schools,  its  religious  rituals, 
all  conspired  to  express  every  aspect  of  this  wonderful 
ideal.  Perfection  was  attained,  and  with  the  attainment 
inspiration  withered.  With  repetition  in  successive  genera¬ 
tions,  freshness  gradually  vanished.  Learning  and  learned 
taste  replaced  the  ardour  of  adventure.  Hellenism  was 
replaced  by  the  Hellenistic  epoch  in  which  genius  was 
stifled  by  repetition.  We  can  imagine  the  fate  of  the 
Mediterranean  civilization  if  it  had  been  spared  the  ir¬ 
ruptions  of  Barbarians  and  the  rise  of  two  new  religions, 
Christianity  and  Mahometanism: — For  two  thousand  years 
the  Greek  art-forms  lifelessly  repeated:  The  Greek  schools 
of  philosophy,  Stoic,  Epicurean,  Aristotelian,  Neo-Pla¬ 
tonic,  arguing  with  barren  formulae:  Conventional 
histories:  A  stabilized  Government  with  the  sanctity  of 
ancient  ceremony,  supported  by  habitual  pieties:  Literature 
without  depth:  Science  elaborating  details  by  deductions 
from  unquestioned  premises:  Delicacies  of  feeling  without 
robustness  of  adventure. 

This  is  no  fancy  picture.  Despite  all  storms,  something 
of  this  sort  did  happen  to  the  Byzantine  Empire  for  a 
thousand  years;  and  despite  the  inroad  of  a  new  religion, 
Buddhism,  and  despite  Tartar  invasions,  something  of  this 
sort  did  happen  to  the  vast  Chinese  Empire  for  a  thousand 
years.  The  Chinese  and  the  Greeks  both  achieved  certain 
perfections  of  civilization — each  worthy  of  admiration. 
But  even  perfection  will  not  bear  the  tedium  of  indefinite 
repetition.  To  sustain  a  civilization  with  the  intensity  of  its 
first  ardour  requires  more  than  learning.  Adventure  is 
essential,  namely,  the  search  for  new  perfections. 

Section  VI.  There  is  nothing  to  be  astonished  at  in  this 
conclusion.  Spontaneity,  originality  of  decision,  belongs  to 
the  essence  of  each  actual  occasion.  It  is  the  supreme  ex¬ 
pression  of  individuality:  its  conformal  subjective  form  is 
the  freedom  of  enjoyment  derived  from  the  enjoyment 
of  freedom.  Freshness,  zest,  and  the  extra  keenness  of 
intensity  arise  from  it.  In  a  personal  succession  of  occa¬ 
sions  the  upward  path  towards  an  ideal  of  perfection,  with 
the  end  in  sight,  gives  a  thrill  keener  than  any  prolonged 
halt  in  a  stage  of  attainment  with  the  major  variations 
completely  tried  out.  Thus  the  wise  advice  is,  Not  to  rest 
too  completely  in  any  continued  realization  of  the  same 
perfection  of  type.  Each  occasion  in  a  society  of  occasions, 


258  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

and  more  particularly  each  occasion  in  a  personal  society, 
seeks  this  zest  by  finding  some  contrast  between  the  Ap¬ 
pearance  resulting  from  the  operations  of  the  mental  pole 
and  the  inherited  Realities  of  the  physical  pole.  When 
spontaneity  is  at  its  lowest,  in  practice  negligible,  the  final 
trace  of  its  operation  is  found  in  alternations  backwards 
and  forwards  between  alternative  modes.  This  is  the  rea¬ 
son  for  the  predominant  importance  of  wave-transmission 
in  physical  nature. 

But — considering  occasions  at  their  highest,  with  ef¬ 
fective  exercise  of  mental  originality — the  preservation  of 
zest,  after  the  attainment  of  a  stage  of  perfection,  first  re¬ 
quires  the  exploration  of  all  variations  which  do  not  intro¬ 
duce  discordances  into  the  type  of  perfection  attained.  The 
variation  of  styles  and  of  decorative  detail  in  mediaeval 
Gothic  architecture  may  serve  as  an  illustration.  But  such 
variations  are  easily  exhausted.  Bolder  adventure  is  needed 
— the  adventure  of  ideas,  and  the  adventure  of  practice 
conforming  itself  to  ideas.  The  best  service  that  ideas  can 
render  is  gradually  to  lift  into  the  mental  poles  the  ideal  of 
another  type  of  perfection  which  becomes  a  program  for 
reform.  An  illustration  of  this  is  the  service  of  Christian¬ 
ity  by  its  introduction  of  new  ideals  for  the  social  life  of 
mankind.  In  other  words,  the  ideal  of  a  new  society  de¬ 
rived  from  a  new  defining  characteristic  is  introduced. 

Section  VII.  The  doctrine  has  been  stated  that  the  ex¬ 
perience  of  destruction  is  in  itself  evil;  in  fact  that  it 
constitutes  the  meaning  of  evil.  We  find  now  that  this 
enunciation  is  much  too  simple-minded.  Qualifications 
have  to  be  introduced,  though  they  leave  unshaken  the 
fundamental  position  that  ‘destruction  as  a  dominant  fact 
in  the  experience’  is  the  correct  definition  of  evil. 

The  intermingling  of  Beauty  and  Evil  arises  from  the 
conjoint  operation  of  three  metaphysical  principles: — (1) 
That  all  actualization  is  finite;  (2)  That  finitude  involves 
the  exclusion  of  alternative  possibility;  (3)  That  mental 
functioning  introduces  into  realization  subjective  forms 
conformal  to  relevant  alternatives  excluded  from  the  com¬ 
pleteness  of  physical  realization. 

The  result  is  that  the  concerns  of  the  actual  world  are 
deflected  from  harmony  of  feeling  by  the  divergent  tonali¬ 
ties  introduced  from  the  mental  poles.  The  new  occasion, 
even  apart  from  its  own  spontaneous  mentality,  is  thus 


Beauty  259 

confronted  by  basic  disharmony  in  the  actual  world  from 
which  it  springs.  This  is  fortunate.  For  otherwise  actuality 
would  consist  in  a  cycle  of  repetition,  realizing  only  a  finite 
group  of  possibilities.  This  was  the  narrow,  stuffy  doc¬ 
trine  of  some  ancient  thinkers. 

In  an  individual  experience  there  are  three  ways  of 
dealing  with  this  disharmony  of  the  world  as  given  for 
initial  prehension.  Two  of  these  ways  have  been  discussed 
under  the  general  term  ‘inhibition.’  One  way  is  termed 
‘Anaesthesia,’  and  is  the  way  of  mere  negative  prehension. 
The  other  way  is  by  positive  realization  with  the  positive 
feeling  of  discordance.  In  this  case,  the  elimination  of  the 
sheer  incompatibility  is  accompanied  by  a  positive  feeling 
of  acute  disruption  of  affective  tone.  This  experience  is 
the  prehension  of  a  qualitative  datum  which  also  imposes 
itself  conformally  on  the  subjective  form.  The  third  way 
depends  on  another  principle,  that  a  readjustment  of  the 
relative  intensitives  of  incompatible  feelings  can  in  some 
cases  reduce  them  to  compatibilities.  This  possibility  arises 
when  the  clash  in  affective  tones  is  a  clash  of  intensities, 
and  is  not  a  sheer  logical  incompatibility  of  qualities.  Thus 
two  systems  of  prehensions  may  each  be  internally  har¬ 
monious;  but  the  two  systems  in  the  unity  of  one  experi¬ 
ence  may  be  discordant,  when  the  two  intensities  of  their 
subjective  forms  are  comparable  in  magnitude.  There  may 
be  a  discordance  in  feeling  this  as  much  as  that,  or  in 
feeling  that  as  much  as  this.  But  if  one  be  kept  at  a  lower 
intensity  in  the  penumbra  of  feeling,  it  may  act  as  a  back¬ 
ground  to  the  other,  providing  a  sense  of  massiveness  and 
variety.  This  is  the  habitual  state  of  human  experience,  a 
vast  undiscriminated,  or  dimly  discriminated  background, 
of  low  intensity,  and  a  clear  foreground.  This  third  way  of 
eliminating  discordance  may  be  termed  the  method  of 
‘reduction  to  a  background.’  Alternatively,  it  can  equally 
well  be  termed  the  method  of  ‘raising  to  a  foreground.’ 
For  the  avoidance  of  anaesthesia  may  come  by  the  per¬ 
cipient  occasion  so  functioning  as  to  increase  the  intensity 
of  subjective  tone  belonging  to  the  prehension  of  one  of 
the  two  systems. 

Yet  a  fourth  way  now  discloses  itself,  and  this  way  is 
the  explanation  of  the  second  and  third  ways  for  all 
occasions  of  experience  where  mentality  has  been  de¬ 
veloped  into  its  higher  activities.  The  second  and  the  third 


260  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

ways,  when  they  are  not  in  truth  this  fourth  way,  are 
examples  of  the  low  type  of  mental  functionings  termed3 
‘physical  purposes.’  This  fourth  way  is  by  spontaneity  of 
the  occasion  so  directing  its  mental  functionings  as  to 
introduce  a  third  system  of  prehensions,  relevant  to  both 
the  inharmonious  systems.  This  novel  system  is  such  as 
radically  to  alter  the  distribution  of  intensities  throughout 
the  two  given  systems,  and  to  -change  the  importance  of 
both  in  the  final  intensive  experience  of  the  occasion. 
This  way  is  in  fact  the  introduction  of  Appearance,  and 
its  use  to  preserve  the  massive  qualitative  variety  of 
Reality  from  simplification  by  negative  prehensions. 

Appearance  preserves  this  variety  by  concentrating  on 
itself  the  intensities  properly  derived  from  Reality  in  the 
background.  It  is  a  procedure  of  simplification.  For  ex¬ 
ample,  in  Appearance  the  one  Region  supersedes  the  many 
individual  occasions  which  compose  it.  Also  qualities 
widely  spread  throughout  the  occasions  in  Reality  are  in 
Appearance  inherent  either  in  Regions  occupied  by  these 
occasions,  or  in  Regions  having  some  definite  association 
with  such  Regions.  The  Reality  is  in  the  background  as 
explanatory  of  the  procedures  by  which  its  rich  variety 
has  been  saved.  Also  the  variety  of  affective  tone  is  now 
transferred  to  Appearance,  with  that  amount  of  trans¬ 
formation  which  saves  its  compatibility.  There  is  massive 
feeling  transferred  to  Appearance,  either  of  Harmony,  or 
of  Discords,  or  of  Vulgarity,  or  of  utter  Commonplaceness. 
Appearance  raises  into  a  distinctness  of  feeling,  factors 
which  can  be  generalized  for  salvation  from  the  welter  of 
Fact.  In  this  way,  it  emphasizes  for  individual  experience 
widespread  qualities  of  feeling.  Massiveness  of  subjective 
form  is  somewhat  at  variance  with  the  intensity  of  indi¬ 
vidual  feelings.  The  variety  of  individual  intensities  thwart 
each  other  by  their  diversities  of  objects.  Appearance 
combines  massiveness  with  intensity  by  unifying  the 
diversities  of  objects.  It  simplifies  the  objects  and  precipi¬ 
tates  upon  the  simplification  the  qualitative  contents  of 
the  given  world.  It  saves  intensities  and  massiveness  at 
the  cost  of  eliciting  vivid  experiences  of  affective  tones, 
good  and  bad.  It  makes  possible  the  height  of  Beauty  and 
height  of  Evil;  because  it  saves  both  from  a  tame  elimina¬ 
tion  or  a  tame  scaling  down. 

3  Cf.  Process  and  Reality,  Part  III,  Ch.  V,  Sections  VII,  VIII. 


Beauty  261 

Section  VIII.  We  can  now  consider  more  closely  the 
grounds  of  Harmony  and  the  grounds  for  the  positive 
feeling  of  its  destruction.  It  must  be  remembered  that  just 
as  there  is  a  positive  integral  feeling  of  Harmony  lost,  so 
there  is  a  positive  integral  feeling  of  Harmony  attained. 
There  is  not  only  the  fact  of  details  in  experience  allowing 
each  other:  beyond  that  there  is  the  positive  feeling  of  the 
whole  as  Harmonious.  Analogously  there  is  the  positive 
feeling  of  the  whole  as  discordant.  Either  feeling  as  the 
case  may  be.  The  Harmony  is  felt  as  such,  and  so  is  the 
Discord.  Now  Harmony  is  more  than  logical  compatibility, 
and  Discord  is  more  than  logical  incompatibility.  Logicians 
are  not  called  in  to  advise  artists.  The  key  to  the  explana¬ 
tion  is  the  understanding  of  the  prehension  of  individuality. 
This  is  the  feeling  of  each  objective  factor  as  an  individual 
‘If  with  its  own  significance.  The  emotional  significance 
of  an  object  as  'It/  divorced  from  its  qualitative  aspects 
at  the  moment  presented,  is  one  of  the  strongest  forces  in 
human  nature.  It  is  at  the  base  of  family  affection,  and  of 
the  love  of  particular  possessions.  This  trait  is  not  a 
peculiarity  of  mankind  alone.  A  dog  smells  in  order  to 
find  out  if  the  person  in  question  is  that  It  to  which  its 
affections  cling.  The  room,  or  stable,  may  be  full  of  odours, 
many  of  them  for  a  dog  sweeter.  But  he  is  not  smelling  for 
the  pleasure  of  that  smell,  but  to  discover  that  It  who 
claims  his  whole  affection.  An  analogous  substitute  may 
deceive,  but  when  discovered  never  does  as  well.  The 
analogy  may  claim  affection.  But  the  original  It  com¬ 
mands  a  poignancy  of  feeling.  This  type  of  interest  is  at 
the  base  of  much  in  archaeology — an  inscribed  stone, 
executed  at  the  command  of  and  under  the  very  eyes  of 
Sennacherib.  A  really  admirable  replica  by  a  modem 
workman  lacks  interest,  except  for  certain  purposes  of 
scholarship.  The  worship  of  relics  touches  upon  the  path¬ 
ology  of  such  concerns. 

Undoubtedly  the  emotional  value  of  particular  indi¬ 
viduality  arises  from  the  generalization  of  emotions,  so  as 
to  get  rid  of  their  mere  sensory  elements.  Such  generalized 
emotional  qualities  are  love,  admiration,  the  feeling  of  ex¬ 
quisiteness,  the  feeling  of  worth,  hate,  horror,  the  general 
feeling  of  association,  that  is  of  particular  objects  entwined 
with  one’s  own  existence.  The  successive  immanence  of 
occasion  after  occasion  in  the  life  of  the  soul  will  in  the 


262  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

present  occasion  of  that  life  included  the  cumulation  of 
the  successive  prehensions  of  some  particular  object.  In  the 
various  prehensions  of  it  new  qualities  secure  prominence, 
original  qualities  are  present  with  some  difference.  There  is 
thus  a  gradual  elimination  of  the  more  special  types  of 
quality,  which  vary  and  fluctuate,  from  conformal  effec¬ 
tiveness  in  the  tone  of  the  final  prehensions.  Generalized 
aromas  take  their  place — the  basic  feelings  of  lifelong 
devotion,  of  lifelong  repulsion,  or  of  aesthetic  excellence. 
Thus  the  indication  of  that  It,  partly  by  its  status  in  the 
pattern  of  experience  and  partly  by  its  immediate  exhibi¬ 
tion  of  minor  qualities,  produces  a  strong  sharp-cut 
emotional  tone  of  dominating  significance.  The  significance 
is  not  merely  for  the  general  complex  of  subjective  form 
in  the  immediate  percipient.  It  is  also  reflected  back  onto 
the  original  objective  It.  Thus  the  It  which  is  indicated  by 
minor  details  of  a  status  and  quality  is  finally  prehended 
in  Appearance  as  It  with  its  permanent  character. 

For  epistemology  of  the  sensationalist  school,  this  final 
prehension  is  construed  as  an  interpretation  of  original 
sense-impressions.  But  in  this  final  prehension  there  is  no 
logical  train,  inductive  or  deductive.  The  percipient 
directly  integrates  antecedent  real  functionings  of  that 
object  in  antecedent  occasions  of  the  soul’s  life.  The  so- 
called  ‘interpretation’  is  the  conflation  of  real  history,  and 
is  not  a  top-dressing  of  conjecture.  The  notion  of  purely 
qualitative  sense-impressions  as  the  origin  of  experience 
has  no  warrant  in  direct  intuition. 

For  the  understanding  of  Harmony  and  Discord  it  is 
essential  to  remember  that  strength  of  experience,  in  mas¬ 
siveness  and  in  intensity,  depends  upon  the  substratum  of 
detail  being  composed  of  significant  individuals.  Appear¬ 
ance  has  been  constituted  fortunately  when  it  has  simpli¬ 
fied  the  welter  of  occasions,  individually  insignificant, 
into  a  few  significant  individual  things.  It  has  ‘interpreted’ 
the  world  in  terms  of  factors  received  from  the  world — so 
that  each  factor  of  interpretation  can  be  substantiated  by 
direct  intuition — if  only  consciousness  can  analyse  so  far. 
Such  is  fortunate  experience.  It  derives  its  strength  from 
the  concurrence  of  significant  individual  objects,  and  its 
own  existence  adds  to  the  significance  of  those  objects. 
This  is  the  enjoyment  of  Harmony,  and  a  factor  in  this 


Beauty  263 

enjoyment  is  the  intuition  that  the  future,  where  its  ob¬ 
jective  immortality  lies,  is  increasing  the  grounds  for 
Harmony.  Destruction  is  absent. 

But  there  can  be  intense  experience  without  Harmony. 
In  this  event,  there  is  Destruction  of  the  significant  char¬ 
acters  of  individual  objects.  When  the  direct  feeling  of 
such  Destruction  dominates  the  whole,  there  is  the  im¬ 
mediate  feeling  of  evil,  and  the  anticipation  of  destructive 
or  weakened  data  for  the  future.  Harmony  is  bound  up 
with  the  preservation  of  the  individual  significance  of 
detail,  and  Discord  consists  in  its  destruction.  In  Discord 
there  is  always  a  frustration.  But  even  Discord  may  be 
preferable  to  a  feeling  of  slow  relapse  into  general 
anaesthesia,  or  into  tameness  which  is  its  prelude.  Perfec¬ 
tion  at  a  low  level  ranks  below  Imperfection  with  higher 
aim. 

A  mere  qualitative  Harmony  within  an  experience  com¬ 
paratively  barren  of  objects  of  high  significance  is  a  debased 
type  of  Harmony,  tame,  vague,  deficient  in  outline  and 
intention.  It  is  one  property  of  a  beautiful  system  of  objects 
that  as  entertained  in  a  succession  of  occasions  adapted 
for  its  enjoyment,  it  quickly  builds  up  a  system  of  apparent 
objects  with  vigorous  characters.  The  sculptures  on  the 
famous  porch  of  the  Cathedral  at  Chartres  at  once  assume 
individual  importance  with  definite  character  while  per¬ 
forming  their  office  as  details  in  the  whole.  There  is  not 
a  mere  pattern  of  qualitative  beauty.  There  are  those 
statues,  each  with  its  individual  beauty,  and  all  lending 
themselves  to  the  beauty  of  the  whole.  Enduring  Indi¬ 
viduality  in  the  details  is  the  backbone  of  strong  experience. 

Art  at  its  highest  exemplifies  the  metaphysical  doctrine 
of  the  interweaving  of  absoluteness  upon  relativity.  In  the 
work  of  art  the  relativity  becomes  the  harmony  of  the 
composition,  and  the  absoluteness  is  the  claim  for  separate 
individuality  advanced  by  component  factors.  We  also 
understand  how  Appearance  leads  to  the  Aristotelian 
doctrine  of  a  substantial,  enduring  It  with  essential 
character.  The  point  of  view  expresses  important  truth. 
Hence  its  obviousness.  The  aesthetic  importance  of  this 
apparent  individuality  lies  in  its  claim  to  attention.  In  so 
far  as  Appearance  has  a  truth-relation  to  Reality  such 
enduring  individuality  indicates  a  real  society  important 
for  its  control  of  the  future.  The  claim  to  aesthetic  attention 


264  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

thus  represents  the  indirect  importance  of  anticipation  and 
purpose  as  factors  in  the  immediate  enjoyment  of  the 
immediate  percipient.  The  danger  of  a  street-crossing  is 
for  the  pedestrian  a  regulative  factor  in  the  aesthetic  values 
of  the  apparent  scene.  The  concept  of  completely  passive 
contemplation  in  abstraction  from  action  and  purpose  is 
a  fallacious  extreme.  It  omits  the  final  regulative  factor 
in  the  aesthetic  complex.  But  of  course  there  are  large 
diversities  of  action  and  large  diversities  of  purpose.  The 
final  point  is  that  the  foundation  of  Reality  upon  which 
Appearance  rests  can  never  be  neglected  in  the  evaluation 
of  Appearance. 


18.  Truth  and  Beauty 

Section  I.  It  appears  from  the  discussion  in  the  two 
previous  chapters  of  this  Part  that  Beauty  is  a  wider,  and 
more  fundamental,  notion  than  Truth.  Of  course  both 
terms  have  been  used  here  in  a  very  generalized  sense. 
Narrower  usages  are  not  marked  off  from  the  wider 
meanings,  here  employed,  by  anything  except  habitual 
presupposition  respecting  importance  and  triviality.  Beauty 
is  the  internal  conformation  of  the  various  items  of  ex¬ 
perience  with  each  other,  for  the  production  of  maximum 
effectiveness.  Beauty  thus  concerns  the  inter-relations  of 
the  various  components  of  Reality,  and  also  the  inter¬ 
relations  of  the  various  components  of  Appearance,  and 
also  the  relations  of  Appearance  to  Reality.  Thus  any 
part  of  experience  can  be  beautiful.  The  teleology  of  the 
Universe  is  directed  to  the  production  of  Beauty.  Thus  any 
system  of  things  which  in  any  wide  sense  is  beautiful  is 
to  that  extent  justified  in  its  existence.  It  may  however 
fail  in  another  sense,  by  inhibiting  more  Beauty  than  it 
creates.  Thus  the  system,  though  in  a  sense  beautiful,  is  on 
the  whole  evil  in  that  environment.  But  Truth  has  a  nar¬ 
rower  meaning  in  two  ways.  First,  Truth,  in  any  important 
sense,  merely  concerns  the  relations  of  Appearance  to 
Reality.  It  is  the  conformation  of  Appearance  to  Reality. 
But  in  the  second  place  the  notion  of  ‘conformation’  in  the 


Truth  and  Beauty  265 

case  of  Truth  is  narrower  than  that  in  the  case  of  Beauty. 
For  the  truth-relation  requires  that  the  two  relata  have 
some  factor  in  common. 

In  itself,  and  apart  from  other  factors,  there  seems  to 
be  no  special  importance  about  the  truth-relation.  There 
is  the  bare  fact  of  a  certain  limited  relationship  of  identity. 
There  is  nothing  in  such  a  fact  which  will  necessarily 
dictate  any  corresponding  type  of  subjective  form  within 
the  percipient  occasion.  Still  less  is  there  any  reason  why 
such  influence  as  a  truth-relation  does  have  upon  subjective 
form  should  be  in  the  direction  of  the  promotion  of  Beauty. 
In  other  words,  a  truth-relation  is  not  necessarily  beautiful. 
It  may  not  even  be  neutral.  It  may  be  evil.  Thus  Beauty  is 
left  as  the  one  aim  which  by  its  very  nature  is  self-justify¬ 
ing.  The  Discord  in  the  Universe  arises  from  the  fact  that 
modes  of  Beauty  are  various,  and  not  of  necessity  com¬ 
patible.  And  yet  some  admixture  of  Discord  is  a  necessary 
factor  in  the  transition  from  mode  to  mode.  The  objective 
life  of  the  past  and  the  future  in  the  present  is  an  inevitable 
element  of  disturbance.  Discord  may  take  the  form  of 
freshness  or  hope,  or  it  may  be  horror  or  pain.  In  the 
higher  types  of  mentality  the  note  of  displacement  im¬ 
presses  its  qualitative  character  upon  subjective  form 
with  peculiar  keenness: — welcome  or  antagonism.  Wide 
purpose  is  in  its  own  nature  beautiful  by  reason  of  its  con¬ 
tribution  to  the  massiveness  of  experience.  It  increases  the 
dimensions  of  the  experient  subject,  adds  to  its  ambit. 
Then  the  destruction  of  immediate  realizations  for  the 
sake  of  purpose  is,  on  the  face  of  it,  a  sacrifice  to  Harmony. 

Section  II.  Notwithstanding  the  possible  unseasonable¬ 
ness  of  the  truth- relation,  the  general  importance  of  Truth 
for  the  promotion  of  Beauty  is  overwhelming.  After  all 
has  been  said,  yet  the  truth-relation  remains  the  simple, 
direct  mode  of  realizing  Harmony.  Other  ways  are  indirect, 
and  indirectness  is  at  the  mercy  of  the  environment.  There 
is  a  blunt  force  about  Truth,  which  in  the  subjective  form 
of  its  prehension  is  akin  to  cleanliness — namely,  the  re¬ 
moval  of  dirt,  which  is  unwanted  irrelevance.  The  sense  of 
directness  which  it  carries  with  it,  sustains  the  upstanding 
individualities  so  necessary  for  the  beauty  of  a  complex. 
Falsehood  is  corrosive. 

Truth  is  various  in  its  extent,  its  modes,  and  its  relevance. 
But  an  apparent  object,  beautiful  beyond  the  hope  of  ante- 


266  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

cedent  imagination,  as  it  functions  in  experience  is  realizing 
some  hidden,  penetrating  Truth  with  a  keenness  beyond 
compare.  The  type  of  Truth  required  for  the  final  stretch 
of  Beauty  is  a  discovery  and  not  a  recapitulation.  The 
Truth  that  for  such  extremity  of  Beauty  is  wanted  is  that 
truth-relation  whereby  Appearance  summons  up  new  re¬ 
sources  of  feeling  from  the  depths  of  Reality.  It  is  a  Truth 
of  feeling,  and  not  a  Truth  of  verbalization.  The  relata  in 
Reality  must  lie  below  the  stale  presuppositions  of  verbal 
thought.  The  Truth  of  supreme  Beauty  lies  beyond  the 
dictionary  meanings  of  words. 

When  Appearance  has  to  Reality,  in  some  important 
direct  sense,  a  truth-relation,  there  is  a  security  about  the 
Beauty  attained,  that  is  to  say,  a  pledge  for  the  future. 

From  these  functions  of  Truth  in  the  service  of  Beauty, 
the  realization  of  Truth  becomes  in  itself  an  element  pro¬ 
moting  Beauty  of  feeling.  Consciousness,  with  its  dim  in¬ 
tuitions,  welcomes  a  factor  so  generally  on  the  right  side, 
so  habitually  necessary.  The  element  of  anticipation  under 
the  influence  of  Truth  is  in  a  deep  sense  satisfied,  and 
thus  adds  a  factor  to  the  immediate  Harmony.  Thus  Truth, 
in  itself  and  apart  from  special  reasons  to  the  contrary, 
becomes  self-justifying.  It  is  accompanied  by  a  sense  of 
rightness  in  the  deepest  Harmony.  But  Truth  derives  this 
self-justifying  power  from  its  services  in  the  promotion  of 
Beauty.  Apart  from  Beauty,  Truth  is  neither  good,  nor 
bad. 

Section  III.  Art  is  purposeful  adaptation  of  Appear¬ 
ance  to  Reality.  Now  ‘purposeful  adaptation’  implies  an 
end,  to  be  obtained  with  more  or  less  success.  This  end, 
which  is  the  purpose  of  art,  is  two-fold — namely  Truth  and 
Beauty.  The  perfection  of  art  has  only  one  end,  which  is 
Truthful  Beauty.  But  some  measure  of  success  has  been 
reached,  when  either  Truth  or  Beauty  is  gained.  In  the 
absence  of  Truth,  Beauty  is  on  a  lower  level,  with  a  defect 
of  massiveness.  In  the  absence  of  Beauty,  Truth  sinks  to 
triviality.  Truth  matters  because  of  Beauty. 

The  relation  of  ‘appearance’  to  ‘reality’  is  such  that  in 
the  final  phase  of  experience  [‘satisfaction’  or  ‘anticipation’] 
the  reality  of  the  primary  phase  is  prehended  with  subjec¬ 
tive  form  as  though  it  participated  in  the  qualitative 
characters  of  ‘appearance.’  When  in  fact  the  reality  does 


Truth  and  Beauty  267 

so  participate,  the  relation  is  truthful.  When  it  does  not 
so  participate,  the  relation  is  falsifying. 

Beauty,  so  far  as  concerns  its  exemplification  in  Appear¬ 
ance  alone,  does  not  necessarily  involve  the  attainment 
of  truth.  Appearance  is  beautiful  when  the  qualitative 
objects  which  compose  it  are  interwoven  in  patterned 
contrasts,  so  that  the  prehensions  of  the  whole  of  its  parts 
produces  the  fullest  harmony  of  mutual  support.  By  this 
it  is  meant,  that  in  so  far  as  the  qualitative  characters  of 
the  whole  and  the  parts  pass  into  the  subjective  forms  of 
their  prehensions,  the  whole  heightens  the  feelings  for  the 
parts,  and  the  parts  heighten  the  feelings  for  the  whole, 
and  for  each  other.  This  is  harmony  of  feeling;  and  with 
harmony  of  feeling  its  objective  content  is  beautiful. 

It  is  evident  that  when  appearance  has  obtained  truth 
in  addition  to  beauty,  harmony  in  a  wider  sense  has  been 
produced.  For  in  this  sense,  it  also  involves  the  relation 
of  appearance  to  reality.  Thus,  when  the  adaptation  of 
appearance  to  reality  has  obtained  truthful  Beauty,  there 
is  a  perfection  of  art.  That  is  to  say,  if  there  be  art:  for 
the  result  may  be  the  slow  outcome  of  nature.  Such  an 
outcome  may  be  due  to  some  wide  universal  purpose.  But 
it  will  not  be  due  to  quick  purposeful  adaptation  originated 
by  finite  creatures,  the  sort  of  adaptation  usually  termed 
art. 

Goodness  is  the  third  member  of  the  trinity  which  tradi¬ 
tionally  has  been  assigned  as  the  complex  aim  of  art — 
namely,  Truth,  Beauty,  and  Goodness.  With  the  point  of 
view  here  adopted,  Goodness  must  be  denied  a  place 
among  the  aims  of  art.  For  Goodness  is  a  qualification 
belonging  to  the  constitution  of  reality,  which  in  any  of 
its  individual  actualizations  is  better  or  worse.  Good  and 
evil  lie  in  depths  and  distances  below  and  beyond  appear¬ 
ance.  They  solely  concern  inter-relations  within  the  real 
world.  The  real  world  is  good  when  it  is  beautiful.  Art  has 
essentially  to  do  with  perfections  attainable  by  purposeful 
adaptation  of  appearance.  With  a  larger  view  and  a 
deeper  analysis,  some  instance  of  the  perfection  of  art  may 
diminish  the  good  otherwise  inherent  in  some  specific 
situation  as  it  passes  into  its  objective  actuality  for  the 
future.  Unseasonable  art  is  analogous  to  an  unseasonable 
joke,  namely,  good  in  its  place,  but  out  of  place  a  positive 
evil.  It  is  a  curious  fact  that  lovers  of  art  who  are  most 


268  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

insistent  on  the  doctrine  of  ‘art  for  art’s  sake’  are  apt  to 
be  indignant  at  the  banning  of  art  for  the  sake  of  other 
interests.  The  charge  of  immorality  is  not  refuted  by 
pointing  to  the  perfection  of  art.  Of  course  it  is  true  that 
the  defence  of  morals  is  the  battle-cry  which  best  rallies 
stupidity  against  change.  Perhaps  countless  ages  ago  re¬ 
spectable  amoebae  refused  to  migrate  from  ocean  to  dry 
land — refusing  in  defence  of  morals.  One  incidental  service 
of  art  to  society  lies  in  its  adventurousness. 

Section  IV.  It  is  a  tribute  to  the  strength  of  the  sheer 
craving  for  freshness,  that  change,  whose  justification  lies 
in  aim  at  the  distant  ideal,  should  be  promoted  by  Art 
which  is  the  adaptation  of  immediate  Appearance  for  im¬ 
mediate  Beauty.  Art  neglects  the  safety  of  the  future  for 
the  gain  of  the  present.  In  so  doing  it  is  apt  to  render  its 
Beauty  thin.  But  after  all,  there  must  be  some  immediate 
harvest.  The  good  of  the  Universe  cannot  he  in  indefinite 
postponement.  The  Day  of  Judgment  is  an  important 
notion:  but  that  Day  is  always  with  us.  Thus  Art  takes 
care  of  the  immediate  fruition,  here  and  now;  and  in  so 
doing  is  apt  to  lose  some  depth  by  reason  of  the  immediate 
fruition  at  which  it  is  aiming.  Its  business  is  to  render 
the  Day  of  Judgment  a  success,  now.  The  effect  of  the 
present  on  the  future  is  the  business  of  morals.  And  yet 
the  separation  is  not  so  easy.  For  the  inevitable  anticipation 
adds  to  the  present  a  qualitative  element  which  profoundly 
affects  its  whole  qualitative  harmony. 

There  is  a  paradox  concerning  morals  to  be  added  to  the 
one  concerning  art.  Morals  consists  in  the  aim  at  the  ideal, 
and  at  its  lowest  it  concerns  the  prevention  of  relapse  to 
lower  levels.  Thus  stagnation  is  the  deadly  foe  of  morality. 
Yet  in  human  society  the  champions  of  morality  are  on 
the  whole  the  fierce  opponents  of  new  ideals.  Mankind 
has  been  afflicted  with  low-toned  moralists,  objecting  to 
expulsion  from  some  Garden  of  Eden.  And  in  a  way  they 
are  right.  For  after  all  we  can  aim  at  nothing  except  from 
the  standpoint  of  a  well-assimilated  system  of  customs — 
that  is,  of  mores.  The  fortunate  changes  are  made  ‘Hand  in 
hand,  with  wand’ring  steps  and  slow.’ 

Section  V.  The  factor  in  experience  that  renders  Art 
possible  is  consciousness.1  Of  course  consciousness,  like 

l  Cf.  P.  R.,  Part  II,  Chapter  VII,  Section  II,  and  Part  III,  Chapter  II, 
Section  IV,  and  Chapters  IV  and  V. 


Truth  and  Beauty  269 

everything  else,  is  in  a  sense  indefinable.  It  is  just  itself  and 
must  be  experienced.  But,  also  like  other  things,  it  is  the 
emergent  quality  illustrated  in  the  essence  of  a  conjunction 
of  circumstances.  It  is  a  qualitative  aspect  of  that  con¬ 
junction.  We  can  ask  therefore  for  an  analysis  of  the  details 
whose  conjunction  in  experience  issues  in  consciousness. 

Consciousness  is  that  quality  which  emerges  into  the 
objective  content  as  the  result  of  the  conjunction  of  a  fact 
and  a  supposition  about  that  fact.  It  passes  conformally 
from  the  complex  object  to  the  subjective  form  of  the  pre¬ 
hension.  It  is  the  quality  inherent  in  the  contrast  between 
Actuality  and  Ideality,  that  is,  between  the  products  of 
the  physical  pole  and  the  mental  pole  in  experience. 
When  that  contrast  is  a  feeble  element  in  experience,  then 
consciousness  is  there  merely  in  germ,  as  a  latent  capacity. 
So  far  as  the  contrast  is  well-defined  and  prominent,  the 
occasion  includes  a  developed  consciousness.  That  portion 
of  experience  irradiated  by  consciousness  is  only  a  selec¬ 
tion.  Thus  consciousness  is  a  mode  of  attention.  It  provides 
the  extreme  of  selective  emphasis.  The  spontaneity  of  an 
occasion  finds  its  chief  outlets,  first  in  the  direction  of  con¬ 
sciousness,  and  secondly  in  production  of  ideas  to  pass 
into  the  area  of  conscious  attention.  Thus  consciousness, 
spontaneity,  and  art  are  closely  interconnected.  But  that 
art  which  arises  within  clear  consciousness  is  only  a 
specialization  of  the  more  widely  distributed  art  within 
dim  consciousness  or  within  the  unconscious  activities  of 
experience. 

Consciousness  is  the  weapon  which  strengthens  the  arti¬ 
ficiality  of  an  occasion  of  experience.  It  raises  the  impor¬ 
tance  of  the  final  Appearance  relatively  to  that  of  the  initial 
Reality.  Thus  it  is  Appearance  which  in  consciousness  is 
clear  and  distinct,  and  it  is  Reality  which  lies  dimly  in  the 
background  with  its  details  hardly  to  be  distinguished  in 
consciousness.  What  leaps  into  conscious  attention  is  a 
mass  of  presuppositions  about  Reality  rather  than  the 
intuitions  of  Reality  itself.  It  is  here  that  the  liability  to 
error  arises.  The  deliverances  of  clear  and  distinct  con¬ 
sciousness  require  criticism  by  reference  to  elements  in 
experience  which  are  neither  clear  nor  distinct.  On  the 
contrary,  they  are  dim,  massive,  and  important.  These  dim 
elements  provide  for  art  that  final  background  of  tone  apart 
from  which  its  effects  fade.  The  type  of  Truth  which 


270  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

human  art  seeks  lies  in  the  eliciting  of  this  background  to 
haunt  the  object  presented  for  clear  consciousness. 

Section  VI.  The  merit  of  Art  in  its  service  to  civiliza¬ 
tion  lies  in  its  artificiality  and  its  finiteness.  It  exhibits  for 
consciousness  a  finite  fragment  of  human  effort  achieving 
its  own  perfection  within  its  own  limits.  Thus  the  mere 
toil  for  the  slavish  purpose  of  prolonging  life  for  more  toil 
or  for  mere  bodily  gratification,  is  transformed  into  the 
conscious  realization  of  a  self-contained  end,  timeless 
within  time.  The  work  of  Art  is  a  fragment  of  nature  with 
the  mark  on  it  of  a  finite  creative  effort,  so  that  it  stands 
alone,  an  individual  thing  detailed  from  the  vague  infinity 
of  its  background.  Thus  Art  heightens  the  sense  of  hu¬ 
manity.  It  gives  an  elation  of  feeling  which  is  supernatural. 
A  sunset  is  glorious,  but  it  dwarfs  humanity  and  belongs 
to  the  general  flow  of  nature.  A  million  sunsets  will  not 
spur  on  men  towards  civilization.  It  requires  Art  to  evoke 
into  consciousness  the  finite  perfections  which  lie  ready 
for  human  achievement. 

Consciousness  itself  is  the  product  of  art  in  its  lowliest 
form.  For  it  results  from  the  influx  of  ideality  into  its  con¬ 
trast  with  reality,  with  the  purpose  of  reshaping  the  latter 
into  a  finite,  select  appearance.  But  consciousness  haying 
emerged  from  Art  at  once  produces  the  new  specialized 
art  of  the  conscious  animals — in  particular  human  art. 
In  a  sense  art  is  a  morbid  overgrowth  of  functions  which 
lie  deep  in  nature.  It  is  the  essence  of  art  to  be  artificial. 
But  it  is  its  perfection  to  return  to  nature,  remaining  art. 
In  short  art  is  the  education  of  nature.  Thus,  in  its  broadest 
sense,  art  is  civilization.  For  civilization  is  nothing  other 
than  the  unremitting  aim  at  the  major  perfections  of 
harmony. 

Section  VII.  The  human  body  is  an  instrument  for 
the  production  of  art  in  the  life  of  the  human  soul.  It  con¬ 
centrates  upon  those  elements  in  human  experience  selected 
for  conscious  perception  intensities  of  subjective  form 
derived  from  components  dismissed  into  shadow.  It  there¬ 
by  enhances  the  value  of  that  appearance  which  is  the  sub¬ 
ject-matter  for  art.  In  this  way  the  work  of  art  is  a  message 
from  the  Unseen.  It  unlooses  depths  of  feeling  from  behind 
the  frontier  where  precision  of  consciousness  fails.  The 
starting-point  for  the  highly  developed  human  art  is  thus 
to  be  sought  amid  the  cravings  generated  by  the  physio- 


Truth  and  Beauty  271 

logical  functionings  of  the  body.  The  origin  of  art  lies  in 
the  craving  for  re-enaction.  In  some  mode  of  repetition  we 
need  by  our  personal  actions,  or  perceptions,  to  dramatize 
the  past  and  the  future,  so  as  to  re-live  the  emotional  life 
of  ourselves,  and  of  our  ancestors.  There  is  a  biological 
law — which  however  must  not  be  pressed  too  far — that 
in  some  vague  sense  the  embryo  in  the  womb  reproduces 
in  its  life-history  features  of  ancestors  in  remote  geologic 
epochs.  Thus  art  has  its  origin  in  ceremonial2  evolutions 
from  which  issue  play,  religious  ritual,  tribal  ceremonial/ 
dance,  pictures  on  caves,  poetic  literature,  prose,  music. 
In  this  list  each  member  in  its  simpler  forms  enshrines 
some  effort  to  reproduce  a  vivid  experience  flashed  out 
among  the  necessities  of  daily  life.  But  the  secret  of  art 
lies  in  its  freedom.  The  emotion  and  some  elements  of  the 
experience  itself  are  lived  again  divorced  from  their  neces¬ 
sity.  The  strain  is  over,  but  the  joy  of  intense  feeling  re¬ 
mains..  Originally  the  intensity  arose  from  some  dire 
necessity;  but  in  art  it  has  outlived  the  compulsion  which 
was  its  origin.  If  Odysseus  among  the  shades  could  hear 
Homer  chanting  his  Odyssey,  he  then  re-enacted  with  free 
enjoyment  the  perils  of  his  wanderings. 

The  arts  of  civilization  now  spring  from  many  origins, 
physical  and  purely  imaginative.  But  they  are  all  sublima¬ 
tions,  and  sublimations  of  sublimations,  of  the  simple 
craving  to  enjoy  freely  the  vividness  of  life  which  first 
arises  in  moments  of  necessity.  With  a  slight  shift  of  the 
focus  of  our  attention,  Art  can  be  described  as  a  psycho¬ 
pathic  reaction  of  the  race  to  the  stresses  of  its  existence. 
From  that  point  of  view,  Odysseus  as  he  listened  to  Homer 
was  evading  the  Furies.  This  psychopathic  function  of  Art 
is  lost  when  the  conviction  of  Truth  is  absent.  It  is  here 
that  the  concept  of  Art  as  the  pursuit  of  Beauty  is  shallow. 
Art  has  a  curative  function  in  human  experience  when  it 
reveals  as  in  a  flash  intimate,  absolute  Truth  regarding  the 
Nature  of  Things.  This  service  of  Art  is  even  hindered  by 
trivial  truths  of  detail.  Such  petty  conformations  place  in 
the  foreground  the  superficialities  of  sense-experience.  Art 
performing  this  great  service  belongs  to  the  essence  of 
civilization.  By  the  growth  of  such  Art  the  adventure  of 
mentality  gains  upon  the  physical  basis  of  existence. 


2  Cf.  Religion  in  the  Making,  Ch.  I,  Section  III. 


272  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

Science  and  Art  are  the  consciously  determined  pursuit 
of  Truth  and  of  Beauty.  In  them  the  finite  consciousness  of 
mankind  is  appropriating  as  its  own  the  infinite  fecundity 
of  nature.  In  this  movement  of  the  human  spirit  types  of 
institutions  and  types  of  professions  are  evolved.  Churches 
and  Rituals,  Monasteries  with  their  dedicated  lives,  Uni¬ 
versities  with  their  search  for  knowledge,  Medicine,  Law, 
methods  of  Trade — they  all  represent  that  aim  at  civiliza¬ 
tion,  whereby  the  conscious  experience  of  mankind 
preserves  for  its  use  the  sources  of  Harmony. 


19.  Adventure 

Section  I.  The  notion  of  civilization  is  very  baffling.  We 
all  know  what  it  means.  It  suggests  a  certain  ideal  for  life 
on  this  earth,  and  this  ideal  concerns  both  the  individual 
human  being  and  also  societies  of  men.  A  man  can  be 
civilized,  and  a  whole  society  can  be  civilized;  although 
the  senses  are  somewhat  different  in  the  two  cases. 

Yet  civilization  is  one  of  those  general  notions  that  are 
very  difficult  to  define.  We  pronounce  upon  particular 
instances.  We  can  say  this  is  civilized,  or  that  is  savage. 
Yet  somehow  the  general  notion  is  elusive.  Thus  we  pro¬ 
ceed  by  examples.  During  the  last  six  centuries,  the  culture 
of  Europe  has  guided  itself  by  example.  The  Greeks  and 
Romans  at  their  best  period  have  been  taken  as  the 
standard  of  civilization.  We  have  aimed  at  reproducing 
the  excellencies  of  these  societies — preferably  the  society 
of  Athens  in  its  prime. 

These  standards  have  served  the  Western  races  well. 
But  the  procedure  has  its  disadvantages.  It  is  backward 
looking,  and  it  is  limited  to  one  type  of  social  excellence. 
Today  the  world  is  passing  into  a  new  stage  of  its  existence. 
New  knowledge,  and  new  technologies  have  altered  the 
proportions  of  things.  The  particular  example  of  an  ancient 
society  sets  too  static  an  ideal,  and  neglects  the  whole 
range  of  opportunity.  It  is  really  not  sufficient  to  direct 
attention  to  the  best  that  has  been  said  and  done  in  the 


Adventure  273 

ancient  world.  The  result  is  static,  repressive,  and  pro¬ 
motes  a  decadent  habit  of  mind. 

Also  I  suggest  that  the  Greeks  themselves  were  not 
backward  looking,  or  static.  Compared  to  their  neighbors, 
they  were  singularly  unhistorical.  They  were  speculative’ 
adventurous,  eager  for  novelty.  The  most  un-Greek  thing 
that  we  can  do,  is  to  copy  the  Greeks.  For  emphatically 
they  were  not  copyists. 

Another  danger  in  forming  our  notions  of  civilization  is 
to  concentrate  exclusively  upon  passive,  critical  qualities 
concerned  chiefly  with  the  Fine  Arts.  Such  qualities  are 
an  important  element  in  a  civilized  society.  But  civiliza¬ 
tion  is  more  than  the  appreciation  of  the  Fine  Arts.  We 
must  not  tie  it  down  to  museums  and  studios. 

I  put  forward  as  a  general  definition  of  civilization,  that 
a  civilized  society  is  exhibiting  the  five  qualities  of  Truth 
Beauty,  Adventure,  Art,  Peace. 

Here  by  the  last  quality  of  Peace,  I  am  not  referring  to 
political  relations.  I  mean  a  quality  of  mind  steady  in  its 
reliance  that  fine  action  is  treasured  in  the  nature  of  things. 

It  is  impossible  in  the  short  space  of  five  chapters  to 
discuss  all  the  various  questions  which  are  suggested  by 
these  notions.  In  this  chapter  I  will  concentrate  upon  a 
few  points  in  philosophy  and  history  which  throw  light 
upon  the  various  functions  of  these  elements  in  civilization. 

Section  H.  From  the  three  preceding  chapters  and 
with  this  short  explanation  as  to  Peace,  let  us  assume  for 
the  moment  that  Truth,  Beauty,  and  Peace  are  sufficiently 
obvious  as  to  their  meanings.  We  will  now  concentrate 
upon  Adventure  and  Art  as  necessary  elements  in  civiliza¬ 
tion.  It  is  in  respect  to  these  two  factors  that  prevalent 
concepts  of  civilization  are  weakest. 

The  foundation  of  all  understanding  of  sociological 
theory  that  is  to  say,  of  all  understanding  of  human  life 
— is  that  no  static  maintenance  of  perfection  is  possible. 
This  axiom  is  rooted  in  the  nature  of  things.  Advance  or 
Decadence  are  the  only  choices  offered  to  mankind.  The 
pure  conservative  is  fighting  against  the  essence  of  the 
universe.  This  doctrine  requires  justification.  It  is  implicitly 
denied  in  the  learned  tradition  derived  from  ancient 
thought. 

The  doctrine  is  founded  upon  three  metaphysical  prin¬ 
ciples.  One  principle  is  that  the  very  essence  of  real  actu- 


274  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

ality — that  is,  of  the  completely  real — is  process.  Thus 
each  actual  thing  is  only  to  be  understood  in  terms  of  its 
becoming  and  perishing.  There  is  no  halt  in  which  the 
actuality  is  just  its  static  self,  accidentally  played  upon 
by  qualifications  derived  from  the  shift  of  circumstances. 
The  converse  is  the  truth. 

The  static  notion,  here  rejected,  is  derived  by  two 
different  paths  from  ancient  thought.  Plato  in  the  earlier 
period  of  his  thought,  deceived  by  the  beauty  of  mathe¬ 
matics  intelligible  in  unchanging  perfection,  conceived  of 
a  super-world  of  ideas,  forever  perfect  and  forever  inter¬ 
woven.  In  his  latest  phase  he  sometimes  repudiates  the 
notion,  though  he  never  consistently  banishes  it  from  his 
thought.  His  later  dialogues  circle  round  seven  notions, 
namely — The  Ideas,  The  Physical  Elements,  The  Psyche, 
The  Eros,  The  Harmony,  The  Mathematical  Relations, 
The  Receptacle.  I  mention  them  because  I  hold  that  all 
philosophy  is  in  fact  an  endeavour  to  obtain  a  coherent 
system  out  of  some  modification  of  these  notions.  They 
largely  explain  themselves  as  to  their  general  meanings, 
apart  from  any  precise  coordination.  The  Psyche  is,  of 
course,  the  Soul;  the  Eros  is  the  urge  towards  the  realiza¬ 
tion  of  ideal  perfection.  The  Receptacle  is  expressly  stated 
by  Plato  to  be  a  difficult  notion;  so  that  we  may  safely  put 
aside  easy  explanations  of  it.  I  explain  it  to  myself  as  the 
conception  of  the  essential  unity  of  the  Universe  con¬ 
ceived  as  an  actuality,  and  yet  in  abstraction  from  the 
‘life  and  motion’  in  which  all  actualities  must  partake.  If 
We  omit  the  Psyche  and  the  Eros,  we  should  obtain  a  static 
world.  The  ‘life  and  motion,’  which  are  essentials  in 
Plato’s  later  thought,  are  derived  from  the  operation  of 
these  two  factors.  But  Plato  left  no  system  of  metaphysics. 

Thus  in  the  modem  development  of  these  seven  meta¬ 
physical  notions,  we  should  start  from  the  notion  of 
actuality  as  in  its  essence  a  process.  This  process  involves 
a  physical  side  which  is  the  perishing  of  the  past  as  it 
transforms  itself  into  a  new  creation.  It  also  involves  a 
mental  side  which  is  the  Soul  entertaining  ideas. 

The  Soul  thereby  by  synthesis  creates  a  new  fact  which 
is  the  Appearance  woven  out  of  the  old  and  the  new — a 
compound  of  reception  and  anticipation,  which  in  its  turn 
passes  into  the  future.  The  final  synthesis  of  these  three 
complexes  is  the  end  to  which  its  indwelling  Eros  urges 


Adventure  275 

the  soul.  Its  good  resides  in  the  realization  of  a  strength 
of  many  feelings  fortifying  each  other  as  they  meet  in  the 
novel  unity.  Its  evil  lies  in  the  clash  of  vivid  feelings,  deny¬ 
ing  to  each  other  their  proper  expansion.  Its  triviality  lies 
in  the  anaesthesia  by  which  evil  is  avoided.  In  this  way 
through  sheer  omission,  fewer,  fainter  feelings  constitute 
the  final  Appearance.  Evil  is  the  half-way  house  between 
perfection  and  triviality.  It  is  the  violence  of  strength 
against  strength. 

Aristotle  introduced  the  static  fallacy  by  another  concept 
which  has  infected  all  subsequent  philosophy.  He  con¬ 
ceived  of  primary  substances  as  the  static  foundations 
which  received  the  impress  of  qualification.  In  the  case  of 
human  experience,  a  modem  version  of  the  same  notion  is 
Locke’s  metaphor  of  the  mind  as  an  ‘empty  cabinet’  re¬ 
ceiving  the  impress  of  ideas.  Thus  for  Locke  the  reality 
does  not  reside  in  the  process  but  in  the  static  recipient  of 
process.  According  to  the  versions  of  Aristotle  and  Locke, 
one  primary  substance  cannot  be  a  component  in  the 
nature  of  another  primary  substance.  Thus  the  intercon¬ 
nections  of  primary  substances  must  be  devoid  of  the  sub¬ 
stantial  reality  of  the  primary  substances  themselves.  With 
this  doctrine,  the  conjunction  of  actualities  has,  in  various 
shapes,  been  a  problem  throughout  modem  philosophy — 
both  for  metaphysics  and  for  epistomology.  The  taint  of 
Aristotelian  Logic  has  thrown  the  whole  emphasis  of 
metaphysical  thought  upon  substantives  and  adjectives,  to 
the  neglect  of  prepositions  and  conjunctions.  This  Aris¬ 
totelian  doctrine  is  in  this  book  summarily  denied.  The 
process  is  itself  the  actuality,  and  requires  no  antecedent 
static  cabinet.  Also  the  processes  of  the  past,  in  their 
perishing,  are  themselves  energizing  as  the  complex  origin 
of  each  novel  occasion.  The  past  is  the  reality  at  the  base 
of  each  new  actuality.  The  process  is  its  absorption  into 
a  new  unity  with  ideals  and  with  anticipation,  by  the  opera¬ 
tion  of  the  creative  Eros. 

Section  III.  I  now  pass  to  the  second  metaphysical 
principle.  It  is  the  doctrine  that  every  occasion  of  actuality 
is  in  its  own  nature  finite.  There  is  no  totality  which  is  the 
harmony  of  all  perfections.  Whatever  is  realized  in  any  one 
occasion  of  experience  necessarily  excludes  the  unbounded 
welter  of  contrary  possibilities.  There  are  always  ‘others,’ 
which  might  have  been  and  are  not.  This  finiteness  is  not 


276  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

the  result  of  evil,  or  of  imperfection.  It  results  from  the 
fact  that  there  are  possibilities  of  harmony  which  either 
produce  evil  in  joint  realization,  or  are  incapable  of  such 
conjunction.  This  doctrine  is  a  commonplace  in  the  fine 
arts.  It  also  is — or  should  be — a  commonplace  of  political 
philosophy.  History  can  only  be  understood  by  seeing  it  as 
the  theatre  of  diverse  groups  of  idealists  respectively  urg¬ 
ing  ideals  incompatible  for  conjoint  realization.  You  can¬ 
not  form  any  historical  judgment  of  right  or  wrong  by 
considering  each  group  separately.  The  evil  lies  in  the 
attempted  conjunction.  .... 

This  principle  of  intrinsic  incompatibility  has  an  im¬ 
portant  bearing  upon  our  conception  of  the  nature  of  God. 
The  concept  of  impossibility  such  that  God  himself  cannot 
surmount  it,  has  been  for  centuries  quite  familiar  to  theolo¬ 
gians.  Indeed,  apart  from  it  there  would  be  difficulty  in  con¬ 
ceiving  any  determinate  divine  nature.  But  curiously 
enough,  so  far  as  I  know,  this  notion  of  incompatibility 
has  never  been  applied  to  ideals  in  the  Divine  realization. 
We  must  conceive  the  Divine  Eros  as  the  active  entertain¬ 
ment  of  all  ideals,  with  the  urge  to  their  finite  realization, 
each  in  its  due  season.  Thus  a  process  must  be  inherent  in 
God’s  nature,  whereby  his  infinity  is  acquiring  realization. 

It  is  unnecessary  to  pursue  theology  further.  But  the 
point  stands  out  that  the  conceptual  entertainment  of 
incompatibilities  is  possible,  and  so  is  their  conceptual 
comparison.  Also  there  is  the  synthesis  of  conceptual  en¬ 
tertainment  with  physical  realization.  The  idea  conceptu¬ 
ally  entertained  may  be  identical  with  the  idea  exemplified 
in  the  physical  fact;  or  it  may  be  different,  compatible  or 
incompatible.  This  synthesis  of  the  ideal  with  the  real  is 
just  what  happens  in  each  finite  occasion. 

Thus  in  every  civilization  at  its  culmination  we  should 
find  a  large  measure  of  realization  of  a  certain  type  of 
perfection.  This  type  will  be  complex  and  will  admit  of 
variation  of  detail,  this  way  or  that.  The  culmination  can 
maintain  itself  at  its  height  so  long  as  fresh  experimentation 
within  the  type  is  possible.  But  when  these  minor  variations 
are  exhausted,  one  of  two  things  must  happen.  Perhaps  the 
society  in  question  lacks  imaginative  force.  Staleness  then 
sets  in.  Repetition  produces  a  gradual  lowering  of  vivid 
appreciation.  Convention  dominates.  A  learned  orthodoxy 
suppresses  adventure. 


Adventure  277 


The  last  flicker  of  originality  is  exhibited  by  the  survival 
of  satire.  Satire  does  not  necessarily  imply  a  decadent  so¬ 
ciety,  though  it  flourishes  upon  the  outworn  features  in  the 
social  system.  It  was  characteristic  that  at  the  close  of  the 
silver  age  of  Roman  culture,  shortly  after  the  deaths  of 
the  younger  Pliny  and  of  Tacitus,  the  satirist  Lucian  was 
born.  Again,  at  the  close  of  the  silver  age  of  the  Renais¬ 
sance  culture,  during  the  eighteenth  century,  Voltaire  and 
Edward  Gibbon  perfected  satire  in  their  various  styles. 
Satire  was  natural  to  the  age  as  it  neared  the  American 
Revolution,  the  French  Revolution,  and  the  Industrial 
Revolution.  Again  a  new  epoch  arose,  the  first  phase  of 
modern  industrialism.  It  flourished  with  consistent  growth 
for  a  hundred  and  fifty  years.  Its  central  period  has  been 
termed  the  Victorian  Epoch.  Within  that  period,  the  Euro¬ 
pean  races  created  new  methods  of  industry;  they  peopled 
North  America;  they  developed  trade  with  the  old  civiliza¬ 
tions  of  Asia;  they  gave  new  directions  to  literature  and 
to  art;  they  re-fashioned  their  forms  of  government.  The 
nineteenth  centum  was  an  epoch  of  civilized  advance — 
humanitarian,  scientific,  industrial,  literary,  political.  But 
at  length  it  wore  itself  out.  The  crash  of  the  Great  War 
marked  its  end,  and  marked  the  decisive  turn  of  human 
life  into  some  new  direction  as  yet  not  fully  understood. 
But  the  close  of  the  epoch  has  been  marked  by  the  rise  of 
satire — Lytton  Strachey  in  England,  Sinclair  Lewis  in  the 
United  States  of  America.  Satire  is  the  last  flicker  of 
originality  in  a  passing  epoch  as  it  faces  the  onroad  of 
staleness  and  boredom.  Freshness  has  gone:  bitterness  re¬ 
mains.  The  prolongation  of  outworn  forms  of  life  means 
a  slow  decadence  in  which  there  is  repetition  without  any 
fruit  in  the  reaping  of  value.  There  may  be  high  survival 
power.  For  decadence,  undisturbed  by  originality  or  by  ex¬ 
ternal  forces,  is  a  slow  process.  But  the  values  of  life  are 
slowly  ebbing.  There  remains  the  show  of  civilization,  with¬ 
out  any  of  its  realities. 

There  is  an  alternative  to  this  slow  decline.  A  race  may 
exhaust  a  form  of  civilization  without  having  exhausted  its 
own  creative  springs  of  originality.  In  that  case,  a  quick 
period  of  transition  may  set  in,  which  may  or  may  not  be 
accompanied  by  dislocations  involving  widespread  unhap¬ 
piness.  Such  periods  are  Europe  at  the  close  of  the  Middle 
Ages,  Europe  during  the  comparatively  long  Reformation 


278  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

Period,  Europe  at  the  end  of  the  eighteenth  century.  Also 
let  us  hope  that  our  present  epoch  is  to  be  viewed  as  a 
period  of  change  to  a  new  direction  of  civilization,  involv¬ 
ing  in  its  dislocations  a  minimum  of  human  misery.  And 
yet  surely  the  misery  of  the  Great  War  was  sufficient  for 
any  change  of  epoch. 

These  quick  transitions  to  new  types  of  civilization  are 
only  possible  when  thought  has  run  ahead  of  realization. 
The  vigour  of  the  race  has  then  pushed  forward  into  the 
adventure  of  imagination,  so  as  to  anticipate  the  physical 
adventures  of  exploration.  The  world  dreams  of  things  to 
come,  and  then  in  due  season  arouses  itself  to  their  realiza¬ 
tion.  Indeed  all  physical  adventure  which  is  entered  upon 
of  set  purpose  involves  an  adventure  of  thought  regarding 
things  as  yet  unrealized.  Before  Columbus  set  sail  for 
America,  he  had  dreamt  of  the  Far  East,  and  of  the  round 
world,  and  of  the  trackless  ocean.  Adventure  rarely  reaches 
its  predetermined  end.  Columbus  never  reached  China. 
But  he  discovered  America. 

Sometimes  adventure  is  acting  within  limits.  It  can  then 
calculate  its  end,  and  reach  it.  Such  adventures  are  the 
ripples  of  change  within  one  type  of  civilization,  by  which 
an  epoch  of  given  type  preserves  its  freshness.  But,  given 
the  vigour  of  adventure,  sooner  or  later  the  leap  of 
imagination  reaches  beyond  the  safe  limits  of  the  epoch, 
and  beyond  the  safe  limits  of  learned  rules  of  taste.  It  then 
produces  the  dislocations  and  confusions  marking  the  ad¬ 
vent  of  new  ideals  for  civilized  effort. 

A  race  preserves  its  vigour  so  long  as  it  harbours  a  real 
contrast  between  what  has  been  and  what  may  be;  and  so 
long  as  it  is  nerved  by  the  vigour  to  adventure  beyond  the 
safeties  of  the  past.  Without  adventure  civilization  is  in 
full  decay. 

It  is  for  this  reason  that  the  definition  of  culture  as  the 
knowledge  of  the  best  that  has  been  said  and  done,  is  so 
dangerous  by  reason  of  its  omission.  It  omits  the  great  fact 
that  in  their  day  the  great  achievements  of  the  past  were 
the  adventures  of  the  past.  Only  the  adventurous  can  un¬ 
derstand  the  greatness  of  the  past.  In  its  day,  the  literature 
of  the  past  was  an  adventure.  TEschylus,  Sophocles,  Eurip¬ 
ides  were  adventurers  in  the  world  of  thought.  To  read 
their  plays  without  any  sense  of  new  ways  of  understand¬ 
ing  the  world  and  of  savouring  its  emotions  is  to  miss  the 


Adventure  279 


/ividness  which  constitutes  their  whole  value.  But  adven- 
:ures  are  to  the  adventurous.  Thus  a  passive  knowledge  of 
the  past  loses  the  whole  value  of  its  message.  A  living 
civilization  requires  learning;  but  it  lies  beyond  it. 

Section  IV.  The  third  metaphysical  principle  may  be 
termed  the  principle  of  Individuality.  It  concerns  the  doc¬ 
trine  of  Harmony;  and  its  omission  is,  I  think,  the  great¬ 
est  gap  in  traditional  discussions  of  that  doctrine.  Indeed, 
in  recent  times,  with  the  predominance  of  the  sensation¬ 
alist  doctrine  of  perception,  modem  views  of  the  Harmony 
characterizing  a  great  experience  have  reached  their  low¬ 
est  point.  This  sensationalist  doctrine  concentrates  atten¬ 
tion  upon  a  mere  qualitative  harmony  within  an  experience 
comparatively  barren  of  objects  of  high  significance.  The 
complex  to  which  the  term  Harmony  is  applicable  is  con¬ 
ceived  as  a  mere  spatio-temporal  pattern  of  sensa.  The 
Harmony  to  be  derived  from  such  a  complex  belongs  to  a 
debased  type — tame,  vague,  deficient  in  outline  and  in¬ 
tention.  At  the  best,  it  can  only  excite  by  a  sense  of 
strangeness.  At  the  worst,  it  fades  into  insignificance.  It 
lacks  any  strong,  exciting  element  capable  of  stirring  the 
depths  of  feeling.  Sense-perception,  despite  its  prominence 
in  consciousness,  belongs  to  the  superficialities  of  experi¬ 
ence.  It  is  here  that  the  Aristotelian  doctrine  of  primary 
substances  has  done  some  of  its  worst  harm.  For  accord¬ 
ing  to  this  doctrine  no  individual  primary  substance  can 
enter  into  the  complex  of  objects  observed  in  any  occasion 
of  experience.  The  qualifications  of  the  soul  are  thus  con¬ 
fined  to  universals.  According  to  the  metaphysical  system 
that  I  suggest  to  you,  this  Aristotelian  doctrine  is  a  com¬ 
plete  mistake.  The  individual,  real  facts  of  the  past  lie  at 
the  base  of  our  immediate  experience  in  the  present.  They 
are  the  reality  from  which  the  occasion  springs,  the 
reality  from  which  it  derives  its  source  of  emotion,  from 
which  it  inherits  its  purposes,  to  which  it  directs  its  pas¬ 
sions.  At  the  base  of  experience  there  is  a  welter  of  feel¬ 
ing,  derived  from  individual  realities  or  directed  towards 
them.  Thus  for  strength  of  experience  we  require  to  dis¬ 
criminate  the  component  factors,  each  as  an  individual 
‘It’  with  its  own  significance. 

Our  lives  are  dominated  by  enduring  things,  each  experi¬ 
enced  as  a  unity  of  many  occasions  bound  together  by  the 
force  of  inheritance.  Each  such  individual  endurance  col- 


280  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

lects  into  its  unity  the  shifting  qualities  of  its  many  occa¬ 
sions.  Perhaps  it  is  the  thing  we  love,  or  perhaps  it  is  the 
tiling  we  hate.  There  is  a  bare  It — a  real  fact  of  the  past, 
stretching  into  the  present,  which  concentrates  upon  itself 
the  wealth  of  emotion  derived  from  its  many  occasions. 
Such  enduring  individualities,  as  factors  in  experience,  con¬ 
trol  a  wealth  of  feeling,  an  amplitude  of  purpose,  and  a 
regulative  power  to  subdue  into  background  the  residue  of 
things  belonging  to  the  immensity  of  the  past.  Surely,  this 
is  what  Descartes  must  have  meant  by  the  realitas  objectiva 
which,  according  to  his  doctrine,  clings  more  or  less  to  our 
perceptions. 

A  complex  experience  which  includes  conscious  atten¬ 
tion  to  such  enduring  individualities  at  once  unlooses  a 
wealth  of  feeling  far  beyond  anything  derived  from  pat¬ 
terns  of  sensa,  merely  as  such.  The  great  Harmony  is  the 
harmony  of  enduring  individualities,  connected  in  the  unity 
of  a  background.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  the  notion  of 
freedom  haunts  the  higher  civilizations.  For  freedom,  in  any 
one  of  its  many  senses,  is  the  claim  for  vigorous  self- 
assertion 

In  considering  the  process  which  constitutes  the  existence 
of  an  occasion  of  experience,  the  perception  of  the  endur¬ 
ing  individuals  must  belong  to  the  final  Appearance  wherein 
the  occasion  terminates.  For  in  the  primary  phase,  the  past 
is  initiating  the  process  in  virtue  of  the  energizing  of  its 
diverse  individual  occasions.  This  is  the  Reality  from  which 
the  new  occasion  springs.  The  process  is  urged  onward  by 
operation  of  the  mental  pole  providing  conceptual  subject- 
matter  for  synthesis  with  the  Reality.  There  finally  emerges 
the  Appearance,  which  is  the  transformed  Reality  after 
synthesis  with  the  conceptual  valuations.  The  Appearance 
is  a  simplification  by  a  process  of  emphasis  and  combina¬ 
tion.  Thus  the  enduring  individuals,  with  their  wealth  of 
emotional  significance,  appear  in  the  foreground.  In  the 
background  there  lie  a  mass  of  undistinguished  occasions 
providing  the  environment  with  its  vague  emotional  tone. 
In  a  general  sense,  the  Appearance  is  a  work  of  Art,  elicited 
from  the  primary  Reality.  In  so  far  as  the  Appearance 
emphasizes  connections  and  qualities  of  connections  which 
in  fact  reside  in  the  Reality,  then  the  Appearance  is  truth¬ 
ful  in  its  relation  to  Reality.  But  the  Appearance  may  have 
effected  connections,  and  have  introduced  qualities,  which 


1 


Adventure  281 

have  no  counterpart  in  Reality.  In  that  case,  the  occasion 
of  experience  contains  in  itself  a  falsehood,  namely  the  dis¬ 
connection  of  its  Appearance  from  its  Reality.  In  any  case, 
the  Appearance  is  a  simplification  of  Reality,  reducing  it  to 
a  foreground  of  enduring  individuals  and  to  a  background 
of  undiscriminated  occasions.  Sense-perception  belongs 
to  Appearance.  It  is  interpreted  as  indicating  enduring  in¬ 
dividuals,  truthfully  or  otherwise. 

Thus,  the  basis  of  a  strong,  penetrating  experience  of 
Harmony  is  an  Appearance  with  a  foreground  of  enduring 
individuals  carrying  with  them  a  force  of  subjective  tone, 
and  with  a  background  providing  the  requisite  connection. 
Undoubtedly,  the  Harmony  is  finally  a  Harmony  of  quali¬ 
tative  feelings.  But  the  introduction  of  the  enduring  individ¬ 
uals  evokes  from  the  Reality  a  force  of  already  harmonized 
feelings  which  no  surface  show  of  sensa  can  produce.  It  is 
not  a  question  of  intellectual  interpretation.  There  is  a  real 
conflation  of  fundamental  feeling. 

Thus  civilization  in  its  aim  at  fineness  of  feeling  should 
so  arrange  its  social  relations,  and  the  relations  of  its  mem¬ 
bers  to  their  natural  environment,  as  to  evoke  into  the  ex¬ 
periences  of  its  members  Appearances  dominated  by  the 
harmonies  of  forceful  enduring  things.  In  other  words,  Art 
should  aim  at  the  production  of  individuality  in  the  com¬ 
ponent  details  of  its  compositions.  It  cannot  trust  to  a  mere 
composition  of  qualities.  In  that  case,  it  becomes  tame  and 
vapid.  It  must  create,  so  that  in  the  experience  of  the  be¬ 
holder  there  appear  Individuals  as  it  were  immortal  by 
their  appeal  to  the  deep  recesses  of  feeling.  For  this  reason, 
it  is  hardly  a  paradox  to  say,  that  a  great  civilization  inter¬ 
fused  with  Art  presents  the  world  to  its  members  clothed 
with  the  Appearance  of  immortality.  The  Individuals  it 
presents  for  Appearance  belong  equally  to  all  time. 

This  is  exactly  what  we  find  in  great  Art.  The  very  de¬ 
tails  of  its  compositions  live  supremely  in  their  own  right. 
They  make  their  own  claim  to  individuality,  and  yet  con¬ 
tribute  to  the  whole.  Each  such  detail  receives  an  access  of 
grandeur  from  the  whole,  and  yet  manifests  an  individual¬ 
ity  claiming  attention  in  its  own  right. 

As  an  example,  the  sculpture  and  the  tracery  in  a 
Gothic  cathedral — Chartres  for  instance — subserve  the 
harmony.  They  lead  the  eye  upward  to  the  vaulting  above, 
and  they  lead  the  eye  onward  horizontally  to  the  supreme 


282  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

symbolism  of  the  altar.  They  claim  attention  by  their  beauty 
of  detail.  Yet  they  shun  attention  by  guiding  the  eye  to 
grasp  the  significance  of  the  whole.  Yet  the  sculpture  and 
the  tracery  could  not  perform  this  service  apart  from  their 
supreme  individuality,  evoking  a  wealth  of  feeling  in  their 
own  right.  Each  detail  claims  a  permanent  existence  for  its 
own  sake,  and  then  surrenders  it  for  the  sake  of  the  whole 
composition. 

Again,  the  value  of  discord  arises  from  this  importance 
of  the  forceful  individuality  of  the  details.  The  discord 
enhances  the  whole,  when  it  serves  to  substantiate  the  in¬ 
dividuality  of  the  parts.  It  brings  into  emphatic  feeling 
their  claim  to  existence  in  their  own  right.  It  rescues  the 
whole  from  the  tameness  of  a  merely  qualitative  harmony. 

Also  the  importance  of  truth  now  emerges.  Truth  of  be¬ 
lief  is  important,  both  in  itself  and  in  its  consequences. 
But  above  all,  there  emerges  the  importance  of  the  truth¬ 
ful  relation  of  Appearance  to  Reality.  A  grave  defect  in 
truth  limits  the  extent  to  which  any  force  of  feeling  can  be 
summoned  from  the  recesses  of  Reality.  The  falsehood  thus 
lacks  the  magic  by  which  a  beauty  beyond  the  power  of 
speech  to  express  can  be  called  into  being,  as  if  by  the 
wand  of  an  enchanter.  It  is  for  these  reasons  that  the 
civilization  of  a  society  requires  the  virtues  of  Truth, 
Beauty,  Adventure  and  Art. 


20.  Peace 

Section  I.  Our  discussions  have  concerned  themselves 
with  specializations  in  History,  of  seven  Platonic  general¬ 
ities,  namely,  The  Ideas,  The  Physical  Elements,  The 
Psyche,  The  Eros,  The  Harmony,  The  Mathematical  Re¬ 
lations,  The  Receptacle.  The  historical  references  have 
been  selected  and  grouped  with  the  purpose  of  illustrating 
the  energizing  of  specializations  of  these  seven  general  no¬ 
tions  among  the  peoples  of  Western  Europe,  driving  them 
towards  their  civilization. 

Finally,  in  this  fourth  and  last  Part  of  the  book,  those 
essential  qualities,  whose  joint  realization  in  social  life  con- 


Peace  283 

stitutes  civilization,  are  being  considered.  Four  such 
qualities  have,  so  far,  been  examined: — Truth,  Beauty, 
Adventure,  Art. 

Section  II.  Something  is  still  lacking.  It  is  difficult  to 
state  it  in  terms  that  are  wide  enough.  Also,  where  clearly 
distinguished  and  exposed  in  all  its  bearings,  it  assumes  an 
air  of  exaggeration.  Habitually  it  is  lurking  on  the  edge  of 
consciousness,  a  modifying  agency.  It  clings  to  our  notion 
of  the  Platonic  ‘Harmony,’  as  a  sort  of  atmosphere.  It  is 
somewhat  at  variance  with  the  notion  of  the  ‘Eros.’  Also 
the  Platonic  ‘Ideas’  and  ‘Mathematical  Relations’  seem  to 
kill  it  by  their  absence  of  ‘life  and  motion.’  Apart  from  it, 
the  pursuit  of  ‘Truth,  Beauty,  Adventure,  Art’  can  be  ruth¬ 
less,  hard,  cruel;  and  thus,  as  the  history  of  the  Italian 
Renaissance  illustrates,  lacking  in  some  essential  quality  of 
civilization.  The  notions  of  ‘tenderness’  and  of  ‘love’  are 
too  narrow,  important  though  they  be.  We  require  the  con¬ 
cept  of  some  more  general  quality,  from  Which  ‘tenderness’ 
emerges  as  a  specialization.  We  are  in  a  way  seeking  for 
the  notion  of  a  Harmony  of  Harmonies,  which  shall  bind 
together  the  other  four  qualities,  so  as  to  exclude  from  our 
notion  of  civilization  the  restless  egotism  with  which  they 
have  often  in  fact  been  pursued.  ‘Impersonality’  is  too 
dead  a  notion,  and  ‘Tenderness’  too  narrow.  I  choose  the 
term  ‘Peace’  for  that  Harmony  of  Harmonies  which  calms 
destructive  turbulence  and  completes  civilization.  Thus  a 
society  is  to  be  termed  civilized  whose  members  partici¬ 
pate  in  the  five  qualities — Truth,  Beauty,  Adventure,  Art, 
Peace. 

Section  III.  The  peace  that  is  here  meant  is  not  the 
negative  conception  of  anaesthesia.  It  is  a  positive  feeling 
which  crowns  the  ‘life  and  motion’  of  the  soul.  It  is  hard  to 
define  and  difficult  to  speak  of.  It  is  not  a  hope  for  the  fu¬ 
ture,  nor  is  it  an  interest  in  present  details.  It  is  a  broad¬ 
ening  of  feeling  due  to  the  emergence  of  some  deep 
metaphysical  insight,  unverbalized  and  yet  momentous  in 
its  coordination  of  values.  Its  first  effect  is  the  removal  of 
the  stress  of  acquisitive  feeling  arising  from  the  soul’s  pre¬ 
occupation  with  itself.  Thus  Peace  carries  with  it  a  sur¬ 
passing  of  personality.  There  is  an  inversion  of  relative 
values.  It  is  primarily  a  trust  in  the  efficacy  of  Beauty.  It 
is  a  sense  that  fineness  of  achievement  is  as  it  were  a  key 
unlocking  treasures  that  the  narrow  nature  of  things  would 


284  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

keep  remote.  There  is  thus  involved  a  grasp  of  infinitude, 
an  appeal  beyond  boundaries.  Its  emotional  effect  is  the 
subsidence  of  turbulence  which  inhibits.  More  accurately, 
it  preserves  the  springs  of  energy,  and  at  the  same  time 
masters  them  for  the  avoidance  of  paralyzing  distractions. 
The  trust  in  the  self -justification  of  Beauty  introduces 
faith,  where  reason  fails  to  reveal  the  details. 

The  experience  of  Peace  is  largely  beyond  the  control  of 
purpose.  It  comes  as  a  gift.  The  deliberate  aim  at  Peace 
very  easily  passes  into  its  bastard  substitute,  Anaesthesia. 
In  other  words,  in  the  place  of  a  quality  of  ‘life  and  mo¬ 
tion,’  there  is  substituted  their  destruction.  Thus  Peace  is 
the  removal  of  inhibition  and  not  its  introduction.  It  re¬ 
sults  in  a  wider  sweep  of  conscious  interest.  It  enlarges  the 
field  of  attention.  Thus  Peace  is  self-control  at  its  widest, — 
at  the  width  where  the  ‘self’  has  been  lost,  and  interest  has 
been  transferred  to  coordinations  wider  than  personality. 
Here  the  real  motive  interests  of  the  spirit  are  meant,  and 
not  the  superficial  play  of  discursive  ideas.  Peace  is  helped 
by  such  superficial  width,  and  also  promotes  it.  In  fact 
it  is  largely  for  this  reason  that  Peace  is  so  essential  for 
civilization.  It  is  the  barrier  against  narrowness.  One  of 
its  fruits  is  that  passion  whose  existence  Hume  denied,  the 
love  of  mankind  as  such. 

Section  IV.  The  meaning  of  Peace  is  most  clearly  un¬ 
derstood  by  considering  it  in  its  relation  to  the  tragic  is¬ 
sues  which  are  essential  in  the  nature  of  things.  Peace  is 
the  understanding  of  tragedy,  and  at  the  same  time  its 
preservation. 

We  have  seen  that  there  can  be  no  real  halt  of  civiliza¬ 
tion  in  the  indefinite  repetition  of  a  perfected  ideal.  Stale¬ 
ness  sets  in.  And  this  fatigue  is  nothing  other  than  the 
creeping  growth  of  anaesthesia,  whereby  that  social  group 
is  gradually  sinking  towards  nothingness.  The  defining 
characteristics  are  losing  their  importance.  There  may  be 
no  pain  or  conscious  loss.  There  is  merely  a  slow  paralysis 
of  surprise.  And  apart  from  surprise,  intensity  of  feeling 
collapses. 

Decay,  Transition,  Loss,  Displacement  belong  to  the 
essence  of  the  Creative  Advance.  The  new  direction  of  aim 
is  initiated  by  Spontaneity,  an  element  of  confusion.  The 
enduring  Societies  with  their  rise,  culmination,  and  decay, 
are  devices  to  combine  the  necessities  of  Harmony  and 


Peace  285 

Freshness.  There  is  the  deep  underlying  Harmony  of  Na¬ 
ture,  as  it  were  a  fluid,  flexible  support;  and  on  its  sur¬ 
face  the  ripples  of  social  etforts,  harmonizing  and  clashing 
in  their  aims  at  ways  of  satisfaction.  The  lower  types  of 
physical  objects  can  have  a  vast  endurance  of  inorganic 
life.  The  higher  types,  involving  animal  life  and  the  domi¬ 
nance  of  a  personality  primarily  mental,  preserve  their  zest 
by  the  quick  succession  of  stages  from  birth,  culmination, 
to  death.  As  soon  as  high  consciousness  is  reached,  the  en¬ 
joyment  of  existence  is  entwined  with  pain,  frustration, 
loss,  tragedy.  Amid  the  passing  of  so  much  beauty,  so  much 
heroism,  so  much  daring,  Peace  is  then  the  intuition  of 
permanence.  It  keeps  vivid  the  sensitiveness  to  the  tragedy; 
and  it  sees  the  tragedy  as  a  living  agent  persuading  the 
world  to  aim  at  fineness  beyond  the  faded  level  of  sur¬ 
rounding  fact.  Each  tragedy  is  the  disclosure  of  an  ideal: — 
What  might  have  been,  and  was  not:  What  can  be.  The 
tragedy  was  not  in  vain.  This  survival  power  in  motive 
force,  by  reason  of  appeal  to  reserves  of  Beauty,  marks 
the  difference  between  the  tragic  evil  and  the  gross  evil. 
The  inner  feeling  belonging  to  this  grasp  of  the  service  of 
tragedy  is  Peace — the  purification  of  the  emotions. 

Section  V.  The  deepest  definition  of  Youth  is,  Life  as 
yet  untouched  by  tragedy.  And  the  finest  flower  of  youth  is 
to  know  the  lesson  in  advance  of  the  experience,  undimmed. 
The  question  here  for  discussion  is  how  the  intuition  of 
Peace  asserts  itself  apart  from  its  disclosure  in  tragedy. 
Evidently  observation  of  the  earlier  stages  of  personal  life 
will  afford  the  clearest  evidence. 

Youth  is  distinguished  for  its  whole-hearted  absorption 
in  personal  enjoyments  and  personal  discomforts.  Quick 
pleasure  and  quick  pain,  quick  laughter  and  quick  tears, 
quick  absence  of  care,  and  quick  diffidence,  quick  courage 
and  quick  fear,  are  conjointly  characters  of  youth.  In  other 
words,  immediate  absorption  in  its  own  occupations.  On 
this  side,  Youth  is  too  chequered  to  be  termed  a  happy 
period.  It  is  vivid  rather  than  happy.  The  memories  of 
youth  are  better  to  live  through,  than  is  youth  itself.  For 
except  in  extreme  cases,  memory  is  apt  to  count  the  sunny 
hours.  Youth  is  not  peaceful  in  any  ordinary  sense  of  that 
term.  In  youth  despair  is  overwhelming.  There  is  then  no 
tomorrow,  no  memory  of  disasters  survived. 

The  short-sightedness  of  youth  matches  the  scantiness  of 


286  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

its  experience.  The  issues  of  its  action  are  beyond  its  ken, 
perhaps  with  literature  supplying  a  delusory  sense  of 
knowledge.  Thus  generosity  and  cruelty  are  equally  nat¬ 
ural,  by  reason  of  the  fact  that  their  full  effects  lie  be¬ 
yond  conscious  anticipation. 

All  this  is  the  veriest  commonplace  in  the  characteriza¬ 
tion  of  Youth.  Nor  does  the  modern  wealth  of  social  litera¬ 
ture  in  any  fundamental  way  alter  the  case.  The  reason  for 
its  statement  here  is  to  note  that  these  features  of  character 
belong  to  all  animals  at  all  ages,  including  human  beings 
at  every  stage  of  their  lives.  The  differences  only  lie  in 
relative  proportions.  Also  the  success  of  language  in  con¬ 
veying  information  is  vastly  over-rated,  especially  in  learned 
circles.  Not  only  is  language  highly  elliptical,  but  also 
nothing  can  supply  the  defect  of  first-hand  experience  of 
types  cognate  to  the  things  explicitly  mentioned.  The  gen¬ 
eral  truth  of  Hume’s  doctrine  as  to  the  necessity  of  first¬ 
hand  impressions  is  inexorable. 

There  is  another  side.  Youth  is  peculiarly  susceptible  to 
appeals  for  beauty  of  conduct.  It  understands  motives 
which  presuppose  the  irrelevance  of  its  own  person.  Such 
motives  are  understood  as  contributing  to  the  magnifica¬ 
tion  of  its  own  interests.  Its  very  search  for  personal  experi¬ 
ence  thus  elicits  impersonality,  self-forgetfulness.  Youth 
forgets  itself  in  its  own  ardour.  Of  course,  not  always.  For 
it  can  fall  in  love.  But  the  test  of  the  better  nature,  so 
happily  plentiful,  is  that  love  passes  from  selfishness  to  de¬ 
votion.  The  higher  forms  of  love  break  down  the  narrow 
self-regarding  motives. 

When  youth  has  once  grasped  where  Beauty  dwells — 
with  a  real  knowledge  and  not  as  a  mere  matter  of  literary 
phraseology  in  some  poetic,  scriptural,  or  psychological 
version — when  youth  has  once  grasped,  its  self-surrender 
is  absolute.  The  vision  may  pass.  It  may  traverse  con¬ 
sciousness  in  a  flash.  Some  natures  may  never  permit  it  to 
emerge  into  attention.  But  Youth  is  peculiarly  liable  to  the 
vision  of  that  Peace,  which  is  the  harmony  of  the  soul’s  ac¬ 
tivities  with  ideal  aims  that  lie  beyond  any  personal  satis¬ 
faction. 

Section  VI.  The  vigour  of  civilized  societies  is  pre¬ 
served  by  the  wide-spread  sense  that  high  aims  are  worth¬ 
while.  Vigorous  societies  harbour  a  certain  extravagance 
of  objectives,  so  that  men  wander  beyond  the  safe  provision 


Peace  287 


of  personal  gratifications.  All  strong  interests  easily  be¬ 
come  impersonal,  the  love  of  a  good  job  well  done.  There 
is  a  sense  of  harmony  about  such  an  accomplishment,  the 
Peace  brought  by  something  worth-while.  Such  personal 
gratification  arises  from  aim  beyond  personality. 

The  converse  tendency  is  at  least  equally  noticeable;  the 
egotistic  desire  for  fame — ‘that  last  infirmity’ — is  an  inver¬ 
sion  of  the  social  impulse,  and  yet  presupposes  it.  The 
tendency  shows  itself  in  the  trivialities  of  child-life,  as  well 
as  in  the  career  of  some  conqueror  before  whom  mankind 
trembled.  In  the  widest  sense,  it  is  the  craving  for  sym¬ 
pathy.  It  involves  the  feeling  that  each  act  of  experience 
is  a  central  reality,  claiming  all  things  as  its  own.  The 
world  has  then  no  justification  except  as  a  satisfaction  of 
such  claims.  But  the  point  is  that  the  desire  for  admiring 
attention  becomes  futile  except  in  the  presence  of  an  au¬ 
dience  fit  to  render  it.  The  pathology  of  feeling,  so  often 
exemplified,  consists  in  the  destruction  of  the  audience  for 
the  sake  of  the  fame.  There  is  also,  of  course,  the  sheer 
love  of  command,  finally  devoid  of  high  purpose.  The  com¬ 
plexity  of  human  motive,  the  entwinement  of  its  threads, 
is  infinite.  The  point,  which  is  here  relevant,  is  that  the 
zest  of  human  adventure  presupposes  for  its  material  a 
scheme  of  things  with  a  worth  beyond  any  single  occasion. 
However  perverted,  there  is  required  for  zest  that  craving 
to  stand  conspicuous  in  this  scheme  of  things  as  well  as  the 
purely  personal  pleasure  in  the  exercise  of  faculties.  It  is 
the  final  contentment  aimed  at  by  the  soul  in  its  retreat 
to  egoism,  as  distinct  from  anaesthesia.  In  this,  it  is  beyond 
human  analysis  to  detect  exactly  where  the  perversion  be¬ 
gins  to  taint  the  intuition  of  Peace.  Milton’s  phrase  states 
5ie  whole  conclusion — ‘That  last  infirmity  of  noble  mind.5 

Fame  is  a  cold,  hard  notion.  Another  half-way  house  be¬ 
tween  the  extreme  ecstasy  of  Peace  and  the  extreme  of 
selfish  desire,  is  the  love  of  particular  individual  things. 
Such  love  is  the  completion  almost  necessary  for  finite 
reality,  and  all  reality  is  in  some  way  finite.  In  file  ex¬ 
treme  of  love,  such  as  mother’s  love,  all  personal  desire  is 
transferred  to  the  thing  loved,  as  a  desire  for  its  perfec¬ 
tion.  Personal  life  has  here  evidently  passed  beyond  itself, 
but  with  explicit,  definite  limitation  to  particular  realities. 
It  is  partly  based  upon  the  importance  of  the  individuality 
of  details  for  the  aesthetic  value  of  objective  appearance. 


288  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

This  has  been  discussed  before.1  This  aspect  of  personal 
love  is  simply  a  clinging  to  a  condition  for  selfish  happi¬ 
ness.  There  is  no  transcendence  of  personality. 

But  some  closeness  of  status,  such  as  the  relation  of 
parent  to  child  or  the  relation  of  marriage,  can  produce  the 
love  of  self-devotion  where  the  potentialities  of  the  loved 
object  are  felt  passionately  as  a  claim  that  it  find  itself  in 
a  friendly  Universe.  Such  love  is  really  an  intense  feeling 
as  to  how  the  harmony  of  the  world  should  be  realized  in 
particular  objects.  It  is  the  feeling  as  to  what  would  hap¬ 
pen  if  right  could  triumph  in  a  beautiful  world,  with  dis¬ 
cord  routed.  It  is  the  passionate  desire  for  the  beautiful 
result,  in  this  instance.  Such  love  is  distracting,  nerve- 
racking.  But,  unless  darkened  by  utter  despair,  it  involves 
deep  feeling  of  an  aim  in  the  Universe,  winning  such  tri¬ 
umph  as  is  possible  to  it.  It  is  the  sense  of  Eros,  hovering 
between  Peace  as  the  crown  of  Youth  and  Peace  as  the 
issue  of  Tragedy. 

Section  VII.  The  general  health  of  social  life  is  taken 
care  of  by  formularized  moral  precepts,  and  formularized 
religious  beliefs  and  religious  institutions.  All  of  these  ex¬ 
plicitly  express  the  doctrine  that  the  perfection  of  life  re¬ 
sides  in  aims  beyond  the  individual  person  in  question. 

It  is  a  doctrine  of  great  generality,  capable  of  a  large 
variety  of  specialization,  not  all  of  them  mutually  con¬ 
sistent.  For  example,  consider  the  patriotism  of  the  Roman 
farmers,  in  the  full  vigour  of  the  Republic.  Certainly  Regu- 
lus  did  not  return  to  Carthage,  with  the  certainty  of  tor¬ 
ture  and  death,  cherishing  any  mystic  notions  of  another 
life — either  a  Christian  Heaven  or  a  Buddhist  Nirvana. 
He  was  a  practical  man,  and  his  ideal  aim  was  the  Roman 
Republic  flourishing  in  this  world.  But  this  aim  transcended 
his  individual  personality;  for  this  aim  he  entirely  sacrificed 
every  gratification  bounded  by  such  limits.  For  him  there 
was  something  in  the  world  which  could  not  be  expressed 
as  sheer  personal  gratification — and  yet  in  thus  sacrificing 
himself,  his  personal  existence  rose  to  its  full  height.  He 
may  have  been  mistaken  in  his  estimate  of  the  worth  of  the 
Roman  Republic.  The  point  is  that  with  that  belief,  he 
achieved  magnificence  by  the  sacrifice  of  himself. 

In  this  estimate,  Regulus  has  not  in  any  way  proved  him- 

lCf.  Ch.  XVII,  Sect.  VIII,  and  Ch.  XIX,  Sect.  IV. 


Peace  289 

self  to  be  exceptional.  His  conduct  showed  heroism  that  is 
unusual.  But  his  estimate  of  the  worth  of  such  conduct 
has  evoked  widest  assent.  The  Roman  farmers  agreed; 
and  generation  after  generation,  amid  all  the  changes  of 
history,  have  agreed  by  the  instinctive  pulse  of  emotion  as 
the  tale  is  handed  down. 

Moral  codes  have  suffered  from  the  exaggerated  claims 
made  for  them.  The  dogmatic  fallacy  has  here  done  its 
worst.  Each  such  code  has  been  put  out  by  a  God  on  a 
mountain  top,  or  by  a  Saint  in  a  cave,  or  by  a  divine 
Despot  on  a  throne,  or,  at  the  lowest,  by  ancestors  with  a 
wisdom  beyond  later  question.  In  any  case,  each  code  is 
incapable  of  improvement;  and  unfortunately  in  details 
they  fail  to  agree  either  with  each  other  or  with  our  exist¬ 
ing  moral  intuitions.  The  result  is  that  the  world  is  shocked, 
or  amused,  by  the  sight  of  saintly  old  people  hindering  in 
the  name  of  morality  the  removal  of  obvious  brutalities 
from  a  legal  system.  Some  Acta  Sanctorum  go  ill  with 
civilization. 

The  details  of  these  codes  are  relative  to  the  social  cir¬ 
cumstances  of  the  immediate  environment — life  at  a  cer¬ 
tain  date  on  ‘the  fertile  fringe’  of  the  Arabian  desert,  life 
on  the  lower  slopes  of  the  Himalayan  Mountains,  life  on 
the  plains  of  China,  or  on  the  plains  of  India,  life  on  the 
delta  of  some  great  river.  Again  the  meaning  of  the  critical 
terms  is  shifting  and  ambiguous,  for  example,  the  notions 
of  ownership,  family,  marriage,  murder,  God.  Conduct 
which  in  one  environment  and  at  one  stage  produces  its 
measure  of  harmonious  satisfaction,  in  other  surroundings 
at  another  stage  is  destructively  degrading.  Each  society 
has  its  own  type  of  perfection,  and  puts  up  with  certain 
blots,  at  that  stage  inevitable.  Thus  the  notion  that  there 
are  certain  regulative  notions,  sufficiently  precise  to  pre¬ 
scribe  details  of  conduct,  for  all  reasonable  beings  on 
Earth,  in  every  planet,  and  in  every  star-system,  is  at  once 
to  be  put  aside.  That  is  the  notion  of  the  one  type  of  per¬ 
fection  at  which  the  Universe  aims.  All  realization  of  the 
Good  is  finite,  and  necessarily  excludes  certain  other  types. 

But  what  these  codes  do  witness  to,  and  what  their 
interpretation  by  seers  of  various  races  throughout  history 
does  witness  to,  is  the  aim  at  a  social  perfection.  Such  a 
realized  fact  is  conceived  as  an  abiding  perfection  in  the 
nature  of  things,  a  treasure  for  all  ages.  It  is  not  a  romance 


290  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

of  thought,  it  is  a  fact  of  Nature.  For  example,  in  one 
sense  the  Roman  Republic  declined  and  fell;  in  another 
sense,  it  stands  a  stubborn  fact  in  the  Universe.  To  perish 
is  to  assume  a  new  function  in  the  process  of  generation. 
Devotion  to  the  Republic  magnified  the  type  of  personal 
satisfactions  for  those  who  conformed  their  purposes  to 
its  maintenance.  Such  conformation  of  purpose  to  ideal 
beyond  personal  limitations  is  the  conception  of  that 
Peace  with  which  the  wise  man  can  face  his  fate,  master  of 
his  soul. 

Section  VIII.  The  wide  scope  of  the  notion  of  ‘society’ 
requires  attention.  Transcendence  begins  with  the  leap 
from  the  actuality  of  the  immediate  occasion  to  the  notion 
of  personal  existence,  which  is  a  society  of  occasions.  In 
terms  of  human  life,  the  soul  is  a  society.  Care  for  the 
future  of  personal  existence,  regret  or  pride  in  its  past,  are 
alike  feelings  which  leap  beyond  the  bounds  of  the  sheer 
actuality  of  the  present.  It  is  in  the  nature  of  the  present 
that  it  should  thus  transcend  itself  by  reason  of  die  im¬ 
manence  in  it  of  the  ‘other.’  But  there  is  no  necessity  as  to 
the  scale  of  emphasis  that  this  fact  of  nature  should  receive. 
It  belongs  to  the  civilization  of  consciousness,  to  magnify 
the  large  sweep  of  harmony. 

Beyond  the  soul,  there  are  other  societies,  and  societies 
of  societies.  There  is  the  animal  body  ministering  to  the 
soul:  there  are  families,  groups  of  families,  nations, 
species,  groups  involving  different  species  associated  in 
the  joint  enterprise  of  keeping  alive.  These  various  societies, 
each  in  its  measure,  claim  loyalties  and  loves.  In  human 
history  the  various  responses  to  these  claims  disclose  the 
essential  transcendence  of  each  individual  actuality  beyond 
itself.  The  stubborn  reality  of  the  absolute  self-attainment 
of  each  individual  is  bound  up  with  a  relativity  which  it 
issues  from  and  issues  into.  The  analysis  of  the  various 
strands  of  relativity  is  the  analysis  of  the  social  structure 
of  the  Universe,  as  in  this  epoch. 

Although  particular  codes  of  morality  reflect,  more  or 
less  imperfectly,  the  special  circumstances  of  social  struc¬ 
ture  concerned,  it  is  natural  to  seek  for  some  highly  general 
principles  underlying  all  such  codes.  Such  generalities 
should  reflect  the  very  notions  of  the  harmonizing  of  har¬ 
monies,  and  of  particular  individual  actualities  as  the  sole 
authentic  reality.  These  are  the  principles  of  the  generality 


*3DU9}SIX3  Sq  JOJ  UOSBaJ  aqj  JI  UIOJJ  SuiddlJIS  Xq 

‘uopBzigAio  jo  aouapBoap  aqi  sgads  jj  **ajniuaApB  joj  jsaz 
sq  jo  ajq  Suiqqoj  ‘aojoj  aAponjjsap  [Bug  aqi  si  Agea^f 
uiojj  aauBJBaddy  jo  uopBoojsip  jo  gugaaj  y  ‘uopBdiopuB 
‘uopBinrasuBJj  ‘uoijbtijba  ‘uopBoggduns  £q  asjaXiuft  ‘aqi 
jo  juaiujsnfpB  sq  Smpnpui  aauBJBaddy  ub — AjqBtipiAip 
-ur  [Bug  sq  suibub  uoisbooo  aqi  qoiqM  qqM  aauBJBaddy 
aqi  si  ajaqi  puB  Ijobj  xuoqqnjs  ‘ajqBdBosaui  jo  £qpa>l 
b — s§uuds  aouauadxa  jo  uoisbooo  aqi  qoiqM  uiojj  ^lipa^ 
aqi  si  oiaqx  •XjgBa^j  oj  aauBJBaddy  jo  iiopBunojuoo  aqi 
si  spuBmap  aoBaj  jBqj  qjruj  ppuassa  aqx  ‘papaim 
aqi  jo  sisajaqn  aAisjnosga  aqi  SupoagB  jopbj  ppgjadns 
A]aAijBJBdmoD  b  si  suopisodojd  jo  .pooqaspj  jo  ipnjj, 
aiBq  siqx  -suopisodojd  aiui  aie  ajaqi  sb  asjBj  Xiibiu  sb 
AqjBssaoau  aiB  ajaqi  ‘aspj  Jaqjo  aqi  puB  anq  aq  isnui  auo 
asaqi  jo  aouis  puB  ‘uopisodojd  XjopipBjjuoo  b  oi  paqoX  si 
uopisodojd  qoBa  aouis  ’qitux  Joj  puBiuap  sup  in  juiod  aqi 
o;  Apoaqp  jou  si  suopisodojd  jo  pooqaspj  jo  qjoii  aqx 

•pooqasjBj  jo  suopBoo[sq) 
aqi  gasq  urqqM  sapiq  qoiqAV  XjtiBag  aqi  m  XoBogp  ajnoas 
ou  aq  ubo  ajaqx  ‘Xuoiujbh  °1  uopBjnng  b  si  qitux  ui 
pajap  y  *qnux  aAjoAui  suopoauuoo-jaim  asoqM  ^uouuBfj 
P?qi  aAipafqo  sq  sb  SBq  aouaj  jo  uopBzgBaj  aqi  Supnips 
-uoo  uopmjui  aqi  iBqi  ‘lUBain  si  q  srqi’Xg’-aoBax  jo  aouas’sa 
aqj  oi  sSuopq  qjtux  jo  juamuiBqB  aqx  *XI  Noixoas 
•uopoapad  jadojd  sq  spjBMoi  luauiuonAua  pqi  jo  uopigoAa 
aq;  ajouiojd  niAv  pauSisap  si  q  qoiqM  joj  luauiuojiAua 
aqi  in  qoiqAV  sujaqBd-jnoiABqaq  aqi  si  apoo  jbjoiu  aqx 

uapjo  gB  jo  aajnos  aip  jo  aouangui  aqi  Sin 
-puaixa  si  Xqajaip  ‘uopmiui  aiBunqn  siqi  uodn  papunoj  si 
aouauadxa  jo  qiSuajjs  asoqM  pnpiAipui  aqi  iBqi  si  aonaj  j 6 
aouassa  aqx  *aouangui  :paM  b  spaxa  ptipiAipui  qB3A\.  b  jox 
•aosapoo  iJBd  m  spunojS  omj  asaqx  uapjo  jo  ad^4  apBjS 
-q§nj  b  jo  uopomojd  aqi  ui  aouangui  sq  uo  XpjBd  puB 
‘aouauadxa  umo  sq  jo  qiSuajjs  oisuuiui  aqi  uo  XpjBd  ‘sisBq 
ajqnop  aqi  uo  jBnpiAipui  aqi  Suiibj  ui  os[y  -aouauadxa  jo 
qi^uajis  guporaojd  ui  efas  oi  si  iBqi  ‘sapgBnpB  [BnpiAipur 
aqi  oUi^qu^Biu  ui  ssaoons  qaqi  oi  SuipioooB  aouBpodun 
aApBpj  ui  japjo  jo  sadXj  Sutibj  ^q  paAjos  si  sisaqipue 
aqx  qBUosjad  si  ‘sSuiqi  gB  aAoqB  ‘aAoj  puB  f[Buosjadun 
si  tjapjo,  jox  *uopisoddo  jo  uopsaSSns  b  si  ajaqi  0M.1  aqi 
uaaMpg  /aAog  suBara  puooas  aqi  puB  /japjo,  suBam  isjg 
aqx  *iBnpiAg)ui  aqi  jo  aouBpodun  aqi  jo  puB  ‘AuouuBq  jo 


16Z  dovdd 


292  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

There  can  be  no  necessity  governing  this  conformation. 
Sense-perception,  which  dominates  the  appearance  of 
things,  in  its  own  nature  re-arranges,  and  thus  in  a  way 
distorts.  Also  there  can  be  no  mere  blunt  truth  about  the 
Appearance  which  it  provides.  In  its  own  nature  Sense- 
perception  is  an  interpretation,  and  this  interpretation  may 
be  completely  misleading.  If  there  were  a  necessary  con¬ 
formation  of  Appearance  to  Reality,  then  Morality  would 
vanish.  There  is  no  morality  about  the  multiplication  table, 
whose  items  are  necessarily  linked.  Art  would  also  be  a 
meaningless  term.  For  it  presupposes  the  efficacy  of 
purpose.  Art  is  an  issue  of  Adventure. 

The  question  for  discussion  is  whether  there  exists  any 
factor  in  the  Universe  constituting  a  general  drive  towards 
the  conformation  of  Appearance  to  Reality.  This  drive 
would  then  constitute  a  factor  in  each  occasion  persuading 
an  aim  at  such  truth  as  is  proper  to  the  special  appearance 
in  question.  This  concept  of  truth,  proper  to  each  special 
appearance,  would  mean  that  the  appearance  has  not 
built  itself  up  by  the  inclusion  of  elements  that  are  foreign 
to  the  reality  from  which  it  springs.  The  appearance  will 
then  be  a  generalization  and  an  adaptation  of  emphasis; 
but  not  an  importation  of  qualities  and  relations  without 
any  corresponding  exemplification  in  the  reality.  This 
concept  of  truth  is  in  fact  the  denial  of  the  doctrine  of 
Appearance  which  lies  on  the  surface  of  Kant’s  Critique  of 
Pure  Reason.  It  is  a  denial  of  his  answer  to  the  question 
— How  are  synthetic  a  priori  judgments  possible?  It  is  at 
least  the  introduction  of  guarding  limitations,  which  Kant 
explicitly  in  that  work  does  not  introduce. 

Section  X.  The  answer  to  this  question  must  issue 
from  a  survey  of  the  factors  in  terms  of  which  individual 
experience  has  been  interpreted: — The  antecedent  World 
from  which  each  occasion  springs,  a  World  of  many  oc¬ 
casions  presenting  for  the  new  creature  harmonies  and 
discords:  the  easy  road  of  Anaesthesia  by  which  discordant 
factors  are  dismissed  into  irrelevance:  the  activity  of  the 
mental  poles  in  building  conceptual  experience  into  pat¬ 
terns  of  feeling  which  rescue  discords  from  loss:  the  spon¬ 
taneity  of  the  mental  action  and  its  persuasion  by  a  sense 
of  relevance:  the  selective  nature  of  consciousness  and  its 
initial  failure  to  discriminate  the  deeper  sources  of  feel- 


Peace  293 

ing:  that  there  is  no  agency  in  abstraction  from  actual 
occasions,  and  that  existence  involves  implication  in 
agency:  the  sense  of  a  unity  of  many  occasions  with  a 
value  beyond  that  of  any  individual  occasion;  for  example, 
the  soul,  the  complete  animal,  the  social  group  of  animals, 
the  material  body,  the  physical  epoch:  the  aim  at  im¬ 
mediate  individual  contentment. 

The  justification  for  the  suggestion  derived  from  this 
group  of  factors  must  mainly  rest  upon  their  direct  elucida¬ 
tion  of  first-hand  experience.  They  are  not,  and  should 
not  be,  the  result  of  an  argument.  For  all  argument  must 
rest  upon  premises  more  fundamental  than  the  con¬ 
clusions.  Discussion  of  fundamental  notions  is  merely 
for  the  purpose  of  disclosing  their  coherence,  their  com¬ 
patibility,  and  the  specializations  which  can  be  derived 
from  their  conjunction. 

The  above  set  of  metaphysical  notions  rests  itself  upon 
the  ordinary,  average^  experience  of  mankind,  properly 
interpreted.  But  there  is  a  further  set  for  which  the  appeal 
lies  to  occasions  and  modes  of  experience  which  in  some 
degree  are  exceptional.  It  must  be  remembered  that  the 
present  level  of  average  waking  human  experience  was  at 
one  time  exceptional  among  the  ancestors  of  mankind. 
We  are  justified  therefore  in  appealing  to  those  modes  of 
experience  which  in  our  direct  judgment  stand  above  the 
average  level.  The  gradual  emergence  of  such  modes,  and 
their  effect  on  human  history,  have  been  among  the  themes 
of  this  book  in  its  appeal  to  history.  We  have  found  the 
growth  of  Art:  its  gradual  sublimation  into  the  pursuit  of 
Truth  and  Beauty:  the  sublimation  of  the  egoistic  aim  by 
its  inclusion  of  the  transcendent  whole:  the  youthful  zest 
in  the  transcendent  aim:  the  sense  of  tragedy:  the  sense 
of  evil :  the  persuasion  towards  Adventure  beyond  achieved 
perfection:  the  sense  of  Peace. 

Section  XI.  The  concept  of  Civilization,  as  developed 
up  to  this  stage,  remains  inherently  incomplete.  No  logical 
argument  can  demonstrate  this  gap.  Such  arguments  are 
merely  subsidiary  helps  for  the  conscious  realization  of 
metaphysical  intuitions. — Non  in  dialectica  complacuit 
Deo  salvum  facere  populum  suum.  This  saying,  quoted  by 


294  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

Cardinal  Newman,2  should  be  the  motto  of  every  meta¬ 
physician.  He  is  seeking,  amid  the  dim  recesses  of  his  ape¬ 
like  consciousness  and  beyond  the  reach  of  dictionary 
language,  for  the  premises  implicit  in  all  reasoning.  The 
speculative  methods  of  metaphysics  are  dangerous,  easily 
perverted.  So  is  all  Adventure;  but  Adventure  belongs  to 
the  essence  of  civilization. 

The  incompleteness  of  the  concept  relates  to  the  notion 
of  Transcendence,  the  feeling  essential  for  Adventure, 
Zest,  and  Peace.  This  feeling  requires  for  its  understanding 
that  we  supplement  the  notion  of  the  Eros  by  including 
it  in  the  concept  of  an  Adventure  in  the  Universe  as  One. 
This  Adventure  embraces  all  particular  occasions  but  as 
an  actual  fact  stands  beyond  any  one  of  them.  It  is,  as  it 
were,  the  complement  to  Plato’s  Receptacle,  its  exact 
opposite,  yet  equally  required  for  the  unity  of  all  things. 
In  every  way,  it  is  contrary  to  the  Receptacle.  The  Re¬ 
ceptacle  is  bare  of  all  forms:  the  Unity  of  Adventure 
includes  the  Eros  which  is  the  living  urge  towards  all 
possibilities,  claiming  the  goodness  of  their  realization.  The 
Platonic  Receptacle  is  void,  abstract  from  all  individual 
occasions:  The  Unity  of  Adventure  includes  among  its 
components  all  individual  realities,  each  with  the  import¬ 
ance  of  the  personal  or  social  fact  to  which  it  belongs. 
Such  individual  importance  in  the  components  belongs  to 
the  essence  of  Beauty.  In  this  Supreme  Adventure,  the 
Reality  which  the  Adventure  transmutes  into  its  Unity  of 
Appearance,  requires  the  real  occasions  of  the  advancing 
world  each  claiming  its  due  share  of  attention.  This  Ap¬ 
pearance,  thus  enjoyed,  is  the  final  Beauty  with  which  the 
Universe  achieves  its  justification.  This  Beauty  has  always 
within  it  the  renewal  derived  from  the  Advance  of  the 
Temporal  World.  It  is  the  immanence  of  the  Great  Fact 
including  this  initial  Eros  and  this  final  Beauty  which 
constitutes  the  zest  of  self-forgetful  transcendence  be¬ 
longing  to  Civilization  at  its  height. 

At  the  heart  of  the  nature  of  things,  there  are  always 
the  dream  of  youth  and  the  harvest  of  tragedy.  The 
Adventure  of  the  Universe  starts  with  the  dream  and  reaps 
tragic  Beauty.  This  is  the  secret  of  the  union  of  Zest  with 

2  Grammar  of  Assent. 


Peace  295 

Peace: — That  the  suffering  attains  its  end  in  a  Harmony 
rf  Harmonies.  The  immediate  experience  of  this  Final 
Fact,  with  its  union  of  Youth  and  Tragedy,  is  the  sense  of 
Peace.  In  this  way  the  World  receives  its  persuasion  to- 
vards  such  perfections  as  are  possible  for  its  diverse  in- 
lividual  occasions. 


THE  END 


INDEX  OF  PROPER  NAMES 


Adrian  the  Sixth,  112 
>Eschylus,  2  78 
Akhnaton,  56 

Alexander  the  Great,  20,  60,  69 

Alexandria,  108,  111 

America,  2  7,  30 

Aquinas,  30 

Archytas,  152 

Aristarchas,  1 10 

Aristotle,  62,  69,  108,  111,  121, 
125,  136,  139,  144,  147,  152, 
156,  160,  224,  238,  275 
Arius,  109 
Asquith,  42 
Athanasius,  109 
Athens,  108 
Atticus,  72,  73 
Attila,  14 

Augustine,  30,  61,  88,  110,  134, 
135,  164,  168 
Augustus,  29,  69 

Bacon,  Francis,  36,  39,  66 
Bacon,  Roger,  156 
Bailey,  Cyril,  12  7 
Bentham,  43-45 
Bergson,  224 
Bradley,  F.  H.,  221-234 
Bright,  John,  41 
Burke,  Edmund,  26,  52 

Caesar,  20 

Calvin,  30,  57,  134,  135,  163,  168 
Campbell-Bannerman,  41 
Charles  the  Second,.  67 
China,  82,  85,  86,  107 
Cicero,  20,  21,  28,  61,  72 
Claudius,  62 

Clement  of  Alexandria,  14,  26,  48 
Cleon,  20 

Clerk-Maxwell,  187 
Cobden,  41 
Columbus,  2  78 

Comte,  Auguste,  43,  45,  46,  133 
Constantine  the  Great,  57 
Cotes,  Roger,  161 
Cranmer,  168 
Crete,  107 

Cyril  (of  Alexandria),  109 
Dante,  37 

Darwin,  Charles,  43,  46 
Democritus,  125,  129 


Denison,  J.  H.,  233 
Descartes.  66,  118,  135,  136,  139, 
177,  192,  206,  211,  224,  280 
Dionysius,  The  Younger,  38 
Disraeli,  41 

Donham,  Dean  W.  B.,  viii 
Dutch  Republic,  57 

Edwards,  Jonathan,  168 
Egypt,  107,  108 

Epicurus,  111,  120,  126,  129,  135, 
138,  139,  146,  160 
Erasmus,  66,  168 
Euclid,  92,  109 
Euripides,  228,  2  78 
Europe,  16,  17 

Fox,  George,  168,  169 
France,  2  7 
Franklin,  B.,  36 

Galba,  62 
Galen,  67 

Galileo,  66,  118,  149,  154,  192 
Galton,  Francis,  43 
Gandhi,  Mahatma,  164 
Gerbert  (Silvester  the  Second)  156, 
159 

Gibbon,  Edward,  vii,  13,  72,  2  77 
Gladstone,  W.  E.,  41,  42,  292 
Greece,  107,  108 
Gregory  the  Great,  35,  87 

Halevy,  Elie,  30 
Hammond,  Barbara,  41 
Hammond,  J.  L.,  41 
Hanno,  86 
Hartington,  Lord,  41 
Hervey,  66 
Hipparchus,  153 
Hobhouse,  L.  T.,  235 
Hooker,  Richard,  30 
Hume,  35-37,  43-45,  129,  130,  133, 
136,  177,  182,  184.  186,  1S9, 
192,  221-225,  234,  286 
Huss,  John,  168 

Ignatius  Loyola,  168 
India,  82,  85,  86,  107 
Irwin,  Lord,  164 

James,  William,  189,  232 
Jefferson,  36 


INDEX  297 


Jerome,  30 
Johnson,  W.  E.,  230 
Joseph,  H.  W.  B.,  230 
Jovvett,  B.,  110 
Justinian,  88 

Kant,  225,  234,  292 
Kepler,  242 

Lamarck,  43 

Leibniz,  30,  66,  135-139,  234 
Leo  the  Tenth,  112 
Leonardo  da  Vinci,  68 
Leonardo  of  Pisa,  156 
Lewis,  Sinclair,  277 
Locke,  John,  26,  30,  36,  57,  135, 
166,  177,  224,  235,  275 
Lovejoy,  Professor,  192 
Lowell,  Percy,  131-133 
Lucian,  63,  2  77 

Lucretius,  60,  111,  126-128,  135- 
139,  179 

Luther,  30,  57,  112,  146,  163,  165 

Macaulay,  12 
Malthus,  80,  82 
Marcus  Aurelius,  22 
Marius,  20 
Marx,  Karl,  42 
Mendel,  43 
Mesopotamia,  107 
Mill,  J.  S.,  133 
Milton,  59 
Monro,  H.  A.  J.,  127 
Moore,  George  Foot,  233 
Morley,  John,  228 

Near  East,  The,  16,  17,  82,  84-92 
Nero,  62 
Nestorius,  109 
Newman,  Cardinal,  vii,  294 
Newton,  Isaac,  26,  36,  44,  92,  117, 
118,  126,  127,  135,  136,  149, 
154,  160,  161,  192 
Nietzsche,  224 

Occam,  238 

Paine,  T.,  37,  44 
Palestine,  107 
Paul,  St.,  60-62 
Pearson,  Karl,  43 
Pelagius,  110,  164 
Pericles,  20,  58,  59,  63,  174 
Phoenicia,  107 


Pitt,  William  (Chatham),  52 
Plato,  14,  19-23,  27,  28,  32-33,  38- 
39,  45,  47,  49,  58,  59,  61,  62, 
68,  70,  75,  88,  90,  106,  108-111, 
122,  126,  131-139,  146,  147,  151- 
157,  160,  164,  166,  170-172,  176, 
177,  189-192,  209,  222,  224,  229, 
238,  274,  294 
Pliny,  21,  62,  277 
Poincare,  Henri,  242 
Poynting,  187 
Price,  H.  H.,  218 
Ptolemy,  109,  153 
Pythagoras,  146 

Roman  Empire,  21,  25,  87 
Rome,  28 
Rousseau,  29 

Santayana,  218 
Shaftesbury,  Lord,  41 
Sidonius  Apollinaris,  72 
Silvester  the  Second  ( Gerber t),  156, 
159 

Smith,  Adam,  35 
Socrates,  58,  62 
Solomon,  92 
Sophocles,  278 
Spinoza,  109 
Stephen,  Leslie,  vii 
Strachey,  Lytton,  18,  277 
Sulla,  20 
Suarez,  30 

Tacitus,  2  77 
Taylor,  A.  E.,  vii,  135 
Taylor,  H.  O.,  vii,  62 
Thales,  145 

Thomson,  Sir  J.  J.,  187 
Thucydides,  58 
Trajan,  62 

Varus,  87 
Vauban,  68 
Vesalius,  67 
Virgil,  28,  61 
Voltaire,  29 

Walpole,  Robert,  52 
Watt,  James,  68 
Wesley,  John,  53,  168 
William  the  Conqueror,  34 
Woolman,  John,  31,  37,  44 
Wycliffe,  168 


INDEX  OF  TERMS 


Absolute  Being,  116 
Absolute  Individuality,  70,  185 
Absolute  Reality,  179 
Absolute  Self-Attainment,  179 
Absoluteness,  50-52 
Abstraction,  150 

Actuality,  138,  181,  190,  269,  273 
Adventure,  257,  271,  272-295 
Esthetic  Destruction,  256 
Affective  Tone,  178,  245 
Agencies,  Intellectual,  19 
Agency,  198,  199 
Agriculture,  114-115 
Alexandrian  Scholarship,  120,  126 
Alexandrian  Theologians,  135 
American  Civil  War,  29,  31 
Anaesthesia,  255,  259,  275,  283,  284 
Anglican  Settlement,  163 
Animal  Body,  206,  216,  290 
Anticipation,  194,  195,  266,  267 
Appeal  to  History,  165,  166,  168 
Appearance,  240-251,  258-270,  275, 
280,  291-295 

Appearance  and  Reality,  210-221 
Arabs,  109 
Argument,  290 
Arian  Solution,  172 
Aristotle’s  Logic,  136-138,  275 
Art,  217,  248,  250,  266-273,  281- 
295 

Association,  234 
Association  of  Ideas,  184 
Atoms,  125,  127,.  129,  179 
Atomicity,  187 
Atomism,  129,  130,  136 
Autonomy,  254 

Background,  259 
Beautiful,  254 

Beauty,  18,  124,  125,  152,  240, 
251-272,  273,  282-295  * 

Body,  192 

Body,  Animal,  207,  215,  290 
Body,  Human,  191,  214,  215,  220, 
270 

Brain,  226 

British  Government,  The,  27 
Brotherhood,  44 
Brotherhood  of  Man,  30,  35 
Buddhism,  40 
Business  Mind,  103-105 
Byzantines,  89 

Capriciousness,  115 
Carthaginians,  32 
Catholic  Church,  35,  65,  66,  91 


Catholic  Missionaries,  31,  37 
Catholic  Theology,  169 
Causal  Action,  124 
Causal  Independence,  197,  198,  218 
Causation,  186,  197 
Certainties  of  Science,  158 
Chance,  127,  128 
Chaos,  119 

Christian  Ethics,  89,  91 
Christianity,  23-25,  40,  88,  92,  109 
Christians,  62 

Civilization,  16,  17,  28,  82,  83,  89- 
92,  106,  114,  145,  169,  173-176, 
270-272,  276-287,  293,  294 
Cities,  101-103 

Classification,  Aristotelian,  101-103, 
142,  147,  157 
Coercive  Forces,  170 
Commerce,  73,  76-105 
Common  Law,  36,  71 
Communal  Customs,  48 
Communication,  138,  139 
Compatability,  151 
Competition,  35,  38,  39,  41 
Complete  Fact,  162 
Composition,  158 

Compulsion,  14,  63,  75,  77,  90,  92, 
170,  173 

Conceptual  Order,  The,  159 
Conceptual  Prehensions,  196 
Concern,  178,  182 
Concrescence,  237,  238 
Conformal  Feeling,  185,  186,  253 
Conformal  Inheritance,  188 
Conformal  Reception,  195 
Conformation,  251 
Connectedness,  157,  229 
Consciousness,  178,  183,  269 
Constraint,  200 

Contemporary  Events,  197-200 
Contemporary  Occasions,  246-247 
Contemporary  World,  220 
Contiguity,  203,  204 
Continuity  of  Nature,  185,  187,  188 
Continuity  of  Subjective  Farm,  185- 
190 

Contract,  71 

Contractual  Freedom,  70 
Conventional  Interpretation,  123, 
139-143 

Coordination,  37,  38,  42,  43 
Corporate  Action,  61,  63,  72 
Corporations,  72 
Corporeal  Substances,  200 
Cosmology  19,  107 


INDEX  299 


Cosmological  Principles,  17 
Crafts,  65 

Creative  Advance,  284 
Creative  Urge,  194,  195 
Creativity,  181,  237,  238 
Custom,  14,  186 
Customary  Status,  70 

Data,  181 

Decadence,  277,  278 

Defining  Characteristic,  205,  207 

Definition  of  Being,  124 

Deism,  117,  118 

Democracy,  2  7,  28,  31 

Description,  123,  126,  127 

Descriptive  Generalization,  235 

Destruction,  263 

Dimensionality,  191 

Discord,  256,  259-262,  265,  282 

Disorder,  152 

Distortion,  220,  282 

Divine  Eros,  2  76 

Divine  Immanence,  164 

Division,  Platonic,  142,  147 

Dogmatic  Fallacy,  149,  224 

Dogmatic  Finality,  166 

Dualism,  192,  193 

Economic  Interpretation  of  History, 
74 

Economic  Man,  100 
Elimination,  259 
Empty  Cabinet,  2  75 
Empty  Continents,  83,  87 
Endurance,  205,  206 
Enduring  Individuality,  263, 
279-282 

Enduring  Objects,  200,  208 
Enduring  Person,  196 
Enduring  Unity,  202 
Energy,  188 

Energy,  Flux  of,  186,  188 
Enjoyment,  195 
Epistemology,  129,  137 
Epochs,  197 

Eros,  19,  73,  151,  152,  162,  201, 
251,  274,  283 
Essential  Character,  202 
Ethics,  24 
Events,  200 
Evidence,  227 
Evil,  258,  260,  267 
Exact  Science,  1 1 1 
Excessiveness,  113 
Experience,  179 


Experience,  Structure  of,  177-193 
Explanation,  116 
Explanatory  Description,  133 
Expression,  248 
External  Relations,  117,  161 

Fame,  287 
Feeling,  231,  232 
Feudal  System,  37 
Feudalism,  34,  35,  66 
Finitude,  255,  275 
Flatness,  217 
Fluent,  133 

Flux  of  Energy,  186,  187,  190 
Flux  of  Impressions,  36,  37 
Force,  90 
Foreground,  259 
Foresight,  93-105 

Freedom,  21,  31,  41,  55-59,  61,  68, 
73,  75,  197,  200,  280,  285 
Future  Occasions,  193-202 

Galilean  Peasantry,  24 
General  Description,  133 
Geometry  in  an  Epoch,  202 
Gnostics,  135 
God,  19 
Gold,  77,  78 
Golden  Mean,  113 
Goodness,  267,  268 
Grace,  164 
Grammar,  109 

Greatest  Happiness  Principle,  43, 
45,  47 
Greek,  17 

Grouping  of. Occasions,  202-209 

Harmony,  38,  39,  151,  152,  155, 
157,  158,  162,  164,  252,  258, 
259,  270,  274,  276,  279,  283,  291 
Hebrew,  16 
Hebrew  Prophets,  57 
Hellenic,  16 

Hellenic  Mentality,  89,  111 
Hellenic  Speculation,  111 
Hellenism,  62,  72,  75,  89,  109,  122, 
123,  257 
Hellenistic,  16 

History,  11,  12,  15,  165,  166 
History  of  Religion,  175 
Human  Body,  191,  215,  216,  220, 
271 

Humanitarian  Ideal,  35-50 
Humanitarian  Principles,  38 
Humanitarian  Spirit,  90 


300  INDEX  OF  TERMS 


Hume’s  Dialogues  on  Natural  Reli¬ 
gion,  173 

Icon,  172 
Ideality,  269,  271 
Ideals,  13,  93,  171 
Ideas,  23-25,  32,  90,  106,  133,  ISO- 
151,  162,  171,  258,  274,  283 
Idolatry,  18 
Imitation,  171 

Immanence,  123-128,  138,  172,  173, 
190,  193-202,  203 
Immanence  of  God,  133,  134 
Immanence  of  Occasions,  186 
Immanence,  Nonsymmetrical,  199 
Immanent  Law,  117,  118,  133,  134 
Immediate  Existence,  193 
Immediate  Future,  194 
Immediate  Past,  183,  184,  194 
Imposed  Law,  117,  133-135 
Imposition,  123,  125,  127 
Impression  of  Sensation,  129,  182 
Incompatibility,  151,  276 
Individual  Identity,  167 
Individual  Substance,  137 
Individual  Thing,  158 
Individualism,  41,  42,  66 
Individuality,  160,  179,  185,  257, 
258,  263,  264,  279,  290 
Induction,  116 
Industrial  Slavery,  41 
Industrial  System,  40,  42 
Inheritance,  70,  191,  218 
Inhibition,  251,  255 
Instinct,  53,  55 
Intelligence,  54,  55 
Intensity,  252,  259 
Interconnection,  137 
Interdependence,  116 
Internal  Relations,  117,  161 
Interpretation,  219,  248 
Introspection,  227,  229 
Irrelevance,  200 
“It,”  253,  261-263,  279 

Jesuits,  44 
Jews,  89,  109 
Judgment,  230,  231 

Knowledge,  12,  179 

Language,  124,  166,  167,  227,  229 

Law,  113,  115 

Law  as  Convention,  115 

Law  as  Description,  115,  119 

Law  as  Immanent,  116,  124 


Law  as  Imposed,  116 
Law,  Natural,  123 
Law  as  Statistical,  117 
Law  of  Gravitation,  145 
Laws  of  Nature,  48,  49,  138,  139, 
141,  143,  201 
Learned  Professions,  111 
Learned  Tradition,  109 
Legal  Organization,  89-90 
Liberalism,  40-45,  70 
Liberty,  61,  64,  65 
Life,  87,  207,  209 
Life  and  Mind,  125 
Life  and  Motion,  151,  274,  283 
Life  of  Christ,  170 
Living  Bodies,  208,  209 
Living  Organisms,  200 
Logic,  122 

Logic,  Aristotelian,  157 
Love,  287,  288,  291 
Lowell  Observatory,  130 

Mahometans,  88,  89,  109 
Malthusian  Law,  35,  42,  79-84 
Man,  207 

Manichaean  Doctrine,  134 
Mariners’  Compass,  91 
Massiveness,  252,  260 
Mathematical  Formulae,  162 
Mathematical  Relations,  151,  153, 
155,  157,  162,  253,  274,  282 
Mathematics,  122,  130,  140,  142, 
153,  157-159 

Matter,  Aristotelian,  126,  154 
Memory,  186 
Mental  Pole,  252,  258 
Mentality,  212,  213 
Metaphysics,  132,  133 
Method,  148,  221-239 
Mind,  206,  210 
Mind  and  Nature,  188 
Mingling  of  Genera,  236 
Mode  of  Togetherness,  243 
Modern  Scholarship,  112 
Monads,  138 
Monads  of  Leibniz,  136 
Moral  Codes,  289-291 
Moral  Order,  108 
Morals,  267,  268 

Nature,  18,  107 
Natural  Law,  123 
Natural  Selection,  43 
Necessity,  16,  76,  196,  197,  199, 
202,  203 

Negative  Prehension,  259 


INDEX  301 


Neologisms,  230 

Non-Sensuous  Perception,  182,  186 
Novelty,  17,  214 

Objective  Immortality,  19S,  239 
Objects  and  Subjects,  177-193 
Observation,  111,  133 
Observational  Order,  The,  158 
Occasion  of  Experience,  181 
Order,  291 

Order  of  Nature,  107,  108,  136 
Order,  Types  of,  197,  201,  202 
Original  Contract,  63 
Originality,  2  77 
Other-Formation,  195 
Otherness,  182 

Participation,  241 

Passivity,  213 

Past  Occasions,  193-202 

Pattern,  241-243,  244 

Patterned  Nexus,  204 

Peace,  273,  282-295 

Perception,  180,  182 

Perceptual  Acceptance,  218 

Perfection,  255,  256,  258,  270,  274 

Perishing,  205,  238,  239,  2  74,  290 

Permanence,  285 

Persians,  89 

Perspective,  200,  201,  219 
Persons,  200,  205,  206,  207 
Personal  Identity,  186,  189 
Personal  Order,  190,  192 
Personal  Societies,  206-209,  212 
Personal  Unity,  189 
Personality,  188 

Persuasion,  33,  49,  75,  77,  90,  93, 
151,  164,  170,  190,  294 
Persuasive  Agency,  170-172 
Phoenician  Sailors,  86 
Physical  Elements,  151,  162,  274, 
282 

Physical  Entities,  162 
Plato’s  Seven  Notions,  274,  282 
Political  Economy,  78,  79 
Population,  79-81 

Positivist  Doctrine,  119-121,  128- 
135 

Potentiality,  181 
Power,  18,  91,  133 
Predication,  137,  244 
Pre-established  Harmony,  138 
Prehension,  178,  182,  231,  235 
Present  Occasions,  268-2  76 
Primary  Phase,  181 
Primary  Substance,  137,  275,  2  79 


Primordial  Nature  of  God,  280 
Printing,  91 
Private  Actions,  63 
Private  Life,  38 
Private  Property,  70 
Probability,  128,  129 
Process,  154,  2  74 
Process  of  Becoming,  178 
Professional  Institutions,  66,  68,  69 
Professional  Qualifications,  64,  65, 
6S 

Professions,  67 

Program  for  Reform,  22,  23,  49,  258 
Prophets,  146 
Proportion,  152 

Propositions,  194,  230,  231,  243 
Protestant  Christianity,  163 
Protestant  Theology,  173 
Psyche,  18,  151,  162,  271,  274,  282 
Purpose,  209,  264,  265 

Quakers,  31,  57 

Qualitative  Valuation,  211,  252 
Quanta,  189 

Real  Agency,  211 
Realitas  Objectiva,  280 
Reality,  240,  246-249,  258,  260, 
263-267,  269,  280-282,  291,  292 
Realization,  199 
Reasoning  92 

Receptacle,  126,  138,  139,  151,  154, 
158,  163,  189,  190,  202,  246,  274, 
282 

Re-enaction,  194,  195,  2  71 
Reformation,  New,  164 
Reformation,  Protestant,  169 
Regions,  199 

Relativity,  50-52,  56,  158  ,  . 

Relevance,  222,  223 

Religion,  82,  83,  165  .  j 

Religion,  Mystical,  40  ,  * 

Religion  and  Science,  47 

Religion  of  Humanity,  43,  45 

Renaissance  Monarchs,  39 

Repetition,  258 

Revelation  of  St.  John,  174 

Rights  of  Man,  20,  26 

Roads,  9 1 

Romans,  89 

Routine,  96-98,  195 

Satire,  2  77 

Satisfaction,  194,  231,  233,  235,  266 
Scholars,  121,  125 
Scholarship,  107,  111,  112 


302  INDEX  OF  TERMS 


Scholasticism,  109,  112 

Scholastics,  121,  126 

Science,  272 

Scientists,  121 

Self-Formatipn,  195,  211 

Self-Identity,  190,  205 

Sensa,  216,  217,  244,  245,  249,  250 

Sensationalist  Doctrine,  279 

Sense-Organs,  226 

Sense-Perception,  179,  183,  210, 

215,  216-218,  246 
Senseless  Forces,  25 
Sensible  World,  133 
Sentences,  243 
Serial  Order,  203,  204,  206 
Seriality,  191 
Simple  Location,  161,  162 
Simplification,  213,  260 
Slave-Trade,  27,  34,  35 
Slaves,  90 
Slavery,  20,  21,  31 
Social  Institutions,  61 
Social  Order,  204 
Societies,  200,  204-207,  290 
Sociological  Defense,  87 
Sociological  Functions,  17 
Sociological  Ideals,  33 
Soul,  23,  26,  32,  36,  58,  126,  151, 
189,  191,  206,  209,  212,  216,  261, 
274 

Space-Time,  154,  190 
Speculation,  60,  107,  109,  112,  113, 
124 

Speculative  Philosophy,  32,  223 
Speech  of  Pericles,  174 
Spontaneity,  54,  58,  70,  209,  252, 
257 

Sporadic  Occurrences,  200 
Statistics,  130 
Status,  Social,  17 
Stoics,  22 

Straightness,  217,  218 
Strength,  2  52 
Strife,  39,  40 

Structure  of  Experience,  177-193, 
194 

Subjective  Aim,  211,  2  52 
Subjective  Form,  178,  185,  211,  217, 
232  252 

Subjects  and  Objects,  177-193,  194, 
210 

Sublimation,  2  71 
Substance,  118,  139 


Substratum,  220 
Subtlety,  214 
Supreme  Craftsman,  151 
Swerve  (Lucretian),  127 
Symbolic  Truth,  247 
Systems,  163 

Tartars,  89 

Technology,  33,  82-84,  87,  92 

Teleological  Self-Creation,  197,  198 

Teleology,  196,  203 

Theologians,  134 

Temporal  World,  294 

Thinking  Substance,  188,  206 

Time-Spans,  98-99 

Together,  157,  237,  238 

Tolerance,  57-59 

Topics  of  Physical  Science,  46 

Tragedy,  284-295 

Transcendence,  125,  134,  135,  290, 
291 

Transition,  15 

Transmutation,  214,  216,  245 
Truth,  18,  240-251,  264,  272,  273, 
282,  283-295 

Truth  and  Beauty,  265-2  72 
Truth  and  Falsehood,  244 
Truth-Relation,  240-251,  264-265 
Turks,  89 

Types  of  Order,  247 

Uniform  Relations,  199 
Uniformity  of  Nature,  85,  190 
Uniformity  of  Space,  198 
Unity  of  Nature,  190 
Universities,  65,  66 
University  Professors,  109 

Vacuous  Inherence,  220 
Valuation,  211 
Vatican  Council,  168 
Violence,  14 

Void,  126,  135,  138,  139 

Wave-Theory,  160 
Wesleyan  Revival,  30 
Western  Civilization,  112 
Wisdom,  54,  55 
Women,  90 

Working  Hypothesis,  223 
World-Soul,  134 

Youth,  285,  286,  295 

Zest,  294 


Other  MENTOR  Books  You  Will  Enjoy 

Only  35  Cents  Each — unless  otherwise  noted 


Philosophy  and  History 

THE  AGE  OF  BELIEF: 

The  Medieval  Philosophers 

Selected  and  edited  by  Anne 
Fremantle.  The  wisdom  of  the 
most  spiritually  harmonious 
age  in  the  history  of  Western 
man,  from  the  5th  to  the  15th 
century,  embodied  in  selec¬ 
tions  from  the  basic  writings 
of  this  period’s  important  phi¬ 
losophers,  interpreted  by  an 
outstanding  religious  scholar. 
(#Msl26 — 50<£) 

SCIENCE  AND  THE  MORAL  LIFE 

Max  C.  Otto,  Introduction  by 
Eduard  C.  Lindeman.  A  noted 
American  philosopher  sounds 
a  positive  approach  to  mor¬ 
als  in  the  age  of  science. 
(#MD139— 50tf) 

THE  SHAPING  OF  THE  MODERN 
MIND 

Crane  Brinton.  The  conclud¬ 
ing  half  of  Ideas  and  Men — a 
self-contained  history  of  West¬ 
ern  thought  since  the  Renais¬ 
sance — a  brilliant  summation 
of  our  past,  a  realistic  exam¬ 
ination  of  our  present  and  a 
look  into  our  future.  (#M98) 

THE  DEMOCRATIC  WAY  OF  LIFE 

T.  V.  Smith  and  Eduard  C . 
Lindeman.  A  challenging  book 
which  examines  the  democra¬ 
tic  ideal  and  how  it  works  in 
practical  application.  (#M59) 

GREEK  HISTORICAL  THOUGHT 

Edited  by  Arnold  J.  Toynbee . 
The  eminent  historian’s  bril¬ 
liant  translations  of  Greek  his¬ 
torical  experience  from  Homer 
to  the  age  of  Heraclius — a 
stimulating  guide  for  our  own 
times.  (#M72) 


Religion 

RELIGION  AND  THE  RISE  OF 

CAPITALISM 

R.  H.  Tawney.  The  influences 
of  religious  thought  on  the  so¬ 
cial  and  economic  structures 
of  the  world.  (#Ms22 — 50tf) 

ETHICS  IN  A  BUSINESS  SOCIETY 

Marquis  W .  Childs  and  Doug¬ 
lass  Cater.  A  brilliant  inter¬ 
pretation  of  a  monumental  in¬ 
quiry  into  the  nature  of  moral 
values  in  the  modern  world. 
(#M107) 

THE  WAY  OF  LIFE:  Too  Te  Ching 

Lao  Tzu.  A  new  translation  by 
R.  B.  Blakney  of  a  master¬ 
piece  of  ancient  Chinese  wis¬ 
dom,  presenting  the  philoso¬ 
phy  of  Taoism,  second  only  to 
Confucianism  in  its  influence 
on  Eastern  thought  and  life. 
(#M129) 

THE  TEACHINGS  OF  THE 

COMPASSIONATE  BUDDHA 

Edited ,  with  commentary ,  by 
E.  A.  Burtt.  The  best  transla¬ 
tions  of  the  basic  texts  and 
scriptures,  early  discourses, 
The  Dhammapada,  and  later 
writings  of  the  great  Oriental 
religion  of  Buddhism,  which 
is  devoted  to  universal  love 
and  the  way  to  its  realization. 
(#MD131 — 50tf ) 

THE  SONG  OF  GOD: 

BHAGAVAD-GITA 

With  an  Introduction  by  Al- 
dous  Huxley.  The  timeless 
epic  of  Hindu  faith  vividly 
translated  for  Western  readers 
by  Swami  Prabhavananda  and 
Christopher  Isherwood — a 
unique  literary  experience  as 
well  as  a  contemporary  mes¬ 
sage  which  touches  today’s 
urgent  problems.  (#M103) 


Classics,  Literature  and  Arts 


MOBY  DICK 

Herman  Melville.  Here,  in  its 
exciting  entirety,  is  the  world- 
famous  sea  epic  about  one- 
legged  Captain  Ahab  and  his 
roughhewn  crew  who  sailed 
out  to  battle  the  great  white 
whale,  the  dreaded  monster 
of  the  deep.  (#01229 — 50$) 

THE  INFERNO  BY  DANTE 

Translated  by  John  Ciardi . 
One  of  the  world’s  great  po¬ 
etic  masterpieces  in  a  new 
verse  translation  in  modern 
English  by  a  celebrated  poet. 
(#MD113— 50$) 

THE  ODYSSEY  OF  HOMER 

T ranslated  by  W.  H.  D.  Rouse. 
A  modern  prose  translation  of 
the  world’s  greatest  adventure 
story,  the  travels  of  Ulysses. 
(#Ms92— 50$) 

THE  ILIAD  OF  HOMER 

Translated  by  W.  H.  D.  Rouse . 
A  brilliant  prose  translation 
of  the  story  of  Achilles  and 
the  Trojan  War  by  a  noted 
English  scholar.  (#MsllO — 
50$) 

WALDEN 

Henry  David  Thoreau .  An 
American  classic,  rich  in 
thought  and  contemplation,  by 
a  rebel  against  civilization 
who  found  freedom  in  the 
simple  life  of  nature.  (#M87) 

HIGHLIGHTS  OF  MODERN  LITERA¬ 
TURE:  A  Permanent  Collection  of 
Memorable  Essays  from  The  New 
York  Times  Book  Review 

Edited  by  Francis  Broivn.  The 
world’s  leading  authors  and 
critics  discuss  modern  litera¬ 
ture  in  fifty-eight  informative, 
thoughtful  and  stimulating  ar¬ 
ticles.  (#M104) 


THE  CREATIVE  PROCESS 

Edited ,  with  introduction ,  by 
Brewster  Ghiselin .  Thirty- 
eight  of  the  greatest  minds  in 
the  world  reveal  how  they  ac¬ 
tually  begin  and  complete 
creative  work  in  such  fields 
as  art,  literature,  science  and 
philosophy.  (#MD132 — 50$) 

NEW  WORLD  WRITING,  Seventh 

Mentor  Selection 

Important  contemporary  writ¬ 
ing  never  before  published  in 
the  United  States,  including 
a  play,  sections  of  novels  in 
progress,  criticism,  poetry  and 
short  stories  by  exciting  iter- 
national  talent,  plus  a  /lan 
Thomas  section  of  two  s  .ries, 
6even  letters  and  full-color 
portrait.  (#MDI30— 50$) 

MYTHOLOGY 

Edith  Hamilton.  A  brilliant 
retelling  of  the  classic  Greek, 
Roman  and  Norse  legends  of 
love  and  adventure.  By  the 
author  of  The  Greek  Way. 
(#MD86— 50$) 

GOOD  LISTENING 
(revised  and  up-dated) 

R.  D.  Darrell.  Expert  advice 
in  the  field  of  music  and  re¬ 
cording  to  help  you  to  in¬ 
crease  your  musical  enjoyment 
and  widen  your  musical  hori¬ 
zons.  Includes  a  list  of  the  best 
LP  recordings  of  great  music. 
(#MD122— 50$) 


TO  OUR  READERS:  We  welcome 
your  comments  about  Signet, 
Signet  Key  and  Mentor  books, 
as  well  as  your  suggestions  for 
new  reprints.  If  your  dealer  does 
not  have  the  books  you  want 
you  may  order  them  by  mail  en¬ 
closing  the  list  price  plus  5$  a 
copy  to  cover  mailing  costs.  Send 
for  a  copy  of  our  complete  cata¬ 
log.  The  New  American  Library 
of  World  Literature,  Inc.,  501 
Madison  Av.,  New  York  22,  N.  Y. 


| 


Adventures  of  Ideas 

. .  |  * 

A  Brilliant  History  of  Mankind’s  Great  Thoughts 


50c  Alfred  North  Whiter 


'jiteii/toi  'Mw'/c 


MENTOR^*  ...Hood  Reading  for  the  Millions 


The  Story  of  Man 

In  this  excitingly  different  story  of  the  past, 
present  and  future  of  the  human  race,  Profes¬ 
sor  Alfred  North  Whitehead  shows  how 
changing  ideas  have  propelled  mankind  s 
cultural  and  social  development.  Discussing 
the  development  of  concepts  of  society,  cos¬ 
mology  and  philosophy,  this  stimulating  and 
important  volume  is  a  brilliant  new  adven¬ 
ture  into  history. 

. .  one  of  the  most  provocative  books  in  popular 
philosophy  since  William  James  .  .  .  remark¬ 
able  . .  -Henry  Seidel  Canby,  Saturday  Review 

"...  a  remarkable  book  . .  brilliantly  and  engag¬ 
ingly  written  .  .  /*  -Julian  Huxley,  Spectator 

"...extraordinarily  illuminating  and  inspiring." 

Book-of-the-Month  Club  N'ews 


Renowned  philosopher,  mathematician  and 
educator,  Alfred  North  Whitehead  was  a 
Fellow  of  Trinity  College  at  the  University 
of  Cambridge  and  Professor  of  Philosophy 
at  Harvard  University.  Professor  White- 
head,  who  died  in  1947,  was  the  author  of 
such  original  and  influential  works  as 
Science  and  the  Modern  World  (Mentor 
#M28),  and  The  Aims  of  Education  (Men¬ 
tor  #M41). 


