22500698028 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


BY 

ALFRED  NORTH  WHITEHEAD 

The  Concept  of  Nature 

An  Enquiry  Concerning  the  Principles  of 
Natural  Knowledge 

The  Principle  of  Relativity  with  Applica¬ 
tions  to  Physical  Science 
Process  and  Reality.  An  Essay  in  Cosmology 
Religion  in  the  Making 
Science  and  the  Modern  World 
Symbolism:  Its  Meaning  and  Effect 
Adventures  of  Ideas 

In  Collaboration  with  Bertrand  Russell 

Principia  Mathematica 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


By 

ALFRED  NORTH  WHITEHEAD 

Sc.D.,  LL.D.,  F.R.S.,  F.B.A. 

FELLOW  OF  TRINITY  COLLEGE  IN  THE  UNIVERSITY 
OF  CAMBRIDGE  AND  PROFESSOR  OF  PHILOSOPHY 
IN  HARVARD  UNIVERSITY 


CAMBRIDGE 

AT  THE  UNIVERSITY  PRESS 

1  939 


CAMBRIDGE 
UNIVERSITY  PRESS 
LONDON:  BENTLEY  HOUSE 


NEW  YORK,  TORONTO,  BOMBAY 
CALCUTTA,  MADRAS:  MACMILLAN 

TOKYO:  MARUZEN  COMPANY  LTD 

Copyrighted  in  the  United 
States  of  America  by  The 
Macmillan  Company 

All  rights  reserved 


First  edition ,  March  1 933 
Reprinted,  May  1933 
Reprinted  1935 


>,  1939 


PRINTED  IN  GREAT  BRITAIN 


To 


JULIA  ISHAM  TAYLOR 
and 

HENRY  OSBORN  TAYLOR 

TO  WHOSE  FRIENDSHIP 
I  OWE  SO  MANY 
HAPPY  HOURS 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2018  with  funding  from 
Wellcome  Library 


https://archive.org/details/b30010238 


PREFACE 


The  title  of  this  book,  Adventures  of  Ideas ,  bears  two  meanings, 
both  applicable  to  the  subject-matter.  One  meaning  is  the 
effect  of  certain  ideas  in  promoting  the  slow  drift  of  mankind 
towards  civilization.  This  is  the  Adventure  of  Ideas  in  the 
history  of  mankind.  The  other  meaning  is  the  author’s  ad¬ 
venture  in  framing  a  speculative  scheme  of  ideas  which  shall 
be  explanatory  of  the  historical  adventure. 

The  book  is  in  fact  a  study  of  the  concept  of  civilization, 
and  an  endeavour  to  understand  how  it  is  that  civilized 
beings  arise.  One  point,  emphasized  throughout,  is  the  im¬ 
portance  of  Adventure  for  the  promotion  and  preservation 
of  civilization. 

The  three  books — Science  and  the  Modern  World ,  Process  and 
Reality ,  Adventures  of  Ideas — are  an  endeavour  to  express  a 
way  of  understanding  the  nature  of  things,  and  to  point  out 
how  that  way  of  understanding  is  illustrated  by  a  survey 
of  the  mutations  of  human  experience.  Each  book  can  be 
read  separately;  but  they  supplement  each  other’s  omissions 
or  compressions. 

The  books  that  have  chiefly  influenced  my  general  way  of 
looking  at  this  historical  topic  are  Gibbon’s  Decline  and  Fall , 
Cardinal  Newman’s  Essay  on  the  Development  of  Christian 
Doctrine ,  Paul  Sarpi’s  History  of  the  Council  of  Trent ,  Henry 
Osborn  Taylor’s  The  Mediaeval  Mind,  Leslie  Stephen’s  English 
Thought  in  the  Eighteenth  Century ,  and  various  well-known 
collections  of  letters.  While  on  the  subject  of  literature, 
I  venture  to  commend  to  the  notice  of  those  interested  in 
an  earlier  development  of  English  Thought,  and  also  in  good 


Vlll 


PREFACE 


literature,  the  sermons  of  the  Elizabethan  and  Jacobean 
divines.  Also  H.  O.  Taylor’s  Thought  and  Expression  in  the 
Sixteenth  Century  presents  the  currents  and  cross-currents  of 
thought  in  those  times.  The  twentieth  century,  so  far  as  it 
has  yet  advanced,  bears  some  analogy  to  that  predecessor  in 
European  history,  both  in  clash  of  thought  and  in  clash  of 
political  interest. 

In  Part  n,  dealing  with  Cosmology,  I  have  made  constant 
use  of  two  books  published  by  the  Oxford  University  Press 
in  1928,  namely,  A  Commentary  on  Plato's  Timaeus ,  by  Professor 
A.  E.  Taylor  of  the  University  of  Edinburgh,  and  The  Greek 
Atomists  and  Epicurus ,  by  Dr  Cyril  Bailey,  Tutor  of  Balliol 
College,  Oxford. 

Use  has  already  been  made  of  some  parts  of  the  book  in 
response  to  invitations  which  I  had  the  honour  to  receive. 
The  main  substance  of  Chapters  1, 11,  in,  vn,  vm  was  delivered 
as  the  four  Mary  Flexner  Lectures  at  Bryn  Mawr  College, 
during  the  session  1929-30:  they  have  not  been  hitherto 
published.  Also  Chapter  ix,  c Science  and  Philosophy’ — not 
previously  published — was  delivered  as  the  Davies  Lecture 
in  Philosophy,  at  the  Institute  of  Arts  and  Sciences,  Columbia 
University,  March,  1932.  Chapter  vi,  ‘Foresight’,  was  de¬ 
livered  as  a  lecture  at  the  Harvard  Business  School,  and  by 
the  request  of  Dean  W.  B.  Donham  was  published  as  a 
preface  to  his  book,  Business  Adrift ,  McGraw-Hill  Book 
Company,  Inc.,  New  York,  1931.  Also  Chapter  xi,  ‘Objects 
and  Subjects’,  was  delivered  as  the  presidential  address  to  the 
eastern  division  of  the  American  Philosophical  Association, 
at  New  Haven,  December,  1931;  and  has  since  been  published 
in  The  Philosophical  Review ,  Vol.  xli,  1932,  Longmans,  Green, 
and  Company,  New  York. 

Some  unpublished  lectures,  delivered  at  Dartmouth  College, 
New  Hampshire,  in  1926,  embodied  a  preliminary  sketch  of 
the  topic  of  this  book.  They  were  concerned  with  the  two 


PREFACE 


IX 


levels  of  ideas  which  are  required  for  successful  civilization, 
namely,  particularized  ideas  of  low  generality,  and  philosophic 
ideas  of  high  generality.  The  former  set  are  required  to  reap 
the  fruit  of  the  type  of  civilization  immediately  attained;  the 
latter  set  are  required  to  guide  the  adventure  toward  novelty, 
and  to  secure  the  immediate  realization  of  the  worth  of  such 
ideal  aim. 

I  am  indebted  to  my  wife  for  many  ideas  fundamental  to 
the  discussion;  and  also  for  the  great  labour  of  revision  of 
the  successive  drafts  of  the  various  chapters. 

ALFRED  NORTH  WHITEHEAD 


HARVARD  UNIVERSITY 

September  1932 


CONTENTS 


Preface  page  vij 

PART  I 

SOCIOLOGICAL 

Chap.  I.  Introduction  3 

II.  The  Human  Soul  11 

III.  The  Humanitarian  Ideal  32 

IV.  Aspects  of  Freedom  54 

V.  From  Force  to  Persuasion  87 

VI.  Foresight  no 

Epilogue  127 

PART  II 

COSMOLOGICAL 

VII.  Laws  of  Nature  131 

VIII.  Cosmologies  152 

IX.  Science  and  Philosophy  179 

X.  The  New  Reformation  205 

PART  III 
PHILOSOPHICAL 

XI.  Objects  and  Subjects  225 

XII.  Past,  Present,  Future  246 

XIII.  The  Grouping  of  Occasions  258 

XIV.  Appearance  and  Reality  268 

XV.  Philosophic  Method  283 


xn 


CONTENTS 


PART  IV 
CIVILIZATION 


Chap .  XVI.  Truth 

page  309 

XVII.  Beauty 

324 

XVIII.  Truth  and  Beauty 

34i 

XIX.  Adventure 

352 

XX.  Peace 

366 

Index  of  Proper  Names 

383 

Index  of  Terms 

387 

PART  I 


SOCIOLOGICAL 


CHAPTER  I 


INTRODUCTION 

Section  I.  In  its  widest  possible  extension  the  title  of  this 
book — Adventures  of  Ideas — might  be  taken  as  a  synonym 
for  The  History  of  The  Human  Race,  in  respect  to  its  wide 
variety  of  mental  experiences.  In  this  sense  of  the  title,  the 
Human  Race  must  experience  its  own  history.  It  cannot  be 
written  in  its  total  variety. 

Throughout  this  book  I  propose  to  consider  critically  the 
sort  of  history  which  ideas  can  have  in  the  life  of  humanity, 
and  to  illustrate  my  thesis  by  an  appeal  to  some  well-known 
examples.  The  particular  topics  chosen  for  illustration  will 
be  dictated  by  the  arbitrary  limitations  of  my  own  know¬ 
ledge,  and  by  the  consideration  of  their  general  interest  and 
importance  in  our  modern  life.  Also  for  our  purpose  in  the 
book  the  notion  of  History  includes  the  present  and  the 
future  together  with  the  past,  affording  a  mutual  elucidation 
and  wrapped  in  common  interest.  For  the  facts  in  detail  we 
shall  be  dependent  upon  that  great  band  of  critical  scholars 
whose  labours  to-day,  and  for  the  past  three  centuries,  lay 
upon  mankind  the  obligation  to  deepest  reverence. 

Theories  are  built  upon  facts;  and  conversely  the  reports 
upon  facts  are  shot  through  and  through  with  theoretical 
interpretation.  Direct  visual  observation  is  concerned  with 
the  vision  of  coloured  shapes  in  motion — 4  questionable 
shapes5.  Direct  aural  observation  is  concerned  with  auditions 
of  sounds.  But  some  contemporary  observer  of  such  shapes 


1-2 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


4 

and  noises,  for  example,  some  envoy  resident  at  a  foreign 
Court,  interpreting  the  so-called  ‘bare5  facts,  states  that  ‘he 
interviewed  the  minister  of  state,  who  manifested  con¬ 
siderable  emotion  and  explained  with  great  clearness  the 
measures  with  which  he  would  meet  the  impending  crisis'. 
In  such  ways  contemporary  evidence  is  contemporary  inter¬ 
pretation,  including  the  assumption  of  data  other  than  these 
bare  sensa. 

In  some  subsequent  age  the  critical  scholar  in  accordance 
with  his  own  theoretical  judgments  selects  from  bygone 
contemporary  observations:  he  criticizes  the  contemporary 
observers,  and  gives  his  own  interpretations  of  the  contem¬ 
porary  evidence.  We  thus  arrive  at  ‘pure  history5,  according 
to  the  faith  of  the  school  of  history  prevalent  in  the  latter 
part  of  the  nineteenth  century.  This  notion  of  historians,  of 
history  devoid  of  aesthetic  prejudice,  of  history  devoid  of 
any  reliance  on  metaphysical  principles  and  cosmological 
generalizations,  is  a  figment  of  the  imagination.  The  belief 
in  it  can  only  occur  to  minds  steeped  in  provinciality — the 
provinciality  of  an  epoch,  of  a  race,  of  a  school  of  learning, 
of  a  trend  of  interest — minds  unable  to  divine  their  own  un¬ 
spoken  limitations. 

The  historian  in  his  description  of  the  past  depends  on 
his  own  judgment  as  to  what  constitutes  the  importance  of 
human  life.  Even  when  he  has  rigorously  confined  himself 
to  one  selected  aspect,  political  or  cultural,  he  still  depends 
on  some  decision  as  to  what  constitutes  the  culmination  of 
that  phase  of  human  experience  and  as  to  what  constitutes 
its  degradation.  For  example,  considering  the  political  his¬ 
tory  of  mankind,  Hegel  saw  in  the  Prussian  State  of  his  date 
its  culmination:  a  generation  later  Macaulay  saw  that  cul¬ 
mination  in  the  English  constitutional  system  of  his  date. 
The  whole  judgment  on  thoughts  and  actions  depends  upon 


INTRODUCTION 


5 


such  implicit  presuppositions.  You  cannot  consider  wisdom 
or  folly,  progress  or  decadence,  except  in  relation  to  some 
standard  of  judgment,  some  end  in  view.  Such  standards, 
such  ends,  when  widely  diffused,  constitute  the  driving  force 
of  ideas  in  the  history  of  mankind.  They  also  guide  the  com¬ 
position  of  historical  narradve. 

In  considering  the  history  of  ideas,  I  maintain  that  the 
notion  of  ‘  mere  knowledge 5  is  a  high  abstraction  which  we 
should  dismiss  from  our  minds.  Knowledge  is  always  ac¬ 
companied  with  accessories  of  emotion  and  purpose.  Also 
we  must  remember  that  there  are  grades  in  the  generality 
of  ideas.  Thus  a  general  idea  occurs  in  history  in  special 
forms  determined  by  peculiar  circumstances  of  race  and  of 
stage  of  civilization.  The  higher  generalities  rarely  receive 
any  accurate  verbal  expression.  They  are  hinted  at  through 
their  special  forms  appropriate  to  the  age  in  question.  Also 
the  emotional  accompaniments  are  partly  due  to  the  vague 
feeling  of  importance  derived  from  the  superior  generality, 
and  partly  due  to  the  special  interest  of  special  forms  in 
which  generalities  make  their  appearance.  Some  people  are 
stirred  by  a  flag,  a  national  anthem;  others  by  the  vague 
feeling  of  the  form  of  civilization  which  their  country  stands 
for.  In  most  people  the  two  origins  of  emotion  are  fused 
together. 

Gibbon’s  history  demonstrates  a  twofold  tale.  It  tells  of 
the  Decline  and  Fall  of  the  Roman  Empire  through  a 
thousand  years.  We  see  the  greatness  of  that  Empire  at  its 
height,  its  military  organization,  its  provincial  administra¬ 
tion,  its  welter  of  races,  the  rise  and  clash  of  two  religions, 
the  passage  of  Greek  philosophy  into  Christian  theology. 
Gibbon  displays  before  us  the  greatness  and  the  littleness  of 
soldiers  and  of  statesmen,  of  philosophers  and  of  priests,  the 
pathos,  the  heroism,  the  grossness  of  the  general  multitude 


6 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


of  humanity.  He  shows  us  the  happiness  of  mankind  and 
the  horrors  which  it  has  endured. 

But  throughout  this  history,  it  is  Gibbon  who  speaks.  He 
was  the  incarnation  of  the  dominant  spirit  of  his  own  times. 
In  this  way  his  volumes  also  tell  another  tale.  They  are  a 
record  of  the  mentality  of  the  eighteenth  century.  They  are 
at  once  a  detailed  history  of  the  Roman  Empire,  and  a 
demonstration  of  the  general  ideas  of  the  silver  age  of  the 
modern  European  Renaissance.  This  silver  age,  like  its  Roman 
counterpart  seventeen  hundred  years  earlier,  was  oblivious  of 
its  own  imminent  destruction  by  the  impact  of  the  Age  of 
Steam  and  of  Democracy,  the  counterparts  of  the  Barbarians 
and  of  the  Christians.  Thus  Gibbon  narrates  the  Decline  and 
F all  of  the  Roman  Empire  and  exemplifies  the  prelude  to  the 
Decline  and  Fall  of  his  own  type  of  culture. 

Section  II.  The  history  of  ideas  is  dominated  by  a  dicho¬ 
tomy  which  is  illustrated  by  this  comparison  of  Steam  and 
Democracy  in  recent  times  to  Barbarians  and  Christians  in 
the  classical  civilization.  Steam  and  Barbarians,  each  in  their 
own  age,  were  the  senseless  agencies  driving  their  respective 
civilizations  away  from  inherited  modes  of  order.  These 
senseless  agencies  are  what  Greek  writers  sometimes  [e.g.  in 
the  Timaeus  of  Plato,  and  passim  throughout  general  litera¬ 
ture]  call  ‘compulsion’  [a vay/07],  and  sometimes  ‘violence’ 
[/3ia] .  They  are  apt  to  speak  of  ‘compulsion’  when  these 
agencies  appear  with  a  general  co-ordination  among  them¬ 
selves,  and  of  ‘violence’  when  they  appear  as  a  welter  of 
sporadic  outbursts.  It  is  one  task  of  history  to  display  the 
types  of  compulsion  and  of  violence  characteristic  of  each 
age.  On  the  other  hand,  Democracy  in  modern  times,  and 
Christianity  in  the  Roman  Empire,  exemplify  articulated 
beliefs  issuing  from  aspirations,  and  issuing  into  aspirations. 
Their  force  was  that  of  consciously  formulated  ideals  at 


INTRODUCTION 


7 

odds  with  the  ancestral  pieties  which  had  preserved  and 
modulated  existing  social  institutions.  For  example,  we  find 
the  Christian  theologian,  Clement  of  Alexandria,  exhorting 
his  contemporaries  to  shun  custom  [avvrjdeia].  These 
Christian  ideals  were  among  the  persuasive  agencies  re¬ 
fashioning  their  respective  ages. 

The  well-marked  transition  from  one  age  into  another  can 
always  be  traced  to  some  analogues  to  Steam  and  Democracy, 
or — if  you  prefer  it — to  some  analogues  to  Barbarians  and 
Christians.  Senseless  agencies  and  formulated  aspirations  co¬ 
operate  in  the  work  of  driving  mankind  from  its  old  anchorage. 
Sometimes  the  period  of  change  is  an  age  of  hope,  sometimes 
it  is  an  age  of  despair.  When  mankind  has  slipped  its  cables, 
sometimes  it  is  bent  on  the  discovery  of  a  New  World,  and 
sometimes  it  is  haunted  by  the  dim  sound  of  the  breakers 
dashing  on  the  rocks  ahead.  The  Fall  of  the  Roman  Empire 
occurred  in  a  prolonged  age  of  despair :  Steam  and  Democracy 
belong  to  an  age  of  hope. 

It  is  easy  to  exaggerate  the  contrast  between  these  two 
kinds  of  ages  of  transition.  It  all  depends  upon  the  sur¬ 
viving  records.  Whose  feelings  do  they  express?  After  all, 
even  during  the  worst  period  of  the  decline  of  Rome  the 
barbarians  were  enjoying  themselves.  To  Attila  and  his 
hordes  their  incursion  into  Europe  was  an  enjoyable  episode 
diversifying  the  monotonous  round  of  a  pastoral  life.  But  we 
have  preserved  for  us  hymns  and  ejaculations  of  sentinels 
in  North  Italian  towns  as  they  paced  the  walls  amid  the 
gathering  gloom  of  a  winter’s  night:  ‘From  the  fury  of 
the  Huns,  Good  Lord  deliver  us5.  In  this  instance  it  seems 
easy  to  discriminate;  barbarism  and  civilization  were  at 
odds  with  each  other,  and  we  stand  for  civilization.  I  waive 
the  point  that  we  now  know  something  about  the  social 
state  of  central  Asia  at  that  epoch,  and  that  the  imagination 


8 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


of  a  sentinel  on  the  walls  of  Padua  or  Aquileia  was  not  quite 
adequate  in  its  presentation  of  the  Huns. 

In  every  age  of  well-marked  transition  there  is  the  pattern 
of  habitual  dumb  practice  and  emotion  which  is  passing, 
and  there  is  the  oncoming  of  a  new  complex  of  habit.  Between 
the  two  lies  a  zone  of  anarchy,  either  a  passing  danger  or  a 
prolonged  welter  involving  misery  of  decay  and  zest  of  young 
life.  In  our  estimate  of  these  agencies  everything  depends 
upon  our  standpoint  of  criticism.  In  other  words,  our  history 
of  ideas  is  derivative  from  our  ideas  of  history,  that  is  to  say, 
upon  our  own  intellectual  standpoint. 

Mankind  is  not  wholly  dumb,  and  in  this  respect  it  differs 
from  other  races  of  animals.  Yet  in  the  history  of  the  world 
of  animals  even  among  the  ancestors  of  men,  there  have 
been  transitions  of  patterns  of  habit  which  exemplify  a 
history  of  forms  of  behaviour  devoid  of  any  contemporary 
intellectual  expression,  either  in  the  form  of  antecedently 
expressed  purpose  or  in  the  form  of  subsequently  expressed 
reflection.  For  example,  at  a  remote  period  urged  by  the 
growth  of  forests  some  mammals  ascended  trees  and  became 
apes;  and  then  later,  after  the  lapse  of  some  vast  period, 
urged  by  the  decay  of  forests,  the  same  race  descended  from 
trees  and  became  men. 

We  have  here  history  on  its  senseless  side,  with  its  tran¬ 
sitions  pushed  forward  either  by  rainfall  and  trees,  or  by 
brute  barbarians,  or  by  coal,  steam,  electricity  and  oil.  Yet 
even  the  senseless  side  of  history  refuses  to  accept  its  own 
proper  category  of  sheer  senselessness.  The  rainfall  and  the 
trees  are  items  in  a  majestic  order  of  nature:  Attila’s  Huns 
had  their  own  intellectual  point  of  view  in  some  respects 
surprisingly  preferable  to  that  of  the  degenerate  Romans: 
the  age  of  coal  and  steam  was  pierced  through  and  through 
by  the  intellectual  abilities  of  particular  men  who  urged 


INTRODUCTION 


9 


forward  the  transition.  But  finally,  with  all  this  qualifica¬ 
tion,  rainfall  and  Huns  and  steam-engines  represent  brute 
necessity,  as  conceived  in  Greek  thought,  urging  forward 
mankind  apart  from  any  human  conception  of  an  end  in¬ 
tellectually  expressed.  Fragmentary  intellectual  agencies 
co-operated  blindly  to  turn  apes  into  men,  to  turn  the 
classic  civilization  into  mediaeval  Europe,  to  overwhelm  the 
Renaissance  by  the  Industrial  Revolution.  Men  knew  not 
what  they  did. 

Section  III.  The  fragment  of  human  history,  upon  which 
this  book  is  concentrated,  is  concerned  with  the  transmission 
of  civilization  from  the  Near  East  to  Western  Europe.  The 
topic  is  limited  to  the  story  of  the  energizing  of  two  or  three 
main  ideas,  whose  effective  entertainment  constitutes  civiliza¬ 
tion.  These  ideas  are  traced  in  outline  from  their  status  in 
the  ancient  world  of  the  Near  East  up  to  the  present  time. 
The  boundaries  of  a  civilization  are  indefinite,  whether  we 
are  speaking  of  geography  or  of  time,  or  of  essential  cha¬ 
racter.  This  vagueness  more  especially  characterizes  the 
eastern  boundaries  of  Western  Europe  and  the  boundaries 
of  the  Near  East.  Also  these  boundaries  fluctuate  as  the 
centuries  pass.  In  its  latest  phase  of  brilliance  the  Near  East 
touched  the  Atlantic  Ocean.  But  during  its  earlier  period 
of  greatness,  before  the  age  of  the  Greeks,  it  stretched  from 
the  Nile  Valley  to  Mesopotamia,  and  from  the  Indian  Ocean 
to  the  Euxine  and  the  Caspian  Seas.  It  also  penetrated  into 
the  Aegean  Basin,  and  later  into  the  Western  Mediterranean. 
But  the  Near  East  is  only  important  for  this  discussion  in 
its  function  of  the  origin  and  the  background  of  modern 
Europe. 

The  whole  point  of  the  present  enquiry  is  to  demonstrate 
those  factors  in  Western  civilization  which  jointly  constitute 
a  new  element  in  the  history  of  culture.  Of  course  no  novelty 


10 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


is  wholly  novel.  Factors  which  were  present  sporadically 
and  as  the  dreams  of  individuals,  or  as  a  faint  tinge  upon 
other  modes  of  mentality,  received  a  new  importance  in  the 
later  civilization  of  Europe.  The  question  is  to  understand 
how  the  shift  of  emphasis  happened,  and  to  recognize  the 
effects  of  this  shift  upon  the  sociology  of  the  Western  World. 
In  this  way  we  obtain  some  presuppositions  of  thought  which 
the  detailed  criticism  of  modern  sociological  development 
requires.  We  can  then  discern  the  status  of  the  impulses  which 
are  driving  forward  the  World  of  mankind. 

In  the  story  of  this  transmission  of  civilization  from  East  to 
West,  the  Hebrew,  the  Hellenic,  and  the  Hellenistic  epochs 
can,  with  equal  reason,  be  considered  together,  either  as  out¬ 
posts  of  the  Near  East  in  the  process  of  differentiating  itself 
into  the  first  phase  of  European  mentality,  or  as  the  earliest 
groups  of  Europeans  to  receive  the  torch  and  successfully 
to  assert  their  spiritual  independence.  Between  them,  the 
Hebrews  and  the  Greeks  introduced  into  Europe,  and  into 
the  latest  phase  of  the  Near  East,  notions  concerning  the 
status  of  mankind  in  general,  and  of  individual  men  in  par¬ 
ticular,  and  a  discipline  and  direction  in  the  general  exercise 
of  mentality,  which  in  their  combination  have  started  the 
modern  phase  of  progress  within  the  European  races.  The 
first  part  of  this  book  is  occupied  with  the  most  general  aspect 
of  the  sociological  functions  arising  from,  and  issuing  into, 
ideas  concerning  the  human  race;  and  the  second  part  is 
concerned  with  modern  cosmological  principles  which  also 
are  the  outcome  of  ancient  Greek  and  Hebrew  thought. 
A  simple-minded  interest  in  ideas  with  one  or  other  of  these 
two  types  of  generality  is  the  main  source  from  which  mankind 
acquires  novelty  of  outlook. 


CHAPTER  n 


THE  HUMAN  SOUL 

Section  I.  In  any  human  society,  one  fundamental  idea 
tingeing  every  detail  of  activity  is  the  general  conception  of 
the  status  of  the  individual  members  of  that  group,  considered 
apart  from  any  special  pre-eminence.  In  such  societies  as 
they  emerge  into  civilization,  the  members  recognize  each 
other  as  individuals  exercising  the  enjoyment  of  emotions, 
passions,  comforts  and  discomforts,  perceptions,  hopes,  fears, 
and  purposes.  Also  there  are  powers  of  intellectual  under¬ 
standing  involving  discrimination  of  details  of  characters, 
judgments  of  ‘true  or  false5,  and  of  ‘beautiful  or  ugly5,  and 
of  ‘good  or  bad5.  We  pass  our  lives  vaguely  and  flittingly 
entertaining  groups  of  such  experiences,  and  we  attribute  like 
ways  of  existence  to  others. 

But  in  the  early  stages  of  civilization  such  experiences  and 
beliefs  are  mere  matters  of  course.  They  provoke  no  abrupt 
reflective  reaction  isolating  them  for  thoughtful  inspection. 
Accordingly  there  is  no  modification  of  habit  arising  from  the 
valuation  of  human  beings  as  such.  Thus  the  various  members 
of  a  society  find  themselves  cherishing  each  other,  destroying, 
obeying  or  commanding,  as  the  case  may  be.  There  is  a  com¬ 
munal  organization,  and  there  are  beliefs  about  it  slowly 
forming  themselves  into  explanations. 

We  are  to  discuss  the  later  phases  when  civilization  has 
reached  its  modern  height,  a  period  of  three  thousand  years 
at  the  most.  Thinkers  have  now  arisen.  The  notion  of  duty 


12 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


has  dawned  and  received  some  definition.  Above  all  the 
notion  of  a  psyche — that  is,  of  a  mind — has  dawned.  In  its 
first  phase  of  gradual  emergence,  this  great  notion  was  in¬ 
stinctively  used  as  a  master-key  to  make  intelligible  the 
baffling  occurrences  of  nature.  The  two  most  obvious  charac¬ 
teristics  of  Nature,  writes  Lytton  Strachey,1  are  loveliness 
and  power.  The  beauty  dawned  later  upon  human  intelli¬ 
gences  than  did  its  power.  Also  in  early  phases  of  thought 
the  powers  of  nature  became  the  minds  of  Nature — minds 
bestial,  ruthless,  and  yet  placable.  In  all  stages  of  civilization 
the  popular  gods  represent  the  more  primitive  brutalities  of 
the  tribal  life.  The  progress  of  religion  is  defined  by  the  de¬ 
nunciation  of  gods.  The  keynote  of  idolatry  is  contentment 
with  the  prevalent  gods. 

The  factor  in  human  life  provocative  of  a  noble  dis¬ 
content  is  the  gradual  emergence  into  prominence  of  a  sense 
of  criticism,  founded  upon  appreciations  of  beauty,  and  of 
intellectual  distinction,  and  of  duty.  The  moral  element  is 
derivative  from  the  other  factors  in  experience.  For  other¬ 
wise  there  is  no  content  for  duty  to  operate  upon.  There 
can  be  no  mere  morality  in  a  vacuum.  Thus  the  primary 
factors  in  experience  are  first  the  animal  passions  such  as 
love,  sympathy,  ferocity,  together  with  analogous  appeti- 
tions  and  satisfactions;  and  secondly,  the  more  distinctly 
human  experiences  of  beauty,  and  of  intellectual  fineness, 
consciously  enjoyed.  Here  the  notion  of  intellectual  distinc¬ 
tion,  or  of  fineness,  is  somewhat  broader  than  that  of  Truth5, 
which  is  ordinarily  cited  in  this  connection.  There  is  a 
grandeur  of  achievement  in  the  delicate  adjustment  of 
thought  to  thought,  which  is  independent  of  the  mere  blunt 
question  of  truth.  We  may  term  it  c  beauty5.  But  intellectual 
beauty,  however  capable  of  being  hymned  in  terms  relevant 

1  Cf.  Books  and  Characters,  Chapter  on  ‘The  Poetry  of  Blake’. 


THE  HUMAN  SOUL 


13 


to  sensible  beauty,  is  yet  beautiful  by  stretch  of  metaphor. 
The  same  consideration  applies  to  moral  beauty.  All  three 
types  of  character  partake  in  the  highest  ideal  of  satisfaction 
possible  for  actual  realization,  and  in  this  sense  can  be  termed 
that  beauty  which  provides  the  final  contentment  for  the  Eros 
of  the  Universe. 

For  European  thought,  the  effective  expression  of  this 
critical  discontent,  which  is  the  gadfly  of  civilization,  has  been 
provided  by  Hebrew  and  Greek  thought.  Its  most  adequate 
expression,  so  far  as  concerns  literary  delicacy  and  definition 
of  the  issues  involved,  is  to  be  found  in  Plato’s  dialogues. 
We  there  find  him  criticizing  the  customary  gods  of  the 
poets — indeed  he  would  banish  all  poets — and  analysing  the 
capacities  latent  in  the  human  soul.  The  religion  of  Plato  is 
founded  on  his  conception  of  what  a  God  can  be,  with  gaze 
fixed  upon  forms  of  eternal  beauty;  and  his  sociology  is 
derived  from  his  conception  of  what  man  can  be,  in  virtue 
of  a  nature,  which  for  its  full  description  requires  terms  ap¬ 
plicable  to  the  nature  of  gods.  Between  them,  the  Hebrews 
and  the  Greeks  provided  a  programme  for  discontent.  But  the 
value  of  their  discontent  lies  in  the  hope  which  never  deserted 
their  glimpses  of  perfection. 

Section  II.  The  intellectual  agencies  involved  in  the 
modification  of  epochs  are  the  proper  subject  of  this  book. 
When  we  examine  them  we  find  a  rough  division  into  two 
types,  one  of  general  ideas,  the  other  of  highly  specialized 
notions.  Among  the  former,  there  are  the  ideas  of  high 
generality  expressing  conceptions  of  the  nature  of  things,  of 
the  possibilities  of  human  society,  of  the  final  aim  which 
should  guide  the  conduct  of  individual  men.  In  each  age  of 
the  world  distinguished  by  high  activity  there  will  be  found 
at  its  culmination,  and  among  the  agencies  leading  to  that 
culmination,  some  profound  cosmological  outlook,  implicitly 


14 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


accepted,  impressing  its  own  type  upon  the  current  springs 
of  action.  This  ultimate  cosmology  is  only  partly  expressed, 
and  the  details  of  such  expression  issue  into  derivative 
specialized  questions  of  violent  controversy.  The  intellectual 
strife  of  an  age  is  mainly  concerned  with  these  latter  questions 
of  secondary  generality  which  conceal  a  general  agreement 
upon  first  principles  almost  too  obvious  to  need  expression, 
and  almost  too  general  to  be  capable  of  expression.  In  each 
period  there  is  a  general  form  of  the  forms  of  thought;  and, 
like  the  air  we  breathe,  such  a  form  is  so  translucent,  and  so 
pervading,  and  so  seemingly  necessary,  that  only  by  extreme 
effort  can  we  become  aware  of  it. 

In  order  to  find  an  example  capable  of  ready  expression, 
we  must  descend  below  the  utmost  generality.  In  the  region 
of  political  theory,  consider  the  divergence  of  outlook  in  the 
classical  Mediterranean  civilization.  Think  of  the  differences 
between  Pericles  and  Cleon,  Plato  and  Alexander  the  Great, 
Marius  and  Sulla,  Cicero  and  Caesar.  Yet  they  all  agreed  in 
one  fundamental  notion  which  lies  at  the  base  of  all  political 
theory.  Throughout  the  Hellenic  and  Hellenistic  Roman 
civilizations — those  civilizations  which  we  term  ‘classical’ — 
it  was  universally  assumed  that  a  large  slave  population  was 
required  to  perform  services  which  were  unworthy  to  engage 
the  activities  of  a  fully  civilized  man.  In  other  words  in  that 
epoch  a  civilized  community  could  not  be  self-sustaining.  A 
comparatively  barbarous  substratum  had  to  be  interwoven 
in  the  social  structure,  so  as  to  sustain  the  civilized  apex. 
This  assumption  that  a  complex  urban  civilization  requires 
a  base  of  slavery  was  so  universal,  both  in  practice  and  in 
implicit  presuppositions,  that  we  may  assume  it  to  be  derived 
from  some  well-founded  reason  in  the  conditions  permitting 
the  formation  of  the  earlier  phases  of  civilized  life.  The 
Egyptians  wanted  bricks,  so  they  captured  the  Hebrews. 


THE  HUMAN  SOUL 


J5 


The  confusion  of  tongues  associated  with  the  tower  of  Babel 
may  be  historically  doubtful  in  the  form  of  the  surviving 
legend :  it  is  at  least  well-found  as  a  reference  to  the  confusion 
of  races  amid  the  slave  populations  supplying  the  mechanized 
man-power  for  the  building  of  cities. 

Now  in  respect  to  the  political  factions  of  the  ancient 
world  nothing  has  yet  been  settled.  Every  problem  which 
Plato  discusses  is  still  alive  to-day.  Yet  there  is  a  vast  differ¬ 
ence  between  ancient  and  modern  political  theories.  For  we 
differ  from  the  ancients  on  the  one  premise  on  which  they 
were  all  agreed.  Slavery  was  the  presupposition  of  political 
theorists  then;  Freedom  is  the  presupposition  of  political 
theorists  now.  In  those  days  the  penetrating  minds  found 
a  difficulty  in  reconciling  their  doctrine  of  slavery  to  certain 
plain  facts  of  moral  feeling  and  of  sociological  practice ;  and 
in  these  days  our  sociological  speculations  find  a  difficulty 
in  reconciling  our  doctrine  of  freedom  to  another  group  of 
plain  facts,  perplexing,  irreconcilable,  only  to  be  conceived 
as  a  hateful  brute  necessity.  Yet,  when  all  such  qualifica¬ 
tions  have  been  made,  Freedom  and  Equality  constitute  an 
inevitable  presupposition  for  modern  political  thought,  with 
an  admixture  of  subsequent  lame  qualification;  while  Slavery 
was  a  corresponding  presupposition  for  the  ancients,  with 
their  admixture  of  lame  qualification.  For  both  sets  of 
thinkers  God  has  been  a  great  resource:  a  lot  of  things, 
which  won’t  work  on  Earth,  can  be  conceived  as  true  in  his 
sight.  Ancients  and  Moderns  in  respect  to  this  question  face 
in  directly  opposite  directions. 

Section  III.  This  growth  of  the  idea  of  the  essential 
rights  of  human  beings,  arising  from  their  sheer  humanity, 
affords  a  striking  example  in  the  history  of  ideas.  Its  forma¬ 
tion  and  its  effective  diffusion  can  be  reckoned  as  a  triumph 
— a  chequered  triumph — of  the  later  phase  of  civilization. 


i6 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


We  shall  find  out  how  general  ideas  arise  and  are  diffused,  if 
we  examine  the  sort  of  history  which  belongs  to  this  particular 
instance. 

The  great  classical  civilization  is  remarkable  for  two  facts. 
First,  it  constituted  a  culmination  of  slavery,  especially  at 
the  height  of  the  Roman  Empire.  At  that  moment  slavery 
reached  its  height,  in  necessity,  in  quantity,  in  horror,  and 
in  danger.  In  earlier,  simpler  communities  slavery  may  have 
been  conceived  as  an  accidental  mercy,  a  favour  granted  to 
a  few  fortunate  communities  or  to  a  few  foriunate  indi¬ 
viduals  within  any  community.  But  for  a  thousand  years  of 
the  classical  civilization,  to  be  civilized  was  to  be  a  slave¬ 
owner.  Some  slave-owners  were  kind,  some  were  brutal: 
probably,  they  were  mostly  mediocre.  In  Plato’s  Symposium 
Agathon,  the  host,  is  represented  with  a  uniform  well-bred 
kindliness  both  towards  his  slaves  and  his  guests.  Cicero 
and  the  younger  Pliny  exhibit  themselves  in  their  Letters  as 
kindly  masters.  But  on  the  whole  the  Roman  capitalists 
with  their  vast  estates  exemplify  the  necessity  for  ancient 
civilization  that  it  be  built  upon  iniquity.  Efficiency  spelt 
Brutality.  When  such  evils  culminate,  either  they  are  cor¬ 
rected  by  the  introduction  of  some  new  principle,  or  they 
destroy  society.  In  the  case  of  the  classical  civilizations,  these 
alternatives  were  not  exclusive:  they  both  happened. 

We  now  come  to  the  second  fact  for  which  the  classical 
period  was  remarkable.  It  was  the  first  period  which  in¬ 
troduced  moral  principles  forming  an  effective  criticism  of 
the  whole  system.  The  Athenians  were  slave-owners:  but 
they  seem  to  have  humanized  the  institution.  Plato  was  an 
aristocrat  by  birth  and  by  conviction,  also  he  must  have 
owned  slaves.  But  it  is  difficult  to  read  some  of  his  Dialogues 
without  an  uneasy  feeling  about  the  compulsory  degradation 
of  mankind.  Also  the  Stoic  lawyers  of  the  Roman  Empire 


THE  HUMAN  SOUL 


17 


introduced  a  legal  reformation  largely  motived  by  the  prin¬ 
ciple  that  human  nature  has  essential  rights.  But  neither  the 
humane  slave-owners,  nor  the  inspired  Plato,  nor  the  clear¬ 
headed  lawyers,  initiated  any  campaign  against  slavery. 
They  accepted  it  as  a  matter  of  course.  It  was  presupposed 
in  the  very  structure  of  society;  and  such  necessity  limits  the 
scope  of  all  generalities.  Distinctions  were  introduced,  the 
sort  of  distinctions  which  are  conclusive  so  long  as  you  know 
that  in  practice  you  have  got  to  accept  them. 

We  see  here  the  first  stage  of  the  introduction  of  great 
ideas.  They  start  as  speculative  suggestions  in  the  minds  of 
a  small,  gifted  group.  They  acquire  a  limited  application  to 
human  life  at  the  hands  of  various  sets  of  leaders  with 
special  functions  in  the  social  structure.  A  whole  literature 
arises  which  explains  how  inspiring  is  the  general  idea,  and 
how  slight  need  be  its  effect  in  disturbing  a  comfortable 
society.  Some  transition  has  been  produced  by  the  agency 
of  the  new  idea.  But  on  the  whole  the  social  system  has  been 
inoculated  against  the  full  infection  of  the  new  principle.  It 
takes  its  place  among  the  interesting  notions  which  have  a 
restricted  application. 

But  a  general  idea  is  always  a  danger  to  the  existing 
order.  The  whole  bundle  of  its  conceivable  special  embodi¬ 
ments  in  various  usages  of  society  constitutes  a  programme  of 
reform.  At  any  moment  the  smouldering  unhappiness  of 
mankind  may  seize  on  some  such  programme  and  initiate  a 
period  of  rapid  change  guided  by  the  light  of  its  doctrines. 
In  this  way,  the  conception  of  the  dignity  of  human  nature 
was  quietly  energizing  in  the  minds  of  Roman  officials, 
producing  somewhat  better  government  and  nerving  men 
like  Marcus  Aurelius  to  rise  to  the  height  of  their  appointed 
task.  It  was  a  worthy  moral  force,  but  society  had  been 
inoculated  against  its  revolutionary  application.  For  six  hun- 


wi 


2 


i8 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


dred  years,  the  ideal  of  the  intellectual  and  moral  grandeur 
of  the  human  soul  had  haunted  the  ancient  Mediterranean 
world.  It  had  in  a  way  transformed  the  moral  ideas  of  man¬ 
kind:  it  had  readjusted  religions:  and  yet  it  had  failed  to 
close  with  the  basic  weakness  of  the  civilization  in  which  it 
flourished.  It  was  the  faint  light  of  the  dawn  of  a  new 
order  of  life. 

Section  IV.  In  the  midst  of  this  period  of  progress  and 
decadence,  Christianity  arose.  In  its  early  form  it  was  a 
religion  of  fierce  enthusiasm  and  of  impracticable  moral 
ideals.  Luckily  these  ideals  have  been  preserved  for  us  in  a 
literature  which  is  almost  contemporary  with  the  origin  of 
the  religion.  They  have  constituted  an  unrivalled  programme 
for  reform,  which  has  been  one  element  in  the  evolution  of 
Western  civilization.  The  progress  of  humanity  can  be 
defined  as  the  process  of  transforming  society  so  as  to  make 
the  original  Christian  ideals  increasingly  practicable  for  its 
individual  members.  As  society  is  now  constituted  a  literal 
adherence  to  the  moral  precepts  scattered  throughout  the 
Gospels  would  mean  sudden  death. 

Christianity  rapidly  assimilated  the  Platonic  doctrine  of 
the  human  soul.  The  philosophy  and  the  religion  were  very 
congenial  to  each  other  in  their  respective  teachings;  al¬ 
though,  as  was  natural,  the  religious  version  was  much  more 
specialized  than  the  philosophic  version.  We  have  here  an 
example  of  the  principle  that  dominates  the  history  of  ideas. 
There  will  be  a  general  idea  in  the  background  flittingly, 
waveringly,  realized  by  the  few  in  its  full  generality — or 
perhaps  never  expressed  in  any  adequate  universal  form  with 
persuasive  force.  Such  persuasive  expression  depends  on  the 
accidents  of  genius;  for  example,  it  depends  on  the  chance 
that  a  man  like  Plato  appears.  But  this  general  idea,  whether 
expressed  or  implicitly  just  below  the  surface  of  conscious- 


THE  HUMAN  SOUL 


19 


ness,  embodies  itself  in  special  expression  after  special  ex¬ 
pression.  It  condescends  so  as  to  lose  the  magnificence  of  its 
generality,  but  it  gains  in  the  force  of  its  peculiar  adaptation 
to  the  concrete  circumstances  of  a  particular  age.  It  is  a 
hidden  driving  force,  haunting  humanity,  and  ever  appear¬ 
ing  in  specialized  guise  as  compulsory  on  action  by  reason 
of  its  appeal  to  the  uneasy  conscience  of  the  age.  The  force 
of  the  appeal  lies  in  the  fact  that  the  specialized  principle  of 
immediate  conduct  exemplifies  the  grandeur  of  the  wider 
truth  arising  from  the  very  nature  of  the  order  of  things,  a 
truth  which  mankind  has  grown  to  the  stature  of  being  able 
to  feel  though  perhaps  as  yet  unable  to  frame  in  fortunate 
expression. 

The  greatness  of  Christianity — the  greatness  of  any  valu¬ 
able  religion — consists  in  its  ‘interim  ethics’.  The  founders 
of  Christianity  and  their  earlier  followers  firmly  believed 
that  the  end  of  the  world  was  at  hand.  The  result  was  that 
with  passionate  earnestness  they  gave  free  reign  to  their 
absolute  ethical  intuitions  respecting  ideal  possibilities  with¬ 
out  a  thought  of  the  preservation  of  society.  The  crash  of 
society  was  certain  and  imminent.  ‘Impracticability’  was  a 
word  which  had  lost  its  meaning;  or  rather,  practical  good 
sense  dictated  concentration  on  ultimate  ideas.  The  last  things 
had  arrived:  intermediate  stages  were  of  no  account. 

This  consideration  was  of  more  influence  in  framing  the 
mentality  of  the  earlier  followers  than  in  the  initial  founda¬ 
tion  of  the  religion.  It  enabled  these  followers  to  transmit 
in  their  full  purity  the  primitive  notions.  But  the  religion 
arose  in  a  more  tranquil  atmosphere  although  highly 
sensitive  in  regard  to  religious  emotion,  and  with  some 
admixture  of  apocalyptic  belief.  The  Galilean  peasantry, 
having  regard  to  their  climate  and  simplicity  of  life,  were 
neither  rich  nor  poor:  they  were  unusually  intellectual  for 


20 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


a  peasantry,  by  reason  of  their  habits  of  study  of  historical 
and  religious  records :  they  were  protected  from  disturbance, 
from  within  or  from  without,  by  the  guardian  structure  of 
the  Roman  Empire.  They  had  no  responsibility  for  the 
maintenance  of  this  complex  system.  Their  own  society  was 
of  the  simplest;  and  they  were  ignorant  of  the  conditions  by 
which  the  Empire  arose,  of  the  conditions  requisite  for  its 
efficiency,  and  of  the  conditions  necessary  for  its  preserva¬ 
tion.  They  were  ignorant  even  of  the  services  which  the 
Empire  was  rendering  them.  The  alternation  of  procurators 
was  like  that  of  the  seasons,  some  were  better  and  some  were 
worse;  but  all  alike,  seasons  and  procurators  of  Judaea,  issued 
from  an  inscrutable  order  of  things. 

The  tone  of  life  of  this  peasantry  provided  an  ideal  en¬ 
vironment  in  which  concepts  of  ideal  relations  between 
rational  beings  could  be  formulated — concepts  devoid  of 
ferocity,  concepts  gracious,  kindly,  and  shrewd,  concepts  in 
which  mercy  prevailed  over  judicial  classification.  In  this 
ideal  world  forgiveness  could  be  stretched  to  seventy  times 
seven,  whereas  in  the  real  world  of  the  Herods  and  the 
Roman  Empire  a  sevenfold  forgiveness  touched  upon  the 
impracticable.  But  the  Galilean  people  were  unconcerned 
with  the  discipline  of  the  Roman  legions,  with  the  imperial 
inspection  of  the  doings  of  proconsuls,  and  with  the  com¬ 
plexities  of  a  legal  system  which  was  to  impose  an  order 
upon  multitudinous  transactions,  stretching  from  the  hills 
of  Scotland  to  the  marshes  of  Mesopotamia.  A  gracious, 
simple  mode  of  life,  combined  with  a  fortunate  ignorance, 
endowed  mankind  with  its  most  precious  instrument  of 
progress — the  impracticable  ethics  of  Christianity. 

A  standard  had  now  been  created,  expressed  in  concrete 
illustrations  fool-proof  against  perversions.  This  standard  is 
a  gauge  by  which  to  test  the  defects  of  human  society.  So 


THE  HUMAN  SOUL 


21 


long  as  the  Galilean  images  are  but  the  dreams  of  an  un¬ 
realized  world,  so  long  they  must  spread  the  infection  of  an 
uneasy  spirit. 

Section  V.  In  ethical  ideals  we  find  the  supreme  example 
of  consciously  formulated  ideas  acting  as  a  driving  force 
effecting  transitions  from  social  state  to  social  state.  Such 
ideas  are  at  once  gadflies  irritating,  and  beacons  luring,  the 
victims  among  whom  they  dwell.  The  conscious  agency  of 
such  ideas  should  be  contrasted  with  senseless  forces,  floods, 
barbarians,  and  mechanical  devices.  The  great  transitions 
are  due  to  a  coincidence  of  forces  derived  from  both  sides 
of  the  world,  its  physical  and  its  spiritual  natures.  Mere 
physical  nature  lets  loose  a  flood,  but  it  requires  intelligence 
to  provide  a  system  of  irrigation. 

The  ethical  ideas,  embodied  in  the  great  religions,  Chris¬ 
tianity  for  instance,  though  representing  a  high  approach  to 
final  generality,  are  yet  specializations  of  the  Platonic  gen¬ 
erality.  Partly  these  ethical  intuitions  are  a  direct  appli¬ 
cation  of  metaphysical  doctrine  for  the  determination  of 
practice.  The  ethical  principle  is  then  a  parable  illuminating 
the  superior  generality  on  which  it  depends.  Thus  the  codes 
of  all  religions  also  embody  the  particular  temperaments  and 
stages  of  civilization  of  their  adherents.  No  religion  can  be 
considered  in  abstraction  from  its  followers,  or  even  from 
its  various  types  of  followers.  Religious  ideas  represent 
highly  specialized  forms  of  general  notions.  Sometimes 
these  specializations  are  concrete  embodiments  with  pecu¬ 
liar  beauty  and  aptness:  sometimes  they  are  the  result  of  a 
throw  back  to  barbaric  brutality.  Neither  religions  nor  in¬ 
dividual  men  demonstrate  their  sanctity  by  their  ejacula¬ 
tions.  We  find  however  this  whole  bundle  of  more  special 
notions,  legal,  political,  ethical,  religious,  driving  forward 
human  life,  and  deriving  a  force  of  grandeur  from  their 


22 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


various  exemplifications  of  the  mystery  of  the  human  soul 
in  its  journey  toward  the  source  of  all  harmony.  It  is  a 
story  of  crime,  misunderstanding,  profanation.  Great  ideas 
enter  into  reality  with  evil  associates  and  with  disgusting 
alliances.  But  the  greatness  remains,  nerving  the  race  in  its 
slow  ascent. 

In  the  Middle  Ages  institutional  Christianity  was  honour¬ 
ably  distinguished  as  a  driving  force  toward  the  grander 
intuitions.  Unfortunately,  in  accordance  with  the  habits  of 
all  institutions,  it  adapted  itself  to  its  environment.  It  be¬ 
came  an  instrument  of  conservation  instead  of  an  instrument 
of  progress.  After  a  short  period  of  progressive  energy,  the 
Reformation  Churches  again  accepted  the  same  idolatrous 
role.  On  the  whole,  well-established  religious  institutions  are 
to  be  reckoned  among  the  conservative  forces  of  society. 
They  soon  become  the  grand  support  of  what  Clement  had 
termed  ‘communal  custom’.  But  the  ultimate  ideals,  of 
which  they  profess  themselves  the  guardians,  are  a  standing 
criticism  of  current  practices. 

Accordingly  the  next  resurgence  of  the  notion  of  the 
essential  greatness  of  the  human  soul  is  associated  with  the 
sceptical  humanitarianism  of  the  eighteenth  century.  We 
have  arrived  at  the  Age  of  Reason  and  the  Rights  of  Man. 
This  great  French  age  of  thought  has  remade  the  pre¬ 
suppositions  of  the  civilized  world,  in  speculation,  in  science, 
and  in  sociological  premises.  It  was  derived  from  the 
English  thought  of  the  seventeenth  century,  Francis  Bacon, 
Isaac  Newton,  and  John  Locke.  Also  it  gained  inspiration 
from  the  English  revolutions  of  the  same  epoch.  But  the 
English  modes  always  retained  the  note  of  insularity.  The 
French  broadened,  clarified,  and  universalized.  They  thus 

made  world-wide,  ideas  which  such  a  man  as  Edmund 

*  « 


THE  HUMAN  SOUL  23 

Burke  could  only  grasp  in  their  application  to  one  race,  and 
even  at  times  to  one  island. 

But  the  thought  of  John  Locke  survived  also  in  England. 
Its  influence  was  reinforced  by  the  general  pride  in  the 
doctrines  of  freedom  embodied  in  the  English  Common 
Law.  There  was  thus  a  Whiggish  tinge  even  to  Tory  Parlia¬ 
ments  in  those  days.  In  this  way  the  British  Government 
was  the  first  government  to  make  effective  two  decisive  steps 
in  the  abolition  of  slavery.  Two  parliaments  determined  the 
new  policies.  They  were  composed  of  aristocratic  land- 
owners  and  evangelical  bankers  and  merchants,  one  parlia¬ 
ment  Tory  and  the  other  Whig.  The  first  step  was  the 
abolition  of  the  British  slave-trade  in  1808,  and  the  second 
step  was  the  purchase  and  freeing  of  all  slaves  in  the  British 
Dominions  in  the  year  1833.  This  latter  operation  cost  twenty 
million  pounds  at  a  time  of  grave  financial  difficulty. 

But  the  problem  was  comparatively  simple  for  the  English 
people.  None  the  less  this  action  constituted  a  foretaste  of 
the  final  triumph  of  that  same  wavering  alliance  of  philo¬ 
sophy,  law,  and  religion  which  had  its  first  success  in  the 
reforms  of  the  Roman  Imperial  system.  We  notice  that  a 
great  idea  in  the  background  of  dim  consciousness  is  like 
a  phantom  ocean  beating  upon  the  shores  of  human  life  in 
successive  waves  of  specialization.  A  whole  succession  of 
such  waves  are  as  dreams  slowly  doing  their  work  of  sapping 
the  base  of  some  cliff  of  habit:  but  the  seventh  wave  is 
a  revolution — ‘And  the  nations  echo  round5.  In  the  last 
quarter  of  the  eighteenth  century,  Democracy  was  born,  with 
its  earliest  incarnations  in  America  and  in  France;  and  finally 
it  was  Democracy  that  freed  the  slaves.  In  the  modern 
world,  Democracy  has  a  deeper  import  than  among  the 
ancients.  At  last,  in  the  nineteenth  century,  the  fundamental 


24 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


question  of  slavery  has  been  explicitly  faced.  In  Europe, 
it  was  already  a  decaying  institution,  slowly  withdrawing 
from  slavery  to  serfdom,  from  serfdom  to  feudalism,  from 
feudalism  to  aristocracy,  from  aristocracy  to  legal  equality, 
from  legal  equality  to  careers  effectively  open  to  talent.  But 
the  question  was  assuming  a  new  and  menacing  form  by 
reason  of  the  impact  of  the  European  and  Arabian  races  upon 
the  African  tribes. 

So  modern  Democrats,  in  the  nineteenth  century,  nerved 
themselves  to  face  the  question  of  Slavery,  explicitly  and 
with  thoroughness.  The  slow  working  of  ideas  is  thereby 
illustrated.  Two  thousand  years  had  elapsed  since  the  foun¬ 
dation  of  Plato’s  Academy,  since  the  reforms  of  the  Stoic 
lawyers,  since  the  composition  of  the  Gospels.  The  great 
programme  of  reform  bequeathed  by  the  classical  civilization 
was  achieving  another  triumph. 

Section  VI.  The  slow  issue  of  general  ideas  into  practical 
consequences  is  not  wholly  due  to  inefficiency  of  human 
character.  There  is  a  problem  to  be  solved,  and  its  com¬ 
plexity  is  habitually  ignored  by  impetuous  seekers.  The 
difficulty  is  just  this:  It  may  be  impossible  to  conceive  a 
reorganization  of  society  adequate  for  the  removal  of  some 
admitted  evil  without  destroying  the  social  organization  and 
the  civilization  which  depends  on  it.  An  allied  plea  is  that 
there  is  no  known  way  of  removing  the  evil  without  the 
introduction  of  worse  evils  of  some  other  type. 

Such  arguments  are  usually  implicit.  Even  the  wisest  are 
unable  to  conceive  the  possibility  of  untried  forms  of  social 
relations.  Human  nature  is  so  complex  that  paper  plans 
for  society  are  to  the  statesman  not  worth  even  the  price  of 
the  defaced  paper.  Successful  progress  creeps  from  point  to 
point,  testing  each  step.  It  is  not  difficult  to  frame  the  sort 
of  defence  that  Cicero  would  have  advanced,  if  challenged 


THE  HUMAN  SOUL 


25 


on  the  question  of  slavery.  The  Roman  Government,  he 
would  have  said,  is  the  one  hope  for  the  human  race.  De¬ 
stroy  Rome;  and  Where  will  you  find  the  firmness  of  the 
Roman  Senate,  the  discipline  of  its  legions,  the  wisdom  of 
its  lawyers,  the  restraints  upon  misgovernment,  the  appre¬ 
ciative  protection  of  Greek  learning?  But  he  would  not  have 
said  this.  His  genius  would  have  risen  to  prophecy,  and  he 
would  have  foreseen  and  quoted  the  lines  of  Virgil  on  the 
mission  of  the  Eternal  City. 

In  fact,  we  do  know  exactly  the  stand  taken  upon  this 
very  question  by  the  lawyers,  Pagan  and  Christian,  and  by 
the  bishops  and  popes,  of  the  five  centuries  succeeding 
Cicero.  Among  them  were  statesmen  with  more  than 
Cicero’s  practical  sagacity,  and  his  equals  in  moral  sensi¬ 
bility.  They  introduced  careful  legal  restraints  upon  the 
powers  of  the  masters;  they  protected  some  of  the  essential 
rights  of  slaves.  But  they  preserved  the  institution.  Civili¬ 
zation,  Hellenic  and  Roman,  was  preserved  intact  for  more 
than  seven  centuries  after  the  death  of  Plato.  The  slaves 
were  the  martyrs  whose  toil  made  progress  possible.  There 
is  a  famous  statue  of  a  Scythian  slave  sharpening  a  knife. 
His  body  is  bent,  but  his  glance  is  upward.  That  figure  has 
survived  the  ages,  a  message  to  us  of  what  we  owe  to  the 
suffering  millions  in  the  dim  past. 

We  may  ask,  Would  Rome  have  been  destroyed  by  a 
crusade  for  the  abolition  of  slavery  in  the  time  of  Cicero 
or  in  the  time  of  Augustus?  Throughout  the  whole  period 
of  classical  civilization  the  foundations  of  social  order  could 
scarcely  sustain  the  weight  upon  them — the  wars  between 
states,  the  surrounding  barbarians,  the  political  convulsions, 
the  evils  of  the  slave  system.  In  the  age  from  the  birth  of 
Cicero  to  the  accession  of  Augustus  to  undisputed  power, 
the  whole  structure  almost  collapsed,  before  it  had  finished 


26 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


its  appointed  task.  Even  earlier,  it  had  nearly  met  its  fate, 
and  later  by  a  few  centuries  came  the  final  collapse.  It  is 
impossible  to  doubt  the  effect  of  any  vigorous  effort  for  the 
immediate  abolition  of  the  only  social  system  that  men  knew. 
It  may  be  better  that  the  heavens  should  fall,  but  it  is  folly 
to  ignore  the  fact  that  they  will  fall. 

Suppose  that,  in  the  middle  of  the  nineteenth  century, 
the  shock  that  overwhelmed  the  Confederate  States  in  the 
American  Civil  War  had  equally  overwhelmed  the  whole 
of  North  America  and  the  whole  of  Europe.  The  sole  hope 
of  progressive  civilization  would  have  been  lost.  We  may 
speculate  about  a  recovery,  but  of  that  we  know  nothing. 
In  the  ancient  world,  the  dangers  were  immeasurably 
greater. 

Section  VII.  The  argument  of  the  previous  section  can 
be  generalized.  It  amounts  to  this:  that  the  final  intro¬ 
duction  of  a  reform  does  not  necessarily  prove  the  moral 
superiority  of  the  reforming  generation.  It  certainly  does 
require  that  that  generation  exhibits  reforming  energy.  But 
conditions  may  have  changed,  so  that  what  is  possible  now 
may  not  have  been  possible  then.  A  great  idea  is  not  to  be 
conceived  as  merely  waiting  for  enough  good  men  to  carry 
it  into  practical  effect.  That  is  a  childish  view  of  the  history  of 
ideas.  The  ideal  in  the  background  is  promoting  the  gradual 
growth  of  the  requisite  communal  customs,  adequate  to  sustain 
the  load  of  its  exemplification. 

Many  factors  contributed  to  the  final  inversion  of  socio¬ 
logical  theory,  from  the  presupposition  of  slavery  to  the 
presupposition  of  freedom.  The  chief  factor  has  already  been 
mentioned,  namely,  the  sceptical,  humanitarian  movement 
of  the  eighteenth  century,  of  which  Voltaire  and  Rousseau 
were  among  the  chief  exponents,  and  the  French  Revolution 
the  culmination. 


THE  HUMAN  SOUL 


27 


Thus  in  a  sense,  and  more  especially  when  we  consider 
the  whole  world-wide  movement,  religion  was  in  the  back¬ 
ground.  But  in  one  section  of  this  stirring  of  mankind  the 
religious  motive  was  among  the  chief  agencies.  Through¬ 
out  the  Anglo-Saxon  world,  English  and  American,  the 
Wesleyan  protestant  revival  was  in  full  activity.  It  had  been 
reserved  for  a  great  French  historian,  Elie  Halevy,  to  point 
out  the  full  sociological  significance  of  this  episode.  The 
Methodist  preachers  aimed  at  saving  men’s  souls  in  the  next 
world,  but  incidentally  they  gave  a  new  direction  to  emotions 
energizing  in  this  world.  The  movement  was  singularly 
devoid  of  new  ideas,  and  singularly  rich  in  vivid  feelings. 
It  is  the  first  decisive  landmark  indicating  the  widening 
chasm  between  the  theological  tradition  and  the  modern 
intellectual  world.  From  the  earliest  Greek  theologians  to 
Jerome  and  Augustine:  from  Augustine  to  Aquinas:  from 
Aquinas  to  Luther,  Calvin,  and  Suarez:  from  Suarez  to 
Leibniz  and  John  Locke:  every  great  religious  movement 
was  accompanied  by  a  noble  rationalistic  justification.  You 
may  disagree  with  the  theologians — indeed  it  is  impossible 
to  agree  with  all  of  them — but  you  cannot  complain  that 
they  have  been  unwilling  to  indulge  in  rational  argument. 
The  Middle  Ages  argued,  Luther  defended  ninety-seven 
theses,  Calvin  produced  his  Institute,  the  Council  of  Trent 
argued  on  and  off  for  eighteen  years,  the  judicious  Hooker 
argued,  at  the  Synod  of  Dort  Arminians  and  Calvinists 
argued. 

The  great  Methodist  movement  more  than  deserves  the 
eulogies  bestowed  on  it.  But  it  can  appeal  to  no  great  in¬ 
tellectual  construction  explanatory  of  its  modes  of  under¬ 
standing.  It  may  have  chosen  the  better  way.  Its  instinct 
may  be  sound.  However  that  may  be,  it  was  a  notable  event 
in  the  history  of  ideas  when  the  clergy  of  the  western 


28 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


races  began  to  waver  in  their  appeal  to  constructive  reason. 
More  recently  scientists  and  critical  philosophers  have  fol¬ 
lowed  the  Methodist  example. 

In  an  age  of  aristocracy  in  England,  the  Methodists  ap¬ 
pealed  to  the  direct  intuitions  of  working  men  and  of  retail 
traders  concerned  with  working  men.  In  America  they 
appealed  to  the  toiling,  isolated  groups  of  pioneers.  They 
brought  hope,  fear,  emotional  release,  spiritual  insight.  They 
stemmed  the  inroads  of  revolutionary  ideas.  Also,  allowing 
for  many  qualifications,  they  must  be  credited  with  one 
supreme  achievement.  They  made  the  conception  of  the 
brotherhood  of  man  and  of  the  importance  of  men  a  vivid 
reality.  They  had  produced  the  final  effective  force  which 
hereafter  made  slavery  impossible  among  progressive  races. 

In  the  history  of  ideas  the  great  danger  is  over-simpli¬ 
fication.  It  is  true  that  the  Methodists  produced  the  final 
wave  of  popular  feeling  which  drove  the  anti-slavery  move¬ 
ment  to  success.  But  the  Methodist  movement  succeeded 
because  it  came  at  the  right  time.  In  this  section  we  are 
discussing  the  religious  influences.  During  the  sixteenth, 
seventeenth,  and  eighteenth  centuries  the  Church  of  Rome 
— to  use  a  Quaker  phrase — had  a  ‘concern5  for  the  races, 
groaning  under  European  exploitation,  which  far  surpassed 
that  of  the  combined  Protestant  churches.  The  priests  did 
not  consider  the  problem  in  terms  of  human  freedom.  But, 
not  to  speak  of  the  rest  of  the  world,  in  America  alone 
the  heroism  of  the  Catholic  missionaries  extended  their 
self-sacrifice  from  the  northern  to  the  southern  icefields.  It 
is  impossible  to  doubt  but  that  their  example  kept  alive  a 
sensitiveness  of  the  European  conscience  respecting  the  obli¬ 
gations  of  men  to  men. 

Neither  the  Catholics,  nor  the  Methodists,  gave  the  first 


THE  HUMAN  SOUL 


29 


modern  formulation  of  an  explicit  purpose  to  procure  the 
abolition  of  slavery.  This  supreme  honour  belongs  to  the 
Quakers,  and  in  particular  to  that  Apostle  of  Human  Free¬ 
dom,  John  Woolman.  Also  the  American  Civil  War  was  the 
tremendous  episode  constituting  the  climax  of  this  sombre 
journey  of  civilization  toward  the  light. 

Thus  in  the  evolution  of  the  strands  of  thought  which 
constituted  the  final  stage  in  the  destruction  of  the  iniquitous 
slave-foundation  of  civilization,  there  is  interwoven  the 
insights  and  the  heroisms  of  sceptical  humanitarians,  of 
Catholics,  of  Methodists,  of  Quakers.  But  the  intellectual 
origin  of  the  movement  is  to  be  traced  back  for  more  than 
two  thousand  years  to  the  speculations  of  the  philosophical 
Greeks  upon  functions  of  the  human  soul,  and  its  status  in 
the  world  of  flux. 

Section  VIII.  In  this  chapter  the  story  of  the  translation 
of  the  Greek  metaphysical  speculations  into  the  sociological 
concept  of  human  freedom  has  been  only  half  told.  In  the 
next  chapter  I  shall  consider  in  more  detail  some  nineteenth- 
century  criticisms  of  this  whole  movement  towards  De¬ 
mocracy  and  Freedom.  But,  so  far  as  it  has  gone,  the  story 
illustrates  the  extreme  difficulty  of  expressing  in  language  the 
final  generalities.  The  importance  of  man  as  the  supreme 
example  of  a  living  organism  is  beyond  question.  Yet  when 
we  try  to  express  the  general  notions  thus  involved,  and 
their  bearing  upon  conduct,  at  every  step  controversy  arises. 
The  immense  history  of  Plato’s  metaphysical  concept  of  the 
soul,  with  its  influence  on  religion,  and  on  social  theory, 
carries  this  moral  decisively. 

Human  life  is  driven  forward  by  its  dim  apprehension 
of  notions  too  general  for  its  existing  language.  Such  ideas 
cannot  be  grasped  singly,  one  by  one  in  isolation.  They 


30 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


require  that  mankind  advances  in  its  apprehension  of  the 
general  nature  of  things,  so  as  to  conceive  systems  of  ideas 
elucidating  each  other.  But  the  growth  of  generality  of 
apprehension  is  the  slowest  of  all  evolutionary  changes.  It 
is  the  task  of  philosophy  to  promote  this  growth  in  men¬ 
tality.  In  so  far  as  there  is  success,  the  specialized  applica¬ 
tions  of  great  ideas  are  purified  from  their  gross  associations 
with  savage  fancies.  The  Carthaginians  were  a  great  civilized 
trading  nation.  They  belonged  racially  to  one  of  the  great 
progressive  sections  of  mankind.  They  traded  from  the  shores 
of  Syria,  throughout  the  Mediterranean  Sea,  up  the  Atlantic 
Coast  of  Europe,  to  the  tin  mines  of  Cornwall  in  England. 
They  circumnavigated  Africa.  They  ruled  Spain  and  Sicily 
and  North  Africa.  Yet,  when  Plato  was  speculating,  this 
great  people  could  so  conceive  the  supreme  powers  of  the 
Universe  that  they  sacrificed  their  children  to  Moloch  as 
an  act  of  religious  propitiation.  The  growth  in  generality  of 
understanding  makes  such  savagery  impossible  in  corre¬ 
sponding  civilizations  to-day. 

Human  Sacrifice,  Human  Slavery  are  instances  of  great 
intuitions  of  religion  and  of  civilized  purposes  expressing 
themselves  by  means  of  inherited  brutalities  of  instinctive 
behaviour.  Direct  religious  intuitions,  even  those  of  the 
purest  origin,  are  in  danger  of  allying  themselves  with  lower 
practices  and  emotions  which  in  fact  pervade  existing  society. 
Religion  lends  a  driving  force  to  philosophy.  But  in  its  turn, 
Speculative  philosophy  guards  our  higher  intuitions  from  base 
alliances  by  its  suggestions  of  ultimate  meanings,  disengaged 
from  the  facts  of  current  modes  of  behaviour. 

The  history  of  ideas  is  a  history  of  mistakes.  But  through 
all  mistakes  it  is  also  the  history  of  the  gradual  purification 
of  conduct.  When  there  is  progress  in  the  development  of 
favourable  order,  we  find  conduct  protected  from  relapse 


THE  HUMAN  SOUL 


31 


into  brutalization  by  the  increasing  agency  of  ideas  con¬ 
sciously  entertained.  In  this  way  Plato  is  justified  in  his 
saying,  The  creation  of  the  world — that  is  to  say,  the  world 
of  civilized  order — is  the  victory  of  persuasion  over  force. 


CHAPTER  HI 


THE  HUMANITARIAN  IDEAL 

Section  I.  In  the  previous  chapter  we  considered  the  com¬ 
bined  influence  of  philosophy,  law,  and  religion,  upon  the 
evolution  from  the  notion  of  society  based  upon  servitude 
to  that  of  society  based  upon  individual  freedom.  To  this 
transformation  philosophy  contributed  its  generality,  law 
contributed  the  constructive  ability,  religion  the  moral 
energy.  By  themselves  and  apart  from  correction  by  the 
Platonic  philosophy,  the  religions  derived  from  Western 
Asia  were  tinged  with  the  mentality  of  the  older  civilizations 
of  that  region.  They  conceived  the  universe  in  terms  of 
despots  and  slaves.  None  of  these  religions  have  been  able 
wholly  to  shake  off  the  horrible  implications  latent  in  such 
a  conception.  But  the  fortunate  coalescence  of  the  initial 
Christian  institutions  with  the  philosophic  Platonic  doctrines 
provided  the  W estern  Races  with  a  beautiful  sociological  ideal, 
intellectually  expressed,  and  closely  allied  with  intermittent 
bursts  of  emotional  energy.  Unfortunately,  interwoven  with 
this  ideal  in  Christian  theology  and  in  the  patterns  of  Christian 
emotion,  there  has  survived  throughout  history  the  older 
concept  of  a  Divine  Despot  and  a  slavish  Universe,  each  with 
the  morals  of  its  kind. 

The  theme  of  the  former  chapter  has  been  the  agency  of 
these  sociological  ideals  in  the  transformation  of  society. 
They  constitute  the  intellectual  side  of  the  transformation, 
combined  with  an  explanation  how  such  intellectual  con- 


THE  HUMANITARIAN  IDEAL 


33 


cepts  acquired  driving  force.  In  the  present  chapter  we 
first  glance  at  accessory  causes,  and  then  proceed  to  the 
criticism  of  the  humanitarian  ideal,  a  criticism  which  has 
been  gathering  strength  since  its  origin  in  the  nineteenth 
century.  Finally,  the  barest  sketch  of  a  reply  to  this  criticism 
is  suggested. 

The  growth  of  technology  is  the  greatest  among  the  ac¬ 
cessory  causes  which  weakened  the  necessity  for  slavery.  But 
this  agency  hardly  came  into  play  before  the  seventeenth 
century.  Till  that  time  the  technology  of  the  ancients,  in 
their  prime,  probably  surpassed  that  of  the  moderns.  From 
that  century  onward,  technological  advance  has  more  than 
satisfied  the  complex  demands  for  effective  labour,  without 
recourse  to  slavery.  Of  course,  the  fixed  order  of  society  in 
a  well-managed  feudal  system  must  not  be  confused  with 
slavery,  even  in  its  application  to  the  agricultural  labourers 
at  the  base  of  the  whole  structure.  Each  order  had  its  rights 
and  duties,  and  in  the  happier  examples  of  later  feudalism 
the  villagers  were  quite  competent  to  go  to  law  with  their 
feudal  chief.  The  system  was  very  liable  to  degenerate  into 
practical  slavery,  and  often  did  so.  Indeed,  there  is  evidence1 
that,  during  the  early  Norman  period  in  England,  there  was 
a  relatively  small  class  of  slaves  whose  lives  were  at  the 
arbitrary  will  of  their  owners.  But  the  slave-trade  shocked 
the  conscience  of  those  times.  William  the  Conqueror  legis¬ 
lated  against  it,  and  Bishops  denounced  it.  In  those  times, 
it  must  be  remembered,  to  be  attached  to  the  land  was  a 
protection  as  well  as  a  restriction.  It  was  the  basis  of  a 
recognized  status  in  an  organized  society — so  far  as  the 
social  system  was  organized,  and  was  not  a  welter  of 
violence. 

1  Cf.  Mediaeval  England,  pp.  ioo,  ioi,  by  Mary  Bateson;  T.  Fisher  Unwin, 
London  1903,  and  G.  P.  Putnam’s  Sons,  New  York. 


Wl 


3 


34 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


The  modern  evolution  of  big  business  involves  a  closer 
analogy  to  feudalism  than  does  feudalism  to  slavery.  In 
fact,  the  modern  social  system  with  its  variety  of  indispen¬ 
sable,  interlocked  avocations  necessitates  such  organization. 
The  only  questions  at  issue  are  the  freedom  of  individuals 
to  circulate  among  the  grades,  and  satisfactory  legal  con¬ 
ceptions  of  the  variety  of  relations  of  the  grades  with  each 
other.  Individualists  and  socialists  are  merely  debating  over 
the  details  of  the  neo-feudalism  which  modern  industry  re¬ 
quires.  The  self-sufficing  independent  man,  with  his  peculiar 
property  which  concerns  no  one  else,  is  a  concept  without 
any  validity  for  modern  civilization.  Unfortunately  this 
notion  has  been  embodied  in  ancient  moral  codes  applicable 
to  Syrian  deserts,  and  has  reappeared  tingeing  western  poli¬ 
tical  theory  in  the  commercial  epoch  immediately  succeeding 
the  decay  of  mediaeval  feudalism.  But  it  is  not  the  practicable 
alternative  to  a  slave  society.  The  problem  of  social  life  is 
the  problem  of  the  co-ordination  of  activities,  including  the 
limits  of  such  co-ordination. 

The  sense  of  the  unity  of  civilization  fostered  by  the 
Catholic  Church,  the  general  similarities  of  mankind 
throughout  Europe,  and  the  simplicities  of  life  in  the  Middle 
Ages,  are  probably  the  main  reasons  why  mediaeval  wars  were 
dissociated  from  slave-raiding  expeditions.  We  hear  of  Saxon 
slaves  in  the  slave-market  in  Rome.  But  that  was  in  the 
life-time  of  Gregory  the  Great,  and  the  Saxons  were  not 
Christians.  Indeed,  whenever  the  European  races  came  into 
contact  with  non-Christian  foreign  races,  they  seem  to  have 
had  no  compunction  about  slavery.  We  read  of  Saracen 
slaves,  of  the  enslavement  of  the  indigenous  American  tribes, 
and,  above  all,  of  negro  slavery.  But  thanks  to  the  growth 
of  technology  concurrently  with  the  advance  of  civilization, 
the  European  races  have  avoided  slavery  in  temperate 


THE  HUMANITARIAN  IDEAL 


35 


climates.  Finally,  the  humanitarian  movement  of  the  eigh¬ 
teenth  century,  combined  with  a  religious  sense  of  the 
kinship  of  men,  has  issued  in  the  settled  policy  of  the  great 
civilized  governments  to  extirpate  slavery  from  the  world. 

Section  II.  This  success  came  only  just  in  time.  For 
before  and  during  the  nineteenth  century,  several  strands  of 
thought  emerged  whose  combined  effect  was  in  direct  oppo¬ 
sition  to  the  humanitarian  ideal.  At  the  moment  when  the 
‘brotherhood  of  man’  triumphed,  the  intellectual  world  was 
meditating  on  political  economy  conceived  in  terms  of  un¬ 
restrained  competition,  on  Malthus5  iron  law  that  the  mass 
of  the  population  must  always  press  on  the  limits  of  bare 
subsistence,  and  on  the  zoological  law  of  natural  selection 
by  which  an  iron  environment  crushed  out  the  less  favoured 
species,  and  on  Hume’s  criticism  of  the  notion  of  the  soul. 
This  new  trend  of  thought  was  in  its  immediate  origin 
British  and  is  to  be  compared  and  contrasted  with  the  ante¬ 
cedent  Wesleyan  movement.  In  neither  case  did  the  leaders 
intend  the  sociological  effects  which  followed  from  their 
efforts.  It  is  often  the  case  that  the  originators  belong  to 
the  antecedent  epoch,  and  stand  outside  the  epoch  of  their 
followers.  The  Methodist  preachers  did  not  intend  to  trans¬ 
form  society,  their  object  was  to  save  souls.  In  like  manner, 
Adam  Smith  was  a  typical  figure  of  the  eighteenth  century 
enlightenment. 

He  and  Hume  are  two  of  the  last  great  Scotchmen  who 
mark  the  traditional  affiliation  of  Scotland  with  France, 
which  had  survived  from  the  earlier  centuries  of  joint  an¬ 
tagonism  to  England.  At  their  date  the  intellectual  life  of 
Edinburgh  and  Glasgow  is  not  to  be  assimilated  with  that 
of  England.  Throughout  the  greater  part  of  the  eighteenth 
century,  during  its  central  portion,  the  intellectual  life  of 
England,  so  far  as  concerns  any  originative  energy,  is  neg- 

3-2 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


36 

ligible.  Indeed,  one  of  the  reasons  for  the  separation  of 
America  from  England  was  that  the  particular  circum¬ 
stances  of  English  life  were  not  applicable  to  America,  and 
that  England  was  not  fermenting  with  any  universal  ideas 
capable  of  specialization  for  American  conditions.  English 
influence  survived,  it  is  true,  in  the  Common  Law;  but, 
apart  from  that  exception,  the  mentality  of  men  like  Jefferson 
and  Franklin  was  French.  There  was  the  homeland  of  their 
thoughts.  It  has  required  the  whole  of  the  activity  of  the 
nineteenth  century,  from  1790  onward,  to  reconstruct  the 
intellectual  influence  of  England  on  the  outside  world.  In 
the  eighteenth  century,  France  looked  to  England;  but  it 
was  to  the  England  of  the  seventeenth  century,  Bacon, 
Newton,  Locke  and  the  Regicides.  In  order  to  understand 
the  intellectual  history  of  Europe,  it  is  essential  to  remember 
the  collapse  of  Germany  during  and  after  the  Thirty  Years5 
War,  to  remember  the  collapse  of  Italy  owing  to  the  super- 
session  of  the  Mediterranean  trade  route  to  the  East,  owing 
to  the  Catholic  Reaction  with  its  activity  of  censorship,  and 
owing  to  the  domination  of  Spaniards  and  Habsburgs,  and 
to  remember  the  collapse  of  England  owing  to  absorption  in 
the  commercial  expansion  of  the  eighteenth  century — in  the 
words  of  the  old  song,  ‘When  George  and  pudding- time 
came  round5.  In  the  eighteenth  century  France  carried  the 
‘White  Man’s  Burden5  of  intellectual  advance. 

Perhaps  it  was  owing  to  the  loss  of  the  habit  of  speculative 
thoroughness,  that  in  the  revival  of  intellectual  activity  in 
England  the  issue  of  the  emerging  lines  of  thought  was  not 
discerned.  Hume’s  flux  of  impressions  and  of  reactions  to 
impressions,  each  impression  a  distinct,  self-sufficient  exist¬ 
ence,  was  very  different  to  the  Platonic  soul.  The  status  of 
man  in  the  universe  required  re-considering.  ‘What  is  man 


THE  HUMANITARIAN  IDEAL  37 

that  thou  art  mindful  of  him?’  The  brotherhood  of  man 
at  the  top  of  creation  ceased  to  be  the  well-defined  founda¬ 
tion  for  moral  principles.  There  seems  no  very  obvious 
reason  why  one  flux  of  impressions  should  not  be  related 
to  another  flux  of  impressions  in  the  relative  status  of  master 
to  slave.  To  put  the  matter  at  its  very  lowest,  the  point  re¬ 
quires  arguing.  It  is  no  answer  to  point  out  that  Hume  and 
Huxley  were  united  in  their  dislike  of  slavery — certainly 
Huxley,  probably  Hume.  The  question  is  what  reason  could 
they  give,  apart  from  their  own  psychological  inheritance 
from  the  Platonic  religious  tradition.  For  example,  in 
Book  III,  of  his  Treatise ,  Part  II,  Section  I,  Hume  writes, 
“In  general,  it  may  be  affirm’d  that  there  is  no  such  passion 
in  human  minds,  as  the  love  of  mankind,  merely  as  such, 
independent  of  personal  qualities,  or  services,  or  of  relation 
to  ourself”.  This  sentence  seems  very  remote  from  the 
Catholic  missionaries  in  America,  from  the  Quaker  John 
Woolman,  or  from  the  free-thinking  Thomas  Paine.  In 
some  mysterious  way,  they  all  cared  for  ‘mankind,  merely 
as  such’. 

Section  III.  In  the  Middle  Ages  of  Europe  the  keynote 
of  sociological  theory  is  ‘co-ordination’.  The  Church  co-ordi¬ 
nated  religious  speculations;  the  Feudal  System  co-ordinated 
the  intimate  structure  of  society;  the  Empire — or,  Was  it  the 
Church?  Here  dispute  crept  in — co-ordinated  the  Govern¬ 
ments  of  the  provincial  regions,  Counts,  Dukes,  Kings, 
and  City-Republics.  In  the  provinces  of  theology  and  of 
clerical  organization,  the  success  was  considerable.  To  a  less 
degree  the  Feudal  System  effected  its  purpose.  No  other 
system  can  be  suggested  which  at  that  time  and  in  those 
circumstances  could  have  replaced  it  successfully:  although 
the  towns  with  their  commercial  and  artisan  populations 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


38 

stood  outside  it,  more  particularly  in  Italy.  The  Empire 
was  a  failure  mitigated  by  a  few  successes.  The  Church, 
as  an  agent  of  large-scale  political  organization,  was  more 
successful  than  the  Empire.  Its  agents  were  better  educated, 
and — allowing  for  many  exceptions — had  a  higher  morale. 
Also  its  influence  extended  to  regions  which  the  Empire 
never  reached.  But,  on  the  whole,  the  attempts  at  large-scale 
organization  of  Europe  were  a  failure.  There  is  a  pathetic 
interest  in  Dante’s  De  Monarchia  with  its  initial  premise 
of  the  desire  of  mankind  for  peace  and  quietness.  We  have 
only  to  remember  the  state  of  Europe  at  that  time,  the  state 
of  Italy,  and  Dante’s  own  life.  Indeed,  men  do  long  for 
peace  and  quietness  but  their  desire  is  chequered  by  other 
impulses.  The  Middle  Ages  were  always  haunted  by  the 
ghost  of  the  old  Roman  Empire,  with  its  message  of  vast 
success  in  the  imposition  of  order  upon  men. 

The  Renaissance  men  read  the  classical  authors,  and  de¬ 
cisively  ignored  the  ideals  of  the  Roman  statesmen.  Plato, 
perhaps,  would  have  been  gratified  by  the  attention  his 
works  then  received.  But  he  would  have  been  horrified  at 
the  outburst  of  individualism.  In  the  men  of  the  Italian 
Renaissance  Plato  would  have  recognized  reproductions  of 
the  character  of  the  younger  Dionysius  of  Syracuse.  At  the 
time  the  incongruity  was  not  perceived.  But  the  inevitable 
issues  followed.  Finally  in  the  nineteenth  century,  amid  the 
triumph  of  humanitarian  principles,  the  basic  positions  of 
the  social  theories  derived  from  Platonism  and  Christianity 
were  questioned.  Previously,  they  had  never  been  fully 
acted  on.  They  were  impracticable.  But  they  had  not  been 
questioned  as  a  social  ideal. 

Section  IV.  The  collapse  of  the  Middle  Ages  was,  in  one 
of  its  aspects,  a  revolt  against  co-ordination.  The  new  keynote 
is  expressed  in  the  word  ‘competition’ — 


THE  HUMANITARIAN  IDEAL 


39 


‘Thou  shalt  not  murder,  but  tradition 
Approves  all  forms  of  competition.’ 

Private  life  now  dominated  the  social  life  of  Europe  in  all 
its  special  forms — The  Right  of  Private  Judgment,  Private 
Property,  The  Competition  of  Private  Traders,  Private 
Amusement.  The  notion  that  every  action  is  at  once  a  private 
experience  and  a  public  utility  had  to  be  born  again.  It 
sickened  and  died  with  the  disappearance  of  the  ‘mediaeval 
mind’.  Wherever  men  looked,  they  saw  ‘competition’ 
written  across  the  face  of  things.  Nations  arose,  and  men 
thought  of  nations  in  terms  of  international  competition. 
They  examined  the  theory  of  trade,  and  they  construed  its 
interactions  in  terms  of  competition,  mitigated  by  ‘higgling’. 
They  considered  the  bounty  of  nature  in  the  provision  of 
food,  and  they  saw  the  masses  of  mankind  competing  for 
insufficient  supplies.  They  saw  the  fecundity  of  nature  in 
the  provision  of  a  myriad  species  of  living  things,  and  they 
construed  the  explanation  in  terms  of  the  competition  of 
species.  What  the  notions  of  ‘form’  and  ‘harmony’  were 
to  Plato,  that  the  notions  of  ‘individuality’  and  ‘competi¬ 
tion’  were  to  the  nineteenth  century.  God  had  placed  his 
bow  in  the  skies  as  a  symbol;  and  the  strip  of  colours, 
rightly  read,  spelt  ‘competition’.  The  prize  to  be  competed 
for  was  ‘life’.  Unsuccessful  competitors  died;  and  thus,  by 
a  beautiful  provision  of  nature,  ceased  from  constituting  a 
social  problem. 

Now  it  is  quite  obvious  that  a  much  needed  corrective 
to  an  unqualified,  sentimental  humanitarianism  is  here 
being  supplied.  Strife  is  at  least  as  real  a  fact  in  the  world  as 
Harmony.  If  you  side  with  Francis  Bacon  and  concentrate 
on  the  efficient  causes,  you  can  interpret  large  features  of 
the  growth  of  structure  in  terms  of  ‘strife’.  If,  with  Plato, 
you  fix  attention  on  the  end,  rationally  worthy,  you  can 


40 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


interpret  large  features  in  terms  of  ‘  harmony 5 .  But  until  some 
outline  of  understanding  has  been  reached  which  elucidates 
the  interfusion  of  strife  and  harmony,  the  intellectual  driving 
force  of  successive  generations  will  sway  uneasily  between 
the  two. 

There  have  been  many  interpretations  of  special  aspects 
of  European  society  in  terms  of  strife:  Machiavelli’s  'Prince5, 
the  political  policies  of  the  great  Renaissance  Monarchs, 
Charles  the  Fifth,  Philip  the  Second,  Francis  the  First, 
Henry  the  Eighth,  Henri  Quatre,  William  the  Silent,  Queen 
Elizabeth.  The  people,  thus  indicated,  found  strife.  They 
could  not  evade  it.  Fleets,  armies,  hatreds,  assassin's  daggers, 
burnings  at  the  stake,  insurrections  were  there  as  real  present 
facts.  To  survive,  as  persons  or  as  nations,  meant  force  and 
policy  suppressing  competitors.  Harmony  crept  in  under  the 
guise  of  the  joy  of  the  adventure,  of  faculties  stretched  to 
the  full.  But  such  harmony  was  a  secondary  effect,  merely 
Romance  gilding  Strife. 

In  the  hands  of  theologians  both  in  the  Middle  Ages  and 
in  the  first  period  of  its  supersession,  the  Platonic-Christian 
tradition  leant  heavily  towards  its  mystical  religious  side. 
It  abandoned  this  world  to  the  Evil  Prince  thereof,  and  con¬ 
centrated  thought  upon  another  world  and  a  better  life. 
Plato  himself  explicitly  considers  this  solution  at  the  end 
of  his  dialogue,  the  Republic.  But  he  there  gives  it  another 
twist  to  that  adopted  by  later  theologians.  He  conceives  the 
perfect  R.epublic  in  Heaven  as  an  immediate  present  pos¬ 
session  in  the  consciousness  of  the  wise  in  the  temporal 
world.  Thus  for  Plato,  at  least  in  his  mood  when  he  con¬ 
cluded  this  dialogue,  the  joy  of  heaven  is  realizable  on 
earth:  the  wise  are  happy.  Theoretically,  this  doctrine  also 
tinged  mediaeval  Christianity.  But  in  practice  there  has 
always  been  the  temptation  to  abandon  the  immediate  ex- 


THE  HUMANITARIAN  IDEAL  41 

perience  of  this  world  as  a  lost  cause.  The  shadows  pass — 
says  mystical  Religion.  But  they  also  recur,  and  recur — 
whispers  the  Experience  of  Mankind.  Be  tranquil,  they 
will  end — rejoins  Religion.  The  mystical  religion  which 
most  whole-heartedly  adopts  this  attitude  is  Buddhism.  In 
it  despair  of  this  world  is  conjoined  with  a  programme  for  the 
world’s  abolition  by  a  mystic  tranquility.  Christianity  has 
wavered  between  Buddhistic  renunciation  and  its  own  im¬ 
practicable  ideals  culminating  in  a  crude  Millennium  within 
the  temporal  flux.  The  difference  between  the  two  consists 
in  the  difference  between  a  programme  for  reform  and  a 
programme  for  abolition.  I  hazard  the  prophecy  that  that 
religion  will  conquer  which  can  render  clear  to  popular 
understanding  some  eternal  greatness  incarnate  in  the  passage 
of  temporal  fact. 

Section  V.  The  political,  liberal  faith  of  the  nineteenth 
century  was  a  compromise  between  the  individualistic, 
competitive  doctrine  of  strife  and  the  optimistic  doctrine  of 
harmony.  It  was  believed  that  the  laws  of  the  Universe  were 
such  that  the  strife  of  individuals  issued  in  the  progressive 
realization  of  a  harmonious  society.  In  this  way,  it  was 
possible  to  cherish  the  emotional  belief  in  the  Brotherhood 
of  Man,  while  engaging  in  relentless  competition  with  all 
individual  men.  Theoretically,  it  seemed  possible  to  con¬ 
ciliate  the  belief  with  the  practice  without  the  intrusion  of 
contradiction.  Unfortunately,  while  this  liberalism  was  win¬ 
ning  triumph  after  triumph  as  a  political  force  in  Europe 
and  America,  the  foundations  of  its  doctrine  were  receiving 
shock  after  shock. 

The  new  industrial  system,  which  should  have  been  a 
triumph  for  the  liberal  doctrines,  did  not  work  well.  It 
had  first  developed  in  England  under  treatment  exclusively 
dictated  by  the  doctrines  of  economic  liberalism.  On  this 


42 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


point,  in  their  treatment  of  the  manufacturing  and  mining 
industries,  the  English  Tories  at  first  were  as  orthodox  as 
the  English  Whigs.  Unfortunately  after  two  generations 
of  such  industrial  development,  the  widespread  misery  at 
the  base  of  the  whole  organization,  in  the  mines,  in  the 
factories,  in  the  slums,  aroused  the  public  conscience.  This 
foundation  of  social  relations  upon  individualism  and  com¬ 
petition,  with  no  mitigating  practices,  was  not  working 
well  under  the  new  industrial  conditions,  such  as  mining 
for  raw  materials  and  mechanized  manufacturing  for  finished 
products.  At  least  this  judgment  holds  for  the  old,  com¬ 
paratively  crowded,  nations  of  Europe.  England  was  the 
pioneer  and  tried  the  system  whole-heartedly.  It  failed. 
The  evidence  is  scattered  through  the  records  of  the  two 
decades  from  1830  to  1850.  For  example,  it  can  be  found 
summarized  in  any  life  of  the  Lord  Shaftesbury  of  the 
period — a  great  philanthropist — in  some  of  Disraeli’s  early 
novels,  in  the  joint  writings  of  J.  L.  Hammond  and  Barbara 
Hammond,  dealing  with  the  state  of  the  labourers,  town  and 
country.  The  mere  doctrines  of  freedom,  individualism,  and 
competition,  had  produced  a  resurgence  of  something  very 
like  industrial  slavery  at  the  base  of  society. 

The  industrial  politics  of  the  nineteenth  century  in 
Europe  can  only  be  understood  by  remembering  this  fact. 
The  pure  doctrine  of  nineteenth-century  liberalism  failed. 
During  the  decade  of  the  eighteen  forties  and  since,  in 
England  and  in  every  European  country  a  series  of  remedial 
industrial  measures  were  introduced.  The  great  liberal 
leaders,  Cobden,  Bright,  and  even  Gladstone,  were  either 
opposed,  or  were  notably  cold,  to  these  measures.  They 
infringed  the  purity  of  the  liberal  doctrine.  The  important 
internal  division  of  the  political  liberals  in  England  was  not 
the  prominent  one  between  Radicals  and  Whigs.  It  was  the 


THE  HUMANITARIAN  IDEAL 


43 


division  between  the  pure  liberals  and  the  modified  liberals. 
These  modified  liberals  were  in  some  ways  nearer  to  the  old 
Tories.  They  repudiated  the  liberal  doctrine  of  an  atomistic 
society.  Unfortunately  for  the  liberal  political  party  in 
England,  its  later  leaders,  Gladstone,  Lord  Hartington, 
Asquith,  belonged  to  the  pure  liberal  faction.  If  Campbell- 
Bannerman  had  been  somewhat  abler  and,  what  is  still 
more  important,  if  he  had  lived,  political  history  in  Eng¬ 
land  would  have  been  different.  As  it  was,  in  the  last  phase, 
English  political  liberalism  under  Asquith’s  leadership  was 
engaged  in  direct  opposition,  or  apathy,  in  respect  to  every 
reform  which  it  was  the  task  of  a  reforming  political  party 
to  undertake — the  Women’s  movement,  Education,  In¬ 
dustrial  Reorganization.  During  the  seventy  years  of  its 
greatest  triumphs,  from  1830  onward,  English  liberalism  was 
slowly  decaying  by  its  failure  to  acquire  a  coherent  system 
of  practicable  ideals.  On  the  whole,  the  pure  liberals  re¬ 
tained  command  of  the  political  machine  in  England,  from 
Mr  Gladstone  in  the  last  third  of  the  nineteenth  century  to 
Mr  Asquith  in  the  opening  phase  of  the  twentieth  century. 

Notwithstanding  this  reluctance  of  the  great  representa¬ 
tive  liberals,  before  the  middle  of  the  century  a  whole  new 
movement  of  social  co-ordination  arose,  in  the  form  of 
Governmental  measures,  regulative  of  mining,  of  factories,  of 
slum  areas.  The  Industrial  System  then  spread  to  Germany, 
where  the  necessity  for  co-ordination  and  the  failure  of  free 
competition  were  at  once  taken  for  granted.  The  early  form 
of  the  industrial  doctrine  of  liberalism  was  never  even  tried 
in  that  country.  But  the  modification  of  the  liberal  doctrines 
came  grudgingly;  and  its  failure  generated  a  new  formula¬ 
tion  of  an  old  idea.  Karl  Marx  proclaimed  the  doctrine  of 
‘The  Class  War5.  The  learned  economists  are  unanimous 
in  telling  us  that  Das  Kapital  does  not  express  a  sound  scien- 


44 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


tific  doctrine,  which  will  stand  comparison  with  the  facts. 
The  success  of  the  book — for  it  is  still  with  us  as  a  power — 
can  then  only  be  accounted  for  by  the  magnitude  of  the  evils 
ushered  in  by  the  first  phase  of  the  industrial  revolution. 

The  early  liberal  faith  that  by  the  decree  of  benevolent 
Providence  individualistic  competition  and  industrial  ac¬ 
tivity  would  necessarily  work  together  for  human  happiness 
had  broken  down  as  soon  as  it  was  tried.  Perhaps  a  more 
enlightened  training  of  the  directing  classes  was  required. 
Then  co-ordination  should  mainly  be  directed  towards 
education  and  sociological  training:  Perhaps,  governmental 
agency  regulating  the  conditions  of  all  employments  was 
the  proper  corrective:  Perhaps  the  State,  controlled  by  the 
workers,  should  be  the  sole  employer.  All  these  suggestions 
are  still  matters  of  fierce  debate.  In  some  country  or  other 
almost  every  solution  has  been  tried.  But  no  one  now  holds 
that,  apart  from  some  further  directive  agency,  mere  indivi¬ 
dualistic  competition,  of  itself  and  by  its  own  self-righting 
character,  will  produce  a  satisfactory  society. 

Unfortunately,  the  Malthusian  doctrine,  in  its  popular 
rendering,  affirmed  that  as  a  law  of  nature  the  masses  of 
mankind  could  never  emerge  into  a  high  state  of  well-being. 
Still  worse,  biological  science  drew  the  conclusion  that  the 
destruction  of  individuals  was  the  very  means  by  which 
advance  was  made  to  higher  types  of  species.  This  was  the 
famous  doctrine  of  Natural  Selection,  promulgated  in  1859, 
by  Charles  Darwin.  This  exclusive  reliance  upon  Natural 
Selection  was  not  characteristic  of  Darwin’s  own  theory. 
For  him,  it  was  one  agency  among  many  others.  But,  in  the 
form  in  which  the  doctrine  reigned  in  thought  from  that 
day  to  this,  Natural  Selection  was  the  sole  factor  to  be 
seriously  considered.  As  applied  to  human  society,  this 
theory  is  a  challenge  to  the  whole  humanitarian  movement. 


THE  HUMANITARIAN  IDEAL  45 

The  contrast  between  the  dominant  theories  of  Lamarck 
and  Darwin  made  all  the  difference.  Instead  of  dwelling 
on  the  brotherhood  of  man,  we  are  now  directed  to  procure 
the  extermination  of  the  unfit.  Again  the  modern  doctrines 
of  heredity,  gained  partly  from  the  experience  of  breeders 
of  stock,  partly  from  practical  horticulturists,  partly  from 
the  statistical  researches  of  Francis  Galton,  Karl  Pearson, 
and  their  school,  partly  from  the  laws  of  heredity  discovered 
by  Mendel,  the  Austrian  Abbot,  who  published  his  un¬ 
noticed  researches  contemporaneously  with  the  publication 
of  Darwin’s  Origin  of  Species — these  doctrines  have  all 
weakened  the  Stoic-Christian  ideal  of  democratic  brother¬ 
hood. 

Religion  by  itself  has  always  wavered  between  that  con¬ 
ception  and  the  despot-slaves  conception  of  God  and  his 
creatures.  But  the  democratic  liberalism  of  the  late  eigh¬ 
teenth  and  early  nineteenth  centuries  was  the  triumph  of 
the  Stoic-Christian  strain  of  thought.  In  Hume’s  criticism 
of  the  doctrine  of  the  soul,  in  the  breakdown  of  pure  un¬ 
mitigated  competitive  individualism  as  a  practical  working 
system,  in  the  Malthusian  doctrine  of  the  pressure  of  popu¬ 
lation  on  the  means  of  subsistence,  in  the  scientific  doctrine 
of  the  elimination  of  the  unfit  as  the  engine  of  progress,  in 
the  Galtonian  and  Mendelian  doctrines  of  heredity,  in  the 
rejection  of  the  Lamarckian  doctrine  that  usage  can  raise  the 
standard  of  fitness — in  the  concurrence  of  all  these  strands 
of  thought  the  liberalism  of  the  early  nineteenth  century  lost 
its  security  of  intellectual  justification. 

Section  VI.  There  are  two  intellectual  movements  to  be 
set  on  the  other  side  of  the  account.  One  is  Jeremy  Bentham’s 
legal  reformation  based  on  the  Utilitarian  Principle  of 
‘The  Greatest  Happiness  of  The  Greatest  Number’:  the 
other  is  Auguste  Comte’s  ‘Religion  of  Humanity’,  that  is  to 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


46 

say,  Positivism.  Most  of  what  has  been  practically  effective, 
in  morals,  in  religion,  or  in  political  theory,  from  their 
day  to  this  has  derived  strength  from  one  or  other  of 
these  men.  Their  doctrines  have  been  largely  repudiated  as 
theoretical  foundations,  but  as  practical  working  principles 
they  dominate  the  world.  On  the  whole,  their  influence  1ms 
been  democratic.  They  have  swept  away  mysterious  claims 
of  privileged  orders  of  men,  based  on  mystical  intuitions 
originated  by  religion  or  philosophy.  They  carried  back  to 
the  Roman  Stoic  lawyers,  though  they  repudiated  the  ulti¬ 
mate  metaphysical  doctrines  of  Stoicism.  They  were  in  effect 
a  resurrection  of  this  Stoic  legal  movement,  but  devoid  of 
its  intellectual  grandeur.  From  another  point  of  view,  they 
recurred  to  the  scientific  revolt  against  metaphysics,  led  by 
Newton,  in  the  seventeenth  century.  They  extended  this 
revolt  to  moral  and  political  theory. 

For  two  thousand  years  Platonic  philosophic  theories  and 
Christian  intuitions  had  furnished  the  intellectual  justifica¬ 
tion  for  the  slow  growth  in  Western  Europe  of  emotions 
of  respect  and  friendliness  between  man  and  man — the 
notion  of  brotherhood.  These  emotions  are  at  the  basis  of  all 
social  groups.  As  relatively  blind  emotions  they  must  per¬ 
vade  animal  society,  namely,  the  urge  to  co-operate,  to  help, 
to  feed,  to  cherish,  to  play  together,  to  express  affection. 
Among  mankind  these  fundamental  feelings  reign  with 
great  strength  within  limited  societies.  But  the  range  of 
human  intelligence — its  very  foresight  as  to  dangers  and 
opportunities,  the  power  of  the  imaginative  entertaining  of 
differences  between  group  and  group,  of  their  divergencies 
of  habit  and  sentiment — this  range  of  intelligence  has  pro¬ 
duced  a  ferocity  of  inversion  of  this  very  sentiment  of  inter¬ 
racial  benevolence.  Mankind  is  distinguished  by  its  strength 
of  tribal  feeling,  and  conversely  it  is  also  distinguished  by 


THE  HUMANITARIAN  IDEAL 


47 


far-reaching  malign  exploitation  and  inter-tribal  warfare. 
Also  the  tribal  feeling  is  apt  to  be  chequered  by  limitations 
of  benevolence  to  special  sections  within  the  boundary  of  the 
same  community. 

For  two  thousand  years  philosophy  and  religion  had  held 
up  before  Western  Europe  the  ideal  figure  of  man,  as  man, 
and  had  claimed  for  it  a  supreme  worth.  Under  this  urge, 
Jesuits  had  gone  to  Patagonia,  John  Woolman  had  de¬ 
nounced  slavery,  Tom  Paine  had  revolted  against  social 
oppression  and  against  the  doctrine  of  original  sin.  These 
Jesuits,  these  Quakers,  and  these  Freethinkers  differed 
among  themselves.  But  they  owed  their  emotions  towards 
men,  as  men,  to  the  generalization  of  feeling  produced  by 
the  joint  influence  of  philosophy  and  religion. 

Jeremy  Bentham  and  Auguste  Comte  accepted  these  gene¬ 
ralized  emotions  as  ultimate  moral  intuitions,  clear  matter 
of  fact,  requiring  no  justification  and  requiring  no  ultimate 
understanding  of  their  relations  to  the  rest  of  things.  They 
discarded  metaphysics.  In  so  doing,  they  effected  an  im¬ 
mense  service  to  democratic  liberalism.  For  they  produced 
a  practicable  programme  of  reform,  and  practicable  modes  of 
expression  which  served  to  unite  men  whose  ultimate  notions 
differed  vastly. 

Unfortunately,  owing  to  the  advance  of  scientific  theory, 
the  relations  of  the  emotions  to  the  rest  of  things  refused  to 
be  ignored.  In  the  evolution  of  life  Nature  is  implacable: 
Nature  discriminates.  Whence  comes  this  universal  bene¬ 
volence  ‘The  Religion  of  Humanity5  should  be  replaced  by 
a  cult  of  a  select  assortment  of  Humanity:  ‘The  Greatest 
Happiness  of  The  Greatest  Number5  should  be  replaced  by 
‘  The  Humane  Extinction  of  Inferior  Specimens 5 .  Hume  denies 
that  there  is  any  ‘  such  passion ...  as  the  love  of  mankind 
merely  as  such5.  Modern  science  gives  a  plausible  explana- 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


48 

tion  why  no  such  passion  is  required.  It  can  only  stand  in 
the  way  of  the  scavenging  process  of  evolution.  If  any 
people  are  subject  to  this  passion,  of  course  they  will  act  on  it. 
But  no  reason  can  be  given  why  we  should  inculcate  the 
passion  in  others,  or  why  we  should  pervert  legislation  to 
subserve  the  ends  of  such  an  unreasonable  emotion.  I  am 
certainly  in  greater  sympathy  with  Bentham  and  Comte 
than  with  this  deduction  from  Hume  and  modern  Zoology. 
But,  if  it  proves  nothing  else,  the  deduction  does  show  that 
Bentham  and  Comte  were  mistaken  in  thinking  that  they 
had  found  a  clear  foundation  for  morals,  religion,  and  legis¬ 
lation,  to  the  exclusion  of  all  ultimate  cosmological  prin¬ 
ciples.  On  the  surface,  their  pet  doctrines  are  just  as  liable 
to  sceptical  attack  as  metaphysical  dogmas  ever  were.  They 
have  gained  nothing  in  the  way  of  certainty  by  dropping 
Plato  and  Religion. 

More  ultimate  reasons  are  required  either  to  justify  dis¬ 
criminations  in  the  mixture,  or  to  provide  a  reconstructed 
justification  for  the  doctrine  of  regard  to  man,  as  man. 
Further  mere  ‘survival  value’  is  not  sufficient:  for  there  are 
conditions  which  stamp  out  just  those  types  which  we  find 
ourselves  most  willing  to  preserve  amid  happiness. 

Section  VII.  Auguste  Comte  founded  his  Positivism  on 
the  assured  results  of  science,  the  physical  and  moral  science 
of  his  own  day.  He  died  in  1857,  and  two  years  later 
Darwin  published  his  Origin  of  Species .  We  have  already  dis¬ 
cussed  some  of  the  difficulties  for  the  Religion  of  Humanity 
introduced  by  the  subsequent  phases  of  the  Evolution 
Theory.  Such  a  foundation  may  be  adequate  to  shape  the 
methodology  of  a  group  of  men  with  limited  interests  at 
some  definite  date.  But  certainly  this  adequacy  does  not 
arise  from  any  adequate  clarity  of  the  point  of  view.  Many 
a  worshipper  obtains  his  purpose  of  spiritual  consolation  by 


THE  HUMANITARIAN  IDEAL 


49 


bowing  towards  the  sunrise  and  muttering  an  incantation; 
but  he  may  be  totally  unable  to  render  any  coherent  account 
of  the  grounds,  metaphysical  or  pragmatic,  which  render  his 
procedure  effective. 

Apart  from  this  difficulty  of  conciliating  the  physical  with 
the  mental  sciences,  physical  science,  taken  by  itself,  has 
some  difficulty  with  its  own  fundamental  notions.  This  per¬ 
plexity  is  relevant  to  Platonic  religious  tradition  whose 
fortunes  and  specializations  we  have  been  tracing.  We  can 
classify  the  topics  of  physical  science  under  four  headings: 
(i)  The  true  and  real  things  which  endure,  (2)  The  true 
and  real  things  which  occur,  (3)  The  abstract  things  which 
recur,  (4)  The  Laws  of  Nature.  An  example  of  the  first 
heading  is  a  piece  of  rock,  or — to  pass  beyond  mere  physical 
science — the  individuality  of  a  human  being,  his  soul,  as 
Plato  would  have  it.  An  example  of  the  second  kind  is  any 
happenings,  in  a  street,  in  a  room,  in  an  animal  body,  or — 
again  to  pass  beyond  mere  physical  science — our  individual 
complex  experience  within  a  tenth  of  a  second.  An  example 
of  the  third  type  is  the  shape  of  a  rock.  It  seems  doubtful 
whether  a  shade  of  colour,  or  the  qualitative  element  in  the 
performance  of  a  musical  symphony,  are  to  be  reckoned  as 
concerned  with  nature  or  mentality.  But  certainly  they  recur. 
On  the  other  hand  a  sort  of  feeling  of  affection  is  a  recurrence 
which  belongs  decidedly  to  the  mental  side  of  things.  An 
example  of  the  fourth  heading  is  the  Law  of  Gravitation,  or 
the  geometrical  Relations  of  Things. 

I  am  not  going  to  plunge  into  a  metaphysical  discussion 
at  the  close  of  a  chapter,  already  sufficiently  complex.  But 
it  is  relevant  to  point  out,  how  superficial  are  our  contro¬ 
versies  on  sociological  theory  apart  from  some  more  funda¬ 
mental  determination  of  what  we  are  talking  about.  The 
four  topics  above  at  once  suggest  a  host  of  perplexing  ques- 

4 


wi 


50 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


tions,  which  have  puzzled  thinkers  from  the  time  of  Plato 
to  the  present  time.  In  these  two  chapters  we  have  been 
tracing  the  history  of  three  very  different  types  of  thought, 
(a)  the  Platonic-Religious  ideas,  (b)  Individualistic,  Com¬ 
petitive  ideas  of  Commercial  Society,  (c)  the  idea  of  physical 
science.  Also  each  of  these  types  involves  internal  com¬ 
plexities.  Now  we  may  hold,  indeed  I  think  we  must  hold, 
that  each  of  these  strains  of  theory  is  the  outcome  of  valid 
intuitions  and  embodies  truths  about  the  nature  of  things 
which  cannot  be  set  aside.  It  seems  an  easy  solution  to  hold 
that  each  type  of  idea  is  within  its  own  sphere  autonomous. 
In  that  case,  the  controversies  arise  from  the  illegitimate 
poaching  of  one  type  over  the  proper  territory  of  some 
other  type.  For  example,  it  is  fashionable  to  state  that  re¬ 
ligion  and  science  can  never  clash  because  they  deal  with 
different  topics.  I  believe  that  this  solution  is  entirely  mis¬ 
taken.  In  this  world  at  least,  you  cannot  tear  apart  minds 
and  bodies.  But  as  soon  as  you  try  to  adjust  ideas,  you  find 
the  supreme  importance  of  making  perfectly  clear  what 
you  are  talking  about.  It  is  fatal  to  oscillate  uncritically 
from  the  things  which  endure  to  the  things  which  occur, 
and  from  the  things  which  occur  to  the  things  which  recur. 
Discussions  based  on  no  metaphysical  clarity  in  the  dis¬ 
crimination  of  endurance,  occurrence,  recurrence,  can  be 
made  sophistically  to  prove  anything. 

For  example,  in  the  statement  of  the  Utilitarian  Principle 
we  find  the  phrase  4  The  Greatest  Happiness  of  The  Greatest 
Number’.  Evidently  this  phrase  has  a  meaning,  at  least 
sufficient  for  us  to  take  it  as  a  rough  guide  to  action.  But 
when  we  use  the  formula  as  a  criticism  of  the  other  points 
of  view,  we  are  entitled  to  ask  what  it  means.  The  'Happi¬ 
ness’  is  evidently  a  recurrent,  and  it  is  differentiated  into 
grades  of  intensity,  so  that  one  occurrence  may  be  more 


THE  HUMANITARIAN  IDEAL  51 

intense  than  another  in  point  of  Happiness.  But  what  is 
meant  by  the  addition  of  the  Happinesses  of  different  occur¬ 
rences?  There  is  no  occurrence  with  the  Happiness  of  this 
addition  sum.  At  least,  if  there  be  such  an  occurrence,  it 
ought  to  be  indicated  in  the  principle,  and  this  indication 
will  lead  us  in  the  direction  of  the  discarded  Platonism. 
Again,  we  must  know  the  relation  of  the  endurances  to  the 
occurrences  in  order  to  understand  the  principle.  As  usually 
employed,  the  phrase  refers  to  the  greatest  number  of  men. 
It  therefore  refers  to  endurances  and  not  to  occurrences. 
But  can  we  really  correlate  the  happinesses  of  three  short¬ 
lived  men  with  that  of  one  long-lived  man?  Then  again 
there  are  the  qualitative  differences  between  different  types 
of  happiness.  Finally  we  conclude  that  before  we  can  profit¬ 
ably  proceed  with  this  discussion,  it  is  necessary  to  attain  some 
clarity  in  our  metaphysical  notions  respecting  endurances, 
occurrences,  and  things  that  recur. 

Section  VIII.  We  now  pass  to  Science  and  ask  whether 
it  provides  us  with  any  clear  notions,  independently  of  a 
metaphysical  discussion.  Science  is  founded  on  the  notion 
of  Law — The  Laws  of  Nature.  The  notion  is  that  there 
are  many  things  in  the  world,  whose  behaviour  towards 
each  other  always  exemplifies  fixed  rules.  These  rules  are 
evidently  indicating  recurrences  which  never  fail  to  recur. 
Yet  here  a  perplexity  arises  as  to  the  connection  of  the  Laws 
with  the  behaving  things.  Behaviours  differ  widely  in  a  city — 
New  York,  for  instance — in  a  forest,  in  a  subtropical  desert, 
in  an  Arctic  icefield.  Also,  to  travel  farther,  they  differ  widely 
on  the  Moon,  on  the  atmosphere  of  the  Sun,  in  the  interior 
of  a  dense  star,  in  inter-stellar  space. 

This  is  very  superficial.  We  all  know  that  if  we  analyse 
the  things  into  molecules  the  laws  «of  chemistry  are  the  same 
in  the  city,  the  forest,  the  desert  and  the  icefield.  These 

4-2 


52 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


laws  of  chemistry  express  the  mutual  behaviour  of  mole¬ 
cules,  packed  with  sufficient  closeness.  But  molecules  are 
analysable.  Things  behave  very  differently  amid  a  close 
pack  of  molecules  from  their  behaviour  amid  the  vibrations 
of  so-called  empty  space.  The  chemical  laws  are  merely 
relevant  to  the  inter-relations  of  molecules.  In  empty  space 
we  are  driven  back  to  the  fundamental  electromagnetic 
laws  controlling  the  flux  of  energy.  At  this  point  we  have 
to  stop  our  regression,  merely  because  our  penetration  has 
come  to  an  end. 

But  there  is  no  reason  to  doubt  that  the  laws  are  the 
outcome  of  the  environment  of  electromagnetic  occasions. 
This  whole  process  of  regression  suggests  an  inversion  of 
ideas.  The  laws  are  the  outcome  of  the  character  of  the 
behaving  things :  they  are  the  ‘  communal  customs 5  of  which 
Clement  spoke.  This  conception  should  replace  the  older 
idea  of  given  things  with  mutual  behaviour  conditioned 
by  imposed  laws.  What  we  know  of  external  nature  is 
wholly  in  terms  of  how  the  various  occasions  in  nature 
contribute  to  each  other’s  natures.  The  whole  environ¬ 
ment  participates  in  the  nature  of  each  of  its  occasions. 
Thus  each  occasion  takes  its  initial  form  from  the  character 
of  its  environment.  Also  the  laws  which  condition  each 
environment  merely  express  the  general  character  of  the 
occasions  composing  that  environment.  This  is  the  doc¬ 
trine  of  the  definition  of  things  in  terms  of  their  modes  of 
functioning. 

But  we  are  now  drawing  close  to  the  impracticable  ethics 
of  Christianity.  The  ideals  cherished  in  the  souls  of  men 
enter  into  the  character  of  their  actions.  These  inter-actions 
within  society  modify  the  social  laws  by  modifying  the 
occasions  to  which  those  laws  apply.  Impracticable  ideals 
are  a  programme  for  reform.  Such  a  programme  is  not  to 


THE  HUMANITARIAN  IDEAL  53 

be  criticized  by  immediate  possibilities.  Progress  consists  in 
modifying  the  laws  of  nature  so  that  the  Republic  on  Earth 
may  conform  to  that  Society  to  be  discerned  ideally  by  the 
divination  of  Wisdom. 

In  these  two  chapters  we  have  been  considering  the  ad¬ 
ventures  in  the  history  of  Europe  of  a  great  idea.  Plato 
conceived  the  notion  of  the  ideal  relations  between  men 
based  upon  a  conception  of  the  intrinsic  possibilities  of  human 
character.  We  see  this  idea  enter  into  human  conscious¬ 
ness  in  every  variety  of  specialization.  It  forms  alliances 
with  allied  notions  generated  by  religion.  It  differentiates 
its  specializations  according  to  the  differentiations  of  the 
diverse  religions  and  diverse  scepticisms  associated  with  it. 
At  times  it  dies  down.  But  it  ever  recurs.  It  is  criticized, 
and  it  is  also  a  critic.  Force  is  always  against  it.  Its  victory 
is  the  victory  of  persuasion  over  force.  The  force  is  the  sheer 
fact  of  what  the  antecedent  volume  of  the  world  in  fact 
contains.  The  idea  is  a  prophecy  which  procures  its  own 
fulfillment. 

The  power  of  an  ideal  consists  in  this.  When  we  examine 
the  general  world  of  occurrent  fact,  we  find  that  its  general 
character,  practically  inescapable,  is  neutral  in  respect  to  the 
realization  of  intrinsic  value.  The  electromagnetic  occasions 
and  the  electromagnetic  laws,  the  molecular  occasions  and 
the  molecular  laws,  are  all  alike  neutral.  They  condition  the 
sort  of  values  which  are  possible,  but  they  do  not  determine 
the  specialities  of  value.  When  we  examine  the  specializations 
of  societies  which  determine  values  with  some  particularity, 
such  specializations  as  societies  of  men,  forests,  deserts, 
prairies,  icefields,  we  find,  within  limits,  plasticity.  The  story 
of  Plato’s  idea  is  the  story  of  its  energizing  within  a  local 
plastic  environment.  It  has  a  creative  power,  making  possible 
its  own  approach  to  realization. 


CHAPTER  IV 


ASPECTS  OF  FREEDOM 

Section  I.  The  cultural  history  of  Western  Civilization 
for  the  period  illuminated  by  written  records  can  be  con¬ 
sidered  from  many  aspects.  It  can  be  conceived  under  the 
guise  of  a  steady  economic  progression,  diversified  by 
catastrophic  collapses  to  lower  levels.  Such  a  point  of  view 
emphasizes  technology  and  economic  organization.  Alter¬ 
natively,  history  can  be  conceived  as  a  series  of  oscillations 
between  worldliness  and  other-worldliness,  or  as  a  theatre 
of  contest  between  greed  and  virtue,  or  between  truth  and 
error.  Such  points  of  view  emphasize  religion,  morality,  and 
contemplative  habits  eliciting  generalizations  of  thought. 
Each  mode  of  consideration  is  a  sort  of  searchlight  eluci¬ 
dating  some  of  the  facts,  and  retreating  the  remainder  into 
an  omitted  background.  Of  course  in  any  history,  even  with 
a  restricted  topic,  limited  to  politics,  or  to  art,  or  to  science, 
many  points  of  view  are  in  fact  interwoven,  each  with  varying 
grades  of  generality. 

One  of  the  most  general  philosophic  notions  to  be  used 
in  the  analysis  of  civilized  activities  is  to  consider  the  effect 
on  social  life  due  to  the  variations  of  emphasis  between 
Individual  Absoluteness  and  Individual  Relativity.  Here 
‘absoluteness5  means  the  notion  of  release  from  essential 
dependence  on  other  members  of  the  community  in  respect 
to  modes  of  activity,  while  ‘relativity5  means  the  converse 
fact  of  essential  relatedness.  In  one  of  their  particulariza- 


ASPECTS  OF  FREEDOM 


55 

tions  these  ideas  appear  in  the  antagonism  between  notions 
of  freedom  and  of  social  organization.  In  another  they 
appear  in  the  relative  importance  to  be  ascribed  to  the 
welfare  of  the  state  and  to  the  welfare  of  its  individual 
members.  The  character  of  each  epoch  as  to  its  social  in¬ 
stitutions,  its  jurisprudence,  its  notions  of  ideal  ends  within 
the  range  of  practicability,  depends  largely  upon  those 
various  patches  of  activity  within  which  one  or  other  of  these 
notions,  individual  absoluteness  or  individual  relativity,  is 
dominant  for  that  epoch.  No  period  is  wholly  controlled  by 
either  one  of  these  extremes,  reigning  through  its  whole 
range  of  activities.  Repression  in  one  direction  is  balanced 
by  freedom  in  others.  Military  discipline  is  severe.  In  the 
last  resort  individual  soldiers  are  sacrificed  to  the  army.  But 
in  many  fields  of  human  activity  soldiers  are  left  completely 
unfettered  both  by  regulation  and  by  custom.  For  members 
of  university  faculties  the  repressions  and  the  freedoms  are 
very  different  from  those  which  obtain  for  soldiers. 

Distribution  of  emphasis  between  absoluteness  and  rela¬ 
tivity  is  seemingly  arbitrary.  Of  course  there  is  always  a 
historical  reason  for  the  pattern.  Frequently  the  shifting  of 
emphasis  is  to  be  ascribed  to  the  general  tendency  to  revolt 
from  the  immediate  past — to  interchange  black  and  white 
wherever  we  find  them.  Also  the  transformation  may  be 
a  judgment  upon  dogmas  held  responsible  for  inherited 
failures.  It  should  be  one  function  of  history  to  disengage 
such  a  judgment  from  the  irritation  due  to  transient  cir¬ 
cumstances. 

More  often  changes  in  the  social  pattern  of  intellectual 
emphasis  arise  from  a  shift  of  power  from  one  class  or  group 
of  classes,  to  another  class,  or  group  of  classes.  For  example, 
an  oligarchic  aristocratic  government  and  a  democratic 
government  may  each  tend  to  emphasize  social  organization, 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


56 

that  is  to  say,  the  relativity  of  individuals  to  the  state.  But 
governments  mainly  satisfying  the  trading  and  professional 
classes,  whether  nominally  they  be  aristocratic,  democratic, 
or  absolute,  emphasize  personal  freedom,  that  is  to  say,  in¬ 
dividual  absoluteness.  Governments  of  the  latter  kind  have 
been  that  of  Imperial  Rome  with  its  middle  class  imperial 
agents,  and  its  middle  class  stoic  lawyers,  and  in  its  happiest 
period  its  middle  class  emperors;  and  that  of  England  in 
the  eighteenth  and  nineteenth  centuries. 

With  the  shift  of  dominant  classes,  points  of  view  which 
in  one  epoch  are  submerged,  only  to  be  detected  by  an 
occasional  ripple,  later  emerge  into  the  foreground  of  action 
and  literary  expression.  Thus  the  various  activities  of  each 
age — governmental,  literary,  scientific,  religious,  purely 
social — express  the  mentalities  of  various  classes  in  the  com¬ 
munity  whose  influence  for  those  topics  happens  to  be 
dominant.  In  one  of  his  speeches  on  the  American  Revolu¬ 
tion,  Burke  exclaims,  “For  heaven’s  sake,  satisfy  somebody” . 

Governments  are  best  classified  by  considering  who  are 
the  ‘somebodies’  they  are  in  fact  endeavouring  to  satisfy. 
Thus  the  English  government  of  the  first  sixty  years  of  the 
eighteenth  century  was,  as  to  its  form  and  its  persons, 
aristocratic.  But  in  policy  it  was  endeavouring  to  satisfy  the 
great  merchants  of  the  City  of  London  and  of  the  City  of 
Bristol.  Their  dissatisfaction  was  the  immediate  source  of 
danger.  Sir  Robert  Walpole  and  William  Pitt,  the  Great 
Commoner,  personify  the  changing  moods  of  this  class,  in 
the  earlier  period  sick  of  wars,  and  later  imperialistic. 

In  a  period  when  inherited  modes  of  life  are  operating 
with  their  traditional  standard  of  efficiency,  or  inefficiency, 
the  class  to  be  actively  satisfied  may  be  relatively  restricted, 
for  example,  the  merchants  of  eighteenth-century  England. 
The  majority  will  then  be  relatively  quiescent,  and  con- 


ASPECTS  OF  FREEDOM 


57 

servative  statesmen,  such  as  Walpole,  will  be  anxious  to  do 
nothing  to  stir  the  depths — i  Quieta  non  movere\  Walpole  was 
an  active  reformer  in  respect  to  trade  interests,  otherwise  a 
conservative. 

The  corresponding  statesmen  in  France  were  actively  con¬ 
cerned  with  the  interests  of  the  Court  whose  power  was  based 
on  a  bureaucracy  (legal,  administrative,  and  ecclesiastical) 
and  an  army.  As  in  contemporary  England,  the  personnel 
of  the  whole  French  organization,  civil  and  military,  was 
aristocratic  and  middle  class.  French  politics  ran  more 
smoothly,  but  unfortunately  for  France  its  active  political 
element  was  more  divorced  from  the  main  interests  of  the 
country  than  the  active  element  in  England,  though  in  each 
country  government  exhibited  its  periods  of  insight  and 
folly.  The  French  emphasis  was  towards  co-ordination,  the 
English  towards  individual  freedom.  In  the  latter  portion 
of  this  century,  in  England  the  more  active  class  politically 
were  the  rural  landowners.  Note  for  instance  the  way 
in  which,  at  the  end  of  his  political  life,  Burke  hugs  the 
improbable  belief  that  he  understood  agriculture.  Also  the 
municipality  of  the  City  of  London  was  in  the  earlier  period 
an  element  of  support  for  the  government,  and — until  the 
excesses  of  the  French  Revolution — in  the  later  period  an 
element  of  opposition. 

In  the  later  period  the  oncoming  industrial  revolution 
absorbed  the  energies  of  that  English  industrial  class,  whom 
at  the  earlier  period  the  slogan,  ‘The  Protestant  Succession’ 
had  stirred  to  political  activity  because  for  them  it  spelled 
‘Industrial  Freedom’.  The  mass  of  the  people  were  now, 
towards  the  end  of  the  century,  stirring  uneasily,  as  yet 
ignorant  of  the  ways  in  which  their  interests  were  being 
determined,  and  with  its  better  members  engaged  in  saving 
their  souls  according  to  the  directions  of  John  Wesley. 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


58 

Finally  out  of  this  welter,  after  a  delay  caused  by  the  wars 
of  the  French  Revolution,  the  Victorian  epoch  emerged. 
The  solution  was  merely  temporary,  and  so  is  the  planet 
itself. 

Section  II.  In  our  endeavour  to  understand  sociological 
change  we  must  not  concentrate  too  exclusively  on  the  effect 
of  abstract  doctrine,  verbally  formulated  and  consciously 
assented  to.  Such  elaborate  intellectual  efforts  play  their  part 
in  preserving,  or  transforming,  or  destroying.  For  example, 
the  history  of  Europe  is  not  to  be  understood  without  some 
reference  to  the  Augustinian  doctrines  of  original  sin,  of 
divine  grace,  and  of  the  consequent  mission  of  the  Catholic 
Church.  The  history  of  the  United  States  requires  in  ad¬ 
dition  some  knowledge  of  the  English  political  doctrines  of 
the  seventeenth  century,  and  of  French  thought  in  the 
eighteenth  century.  Men  are  driven  by  their  thoughts  as 
well  as  by  the  molecules  in  their  bodies,  by  intelligence  and 
by  senseless  forces.  Social  history,  however,  concentrates  on 
modes  of  human  experience  prevalent  at  different  periods. 
The  physical  conditions  are  merely  the  background  which 
partially  controls  the  flux  of  modes  and  of  moods.  Even 
here  we  must  not  over-intellectualize  the  various  types  of 
human  experience.  Mankind  is  the  animal  at  the  head  of 
the  Primates,  and  cannot  escape  habits  of  mind  which  cling 
closely  to  habits  of  body. 

Our  consciousness  does  not  initiate  our  modes  of  func¬ 
tionings.  We  awake  to  find  ourselves  engaged  in  process, 
immersed  in  satisfactions  and  dissatisfactions,  and  actively 
modifying,  either  by  intensification,  or  by  attenuation,  or  by 
the  introduction  of  novel  purposes.  This  primary  procedure 
which  is  presupposed  in  consciousness  I  will  term  Instinct. 
It  is  the  mode  of  experience  directly  arising  out  of  the  urge 
of  inheritance,  individual  and  environmental.  Also,  after 


ASPECTS  OF  FREEDOM 


59 

instinct  and  intellectual  ferment  have  done  their  work,  there 
is  a  decision  which  determines  the  mode  of  coalescence  of 
instinct  with  intelligence.  I  will  term  this  factor  Wisdom. 
It  is  the  function  of  wisdom  to  act  as  a  modifying  agency  on 
the  intellectual  ferment  so  as  to  produce  a  self-determined 
issue  from  the  given  conditions.  Thus  for  the  purpose 
of  understanding  social  institutions,  this  crude  three-fold 
division  of  human  nature  is  required :  Instinct,  Intelligence, 
Wisdom. 

But  this  division  must  not  be  made  too  sharply.  After  all, 
intellectual  activity  is  itself  an  inherited  factor.  We  do  not 
initiate  thought  by  an  effort  of  self-consciousness.  We  find 
ourselves  thinking,  just  as  we  find  ourselves  breathing  and 
enjoying  the  sunset.  There  is  a  habit  of  day-dreaming,  and 
a  habit  of  thoughtful  elucidation.  Thus  the  autonomy  of 
thought  is  strictly  limited,  often  negligible,  generally  beyond 
the  threshold  of  consciousness.  The  ways  of  thought  of  a 
nation  are  as  much  instinctive — that  is  to  say,  are  subject 
to  routine — as  are  its  ways  of  emotional  reaction.  But  most 
of  us  believe  that  there  is  a  spontaneity  of  thought  which 
lies  beyond  routine.  Otherwise,  the  moral  claim  for  freedom 
of  thought  is  without  meaning.  This  spontaneity  of  thought 
is,  in  its  turn,  subject  to  control  as  to  its  maintenance  and 
efficiency.  Such  control  is  the  judgment  of  the  whole, 
attenuating  or  strengthening  the  partial  flashes  of  self- 
determination.  The  whole  determines  what  it  wills  to  be,  and 
thereby  adjusts  the  relative  importance  of  its  own  inherent 
flashes  of  spontaneity.  This  final  determination  is  its  Wisdom 
or,  in  other  words,  its  subjective  aim  as  to  its  own  nature, 
with  its  limits  set  by  inherited  factors. 

Wisdom  is  proportional  to  the  width  of  the  evidence  made 
effective  in  the  final  self-determination.  The  intellectual 
operations  consist  in  the  co-ordination  of  notions  derived 


6o 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


from  the  primary  facts  of  instinctive  experience  into  a 
logically  coherent  system.  Those  facts,  whose  qualitative 
aspects  are  thus  co-ordinated,  gain  importance  in  the  final 
self-determination.  This  intellectual  co-ordination  is  more 
readily  achieved  when  the  primary  facts  are  selected  so  as 
to  dismiss  the  baffling  aspects  of  things  into  intellectual  sub¬ 
ordination.  For  this  reason  intellectual  activity  is  apt  to 
flourish  at  the  expense  of  Wisdom.  To  some  extent,  to  under¬ 
stand  is  always  to  exclude  a  background  of  intellectual 
incoherence.  But  Wisdom  is  persistent  pursuit  of  the  deeper 
understanding,  ever  confronting  intellectual  system  with 
the  importance  of  its  omissions.  These  three  elements,  In¬ 
stinct,  Intelligence,  Wisdom,  cannot  be  torn  apart.  They 
integrate,  react,  and  merge  into  hybrid  factors.  It  is  the  case 
of  the  whole  emerging  from  its  parts,  and  the  parts  emerging 
within  the  whole.  In  judging  social  institutions,  their  rise, 
their  culmination,  and  their  decay,  we  have  to  estimate  the 
types  of  instinct,  of  intelligence,  and  of  wisdom  which  have 
co-operated  with  natural  forces  to  develop  the  story.  The  folly 
of  intelligent  people,  clear-headed  and  narrow- visioned,  has 
precipitated  many  catastrophes. 

However  far  we  go  back  in  recorded  history,  we  are 
within  the  period  of  the  high  grade  functioning  of  man¬ 
kind,  far  removed  from  mere  animal  savagery.  Also,  within 
that  period  it  would  be  difficult  to  demonstrate  that  man¬ 
kind  has  improved  upon  its  inborn  mental  capacity.  Yet 
there  can  be  no  doubt  that  there  has  been  an  immense 
expansion  of  the  outfit  which  the  environment  provides 
for  the  service  of  thought.  This  outfit  can  be  summarized 
under  the  headings,  modes  of  communication,  physical  and 
mental,  writing,  preservation  of  documents,  variety  of  modes 
of  literature,  critical  thought,  systematic  thought?  construc¬ 
tive  thought,  history,  comparison  of  diverse  languages, 


ASPECTS  OF  FREEDOM 


6l 


mathematical  symbolism,  improved  technology  providing 
physical  ease.  This  list  is  obviously  composed  of  many  par¬ 
tially  redundant  and  overlapping  items.  But  it  serves  to 
remind  us  of  the  various  ways  in  which  we  have  at  our 
service  facilities  for  thought  and  suggestions  for  thought,  far 
beyond  those  at  hand  for  our  predecessors  who  lived  any¬ 
where  from  two  to  five  thousand  years  ago.  Indeed,  the  last 
two  hundred  years  has  added  to  this  outfit  in  a  way  which 
may  create  a  new  epoch  unless  mankind  degenerates.  Of 
course,  a  large  share  of  this  outfit  had  already  accumulated 
between  two  and  three  thousand  years  ago.  It  is  the  brilliant 
use  which  the  leading  men  of  that  millennium  made  of  their 
opportunities  which  makes  us  doubt  of  any  improvement  in 
the  native  intelligence  of  mankind. 

But  the  total  result  is  that  we  now  discern  a  certain  simple- 
mindedness  in  the  way  our  predecessors  adjusted  themselves 
to  inherited  institutions.  To  a  far  greater  extent  the  adjust¬ 
ment  was  a  matter  of  course,  in  short,  it  was  instinctive. 
In  the  great  period  they  discovered  what  we  have  inherited. 
But  there  was  a  naivety  about  the  discovery,  a  surprise. 
Instinctive  adaptation  was  so  pervasive  that  it  was  unnoticed. 
Probably  the  Egyptians  did  not  know  that  they  were  governed 
despotically,  or  that  the  priests  limited  the  royal  power, 
because  they  had  no  alternative  as  a  contrast  either  in  fact 
or  in  imagination.  They  were  nearer  in  their  thoughts  to  the 
political  philosophy  prevalent  in  an  anthill. 

Another  aspect  of  this  fact  is  that  in  such  societies,  rela¬ 
tivity  is  stressed  rather  than  individual  freedom.  Indeed,  in 
the  earlier  stages  freedom  is  almost  a  meaningless  notion. 
Action  and  mood  both  spring  from  an  instinct  based  upon 
ancestral  co-ordination.  In  such  societies,  whatever  is  not 
the  outcome  of  inherited  relativity,  imposing  co-ordination 
of  action,  is  sheer  destructive  chaos.  Alien  groups  are  then 


62 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


evil  groups.  An  energetic  prophet  hewed  Agag  in  pieces. 
Unfortunately  the  spiritual  descendants  of  Samuel  still  sur¬ 
vive,  archaic  nuisances. 

Section  III.  We  can  watch  some  of  the  episodes  in  the 
discovery  of  freedom.  About  fourteen  hundred  years  before 
Christ  the  Egyptian  king  Akhnaton  evidently  belonged  to 
an  advanced  group  who  thought  for  themselves  and  made 
a  step  beyond  the  inherited  religious  notions.  Such  groups, 
with  flashes  of  free  thought,  must  have  arisen  sporadically 
many  times  before,  during  countless  thousands  of  years, 
some  successful  and  most  of  them  failures.  Otherwise  the 
transition  to  civilization,  as  distinct  from  the  mere  diversity 
of  adaptations  of  thoughtless  customs,  could  never  have 
arisen.  Bees  and  ants  have  diverse  social  organizations;  but, 
so  far  as  we  know,  neither  species  is  in  any  sense  civilized. 
They  may  enjoy  thoughtless  adaptations  of  social  customs. 
Anyhow,  their  flashes  of  freedom  are  below  the  level  that  we 
can  discern.  But  Akhnaton,  having  exercised  his  freedom, 
evidently  had  no  conception  of  freedom  as  such.  We  have 
all  the  evidence  archaeology  can  provide  that  he  rigidly 
endeavoured  to  impose  his  notions  upon  the  thoughts  and 
customs  of  the  whole  Egyptian  nation.  Apparently  he 
failed;  for  there  was  a  reaction.  But  reactions  never  restore 
with  minute  accuracy.  Thus  in  all  probability  there  re¬ 
mained  a  difference  which  the  evidence  before  us  is  unable 
to  discriminate. 

A  more  successful  group  were  the  Hebrew  prophets  about 
eight  or  nine  hundred  years  later.  Spurred  by  the  evils  of 
their  times,  they  exercised  a  freedom  in  the  expression  of 
moral  intuition,  and  fitted  out  the  character  of  Jehovah  with 
the  results  of  their  thoughts.  Our  civilization  owes  to  them 
more  than  we  can  express.  They  constitute  one  of  the  few 
groups  of  men  who  decisively  altered  history  in  any  intimate 


ASPECTS  OF  FREEDOM  63 

sense.  Most  spectacular  upheavals  merely  replace  one  set 
of  individuals  by  another  analogous  set;  so  that  history  is 
mostly  a  barren  change  of  names.  But  the  Hebrew  prophets 
really  produced  a  decisive  qualitative  alteration,  and  what 
is  still  more  rare,  a  change  for  the  better;  yet  the  concep¬ 
tion  of  freedom  never  entered  into  the  point  of  view  of  the 
Jehovah  of  the  prophets.  Intolerance  is  the  besetting  sin  of 
moral  fervour.  The  first  important  pronouncement  in  which 
tolerance  is  associated  with  moral  fervour  is  in  the  Parable 
of  the  Tares  and  the  Wheat,  some  centuries  later. 

Subsequent  examples  of  intolerance  supervening  upon  the 
exercise  of  freedom  are  afforded  by  the  Christian  Church 
after  its  establishment  by  Constantine,  and  by  the  Pro¬ 
testants  under  the  guidance  of  Luther  and  Calvin.  At  the 
period  of  the  Reformation  mankind  had  begun  to  know 
better  and  so  charity  of  judgment  upon  the  Reformers 
begins  to  wear  thin.  But  then  charity  is  a  virtue  allied  to 
tolerance,  so  we  must  be  careful.  All  advanced  thinkers, 
sceptical  or  otherwise,  are  apt  to  be  intolerant,  in  the  past 
and  also  now.  On  the  whole,  tolerance  is  more  often  found 
in  connection  with  a  genial  orthodoxy.  The  apostles  of 
modern  tolerance — in  so  far  as  it  exists — are  Erasmus,  the 
Quakers,  and  John  Locke.  They  should  be  commemorated 
in  every  laboratory,  in  every  church,  and  in  every  court  of 
law.  We  must  however  remember  that  many  of  the  greatest 
seventeenth-century  statesmen  and  thinkers,  including  John 
Locke,  owed  their  lives  to  the  wide  tolerance  of  the  Dutch 
Republic. 

Certainly  these  men  were  not  the  originators  of  their 
admirable  ideas.  To  find  the  origins  we  must  go  behind 
them  for  two  thousand  years.  So  slow  is  translation  of  idea 
into  custom.  We  must  however  first  note  that  the  examples 
cited  have  all  been  concerned  with  religion.  There  are 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


64 

other  forms  of  behaviour,  active  and  contemplative.  The 
Athenians  have  given  us  the  first  surviving  instance  of  the 
explicit  recognition  of  the  importance  of  tolerance  in  respect 
to  varieties  of  social  behaviour.  No  doubt  antecedent  civili¬ 
zations  must  have  provided  many  practical  examples  of  it. 
For  example,  it  is  difficult  to  believe  that  in  big  metropolitan 
cities  such  as  Babylon  and  Nineveh  there  was  much  detailed 
supervision  of  social  behaviour.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
ways  of  life  in  Egypt  seem  to  have  been  tightly  organized. 
But  the  first  explicit  defence  of  social  tolerance,  as  a  requisite 
for  high  civilization,  is  found  in  the  speech  of  Pericles  as 
reported  by  Thucydides.  It  puts  forth  the  conception  of  the 
organized  society  successfully  preserving  freedom  of  be¬ 
haviour  for  its  individual  members.  Fifty  years  later,  in  the 
same  social  group,  Plato  introduced  deeper  notions  from 
which  all  claims  for  freedom  must  spring.  His  general 
concept  of  the  psychic  factors  in  the  Universe  stressed  them 
as  the  source  of  all  spontaneity,  and  ultimately  as  the  ground 
of  all  life  and  motion.  The  human  psychic  activity  thus  con¬ 
tains  the  origins  of  precious  harmonies  within  the  transient 
world.  The  end  of  human  society  is  to  elicit  such  psychic 
energies.  But  spontaneity  is  of  the  essence  of  soul.  Such  in 
outline  is  the  argument  from  Platonic  modes  of  thought  to 
the  importance  of  social  freedom. 

Plato’s  own  writings  constitute  one  prolonged  apology 
for  freedom  of  contemplation,  and  for  freedom  for  the  com¬ 
munication  of  contemplative  experiences.  In  the  persistent 
exercise  of  this  right  Socrates  and  Plato  lived,  and  it  was  on 
its  behalf  that  Socrates  died.  There  are  exceptional  passages, 
but  throughout  the  bulk  of  the  Dialogues  Socrates  and  Plato 
are  engaged  in  expressing  manners  of  thought.  Hardly 
ever  is  there  a  passage  which  can  be  directly  translated 
into  a  particular  action.  The  conclusions  of  the  Republic 


ASPECTS  OF  FREEDOM 


65 

will  work  only  in  heaven.  The  great  exception  is  The  Laws, 
which  is  a  minutely  practical  scheme  for  the  establishment 
of  small  city-states  of  the  type  then  prevalent  in  the  Aegean 
area.  The  Thucydidean  Pericles  stresses  the  other  side.  He 
is  thinking  of  the  activities  of  the  individual  citizens.  The 
peculiar  civilization  of  the  speech  arises  from  its  stress  upon 
the  aesthetic  end  of  all  action.  A  Barbarian  speaks  in  terms 
of  power.  He  dreams  of  the  superman  with  the  mailed 
fist.  He  may  plaster  his  lust  with  sentimental  morality  of 
Carlyle’s  type.  But  ultimately  his  final  good  is  conceived  as 
one  will  imposing  itself  upon  other  wills.  This  is  intellectual 
barbarism.  The  Periclean  ideal  is  action  weaving  itself  into 
a  texture  of  persuasive  beauty  analogous  to  the  delicate 
splendour  of  nature. 

The  establishment  of  freedom  requires  more  than  its  mere 
intellectual  defence.  Plato  above  all  men  introduced  into 
the  world  this  further  essential  element  of  civilization.  For 
he  exhibited  the  tone  of  mind  which  alone  can  maintain 
a  free  society,  and  he  expressed  the  reasons  justifying  that 
tone.  His  Dialogues  are  permeated  with  a  sense  of  the 
variousness  of  the  Universe,  not  to  be  fathomed  by  our  in¬ 
tellects,  and  in  his  Seventh  Epistle  he  expressly  disclaims  the 
possibility  of  an  adequate  philosophic  system.  The  moral 
of  his  writings  is  that  all  points  of  view,  reasonably  coherent 
and  in  some  sense  with  an  application,  have  something  to 
contribute  to  our  understanding  of  the  universe,  and  also 
involve  omissions  whereby  they  fail  to  include  the  totality 
of  evident  fact.  The  duty  of  tolerance  is  our  finite  homage 
to  the  abundance  of  inexhaustible  novelty  which  is  awaiting 
the  future,  and  to  the  complexity  of  accomplished  fact  which 
exceeds  our  stretch  of  insight. 

Thus  two  types  of  character  must  be  excluded  from  those 
effectually  promoting  freedom.  One  type  belongs  to  those 

5 


wi 


66 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


who  despair  of  attaining  any  measure  of  truth,  the  Sceptics. 
Such  temperaments  can  obviously  have  no  message  for  those 
who  hold  that  thought  does  count.  Again  the  pursuit  of 
freedom  with  an  intolerant  mentality  is  self-defeating.  For 
all  his  equipment  of  imagination,  learning,  and  literary  mag¬ 
nificence  in  defence  of  freedom,  the  example  of  Milton’s  life 
probably  does  as  much  to  retard  the  cause  as  to  advance 
it.  He  promotes  a  frame  of  mind  of  which  the  issue  is 
intolerance. 

The  ancient  world  of  paganism  was  tolerant  as  to  creeds. 
Provided  that  your  actions  conformed,  your  speculations 
were  unnoticed.  Indeed,  one  mark  of  progress  beyond 
purely  instinctive  social  relations  is  an  uneasy  feeling  as  to 
the  destructive  effect  of  speculative  thought.  Creeds  are  at 
once  the  outcome  of  speculation  and  efforts  to  curb  specu¬ 
lation.  But  they  are  always  relevant  to  it.  Antecedently  to 
speculation  there  can  be  no  creeds.  Wherever  there  is  a  creed, 
there  is  a  heretic  round  the  corner  or  in  his  grave.  Amid 
the  great  empires,  Egyptian,  Mesopotamian,  and  Hittite, 
and  with  the  discovery  of  navigation,  the  intercourse 
between  races  promoted  shrewd  comparisons  gradually 
broadening  into  speculative  thought.  In  its  beginnings  this 
shift  in  human  mentality  must  have  developed  slowly. 
Where  there  is  no  anticipation,  change  has  to  wait  upon 
chance,  and  peters  out  amid  neglect.  Fortunately  the  Bible 
preserves  for  us  fragments  of  the  process  as  it  affected  one 
gifted  race  at  a  nodal  point.  The  record  has  been  written  up 
by  editors  with  the  mentality  of  later  times.  Thus  the  task 
of  modern  scholars  is  analogous  to  an  endeavour  to  recover 
the  histories  of  Denmark  and  Scotland  from  a  study  of 
Hamlet  and  Macbeth.  We  can  see  initial  antagonisms 
broadening  into  speculative  attempts  to  rationalize  the  welter. 
We  can  watch  Samuel  and  Agag  succeeded  by  Solomon 


ASPECTS  OF  FREEDOM 


67 

and  the  Queen  of  Sheba.  There  are  the  meditations  of  Job 
and  his  friends,  the  prophetical  books,  and  the  ‘wisdom5 
books  of  the  Bible.  And  with  a  leap  of  six  hundred  years 
one  version  of  the  story  ends  with  the  creed  of  the  Council 
at  Nicaea. 

Section  IV.  The  episode  of  Greek  civilization  during  its 
short  phase  of  independence  created  a  new  situation.  Specu¬ 
lation  was  explicitly  recognized.  It  was  ardently  pursued. 
Its  various  modes  and  methods  were  discovered.  The  re¬ 
lation  of  the  Greeks  to  their  predecessors  is  analogous,  as  to 
stretch  of  time  and  intensity  of  effect,  to  that  of  the  second 
phase  of  the  modern  industrial  revolution  during  the  last 
fifty  years  to  the  first  phase  which  in  truth  sprawls  over  the 
long  centuries  from  the  fifteenth  century  to  the  close  of  the 
nineteenth. 

By  reason  of  its  inheritance  from  the  episode  of  Hellenic 
culture  the  Roman  Empire  was  more  self-conscious  than  its 
predecessors  in  its  treatment  of  the  problem  of  liberty  and 
of  the  allied  problem  of  social  institutions.  So  far  as  con¬ 
cerns  Western  Europe,  the  origin  of  the  mediaeval  civiliza¬ 
tion  must  be  dated  from  the  Emperor  Augustus  and  the 
Journeys  of  St  Paul.  For  the  Byzantine,  Semitic,  Egyptian 
area,  the  date  must  be  pushed  back  to  the  death  of  Alex¬ 
ander  the  Great,  and  the  renaissance  of  Graeco-Egyptian 
learning.  For  the  first  two  centuries  after  Augustus  the 
former  area,  centred  in  Italy,  was  incomparably  the  more 
important.  Latin  literature  is  the  translation  of  Hellenic 
culture  into  the  mediaeval  modes  of  thought,  extending  that 
period  to  end  with  the  French  Revolution.  Throughout 
that  whole  period  culture  was  backward  looking.  Lucretius, 
Cicero,  Virgil  were  mediaevals  in  their  relation  to  Hellenic 
literature  and  speculation;  though  they  lacked  the  Semitic 
factor.  After  that  first  Latin  period,  the  notable  contribu- 

5-2 


68 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


tions  to  thought,  Pagan,  Christian,  and  Mahometan,  all  de¬ 
rive  from  the  eastern  region,  with  the  important  exception 
of  Augustine.  Finally,  the  centre  of  culture  again  swings 
westward,  as  the  Eastern  civilization  collapses  under  the 
prolonged  impacts  of  Tartars  and  Turks.  The  notes  of  these 
three  allied  cultures,  the  Eastern,  the  Latin,  and  the  later 
European,  are  scholarly  learning,  recurrence  to  Hellenic 
speculation  re-stated  in  creedal  forms,  imitative  literatures 
stressing  humane  aspirations,  the  canalization  of  curiosity 
into  professional  grooves,  and — in  the  West — a  new  grade 
of  intelligence  exhibited  in  the  development  of  a  variety  of 
social  institutions.  It  is  this  last  factor  which  has  saved  the 
progress  of  mankind. 

The  new  epoch  in  the  formation  of  social  institutions 
unfolded  itself  very  gradually.  It  is  not  yet  understood  in 
its  full  importance.  Social  philosophy  has  not  grasped  the 
relevant  principles,  so  that  even  now  each  case  is  treated  as 
a  peculiar  fact.  But  the  problem  of  liberty  has  been  trans¬ 
formed  by  it.  The  novelty  consists  in  the  deliberate  forma¬ 
tion  of  institutions,  embodying  purposes  of  special  groups, 
and  unconcerned  with  the  general  purposes  of  any  political 
state,  or  of  any  embodiment  of  tribal  unity  playing  the  part 
of  a  state.  Of  course  any  big  empire  involves  a  coalescence 
of  diverse  tribes,  customs,  and  modes  of  thought.  But  in  the 
earlier  examples,  each  subject  race  had  its  own  status  in  the 
complex  empire,  and  its  ways  of  procedure  were  part  of  the 
imperial  system.  Also  there  must  have  been  complex  modes 
of  behaviour,  peculiar  to  the  various  races,  inherited  and 
tolerated  as  a  matter  of  course.  In  the  case  of  the  smaller 
units  such  as  the  Greek  city-states,  we  find  a  condition  of 
affairs  in  which  all  corporate  action  is  an  element  in  state 
policy.  The  freedom  was  purely  individual,  never  corporate. 
All  incorporation,  religious  or  secular,  was  communal,  or 


ASPECTS  OF  FREEDOM  69 

patriarchal.  The  saying,  “Render  unto  Caesar  the  things 
that  are  Caesar’s  and  unto  God  the  things  that  are  God’s” 
was  uttered  by  Christ  in  the  reign  of  Tiberius,  and  not  by 
Plato  four  hundred  years  earlier.  However  limited  may  be 
the  original  intention  of  the  saying,  very  quickly  God  was 
conceived  as  a  principle  of  organization  in  complete  dis¬ 
junction  from  Caesar. 

It  is  interesting  to  speculate  on  the  analogies  and  differ¬ 
ences  between  the  deaths  of  Socrates  and  of  Paul.  Both 
were  martyrs.  Socrates  died  because  his  speculative  opinions 
were  held  to  be  subversive  of  the  communal  life.  It  is  difficult 
to  believe  that  the  agents  of  Claudius,  or  Nero,  or  Galba, 
were  much  concerned  with  Paul’s  speculative  opinions  as 
to  the  ways  of  God  to  man.  Later  on,  Lucian’s  opinions 
were  as  unorthodox  as  Paul’s.  But  he  died  in  his  bed. 
Unfortunately  for  Paul,  as  he  journeyed  he  left  behind  him 
organized  groups,  indulging  in  activities  unco-ordinated 
with  any  purposes  of  state.  Thus  imperial  agents  were 
alarmed,  and  sympathized  with  popular  prejudice.  Indeed, 
we  know  exactly  what  one  of  the  best  of  the  Roman  Em¬ 
perors  about  half  a  century  later  thought  of  the  matter. 
Trajan  in  his  letter  to  the  younger  Pliny  dismisses  Christian 
Theology  as  negligible.  He  is  even  unconcerned  with  their 
organization  into  groups,  so  long  as  no  overt  action  emerges 
affronting  the  traditional  association  of  the  State  with  religion. 
Yet  he  recognizes  that  the  Christians  will  fit  into  no  current 
political  philosophy,  and  that  they  represent  corporate 
actions  on  the  verge  of  the  intolerable.  Thus  if  circumstances 
unearth  them,  they  are  to  be  questioned,  dismissed  if 
possible,  but  punished  when  their  actions  become  glaring. 
It  is  interesting  to  compare  the  Christians  in  the  Roman 
Empire,  from  Nero  to  Trajan,  with  the  Communists  in 
modern  America. 


70 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


Trajan  shows  himself  as  a  fine  statesman  dealing  with  the 
faint  dawn  of  a  new  epoch,  not  understood,  and  indeed 
not  yet  understood.  The  old  organization  of  mankind  was 
being  affected  by  the  influence  of  the  new  width  of  intel¬ 
lectuality  due  to  Hellenism.  Organizations  mainly  derived 
from  blind  inheritance,  and  affected  by  the  intellect  only 
in  detail  and  in  interpretation,  are  to  receive  the  shock  of 
other  types  founded  primarily  on  the  intellectual  apprecia¬ 
tion  of  private  ends,  that  is  to  say,  of  ends  unconcerned  with 
the  State.  What  Henry  Osborn  Taylor  has  termed  ‘rational 
consideration 5  is  becoming  a  major  force  in  human  organiza¬ 
tion.  Of  course,  Plato  and  Aristotle  exhibited  rational  con¬ 
sideration  on  a  magnificent  scale.  But  a  group  of  thinkers 
does  not  necessarily  constitute  a  political  force.  Centuries, 
sometimes  thousands  of  years,  have  to  elapse  before  thought 
can  capture  action.  It  is  typical  of  this  gap,  that  Aristotle’s 
manuscripts  are  said  to  have  been  stowed  in  a  cellar  for  two 
hundred  years,  and  that  even  to  this  day  Plato  is  mainly 
valued  as  a  religious  mystic  and  a  supreme  literary  artist.  In 
these  latter  functions,  Plato  represents  the  world  he  inherited 
and  not  the  world  he  created.  Perhaps  these  constitute  his 
best  part.  But  he  played  two  roles. 

The  situation  in  the  Roman  Empire  was,  in  effect,  novel. 
Pericles  had  conceived  a  freedom  for  private  actions,  of  a 
certain  civilized  type  within  narrowly  restricted  bounds. 
Plato  voices  the  claim  for  contemplative  freedom.  But  the 
Empire  was  faced  with  the  claim  for  freedom  of  corporate 
action.  Modern  political  history,  from  that  day  to  this,  is 
the  confused  story  of  the  strenuous  resistance  of  the  State, 
and  of  its  partial  concessions.  The  Empire  reasserted  the 
old  doctrine  of  the  divine  Emperor;  but  also  yielded  by 
admitting  as  legal  principle  the  Stoic  doctrine  of  the  Voice 
of  Nature.  The  Middle  Ages  compromised  with  the  doc- 


ASPECTS  OF  FREEDOM  71 

trine  of  the  two  swords.  In  recent  times,  the  State  is 
fighting  behind  its  last  ditch,  which  is  the  legal  doctrine  of 
sovereignty.  The  thought  of  the  seventeenth  and  eighteenth 
centuries  rationalized  its  political  philosophy  under  the 
fiction  of  the  ‘Original  Contract’.  This  concept  proved  itself 
formidable.  It  helped  to  dismiss  the  Stuarts  into  romance, 
to  found  the  American  Republic,  and  to  bring  about  the 
French  Revolution.  Indeed,  it  was  one  of  the  most  timely 
notions  known  to  history.  Its  weakness  is  that  it  antedates 
the  era  of  the  importance  of  rational  consideration,  and 
over-estimates  the  political  importance  which  at  any  time 
reason  has  possessed.  The  antagonistic  doctrine  was  that  of 
the  ‘Divine  Right  of  Kings’,  which  is  the  ghost  of  the 
‘divine  Emperor’. 

Section  V.  Political  philosophy  can  claim  no  exemption 
from  the  doctrine  of  the  golden  mean.  Unrestricted  liberty 
means  complete  absence  of  any  compulsory  co-ordination. 
Human  society  in  the  absence  of  any  compulsion  is  trusting 
to  the  happy  co-ordination  of  individual  emotions,  purposes, 
affections,  and  actions.  Civilization  can  only  exist  amid  a 
population  which  in  the  mass  does  exhibit  this  fortunate 
mutual  adaptation.  Unfortunately  a  minority  of  adverse 
individual  instances,  when  unchecked,  is  sufficient  to  upset 
the  social  structure.  A  few  men  in  the  whole  cast  of  their 
character,  and  most  men  in  some  of  their  actions,  are  anti¬ 
social  in  respect  to  the  peculiar  type  of  any  society  possible 
in  their  time.  There  can  be  no  evasion  of  the  plain  fact  that 
compulsion  is  necessary  and  that  compulsion  is  the  restriction 
of  liberty. 

It  follows  that  a  doctrine  as  to  the  social  mingling  of 
liberty  and  compulsion  is  required.  A  mere  unqualified  de¬ 
mand  for  liberty  is  the  issue  of  shallow  philosophy,  equally 
noxious  with  the  antithetical  cry  for  mere  conformation  to 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


72 

standard  pattern.  Probably,  there  can  be  no  one  solution  of 
this  problem  adapted  to  all  the  circumstances  of  human 
societies  which  have  been  and  will  be.  We  must  confine 
ourselves  to  the  way  in  which  at  the  present  day  the  issue 
is  being  adjusted  in  the  western  civilization,  European  and 
American. 

Roughly  speaking,  the  main  effectiveness  of  this  solution 
presupposes  a  wide  distribution  of  institutions  founded  upon 
professional  qualifications  and  exacting  such  qualifications. 
Obviously  the  canalization  of  a  variety  of  occupations  into 
professions  is  a  pre-requisite.  Here  the  term  Profession  means 
an  avocation  whose  activities  are  subjected  to  theoretical 
analysis,  and  are  modified  by  theoretical  conclusions  derived 
from  that  analysis.  This  analysis  has  regard  to  the  purposes 
of  the  avocation  and  to  the  adaptation  of  the  activities 
for  the  attainment  of  those  purposes.  Such  criticism  must 
be  founded  upon  some  understanding  of  the  natures  of 
the  things  involved  in  those  activities,  so  that  the  results  of 
action  can  be  foreseen.  Thus  foresight  based  upon  theory, 
and  theory  based  upon  understanding  of  the  nature  of 
things,  are  essential  to  a  profession.  Again,  the  purposes  of 
a  profession  are  not  a  simple  bundle  of  definite  ends.  There 
is  a  general  purpose,  such  as  the  curing  of  sickness,  which 
defines  medicine.  But  in  a  multitude  of  ways  every  human 
body  might  be  in  a  better  state  of  biological  fitness,  and 
might  easily  be  worse.  There  has  in  every  case  to  be  a 
selection  of  ends  dependent  partly  on  intrinsic  importance  if 
attained,  and  partly  upon  practicability  of  attainment.  It  is 
for  this  reason  that  the  practice  of  a  profession  cannot  be 
disjoined  from  its  theoretical  understanding,  and  vice  versa. 
We  do  however  find  it  necessary  to  specialize  even  further, 
not  only  within  some  department  of  that  profession,  such  as 


ASPECTS  OF  FREEDOM  73 

surgery,  but  also  either  to  a  major  consideration  of  its  theory 
or  to  a  major  devotion  to  its  current  practice. 

The  antithesis  to  a  profession  is  an  avocation  based  upon 
customary  activities  and  modified  by  the  trial  and  error  of 
individual  practice.  Such  an  avocation  is  a  Craft,  or  at 
a  lower  level  of  individual  skill  it  is  merely  a  customary 
direction  of  muscular  labour.  The  ancient  civilizations  were 
dominated  by  crafts.  Modern  life  ever  to  a  greater  extent 
is  grouping  itself  into  professions.  Thus  ancient  society  was 
a  co-ordination  of  crafts  for  the  instinctive  purposes  of  com¬ 
munal  life,  whereas  modern  society  is  a  co-ordination  of 
professions.  Without  question  the  distinction  between  crafts 
and  professions  is  not  clear-cut.  In  all  stages  of  civilization, 
crafts  are  shot  through  and  through  with  flashes  of  con¬ 
structive  understanding,  and  professions  are  based  upon 
inherited  procedures.  Nor  is  it  true  that  the  type  of  men 
involved  are  to  be  ranked  higher  in  proportion  to  the 
dominance  of  abstract  mentality  in  their  lives.  On  the  con¬ 
trary,  a  due  proportion  of  craftsmanship  seems  to  breed  the 
finer  types.  The  brilliant  ability,  in  proportion  to  popula¬ 
tion,  of  Europe  in  the  fifteenth,  sixteenth,  and  seventeenth 
centuries  suggests  that  at  about  that  period  the  best  harmony 
had  been  reached.  Pure  mentality  easily  becomes  trivial  in 
its  grasp  of  fact. 

The  organization  of  professions  by  means  of  self-governing 
institutions  places  the  problem  of  liberty  at  a  new  angle. 
For  now  it  is  the  institution  which  claims  liberty  and  also 
exercises  control.  In  ancient  Egypt  the  Pharaoh  decided, 
acting  through  his  agents.  In  the  modern  world  a  variety 
of  institutions  have  the  power  of  action  without  immediate 
reference  to  the  State.  This  new  form  of  liberty,  which  is 
the  autonomous  institution  limited  to  special  purposes,  was 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


74 

especially  exemplified  in  the  guilds  of  the  Middle  Ages ;  and 
that  period  was  characterized  by  a  remarkable  growth  of 
civilized  genius.  The  meaning  that — in  England  at  least — was 
then  assigned  to  the  word  ‘liberty ’  illustrates  the  projection 
of  the  new  social  structure  upon  the  older  form  of  customary 
determination.  For  a  ‘liberty’  did  not  then  mean  a  general 
freedom,  but  a  special  licence  to  a  particular  group  to  organize 
itself  within  a  special  field  of  action.  For  this  reason  ‘  liberties 5 
were  sometimes  a  general  nuisance. 

Of  course  the  Catholic  Church  was  the  great  ‘liberty’  which 
first  confronted  the  Roman  Empire,  and  then  dominated 
mediaeval  life.  In  its  early  stages  it  is  seen  in  its  proper 
theoretical  relation  to  other  autonomous  societies.  For  ex¬ 
ample,  in  the  pagan  Empire  its  legal  status  seems  to  have 
been  analogous  to  that  of  the  pagan  burial  societies ;  although 
the  status  of  the  Church  property  before  the  age  of  Con¬ 
stantine  has  not  yet  been  finally  elucidated  by  scholars. 
But  in  the  Middle  Ages  the  Church  so  towered  above  other 
institutions  that  it  out-rivalled  the  State  itself.  Accordingly 
its  analogy  to  secular  guilds  and  to  other  professional  in¬ 
stitutions  such  as  universities  was  obscured  by  its  greatness. 
The  Catholic  Church  had  another  characteristic  of  priceless 
value.  It  was,  so  far  as  concerned  Europe,  universal,  that 
is  to  say,  Catholic.  Until  the  approach  of  the  Renaissance 
there  were  no  European  nations  in  the  modern  sense.  But 
the  Church  transcended  all  governmental  boundaries,  all 
racial  divisions  and  all  geographic  divisions.  It  was  a  standing 
challenge  to  any  form  of  communal  despotism,  a  universal 
‘liberty’. 

Section  VI.  From  the  beginning  of  the  sixteenth  cen¬ 
tury  this  first  form  of  institutional  civilization,  with  its 
feudalism,  its  guilds,  its  universities,  its  Catholic  Church, 
was  in  full  decay.  The  new  middle  classes,  whether  scholars 


ASPECTS  OF  FREEDOM 


75 

or  traders,  would  have  none  of  it.  They  were  individualists. 
For  them  the  universities  were  secondary,  the  monasteries 
were  a  nuisance,  the  Church  was  a  nuisance,  feudalism  was 
a  nuisance,  the  guilds  were  a  nuisance.  They  wanted  good 
order,  and  to  be  let  alone  with  their  individual  activities. 
The  great  thinkers  of  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  cen¬ 
turies  were  singularly  detached  from  universities.  Erasmus 
wanted  printers,  and  Bacon,  Hervey,  Descartes,  Galileo, 
Leibniz  wanted  governmental  patronage,  or  protection, 
more  than  university  colleagues,  mostly  reactionary.  When 
Luther,  Descartes,  Galileo,  or  Leibniz  shifted  his  residence, 
it  was  not  to  find  a  better  university,  but  a  more  suitable 
government — a  Duke  who  would  protect,  a  Prince  who 
would  pay,  or  a  Dutch  Republic  which  would  not  ask 
questions.  Nevertheless,  the  universities  survived  the  change 
better  than  other  institutions.  In  some  ways  it  was  a  great 
time  for  them,  though  they  shrank  to  be  national.  What 
finally  emerged  was  the  modern  national  organization  of 
Europe  with  the  sovereign  state  dictating  every  form  of 
institutional  organization,  as  subordinate  elements  for  its  own 
purposes.  This  was  a  recurrence  to  that  earlier  form  of  human 
organization  which  showed  its  faint  signs  of  decay  during 
the  period  of  the  Roman  Empire.  Naturally  there  were  great 
differences.  For  nothing  is  ever  restored.  In  fact  the  reaction 
was  a  failure,  because  mankind  had  outgrown  the  simplicities 
of  the  earlier  form  of  civilization. 

The  political  philosophy  of  the  modern  era  was  a  retro¬ 
gression,  based  upon  a  recurrence  to  the  philosophers  and 
lawyers  of  the  old  classical  civilizations.  The  Middle  Ages, 
in  the  simplified  form  of  the  relations  of  Church  with 
State,  were  considering  the  problem  of  a  civilization  in 
which  men  owed  a  divided  allegiance  to  many  intersecting 
institutions  pursuing  diverse  ends.  This  is  the  real  problem 


j6  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

in  a  world  dominated  by  fraternity  derived  from  the  catholic 
diffusion  of  ideas,  and  from  the  international  distribution 
of  property.  The  solution  provided  by  the  doctrine  of  the 
sole  sovereignty  of  the  State,  however  grateful  to  protestants 
and  to  sovereigns,  is  both  shocking  and  unworkable,  a 
mere  stick  with  which  to  beat  Papists  in  the  sixteenth  and 
seventeenth  centuries,  a  mere  way  to  provide  policemen 
for  the  counting-houses  of  merchants.  But,  amid  this  re¬ 
actionary  triumph  of  Periclean  individualism  in  the  political 
philosophies  of  the  eighteenth  and  nineteenth  centuries, 
there  was  an  outcrop  of  institutions  based  upon  the  vigour 
of  modern  intellectual  interests.  These  institutions,  even 
when  national,  were  concerned  with  interests  impartial 
among  the  nations.  These  were  the  centuries  in  which 
science  triumphed,  and  science  is  universal.  Thus  scientific 
institutions,  though  in  form  national,  informally  established 
a  catholic  league.  Again  the  advance  of  scholarship,  and 
of  natural  science,  transformed  the  professions.  It  intel- 
lectualized  them  far  beyond  their  stage  of  advance  in  earlier 
times.  Professions  first  appear  as  customary  activities  largely 
modified  by  detached  strains  of  theory.  Theories  are  often 
wrong;  and  some  of  the  earlier  professional  doctrines  erred 
grievously  and  were  maintained  tenaciously.  Doctrines 
emerged  as  plausible  deductions,  and  survived  as  the  wisdom 
of  ancestors.  Thus  the  older  professional  practice  was  rooted 
upon  custom,  though  it  was  turning  towards  the  intellectual 
sunlight.  Here  and  there  individuals  stood  out  far  in 
advance  of  their  colleagues.  For  example,  in  the  fourteen 
hundred  years  separating  Galen  from  Vesalius,  the  standard 
of  European  medical  practice  was  not  to  be  compared 
with  the  attainments  of  either  of  these  men.  Also  more 
than  a  century  after  Vesalius,  Charles  the  Second,  of 
England,  on  his  deathbed  was  tortured  by  physicians  em- 


ASPECTS  OF  FREEDOM 


77 


ploying  futile  remedies  customary  at  that  time.  Again,  as 
a  designing  engineer  Leonardo  da  Vinci  was  unequalled 
until  the  advent  of  Vauban  and  James  Watt.  In  the  earlier 
centuries  the  professional  influence,  as  a  general  sociological 
fact,  was  mainly  a  welter  of  bygone  flashes  of  intelligence 
relapsing  into  customary  procedures.  It  represented  the  con¬ 
tinual  lapse  of  intellect  into  instinct.  But  the  culmination 
of  science  completely  inverted  the  roles  of  custom  and  in¬ 
telligence  in  the  older  professions.  By  this  inversion  pro¬ 
fessional  institutions  have  acquired  an  international  life. 
Each  such  institution  practises  within  its  own  nation,  but 
its  sources  of  life  are  world-wide.  Thus  loyalties  stretch 
beyond  sovereign  states. 

Perhaps  the  most  important  function  of  these  institutions 
is  the  supervision  of  standards  of  individual  professional 
competence  and  of  professional  practice.  For  this  purpose 
there  is  a  complex  interweaving  of  universities  and  more 
specialized  institutions.  The  problem  of  freedom  comes  in 
here.  For  it  is  not  opinions  which  are  censured,  but  learning 
and  ability.  Thus  in  the  more  important  fields  of  thought, 
opinion  is  free  and  so  are  large  divergences  of  practice. 
The  community  is  provided  with  objective  information 
as  to  the  sort  of  weight  to  be  attached  to  individuals  and 
as  to  the  sort  of  freedom  of  action  which  may  safely  be 
granted.  Whatever  is  done  can  be  subjected  to  the  test  of 
general  professional  opinion,  acting  through  this  network 
of  institutions.  Further,  even  large  freedom  can  now  be 
allowed  to  non-professional  individuals.  For  the  great  pro¬ 
fessional  organizations,  so  long  as  they  are  efficient,  should 
be  able  to  demonstrate  the  dangers  of  extravagant  notions. 
In  this  way,  where  sudden  action  is  not  in  question,  reason 
has  obtained  an  entrenchment  which  should  be  impreg¬ 
nable.  Indeed,  individual  freedom,  standing  apart  from 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


78 

organization,  has  now  its  indispensable  role.  For  all  organi¬ 
zations  are  liable  to  decay,  and  licence  for  outside  criticism 
is  the  best  safeguard  for  the  professions. 

Also  the  sovereign  state  of  modern  legal  theory  has  its 
sphere  of  action  and  its  limitation.  The  State  represents  the 
general  wisdom  of  the  community  derived  from  an  experience 
broader  than  the  topics  of  the  various  sciences.  The  role 
of  the  State  is  a  general  judgment  on  the  activity  of  the 
various  organizations.  It  can  judge  whether  they  welcome 
ability,  whether  they  stand  high  among  the  kindred  institu¬ 
tions  throughout  the  world.  But  where  the  State  ceases  to 
exercise  any  legitimate  authority  is  when  it  presumes  to 
decide  upon  questions  within  the  purview  of  sciences  or 
professions. 

For  example,  in  the  teaching  profession  it  is  obvious  that 
young  students  cannot  be  subjected  to  the  vagaries  of  indi¬ 
vidual  teachers.  In  this  sense,  the  claim  for  the  freedom  of 
teaching  is  nonsense.  But  the  general  community  is  very 
incompetent  to  determine  either  the  subject  matter  to  be 
taught  or  the  permissible  divergences  to  be  allowed,  or  the 
individual  competence.  There  can  be  only  one  appeal,  and 
this  is  to  general  professional  opinion  as  exhibited  in  the 
practice  of  accredited  institutions.  The  appeal  is  catholic. 
The  State  of  Tennessee  did  not  err  in  upholding  the  prin¬ 
ciple  that  there  are  limits  to  the  freedom  of  teaching  in 
schools  and  colleges.  But  it  exhibited  a  gross  ignorance  of 
its  proper  functions  when  it  defied  a  professional  opinion 
which  throughout  the  world  is  practically  unanimous.  Even 
here  that  State  is  hardly  to  be  blamed.  For  the  current 
political  philosophy  of  sovereignty  is  very  weak  as  to  the 
limitations  of  moral  authority.  Of  course,  whoever  at  any 
moment  has  physical  power  has  that  power  of  physical 
compulsion,  whether  he  be  a  bandit,  or  a  judge,  or  political 


ASPECTS  OF  FREEDOM 


79 


ruler.  But  moral  authority  is  limited  by  competence  to 
attain  those  ends  whose  immediate  dominance  is  evident  to 
enlightened  wisdom.  Political  loyalty  ceases  at  the  frontiers 
of  radical  incapacity. 

The  functions  of  professional  institutions  have  been  con¬ 
sidered  in  some  detail  because  they  constitute  a  clear-cut 
novelty  within  modern  societies.  There  were  faint  antici¬ 
pations  in  the  ancient  world,  for  example  the  schools  at 
Athens,  in  particular  those  founded  by  Plato,  Aristotle,  and 
the  Stoics,  and  elsewhere  the  great  foundation  at  Alexandria. 
Also  later  the  theologians  of  the  Christian  Church  formed 
another  professional  group  which  even  stretched  its  claim 
to  authority  beyond  all  bounds  of  good  sense.  It  is  by  reason 
of  these  anticipations,  and  of  the  legal  developments  of  the 
Roman  and  Byzantine  schools  of  law,  that  the  beginnings 
of  the  modern  world,  in  respect  to  the  problem  of  freedom  and 
of  moral  authority,  have  been  placed  as  early  as  Alexander 
and  Augustus. 

Section  VII.  In  the  immediate  present,  economic  or¬ 
ganization  constitutes  the  most  massive  problem  of  human 
relationships.  It  is  passing  into  a  new  phase,  and  presents 
confused  outlines.  Evidently  something  new  is  developing. 
The  individualistic  liberalism  of  the  nineteenth  century  has 
collapsed,  quite  unexpectedly.  So  long  as  the  trading  middle 
classes  were  dominant  as  the  group  to  be  satisfied,  its  doc¬ 
trines  were  self-evident.  As  soon  as  industrialism  and  edu¬ 
cation  produced  in  large  numbers  the  modern  type  of 
artisan,  its  whole  basis  was  widely  challenged.  Again,  the 
necessity  for  large  capital,  with  the  aid  of  legal  ingenuity, 
produced  the  commercial  corporation  with  limited  liability. 
These  fictitious  persons  are  exempt  from  physiological  death 
and  can  only  disappear  by  a  voluntary  dissolution  or  by 
bankruptcy.  The  introduction  into  the  arena  of  this  new 


8o 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


type  of  ‘person’  has  considerably  modified  the  effective 
meaning  of  the  characteristic  liberal  doctrine  of  contractual 
freedom.  It  is  one  thing  to  claim  such  freedom  as  a  natural 
right  for  human  persons,  and  quite  another  to  claim  it  for 
corporate  persons.  And  again  the  notion  of  private  property 
had  a  simple  obviousness  at  the  foot  of  Mount  Sinai  and 
even  in  the  eighteenth  century.  When  there  were  primitive 
roads,  negligible  drains,  private  wells,  no  elaborate  system 
of  credit,  when  payment  meant  the  direct  production  of  gold- 
pieces,  when  each  industry  was  reasonably  se)f-contained — 
in  fact  when  the  world  was  not  as  it  is  now — then  it  was 
fairly  obvious  what  was  meant  by  private  property,  apart 
from  any  current  legal  fictions.  To-day  private  property  is 
mainly  a  legal  fiction,  and  apart  from  such  legal  deter¬ 
mination  its  outlines  are  completely  indefinite.  Such  legal 
determination  is  probably,  indeed  almost  certainly,  the  best 
way  of  arranging  society.  But  the  ‘voice  of  nature’  is  a  faint 
echo  when  we  are  dealing  with  it.  There  is  a  striking  analogy 
between  the  hazy  notions  of  justice  in  Plato’s  Republic  and 
the  hazy  notions  of  private  property  to-day.  The  modern 
artisan,  like  Thrasymachus  of  old,  is  apt  to  define  it  as  ‘  the 
will  of  the  stronger  ’ . 

Of  course  these  extremes  as  to  the  nature  of  property — 
simple-minded  assertion  and  simple-minded  denial — are 
exaggeration.  The  whole  concept  of  absolute  individuals  with 
absolute  rights,  and  with  a  contractual  power  of  forming 
fully  defined  external  relations,  has  broken  down.  The 
human  being  is  inseparable  from  its  environment  in  each 
occasion  of  its  existence.  The  environment  which  the 
occasion  inherits  is  immanent  in  it,  and  conversely  it  is 
immanent  in  the  environment  which  it  helps  to  transmit. 
The  favourite  doctrine  of  the  shift  from  a  customary  basis 
for  society  to  a  contractual  basis,  is  founded  on  shallow 


ASPECTS  OF  FREEDOM 


8l 


sociology.  There  is  no  escape  from  customary  status.  This 
status  is  merely  another  name  for  the  inheritance  immanent 
in  each  occasion.  Inevitably  customary  status  is  there,  an 
inescapable  condition.  On  the  other  hand,  the  inherited 
status  is  never  a  full  determination.  There  is  always  the 
freedom  for  the  determination  of  individual  emphasis.  In 
terms  of  high-grade  human  society,  there  is  always  the  cus¬ 
tomary  fact  as  an  essential  element  in  the  meaning  of  every 
contractual  obligation.  There  can  be  no  contract  which  does 
not  presuppose  custom,  and  no  custom  leaving  no  loophole 
for  spontaneous  contract.  It  is  this  truth  that  gives  vitality 
to  the  Anglo-American  Common  Law.  It  is  an  instrument, 
in  the  hands  of  skilled  experts,  for  the  interpretation  of  ex¬ 
plicit  contract  in  terms  of  implicit  status.  No  code  of  verbal 
statement  can  ever  exhaust  the  shifting  background  of  pre¬ 
supposed  fact.  What  does  alter  for  dominant  interests  within 
each  social  system  is  the  relative  importance  of  the  contractual 
and  customary  factors  in  general  conscious  experience.  This 
balance,  fortunate  or  unfortunate,  largely  depends  on  the 
type  of  social  inheritance  provided  by  that  society.  But 
contract  is  a  mode  of  expression  for  spontaneity.  Otherwise 
it  is  meaningless,  a  futile  gesture  of  consciousness. 

In  the  end  nothing  is  effective  except  massively  co¬ 
ordinated  inheritance.  Sporadic  spontaneity  is  composed 
of  flashes  mutually  thwarting  each  other.  Ideas  have  to 
be  sustained,  disentangled,  diffused,  and  co-ordinated  with 
the  background.  Finally  they  pass  into  exemplification  in 
action.  The  distinguishing  mark  of  modern  civilization  is  the 
number  of  institutions  whose  origin  can  be  traced  to  the 
initial  entertainment  of  some  idea.  In  the  ancient  civiliza¬ 
tions  thought  was  mainly  explanatory.  It  was  only  creative 
in  respect  to  individual  actions.  But  the  corporate  actions 
preceded  thought.  The  ancient  gods,  either  as  notions  or  as 

6 


wi 


82 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


persons,  did  not  create  the  thunderstorm,  they  explained  it. 
Jehovah  did  not  create  the  Hebrew  tribal  emotions,  he  ex¬ 
plained  them.  He  never  made  a  covenant  which  initiated 
Hebrew  history;  the  notion  of  the  covenant  was  an  ex¬ 
planatory  idea.  It  was  influential;  but  the  idea  arose  as  an 
explanation  of  the  tribal  history.  Nevertheless  it  intensified  a 
pre-existing  fact.  The  Old  Testament  is  on  the  verge  of  the 
dividing  line  between  ancient  and  modern.  This  watershed 
is  Hellenism.  The  difference  is  only  one  of  proportion,  of 
more  or  less.  But  a  sufficient  change  of  proportion  makes  all 
the  difference.  In  the  last  phase  of  ancient  life  there  is  a 
haunting  feeling  that  corporate  actions  ought  to  have  ori¬ 
ginated  from  ideas.  Thus  their  historical  imagination  un¬ 
consciously  imported  types  of  explanation  of  their  past  which 
were  faintly  relevant  to  their  own  present:  explanations 
fantastic,  incredible,  fit  only  for  exposure  by  scholars.  It  was 
the  shadow  of  the  future  thrown  back  on  to  the  past. 

Returning  to  the  economic  side  of  life,  in  the  ancient 
world  there  were  economic  transactions  between  tribes  and 
between  states,  and  there  were  also  the  economic  activities 
of  craftsmen,  merchants,  and  bankers.  There  was  com¬ 
munal  activity  and  individual  activity.  Cicero’s  financial 
worries  are  preserved  for  us  in  his  letters  to  Atticus.  They 
are  very  analogous  to  Gibbon’s  letters  to  Holroyd,  which  are 
characteristic  of  educated  Europe  in  the  eighteenth  century. 
Certainly  Cicero’s  affairs  were  sufficiently  complex.  It  is  not 
in  that  respect  that  the  ancient  world  fell  short.  It  would 
be  worth  sacrificing  a  good  deal  of  Latin  literature  to  know 
what  Atticus  thought  of  Cicero’s  financial  position.  Even 
after  two  thousand  years  it  is  difficult  not  to  entertain  a 
friendly  anxiety  on  the  subject.  Perhaps  as  Cicero  put  his 
head  out  of  the  litter  he  had  been  dreaming  of  bankruptcy, 
when  the  sword  of  the  soldier  gave  him  death. 


ASPECTS  OF  FREEDOM 


83 

That  ancient  world  is  modern  both  in  the  physical  facts 
which  await  us,  and  in  the  ripples  of  anxiety  arising  from  its 
social  intricacies.  At  that  time  the  human  mind  was  singu¬ 
larly  powerful  for  the  generation  of  ideas.  To  the  epoch 
between  Plato  and  Justinian  we  can  trace  our  philosophical 
ideas,  our  religious  ideas,  our  legal  ideas,  and  the  model 
of  modern  governmental  organization.  We  can  recognize 
Pliny  as  he  discusses  whether  the  parents  should  serve  on 
the  board  of  governors  of  the  Grammar  School  he  had 
founded.  Sidonius  Apollinaris  is  an  anticipation  of  many 
New  England  gentlemen,  ecclesiastic  and  lay.  But  within 
that  period  the  ferment  of  ideas  had  not  persisted  for  a 
sufficient  time  to  transform  society  by  a  profusion  of  cor¬ 
porations  originated  by  explicit  thought.  In  particular  the 
great  commercial  corporations  awaited  modern  times,  the 
Bank  of  St  George  at  Genoa,  the  Bank  of  England,  the 
great  trading  companies  to  India  and  the  East.  Atticus  was 
a  banker;  but  he  was  not  the  president  of  a  banking  cor¬ 
poration.  Private  wealth  was  deposited  in  pagan  temples ;  but 
temples  were  corporations  devoted  to  the  customary  rites  of 
religion.  The  state  taxes  were  farmed  by  private  corporations 
of  Roman  capitalists.  Here  we  approach  modern  notions. 
Yet,  after  all,  the  pub licani  were  engaged  in  performing  one 
of  the  direct  services  of  the  State.  Their  actions  were  com¬ 
munal  and  traditional  with  a  tinge  of  modern  modes  of 
incorporation.  No  doubt  many  anticipations  of  modern  com¬ 
mercial  institutions  can  be  found.  Those  times  lie  within  the 
modern  world.  But  it  was  modern  commerce  in  its  infancy. 
Indeed,  the  examples  quoted  of  modern  commercial  activity 
belong  to  an  intermediate  period,  and  only  recently  has  the 
influence  of  ideas  produced  its  full  economic  effect.  But 
wherever  ideas  are  effective,  there  is  freedom. 

Section  VIII.  Unfortunately  the  notion  of  freedom  has 

6-2 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


84 

been  eviscerated  by  the  literary  treatment  devoted  to  it.  Men 
of  letters,  artists  in  symphonies  of  pictorial  imagination,  have 
staged  the  shock  of  novel  thought  against  tradition.  The 
concept  of  freedom  has  been  narrowed  to  the  picture  of 
contemplative  people  shocking  their  generation.  When  we 
think  of  freedom,  we  are  apt  to  confine  ourselves  to  freedom 
of  thought,  freedom  of  the  press,  freedom  for  religious 
opinions.  Then  the  limitations  to  freedom  are  conceived  as 
wholly  arising  from  the  antagonisms  of  our  fellow  men. 
This  is  a  thorough  mistake.  The  massive  habits  of  physical 
nature,  its  iron  laws,  determine  the  scene  for  the  sufferings 
of  men.  Birth  and  death,  heat,  cold,  hunger,  separation, 
disease,  the  general  impracticability  of  purpose,  all  bring 
their  quota  to  imprison  the  souls  of  women  and  of  men. 
Our  experiences  do  not  keep  step  with  our  hopes.  The 
Platonic  Eros,  which  is  the  soul  stirring  itself  to  life  and 
motion,  is  maimed.  The  essence  of  freedom  is  the  practi¬ 
cability  of  purpose.  Mankind  has  chiefly  suffered  from  the 
frustration  of  its  prevalent  purposes,  even  such  as  belong  to 
the  very  definition  of  its  species.  The  literary  exposition  of 
freedom  deals  mainly  with  the  frills.  The  Greek  myth  was 
more  to  the  point.  Prometheus  did  not  bring  to  mankind 
freedom  of  the  press.  He  procured  fire,  which  obediently  to 
human  purpose  cooks  and  gives  warmth.  In  fact,  freedom 
of  action  is  a  primary  human  need.  In  modern  thought,  the 
expression  of  this  truth  has  taken  the  form  of  4  the  economic 
interpretation  of  history’. 

The  fact  that  the  ‘  economic  interpretation  ’  is  itself  a  novel 
thought  arising  within  the  last  sixty  or  seventy  years  illus¬ 
trates  an  important  sociological  fact.  The  literary  world 
through  all  ages  belonged  mainly  to  the  fortunate  section  of 
mankind  whose  basic  human  wants  have  been  amply  satisfied. 
A  few  literary  men  have  been  in  want  throughout  their 


ASPECTS  OF  FREEDOM  85 

lives,  many  have  occasionally  suffered.  The  fact  shocks  us. 
It  is  remembered  because  it  is  rare.  The  fortunate  classes 
are  oblivious  to  the  fact  that  throughout  the  ages  the  masses 
of  mankind  have  lived  in  conscious  dread  of  such  disaster — 
a  drought,  a  wet  summer,  a  bad  harvest,  a  cattle  disease, 
a  raid  of  pirates.  Also  the  basic  needs  when  they  are  habitu¬ 
ally  satisfied  cease  to  dominate  thought.  Delicacies  of  taste 
displace  the  interest  in  fullness  of  stomach.  Thus  the  motives 
which  stir  the  fortunate  directing  classes  to  conscious 
activity  have  a  long-range  forecast  and  an  aesthetic  tinge: 
Power,  glory,  safety  in  the  distant  future,  forms  of  govern¬ 
ment,  luxury,  religion,  excitement,  dislike  of  strange  ways, 
contemplative  curiosity,  play.  Mankind  survived  by  evolving 
a  peculiar  excitability  whereby  it  quickly  adapts  itself  to 
novel  circumstance.  This  instability  is  quickly  diverted  to 
some  simple  form  of  the  more  abstract  interests  of  the 
minority.  The  great  convulsions  happen  when  the  economic 
urge  on  the  masses  have  dove-tailed  with  some  simplified 
ideal  end.  Intellect  and  instinct  then  combine,  and  some 
ancient  social  -order  passes  away.  But  the  masses  of  the 
population  are  always  there,  requiring  at  least  a  minimum 
of  satisfaction,  with  their  standard  of  life  here  higher  and 
there  lower,  also  rising  or  falling.  Thus,  even  when  the 
minority  is  dominant,  the  plain  economic  facts  of  life  must 
be  the  governing  force  in  social  development.  Yet  in  general 
the  masses  are  intellectually  quiescent,  though  the  more 
ideal  ends  of  the  minority,  good  and  bad,  permeate  the 
masses,  directing  policies  according  to  the  phantasies  of  the 
generations.  And  the  primary  demand  for  freedom  is  to  be 
found  in  the  general  urge  for  the  accomplishment  of  these 
general  ends,  which  are  a  fusion  of  ideal  and  economic 
policies,  making  the  stuff  of  history.  In  so  far  as  a  popu¬ 
lation  is  dominated  by  some  general  appetition,  freedom 


86 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


presents  no  peculiar  problem  to  the  statesman.  The  tribal 
actions  are  shaped  inevitably,  and  that  group  of  mankind  is 
pushed  towards  accomplishment  or  frustration. 

In  modern  states  there  is  a  complex  problem.  There  are 
many  types  of  character.  Freedom  means  that  within  each 
type  the  requisite  co-ordination  should  be  possible  without 
the  destruction  of  the  general  ends  of  the  whole  community. 
Indeed,  one  general  end  is  that  these  variously  co-ordinated 
groups  should  contribute  to  the  complex  pattern  of  com¬ 
munity  life,  each  in  virtue  of  its  own  peculiarity.  In  this 
way  individuality  gains  the  effectiveness  which  issues  from 
co-ordination,  and  freedom  obtains  power  necessary  for  its 
perfection. 

This  is  the  hope  of  the  statesman,  the  solution  which  the 
long  course  of  history  is  patiently  disclosing.  But  it  is  not  the 
intuition  which  has  nerved  men  to  surpass  the  limitations 
of  mankind.  After  all,  societies  of  primates,  of  animals,  of 
life  on  the  earth’s  surface,  are  transient  details.  There  is  a 
freedom  lying  beyond  circumstance,  derived  from  the  direct 
intuition  that  life  can  be  grounded  upon  its  absorption  in 
what  is  changeless  amid  change.  This  is  the  freedom  at  which 
Plato  was  groping,  the  freedom  which  Stoics  and  Christians 
obtained  as  the  gift  of  Hellenism.  It  is  the  freedom  of  that 
virtue  directly  derived  from  the  source  of  all  harmony.  For 
it  is  conditioned  only  by  its  adequacy  of  understanding.  And 
understanding  has  this  quality  that,  however  it  be  led  up 
to,  it  issues  in  the  soul  freely  conforming  its  nature  to  the 
supremacy  of  insight.  It  is  the  reconciliation  of  freedom 
with  the  compulsion  of  the  truth.  In  this  sense  the  captive 
can  be  free,  taking  as  his  own  the  supreme  insight,  the 
indwelling  persuasion  towards  the  harmony  which  is  the 
height  of  existence. 


CHAPTER  V 


FROM  FORCE  TO  PERSUASION 

Section  I.  The  gradual  development  of  Persuasive 
Agencies  in  the  communal  life  of  mankind  was  not  wholly 
due  to  the  energizing  of  ideas.  Indeed,  the  very  habit  of  in¬ 
tellectual  activity  was  promoted  by  the  slow  natural  develop¬ 
ment  of  persuasive  intercourse  within  the  social  life  of  each 
community,  and  between  different  communities.  Evidently 
the  existence  of  each  family  group  involves  a  mixture  of  love, 
dependence,  sympathy,  persuasion,  and  compulsion.  There 
can  never  have  been  any  period  when  the  gentler  modes  of 
human  relations  were  wholly  absent.  Indeed,  the  ferocity 
may  have  been  the  later  development,  due  to  the  increase  of 
intelligent  self-interest.  It  may  easily  have  arisen  as  a  strain 
of  character  necessary  for  preservation,  and  have  developed 
into  an  overgrowth  checking  upward  evolution  beyond  a 
low  level  of  life.  We  find  civilized  communities  struggling 
with  two  kinds  of  compulsion.  There  are  the  natural  neces¬ 
sities,  such  as  food,  warmth,  and  shelter.  There  are  also 
the  necessities  for  a  co-ordination  of  social  activities.  This 
co-ordination  is  produced  partly  by  instinctive  habit,  sus¬ 
tained  by  flashes  of  good  sense,  partly  by  the  compulsion 
exercised  by  other  members  of  the  community,  and  partly 
by  reasonable  persuasion.  In  so  far  as  the  area  of  reasonable 
persuasion  widens,  an  environment  has  been  provided 
within  which  the  higher  mental  activities  and  the  subtler 
feelings  can  find  their  use  and  their  enjoyment.  But  with 


88 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


the  growth  of  intellect  the  range  of  necessity  diminishes. 
Some  command  over  nature  has  been  attained.  Thus  a  wide¬ 
spread  reliance  on  persuasion  produces  its  reward  in  the  shape 
of  an  upward  evolution.  At  least,  it  produces  conditions 
favourable  to  such  an  upward  trend. 

In  this  chapter  we  consider  the  effect  of  some  of  the 
natural  necessities,  such  as  food  and  clothing,  and  also  the 
effect  of  activities,  such  as  commerce,  which  naturally  pro¬ 
mote  the  persuasive  reactions  within  society,  and  between 
societies.  Also  we  consider  the  transition  of  these  agencies 
into  various  types  of  restlessness. 

Such  activities,  energizing  for  centuries,  indeed  for  thou¬ 
sands  of  years,  lie  behind  the  intellectual  ferment  which  we 
find  driving  onward  the  Hebrew  prophets  and  the  Greek 
philosophers.  Indeed,  apart  from  the  continuing  vigour  of 
such  agencies,  the  intellectual  life  of  mankind  would  wither, 
without  roots,  and  without  any  material  content  for  thought 
or  purpose. 

Section  II.  The  term  Commerce,  as  used  in  this  chapter, 
will  have  an  enlarged  sense.  It  will  include  the  interchange 
of  material  commodities,  and  their  manufacture  for  the 
purpose  of  such  interchange.  It  will  also  include  the  manage¬ 
ment  of  currency,  which  is  a  conventionalized  commodity, 
possibly  but  not  necessarily  possessing  some  intrinsic  value 
of  its  own  apart  from  its  use  as  currency.  Finally  we 
shall  extend  the  meaning  of  the  term  even  beyond  these 
limits,  passing  beyond  the  bounds  of  material  things.  In  its 
most  general  sense,  the  commerce  of  mankind  involves  every 
species  of  interchange  which  proceeds  by  way  of  mutual 
persuasion. 

All  commercial  values  are  psychological,  that  is  to  say,  they 
are  measured  by  the  desire  widely  spread  among  sections 


FROM  FORGE  TO  PERSUASION  89 

of  mankind  to  acquire  the  numerous  articles  in  question. 
Such  desire  may  be  closely  connected  with  some  physical 
necessity  arising  out  of  possession  or  deprivation,  for  ex¬ 
ample,  the  satisfaction  of  hunger  or  starvation.  When  there 
is  a  complete  absence  of  any  such  physical  necessity  or 
aesthetic  fact,  so  that  the  sole  advantages  of  possession  depend 
on  the  possibility  of  renewed  exchange,  we  are  essentially 
concerned  with  currency  founded  on  credit.  In  this  field 
of  human  behaviour  the  psychological  peculiarities  of  man¬ 
kind  produce  their  fullest  effect.  Very  often,  even  in  con¬ 
nection  with  currencies,  there  is  no  explicit  contract,  but 
the  advantage  of  possession  consists  in  the  belief  as  to  the 
stability  of  certain  habits  of  mankind,  habits  which  are  not 
founded  on  physical  necessities  for  the  preservation  of  life. 
For  example,  gold  currencies  depend  for  their  prestige  upon 
the  habit  of  highly  prizing  the  possession  of  gold.  This 
habit  has  a  long  and  complex  history.  One  comparatively 
late  element  in  this  history  is  the  well-established  use  of  coined 
gold  pieces  as  a  medium  of  exchange.  Another  element  is 
the  unfounded  belief  that  the  value  of  gold  is  still  mainly 
independent  of  its  use  as  currency,  by  reason  of  its  aesthetic 
and  metallurgic  uses.  Another  element  is  the  well-founded 
belief  that  so  long  as  gold  is  generally  used  as  currency, 
no  Government  can  arbitrarily  increase  its  stock  of  gold 
pieces.  All  of  these  characteristics  of  gold  are  alterable. 
A  chemical  discovery  in  the  remote  future  may  render  the 
production  of  gold  as  easy  as  that  of  paper  currency-notes. 
The  superstitious  reverence  for  gold  may  pass  away.  The 
governments  of  the  world  may  prefer  paper  currencies,  per¬ 
haps  for  the  very  reason  that  they  can  increase  the  number 
of  paper  notes  at  their  arbitrary  will,  thus  freeing  society 
from  one  type  of  physical  compulsion.  But  the  fundamental 


go 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


fact  is  that  so  long  as  the  generality  of  mankind  deem  gold 
to  be  wealth,  then  it  is  wealth;  and  as  soon  as  this  opinion 
passes,  gold  then  becomes  a  metal  of  subsidiary  importance. 

Currencies  represent  only  one  particular  case  of  this  de¬ 
pendence  on  habits  of  mankind.  All  producers  and  retail 
traders  are  in  this  position.  One  extreme  example  is  afforded 
by  the  commerce  in  religious  emblems,  such  as  the  production 
of  idols  for  worship  in  Central  Africa,  or  the  production 
of  black  gowns  for  the  vesture  of  Calvinistic  or  Unitarian 
preachers  in  some  countries.  However,  most  commodities 
belong  to  a  mixed  type.  In  temperate  climates  dress  is  a 
physical  necessity,  but  fashions  of  dress  depend  upon  taste 
and  are  in  fact  very  alterable.  Even  food,  though  a  more 
pressing  necessity  than  dress,  in  modern  times  includes  an 
abundance  of  alternatives.  The  upshot  of  all  these  con¬ 
siderations  is  that  the  doctrines  of  commerce  have  to  be 
founded  upon  assumptions  concerning  necessities,  habits, 
technology,  and  prevalent  knowledge.  But  habits,  tech¬ 
nology,  and  knowledge  are  variable  from  epoch  to  epoch, 
and  even  in  any  one  epoch  differ  in  different  sections  of 
humanity.  Thus  any  theory  of  commerce  depends  upon 
pre-suppositions  as  to  the  populations  concerned,  and  cannot 
be  extended  beyond  these  limits  apart  from  a  direct  in¬ 
vestigation  of  the  wider  populations.  For  example,  any 
considerable  change  in  technology  alters  in  effect  the  popu¬ 
lations,  and  thus  requires  a  corresponding  shift  in  commercial 
theory.  This  conclusion  has  been  well  known  to  the  great 
masters  of  economic  doctrine.  But  certainly  it  has  not  been 
adequately  attended  to  by  the  majority  of  people  engaged 
in  the  theory  or  the  practice  of  commerce  or  in  its  political 
regulation.  The  classical  political  economy  which  dominated 
the  nineteenth  century  was  largely  based  upon  sociological 
observation  of  the  middle  classes  of  Northern  Europe  and 


FROM  FORCE  TO  PERSUASION  91 

Northern  America  in  the  eighteenth  century,  also  with 
some  reference  to  Mediterranean  commerce  of  earlier  epochs. 
Everything  else,  discernible  in  other  sections  of  the  Euro¬ 
pean  populations  or  in  other  continents,  was  dismissed  as 
irrelevant  interruption  to  the  pure  practice  of  perfect 
commerce. 

The  development  of  economics  was,  in  truth,  affected 
by  the  moralizing  tendency  of  the  class  mainly  concerned. 
Their  ideal  of  commercial  activity  as  the  main  occupation  of 
perfected  civilization  led  to  the  consideration  of  economic 
laws  which  should  hold,  and  to  the  neglect  of  economic  pro¬ 
cedures  which  in  fact  did  hold.  For  example,  in  England 
in  the  mid-nineteenth  century  radical  manufacturers  opposed 
the  enactment  of  adulteration  laws,  basing  their  action  on 
the  axiom  Caveat  emptor.  In  this  instance  their  individual¬ 
istic  doctrine  of  society,  combined  with  their  presupposition 
that  respectable  men  and  women  are  mainly  engaged  in 
safeguarding  all  details  of  their  commercial  interests,  led 
them  to  neglect  questions  of  prevalent  fact.  In  the  study 
of  ideas,  it  is  necessary  to  remember  that  insistence  on 
hard-headed  clarity  issues  from  sentimental  feeling,  as  it 
were  a  mist,  cloaking  the  perplexities  of  fact.  Insistence  on 
clarity  at  all  costs  is  based  on  sheer  superstition  as  to  the 
mode  in  which  human  intelligence  functions.  Our  reasonings 
grasp  at  straws  for  premises  and  float  on  gossamers  for 
deductions. 

Section  III.  Another  instance  of  ill-judged  simplification 
is  the  use  made  of  the  Malthusian  Law  of  Population.  This 
law,  in  any  reasonably  accurate  statement,  is  undeniable. 
The  increase  of  population  apart  from  checks  on  impulse,  or 
on  child-bearing,  or  on  survival,  proceeds  by  a  law  with 
some  analogy  to  geometric  progression.  Also,  apart  from 
these  checks,  the  numerical  factor  of  the  geometric  increase 


92 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


is  greater  than  unity  by  a  difference  which  is  not  negligible. 
Again  the  means  of  subsistence — food,  clothing,  shelter — so 
far  as  they  are  provided  by  appliances  of  given  types,  can 
only  be  increased  by  the  production  of  additional  appliances 
of  these  types.  Such  additional  production,  even  if  variable, 
must  conform  to  the  general  type  of  arithmetical  progression. 
But  a  geometric  progression  will  always  overtake  an  arith¬ 
metic  progression.  It  was  then  concluded,  as  a  consequence 
of  this  Malthusian  Law,  that  population  will  always  overtake 
the  means  of  subsistence.  The  further  inference  was  then 
drawn  that,  apart  from  short  exceptional  periods,  the  normal 
structure  of  society  was  that  of  a  comparatively  affluent 
minority  subsisting  on  the  labours  of  a  teeming  population 
checked  by  starvation  and  other  discomforts. 

These  sociological  conclusions,  if  true,  are  of  enormous 
importance  to  commerce,  in  the  enlarged  sense  in  which 
we  have  used  that  term.  For,  in  the  first  place,  the  normal 
structure  of  society  is  now  defined.  It  consists  of  the  fortunate 
few,  and  of  the  semi-destitute  many.  Thus  producers  must, 
in  the  long  run,  design  their  production  to  suit  these  types 
of  customers.  Again  the  hope  of  improving  the  social  system 
by  a  humane  adjustment  of  social  conditions  in  factories 
must  be  abandoned.  It  is  of  course  possible,  here  and  there, 
as  the  result  of  isolated  charity.  But  in  the  long  run,  there 
must  be  a  pool  of  labour,  starving  and  destitute,  ready  to 
work  on  the  wages  of  bare  subsistence.  Factories  taking 
advantage  of  such  cheap  labour  will  drive  out  of  trade  those 
managed  on  fanciful  humanitarian  lines.  Hence  the  final 
improvement  of  the  social  system  is  mirage.  In  so  far  as 
medicine  saves  life,  there  will  be  only  more  to  starve. 

These  sociological  conclusions  from  the  Malthusian  Law 
assume  first  that  all  the  restraints  upon  increase  of  mankind 
are  secondary  in  their  effect  until  they  are  raised  to  domin- 


FROM  FORCE  TO  PERSUASION  93 

ance  by  excessive  population.  Secondly  they  assume  that 
within  the  span  of  time  required  for  the  operation  of  the 
Malthusian  Law,  sudden  increases  of  productive  power,  due 
to  improved  technology  will  not  be  introduced.  Perhaps 
such  improved  technology  may  even  require  additional 
population.  Thirdly  they  assume  that  the  geographic  situa¬ 
tion  of  the  population  concerned  will  not  be  seriously 
affected  by  migration.  In  truth  there  is  a  complex  situation 
depending  on  the  balance  of  many  factors.  By  arbitrarily 
seizing  upon  one  or  two  factors,  and  by  relegating  the  re¬ 
mainder  to  the  status  of  secondary  disturbances,  almost  any 
law  of  population  can  be  deduced.  Thus  the  Malthusian  Law, 
with  its  sociological  consequences,  is  not  an  iron  necessity. 
It  is  a  possibility  inherent  in  the  facts,  which  may  afford  an 
interpretation  of  the  circumstances  of  some  human  societies, 
perhaps  of  all. 

A  recourse  to  observation  at  once  discloses  the  importance 
of  the  doctrine  of  Malthus.  China  and  India  both  afford 
examples  of  societies  which  illustrate  his  law.  They  contain 
large  populations  whose  standard  of  life  is  perilously  near 
to  the  margin  of  subsistence.  We  must  conclude,  therefore, 
that  for  nearly  half  the  human  race,  Malthus  has  provided 
an  interpretation  for  some  of  the  dominant  facts  of  history 
occurring  within  the  last  few  centuries,  and  perhaps  stretching 
into  a  longer  period.  Now  India  and  China  are  instances 
of  civilized  societies  which  for  a  long  period  in  their  later 
history  maintained  themselves  with  arrested  technology  and 
with  fixed  geographical  location.  They  provided  the  exact 
conditions  required  for  the  importance  of  the  Malthusian 
Law. 

When  we  turn  to  the  European  races  the  evidence  is  more 
perplexing.  The  superficial  fact  is  that  during  the  eleven 
centuries  from  the  age  of  Charlemagne  to  the  present  day  a 


94 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


persistently  increasing  population  has  been  accompanied  by 
an  equally  persistent  rise  in  the  general  standard  of  life. 
Thus  any  simple-minded  Malthusian  correlation  of  density 
of  population  with  deficiency  in  the  necessaries  of  life  does 
not  apply.  Of  course,  the  stock  answer  to  this  conclusion  is 
that  the  checks,  which  the  leading  Malthusians  have  always 
explicitly  recognized,  have  intervened  to  delay  the  inevitable 
issue.  But  Europe,  even  Western  Europe,  is  a  large  region, 
and  a  thousand  years  is  a  long  time,  about  one-sixth  of  the 
whole  past  of  civilization  within  the  historical  period.  The 
plain  truth  is  that  during  this  period  and  over  that  area  the 
so-called  checks  were  such  that  the  Malthusian  Law  repre¬ 
sented  a  possibility,  unrealized  and  of  no  importance.  Also 
these  checks  were  not  even  in  proportion  to  the  density  of 
the  population.  For  examples,  the  plagues  depended  mainly 
on  insanitary  habits,  and  the  densities  of  rats,  insects,  and 
microbes.  At  the  time  of  the  Black  Death,  a  Malthusian 
discussing  the  excessive  birth  rate  would  have  been  talking 
irrelevant  nonsense.  Soap,  water,  and  drains  were  the  key  to 
the  situation.  The  Thirty  Years’  War  halved  the  population 
of  Germany.  It  was  due  to  many  causes,  a  few  creditable, 
but  most  of  them  discreditable.  An  excessive  population 
in  Germany  has  never  been  mentioned  among  them.  Of 
course  there  was  plenty  of  misery  in  the  Middle  Ages,  and 
during  the  Renaissance.  For  example,  we  read  of  peasants’ 
risings.  But  this  misery  certainly  did  not  prevail  in  any 
proportion  to  density  of  population.  Thus,  in  the  early 
years  of  the  sixteenth  century,  Flanders  which  was  thickly 
populated  was  notably  more  prosperous  than  the  country- 
districts  in  Germany  where,  at  that  time,  there  was  a  rising 
of  the  peasants.  Of  course  the  reasons  for  this  contrast  are 
too  obvious  to  be  worth  mentioning.  But  among  these 
reasons,  the  fact  emerges  that  the  Malthusian  Law  is  largely 


FROM  FORCE  TO  PERSUASION  95 

irrelevant  for  the  discussion  of  sociological  conditions  in 
Europe. 

Section  IV.  Nevertheless,  there  have  been  such  occasions 
of  relevance.  It  is  a  mistake  to  discuss  the  development  of 
Western  Europe  in  isolation.  The  history  of  Europe  has  been 
decisively  influenced  by  its  reactions  with  the  Near  East. 
Here  the  term  Near  East  is  used  to  denote  that  large  region, 
including  three  metropolitan  districts,  on  its  coastal  boun¬ 
daries — Constantinople,  Mesopotamia,  and  the  Delta  of  the 
Nile,  and  also  including  the  Arabian  Desert  with  its  fertile 
fringes,  and  the  plateaux  and  mountains  of  Asia  Minor.  The 
history  of  civilization  in  the  Old  World  is  the  history  of 
the  internal  development  of  the  four  continental  regions 
fringing  Asia,  namely,  China,  India,  the  Near  East,  and 
Europe.  These  four  histories  cannot  be  understood  apart 
from  a  study  of  the  reactions  of  these  vast  regions  on  each 
other.  For  example,  the  Hellenic  and  Hellenistic  epochs 
comprise  the  story  of  how  the  ancient  civilization  of  the 
Near  East  brought  to  birth  the  new  civilization  of  Europe, 
and  how  European  civilization  asserted  its  independence  of 
the  social  system  to  which  it  owed  its  nurture.  The  subsequent 
collapse  of  the  older  civilization  is  the  tragedy  of  history, 
foreshadowed  by  the  decline  of  the  Roman  Empire  whose 
imperial  system  had  reverted  to  Eastern  ideals. 

The  reactions  between  mediaeval  Europe  and  the  Near 
East  can  be  classified  under  four  headings,  Malthus,  Religion, 
Technology,  Commerce.  It  must  be  remembered,  however, 
that  all  the  major  crises  in  the  story  were  precipitated 
by  a  concurrence  of  many  causes.  It  is  a  great  mistake  in 
sociological  theory  to  link  impulse  towards  activity  with 
abject  destitution.  In  fact,  when  a  population  has  sunk  its 
standard  of  life  to  the  marginal  level  for  subsistence,  the 
poverty  of  life  weakens  the  impulse  towards  adventure.  The 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


96 

Malthusian  impulse  towards  conquest  arises  when  a  well- 
nurtured,  hardy  population  is  only  beginning  to  feel  the 
pressure  of  its  numbers  on  its  resources.  There  was  no  evidence 
of  starvation  at  the  Courts  of  Central  Asia  or  among  the 
Arabian  tribes.  Probably  there  was  a  growing  hard  dullness 
of  life  provoking  unrest.  But  the  active  stimulants  for  the 
eruptions  of  the  Tartar  and  Arabian  tribes  were  adventure, 
the  dream  of  fabulous  luxury,  religion.  The  dream  of  luxury 
is  the  first,  and  more  dangerous,  phase  of  the  Malthusian 
pressure  on  a  population.  It  arises  before  the  inroad  of 
enfeeblement.  But  the  initial  phase  of  emotional  unrest  can 
take  a  more  intellectual  form,  and  clothe  itself  in  religious 
concepts.  A  new  mass-religion  can  then  arise,  with  the 
mission  to  subdue  the  Earth  and  destroy  the  infidels.  In 
fact,  it  is  a  commonplace  of  history,  that  the  pressure  of 
population  upon  its  resources  is  one  main  ingredient  in  the 
catastrophic  reactions  between  large  regions,  and  between 
diverse  classes  within  the  same  social  system.  On  the  whole, 
catastrophes  are  disastrous  to  civilization.  They  are  a  plunge 
into  the  unknown;  and  civilization  is  not  the  average  result 
of  raw  nature.  It  depends  upon  the  long-time  operation  of 
selective  agency. 

Three  reasons  stand  out  to  explain  why  the  internal  con¬ 
ditions  in  Europe,  for  more  than  a  thousand  years,  reduced 
to  insignificance  the  operation  of  the  Malthusian  Law.  They 
are,  Expansion  of  Commerce,  Development  of  Technology, 
and  Discovery  of  Empty  Continents.  All  these  causes  are 
interconnected.  Also  the  activities  involved  in  each  can 
be  represented  as  due  to  a  population  seeking  means  of 
subsistence.  But  the  point  is  that  mankind  has  developed 
an  unstable  sensitivity  in  respect  to  its  emotional  and  intel¬ 
lectual  functions.  Thus  in  fortunate  societies  faint  signs  of 
economic  pressure  develop  disproportionate  forms  of  adven- 


FROM  FORGE  TO  PERSUASION 


97 

ture,  physical  and  intellectual.  Avocations  are  initiated  as 
means  of  subsistence:  they  end  as  passions.  The  result  in 
Europe  has  been  the  introduction  of  novelties,  of  Commerce, 
of  Scientific  Technology,  and  of  Geographic  Knowledge, 
which  have  entirely  masked  sociological  consequences  of  the 
Malthusian  type. 

The  central  activity  from  which  the  other  two  developed 
was  Commerce.  We  are  speaking  of  Europe  from  the  Age 
of  Charlemagne  onwards.  If  we  had  included  the  six  hun¬ 
dred  years  preceding  that  Age,  the  migration  of  Peoples 
within  Europe  was  one  main  factor.  But  in  the  period  under 
review  these  great  migrations  were  over.  The  diffusion  of 
the  Scandinavian  Northmen  was  still  in  progress.  But  this 
migration  was  hardly  a  mass  movement.  It  is  best  conceived 
as  the  diffusion  of  the  ablest  governing  class  that  Europe 
has  ever  seen — Canute  and  his  Danes,  Norman  Barons  in 
France,  and  in  England,  and  in  Southern  Italy.  Also  their 
direct  activities  were  not  such  as  to  mask  the  Malthusian 
Laws.  They  introduced  order,  and  good  order  is  a  con¬ 
dition  for  the  increase  of  population.  Order,  as  such,  gives 
no  reason  for  escape  from  the  consequences  of  an  increasing 
population.  Also  an  enumeration  of  some  main  interests  of 
the  epoch  is  not  to  the  point.  For  example,  the  various 
activities  of  the  Catholic  Church,  the  scholastic  controversies, 
the  Holy  Roman  Empire,  architecture,  the  artistic  and 
literary  interests  of  the  Renaissance,  the  Reformation,  had 
no  direct  bearing  on  the  evasion  of  Malthusian  consequences 
arising  from  the  increase  of  population.  Granting  the  in¬ 
crease  of  population,  History  has  only  disclosed  three  ways 
of  escape — expanding  Commerce,  improving  Technology, 
and  utilization  of  Empty  Regions.  The  most  fundamental 
of  all  sociological  classifications  is  that  between  civilized 
societies  for  which  one  or  more  of  these  conditions  do  obtain, 

7 


wi 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


98 

and  those  for  which  they  do  not  obtain.  In  the  wide  sense 
of  the  term,  Commerce  covers  all  three  conditions.  Thus 
Commerce  is  one  central  factor,  essential  for  a  prosperous 
civilization.  As  soon  as  there  is  an  arrest,  when  expansion, 
improvement,  and  novel  utilization  cease,  then  slowly  and 
imperceptibly  a  blight  settles  upon  the  populations  con¬ 
cerned.  China  and  India  survived,  with  populations  blighted 
by  hopeless  poverty,  the  Roman  Empire  fell  by  reason  of 
the  blight,  the  Near  East  is  the  store-house  of  buried  cities 
recording  ancient  magnificence.  The  central  factor  is  Com¬ 
merce;  and  more  than  that,  it  is  Commerce  developed 
adventurously. 

In  the  first  three  hundred  years  of  the  slow  development 
of  the  Feudal  System  after  Charlemagne,  wre  see  a  popula¬ 
tion  barely  gaining  a  livelihood  by  hard  toil.  This  state  of 
things  exemplifies  the  application  of  Malthus’  Doctrine  in 
the  primitive  stages  of  civilization.  The  only  way  of  coping 
with  an  increase  of  population  was  to  cut  down  another 
forest,  and  arithmetically  to  add  field  to  field,  till  fertile  land 
was  fully  occupied.  Also  fertility  itself  became  exhausted, 
so  that  until  the  close  of  the  eighteenth  century  fallow  fields 
bore  witness  to  the  iron  limits  that  nature  set  to  agriculture. 
The  essence  of  technology  is  to  enable  mankind  to  transcend 
such  limitations  of  unguided  nature.  For  example,  the  ro¬ 
tation  of  the  crops,  the  scientific  understanding  of  fertilizers 
and  of  genetics,  have  already  altered  the  bounds  set  to  food 
production. 

In  those  early  times  the  Malthusian  Laws  set  their  limits 
to  life.  The  ‘checks’  were  operating,  and  population  hardly 
increased.  The  slow  growth  of  Commerce,  the  foundation 
of  centres  of  trade  with  the  peculiar  privileges  of  the  bur¬ 
gesses  and  the  guilds,  the  strange  knowledge  of  the  Jews, 
pilgrims,  the  glimpses  of  the  Near  East  provided  by  Medi- 


FROM  FORGE  TO  PERSUASION  99 

terranean  trade,  and  later  by  the  Crusades,  the  intelligence 
housed  in  the  great  monasteries — all  these  factors  gradually 
removed  the  repression  of  raw  nature  upon  the  possibilities 
of  human  existence.  European  life  began  to  approach  the 
standards  of  the  Near  East  and  of  China  so  far  as  concerned 
technology  and  general  commercial  activities.  But  these 
older  civilizations  were  about  to  face  new  limitations,  equally 
inexorable,  granting  their  stage  of  technology  and  of  social 
organization. 

Section  V.  Nature  is  plastic,  although  to  every  prevalent 
state  of  mind  there  corresponds  iron  nature  setting  its  bounds 
to  life.  Modern  history  begins  when  Europeans  passed  into 
a  new  phase  of  understanding  which  enabled  them  to 
introduce  new  selective  agencies,  unguessed  by  the  older 
civilizations.  It  is  a  false  dichotomy  to  think  of  Nature  and 
Man.  Mankind  is  that  factor  in  Nature  which  exhibits  in 
its  most  intense  form  the  plasticity  of  nature.  Plasticity  is  the 
introduction  of  novel  law.  The  doctrine  of  the  Uniformity  of 
Nature  is  to  be  ranked  with  the  contrasted  doctrine  of  magic 
and  miracle,  as  an  expression  of  partial  truth,  unguarded  and 
unco-ordinated  with  the  immensities  of  the  Universe.  Our 
interpretations  of  experience  determine  the  limits  of  what  we 
can  do  with  the  world. 

For  the  purpose  of  understanding  how  it  happened  that 
European  life  escaped  the  restrictions  which  finally  bound 
China,  India,  and  the  Near  East,  it  is  important  to  re¬ 
capture  the  attitude  towards  Commerce  prevalent  in  various 
epochs.  I  do  not  mean  records  of  trade,  but  records  of  the 
kinds  of  mentality  governing  commercial  relations.  We  can 
only  understand  a  society  by  knowing  what  sort  of  people 
undertook  what  sort  of  functions  in  that  society.  It  must  be 
remembered  that  China  and  Bagdad,  at  the  height  of  their 
prosperity,  exhibited  forms  of  human  life  in  many  ways 

7-2 


100 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


more  gracious  than  our  own.  They  were  great  civilizations. 
But  they  became  arrested,  and  the  arrest  is  the  point  of  our 
enquiry.  We  have  to  understand  the  reasons  for  the  greatness 
and  the  final  barriers  to  advancement.  Of  course,  such  an 
ambitious  design  is  absurd.  It  would  mean  the  solution  of 
the  main  problem  of  sociology.  What  can  be  done,  is  to  note 
some  indications  of  relevant  tones  of  mind  apparently  widely 
spread  in  various  districts  at  different  epochs. 

There  is  ample  evidence  of  active  Commerce  in  China  and 
the  Near  East  in  ancient  times,  contemporary  with  the  pre- 
Hellenic  and  Hellenic  periods  of  the  Aegean  Basin.  There 
are  Codes  of  Law  which  determine  commercial  problems. 
Also  among  the  early  inscriptions  recovered  from  Babylon 
and  Nineveh  there  are  a  mass  of  records  of  private  trans¬ 
actions  between  merchants.  Three  thousand  years  ago  the 
importance  of  credit  would  have  been  no  news  either  in 
Mesopotamia  or  in  China.  Also  there  was  foreign  trade 
beyond  the  boundaries  of  the  Near  East.  There  are  evidences 
of  ocean-borne  trade  between  India  and  Egypt,  perhaps  even 
between  China  and  Egypt,  with  Ceylon  as  an  intermediary. 
Also  Central  Asia  was  nearing  its  last  phase  of  prosperity 
before  it  faded  out  into  desert.  It  seems  to  have  provided  the 
route  for  a  flourishing  overland  trade  between  China  and 
the  Near  East.  Thus  these  great  civilizations  were  supported 
by  internal  trade  and  by  external  trade  with  each  other.  Also 
there  was  the  whole  coast-line  of  semi-barbarous  Europe — 
the  shores  of  the  Black  Sea,  the  shores  of  the  Western 
Mediterranean,  the  Atlantic  coasts  of  Europe. 

Having  regard  to  relative  backwardness  of  the  art  of 
navigation  then,  compared  with  the  same  art  in  the  fifteenth 
and  sixteenth  centuries  after  Christ,  the  boldness  of  the 
Phoenician  sailors  and  the  enterprise  of  their  traders  at  least 
equals  that  in  any  of  the  later  feats.  It  is  impossible  to  be  more 


FROM  FORCE  TO  PERSUASION 


IOI 


than  absolutely  fearless :  and  considering  the  dim  geographic 
knowledge  possessed  by  the  ancients,  the  Phoenicians  must 
be  allowed  the  fame  of  having  displayed  that  extremity  of 
courage.  The  Greeks  were  bold  sailors,  but  the  Phoenicians 
led  the  way.  There  is  no  reason  to  believe  that  in  later 
times  a  Greek  or  a  Roman  vessel  ever  saw  a  coast-line  not 
previously  visited  by  Phoenician  traders.  Also,  remembering 
Hanno’s  voyage  in  the  sixth  century  before  Christ,  the  whole 
oceanic  coast-line  of  Africa  was  explored  by  the  men  of  the 
Near  East,  where  western  Europeans  did  not  venture  till  the 
lapse  of  nigh  two  thousand  years.  In  the  last  few  hundred 
years,  European  races  have  been  apt  to  forget  the  greatness 
of  the  Near  East,  whose  populations,  with  no  predecessors  to 
guide  them,  carried  mankind  from  the  stage  of  semi-barbarism  * 
only  half-erect  from  the  soil,  to  peaks  of  civilized  life,  in 
art,  in  religion,  and  in  adventure,  which  remain  unsurpassed. 
Their  civilization  in  its  prime  was  founded  on  Expanding 
Commerce,  Development  of  Technology,  and  Discovery  of 
Empty  Continents.  But  in  this  list  one  item  has  been  omitted, 
The  Souls  of  Men. 

The  vigour  of  the  Near  East  survived  the  first  effort  to 
establish  a  widespread  European  civilization.  This  Euro¬ 
pean  attempt  was  embodied  in  the  Western  portion  of  the 
Roman  Empire.  It  was  sustained  during  four  hundred  and 
fifty,  or  five  hundred  years.  The  limits  of  this  period  may 
be  approximately  assigned  from  Caesar  and  Augustus  at  the 
commencement  down  to  the  taking  of  Rome  by  Alaric  in 
the  year  410  a.d.  The  failure  did  not  consist  in  the  decline 
and  fall  of  its  political  institutions.  Such  state-systems  are 
transient  expedients  upon  the  surface  of  civilization.  The 
real  failure  consists  in  the  fact  that  in  the  year  600  a.d., 
Western  Europe  was  less  civilized  than  in  the  year  100  a.d., 
and  was  far  behind  the  Eastern  Mediterranean  during  the 


102 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


third  and  fourth  centuries  before  Christ.  Pope  Gregory,  the 
Great,  would  have  been  poor  company  for  Sophocles,  Aris¬ 
totle,  Eratosthenes,  or  Archimedes.  Gregory  was  the  man 
for  his  time.  But  the  delicacies  of  civilization — in  art,  or  in 
thought,  or  in  human  behaviour — were  then  at  a  discount. 

In  every  sense  of  the  term,  the  Western  Empire  had 
lacked  expansive  force.  Across  the  Rhine  and  the  Danube 
the  northern  forests  were  impenetrable.  On  the  west,  the 
Atlantic  Ocean  was  trackless.  With  the  minor  excepdon  of 
the  conquest  of  Britain,  all  attempt  at  physical  expansion 
ceased  after  Varus  lost  the  legions  of  Augustus.  The  Western 
Empire  in  all  its  ramifications  was  a  purely  defensive  in¬ 
stitution,  in  its  sociological  functionings  and  in  its  external 
behaviour.  Its  learning  lacked  speculative  adventure.  In  no 
sense,  however  we  stretch  the  metaphor,  did  it  discover  a 
New  World.  Unfortunately  life  is  an  offensive,  directed 
against  the  repetidous  mechanism  of  the  Universe.  It  is  the 
thesis  of  this  discussion  that  a  policy  of  sociological  defence 
is  doomed  to  failure.  We  are  analysing  those  types  of  social 
functioning  which  provide  that  expansion  and  novelty  which 
life  demands.  Life  can  only  be  understood  as  an  aim  at  that 
perfection  which  the  conditions  of  its  environment  allow. 
But  the  aim  is  always  beyond  the  attained  fact.  The  goal  is 
some  type  of  perfected  things,  however  lowly  and  basically 
sensual.  Inorganic  nature  is  characterized  by  its  acceptance 
of  matter  of  fact.  In  nature,  the  soil  rests,  while  the  root  of  the 
plant  pursues  the  sources  of  its  refreshment.  In  the  Western 
Empire  there  was  no  pursuit.  Its  remnants  of  irritability  were 
devoid  of  transcendent  aim. 

Of  course  Christianity  was  a  tremendous  exception.  But 
on  the  whole,  in  its  immediate  effect  it  was  a  destructive 
agency.  Its  disregard  of  temporal  fact,  based  on  apocalyptic 
prophecy,  was  too  extreme.  It  was  not  till  its  first  few  cen- 


FROM  FORGE  TO  PERSUASION  IO3 

turies  were  passed  that  it  began  to  acquire  a  fortunate  world¬ 
liness.  Indeed  the  translation  of  Eastern  modes  of  thought — 
Semitic,  Greek,  and  Egyptian — to  Western  Europe  had 
the  unfortunate  effect  of  making  the  ideal  side  of  civiliza¬ 
tion  appear  more  abstract  than  it  was  in  the  lands  and  the 
epochs  of  its  origin.  It  had  this  effect  in  the  Near  East 
itself  when  by  the  lapse  of  time  circumstances  altered.  For 
the  early  Hebrews,  their  God  was  a  personage  whose  aims 
were  expressible  in  terms  of  the  immediate  political  and 
social  circumstances.  Their  religious  notions  had  singularly 
slight  reference  to  another  World.  The  absorption  of  the 
Greek  philosophers  in  the  city  life  of  their  times  is  evident. 
But  in  other  times  and,  still  more,  in  other  lands,  such 
thoughts  and  ideals  took  on  an  abstract  tinge.  They  had 
lost  their  practical  application.  The  notion  arose  that  the 
man  of  culture  and  the  man  of  ideal  aim  was  a  stranger 
in  the  busy  world.  It  is  true  that  such  a  notion  haunted 
Plato.  But  it  dominated  Augustine.  Yet  in  Augustine’s 
age,  towards  the  close  of  the  century  after  Constantine,  the 
mission  of  the  Church  for  the  reformation  of  this  World 
was  in  its  first  phase.  The  obstinate  survival  of  the  present 
World  was  upsetting  the  unworldly  tactics  of  the  early 
Christians. 

But  the  civilization  of  the  Near  East,  including  its  By¬ 
zantine  fringe,  contained  other  sources  of  vigour,  preserving 
it  from  the  decadence  of  its  Western  off-shoot.  The  true 
successors  of  Alexander,  the  men  who  realized  his  fabled 
dream  of  extending  the  Near  Eastern  civilization  from  the 
Tigris  to  the  western  shores  of  the  Mediterranean,  belonged 
to  the  age  of  Justinian  and  to  the  age  of  Mahometan  ex¬ 
pansion.  Justinian’s  success  was  incomplete.  It  was  a 
false  dawn.  But  the  Mahometans  represent  the  complete 
triumph  of  the  Near  East,  after  it  had  absorbed  the  novel 


104  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

ingredients  introduced  by  Hellenism  and  Hebrewism,  its 
two  great  off-shoots  destined  to  re-create  civilization.  Thus 
there  are  two  peaks  to  the  Near  Eastern  Culture.  The 
earlier  is  embodied  in  the  first  known  examples  of  high 
civilization  in  Babylon  and  Egypt.  The  metaphor  of  a  peak 
here  fails;  for  this  earlier  type  of  life  maintained  itself  for 
long  ages.  The  advent  of  the  Persians  represents  a  transitional 
period.  They  almost  antedated  the  Mahometans.  But  the 
times  were  not  ready. 

The  distinction  separating  the  Byzantines  and  the  Maho¬ 
metans  from  the  Romans  is  that  the  Romans  were  them¬ 
selves  deriving  the  civilization  which  they  spread.  In  their 
hands  it  assumed  a  frozen  form.  Thought  halted,  and  litera¬ 
ture  copied.  The  Byzantines  and  the  Mahometans  were 
themselves  the  civilization.  Thus  their  culture  retained  its 
intrinsic  energies,  sustained  by  physical  and  spiritual  ad¬ 
venture.  They  traded  with  the  Far  East:  they  expanded 
westward:  they  codified  law:  they  developed  new  forms  of 
art:  they  elaborated  theologies:  they  transformed  mathe¬ 
matics:  they  developed  medicine.  In  this  final  period  of 
Near  Eastern  greatness  the  Jews  played  the  same  part  as 
did  the  Greeks  during  the  Persian  epoch.  Finally,  the  Near 
East  as  a  centre  of  civilization  was  destroyed  by  the  Tartars 
and  the  Turks. 

Luckily  for  Europe,  the  more  northern  thrust  of  the 
Tartars  across  Russia  seems  to  have  been  checked  by 
the  forests  of  Poland  and  the  more  southern  hills  and 
mountains.  These  conquerors  of  the  Near  East  were  never 
civilized  in  any  effective  sense  of  the  term.  During  the 
later  centuries,  the  Turkish  pressure  on  Europe  consti¬ 
tuted  merely  the  threat  of  Europe  produced  by  a  lower 
civilization,  an  ingenious  compound  of  primitive  brutality 
and  decadent  refinement.  In  the  eighteenth  and  nineteenth 


FROM  FORCE  TO  PERSUASION  IO5 

centuries  much  history  was  written  under  the  impression 
that  the  Turks  were  the  authentic  representatives  of  the 
previous  Near  Eastern  civilization.  Thus  the  early  Greeks 
were  staged  as  its  opponents  and  not  as  its  derivatives.  In 
fact  the  long  pupillage  of  Europe  to  the  Near  East  was 
entirely  misrepresented. 

Section  VI.  At  the  close  of  the  Dark  Ages  Europe  started 
upon  its  second  effort  after  civilization  with  three  main  ad¬ 
vantages  :  its  Christian  ethics :  its  instinct  for  legal  organiza¬ 
tion  transcending  local  boundaries,  derived  from  the  Church 
and  the  reminiscence  of  the  Empire:  and  thirdly  its  wider 
inheritance  of  antecedent  thought,  gradually  disclosing  itself 
as  Hebrew,  Greek,  and  Roman  literatures.  The  total  effect 
was  the  increased  sense  of  the  dignity  of  man,  as  man. 
There  has  been  a  growth,  slow  and  wavering,  of  respect  for 
the  preciousness  of  human  life.  This  is  the  humanitarian 
spirit,  gradually  emerging  in  the  slow  sunrise  of  a  thousand 
years. 

The  creation  of  the  world — said  Plato — is  the  victory  of 
persuasion  over  force.  The  worth  of  men  consists  in  their 
liability  to  persuasion.  They  can  persuade  and  can  be  per¬ 
suaded  by  the  disclosure  of  alternatives,  the  better  and  the 
worse.  Civilization  is  the  maintenance  of  social  order,  by 
its  own  inherent  persuasiveness  as  embodying  the  nobler 
alternative.  The  recourse  to  force,  however,  unavoidable,  is 
a  disclosure  of  the  failure  of  civilization,  either  in  the  general 
society  or  in  a  remnant  of  individuals.  Thus  in  a  live  civiliza¬ 
tion  there  is  always  an  element  of  unrest.  For  sensitiveness 
to  ideas  means  curiosity,  adventure,  change.  Civilized  order 
survives  on  its  merits,  and  is  transformed  by  its  power  of 
recognizing  its  imperfections. 

Now  the  intercourse  between  individuals  and  between 
social  groups  takes  one  of  two  forms,  force  or  persuasion. 


106  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

Commerce  is  the  great  example  of  intercourse  in  the  way 
of  persuasion.  War,  slavery,  and  governmental  compulsion 
exemplify  the  reign  of  force.  The  weakness  of  the  Near 
Eastern  civilizations  consisted  in  their  large  reliance  upon 
force.  The  growth  of  persuasive  inter  course  within  the  texture 
of  society  became  halted.  These  civilizations  never  eradicated 
a  large  reliance  upon  the  sway  of  conquerors  over  conquered 
populations,  and  upon  the  rule  of  individual  masters  over  « 
slaves.  This  habit  of  dominance  spread  its  infection  beyond 
these  limits.  A  rule  of  men  over  women  remained  an 
established  feature  of  highly  civilized  societies.  It  survived 
as  a  hang-over  from  barbarism.  But  its  demoralizing  effects 
increased  with  civilization.  This  inequality  of  men  and 
women  seems  to  have  been  based  upon  physical  superiorities, 
and  the  absorption  of  women  in  the  birth  and  care  of 
children.  Anyhow  it  issued  in  the  degradation  of  women 
below  the  level  of  the  males.  Thus  these  eastern  races  entered 
upon  the  fatal  experiment  of  maintaining  themselves  at  two 
levels  of  culture,  and  of  dominating  subject  populations  at 
yet  a  third  level.  The  enjoyment  of  power  is  fatal  to  the 
subtleties  of  life.  Ruling  classes  degenerate  by  reason  of  their 
lazy  indulgence  in  obvious  gratifications. 

Commerce  followed  upon  the  gradual  acquirement  of 
means  for  easy  locomotion  in  small  groups.  Whole  com¬ 
munities  had  wandered,  gradually  shifting  to  other  en¬ 
vironments.  But  travel  and  return,  undertaken  by  small 
groups  or  even  by  individual  men,  is  an  enterprise  of  entirely 
different  character.  It  requires  either  open  country,  free 
from  forest  barriers,  or  the  navigation  of  rivers  and  seas.  The 
strangers  arrive  in  small  groups.  They  are  thus  under  no 
temptation  to  dominate,  and  excite  no  fear.  Commerce  may 
stabilize  itself  into  a  steady  traditional  routine.  This  halt 
in  progress  has  happened  over  large  areas  for«  long  periods 


FROM  FORCE  TO  PERSUASION  IO7 

of  time.  But  on  the  whole,  Commerce  is  unstable.  It  brings 
together  groups  of  men  with  different  modes  of  life,  different 
technologies,  and  different  ways  of  thought.  Apart  from 
Commerce,  the  mariners’  compass,  with  the  vast  theory 
which  it  has  suggested,  would  never  have  reached  the  shores 
of  the  Atlantic,  and  printing  would  not  have  spread  from 
Pekin  to  Cairo. 

The  expanding  Commerce  of  mediaeval  and  modern 
Europe  was  promoted  in  the  first  place  by  the  great  roads 
which  were  the  legacy  from  the  Roman  Empire,  by  the 
improving  art  of  navigation  which  enabled  the  indented 
coast-line  to  be  utilized,  and  by  the  sense  of  unity  promoted 
by  the  Catholic  Church  and  Christian  ethics.  There  were 
pirates,  and  feudal  wars,  and  rough  sporadic  disorder.  But 
men  from  different  regions,  of  different  races,  and  of  different 
occupation  were  meeting  together  on  the  basis  of  free  per¬ 
suasion.  Even  the  feudal  castle,  though  it  often  harboured 
men  with  the  mentality  of  gangsters,  was  more  apt  for  de¬ 
fence  than  for  offence.  Also  feudal  levies,  with  their  short 
periods  of  service,  were  mostly  effective  as  defensive  forces. 
In  later  times  the  evils  of  this  system  outweighed  its  merits. 
But  in  its  origin  it  can  be  compared  to  the  modern  police, 
quite  as  aptly  as  to  the  modern  army.  Of  course  it  differed 
from  both.  The  point  is  that  the  feudal  castle  was  mostly  a 
sensible  mode  of  self-protection  for  a  peaceful  district.  The 
merit  of  Commerce  lies  in  its  close  relation  to  technology. 
The  novelty  of  experience  promoted  by  Commerce  suggests 
alternatives  in  ways  of  production.  Again  European  tech¬ 
nology  was  fertilized  from  another  source.  The  art  of  clear 
thinking,  of  criticism  of  premises,  of  speculative  assumption, 
of  deductive  reasoning — this  great  art  was  discovered,  at 
least  in  embryo,  by  the  Greeks,  and  was  inherited  by  Europe. 
Like  other  inventions  it  has  often  been  disastrously  misused. 


io8 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


But  its  effect  on  intellectual  capacity  can  only  be  compared 
with  that  of  fire  and  iron  and  steel  for  the  production  of  the 
blades  of  Damascus  and  Toledo.  Mankind  was  now  armed 
intellectually,  as  well  as  physically. 

Curiosity  was  now  progressive.  The  static  wisdom  of  the 
proverbs  of  Solomon,  and  of  the  Wisdom  Books  of  the  Bible, 
has  been  supplanted  by  Euclid’s  Elements,  by  Newton’s 
Physics,  by  the  modern  epoch  in  industry.  4  All  the  rivers 
run  into  the  sea;  there  is  nothing  new  under  the  sun’,  was 
the  final  judgment  of  the  Near  East.  When  we  have  allowed 
for  all  its  brilliance,  and  for  its  many  modes  of  activity,  this 
great  civilization  finally  sank  under  the  barren  criticism  of 
disillusioned  sensualists.  It  is  the  nemesis  of  the  reign  of 
force,  of  the  worship  of  power,  that  the  ideals  of  the  semi¬ 
divine  rulers  centre  upon  some  variant  of  Solomon’s  mag¬ 
nificent  harem  of  three  hundred  wives  and  seven  hundred 
concubines.  The  variation  may  be  towards  decency,  but  it 
is  equally  decadent.  Christianity  has  only  escaped  from  the 
Near  East  with  scars  upon  it. 

Section  VII.  In  this  rapid  survey  of  the  rise  and  fall  of 
civilizations,  we  have  noted  four  factors  which  decisively 
govern  the  fate  of  social  groups.  First,  there  stands  the 
inexorable  law  that  apart  from  some  transcendent  aim  the 
civilized  life  either  wallows  in  pleasure  or  relapses  slowly 
into  a  barren  repetition  with  waning  intensities  of  feeling. 
Secondly,  there  stands  the  iron  compulsion  of  nature  that 
the  bodily  necessities  of  food,  clothing,  and  shelter  be  pro¬ 
vided.  The  rigid  limits  which  are  thereby  set  to  modes  of 
social  existence  can  only  be  mitigated  by  the  growth  of  an 
understanding  by  which  the  interplay  between  man  and  the 
rest  of  nature  can  be  adjusted.  Thirdly,  the  compulsory 
dominion  of  men  over  men  has  a  double  significance.  It 
has  a  benign  effect  so  far  as  it  secures  the  co-ordination  of 


FROM  FORGE  TO  PERSUASION  IO9 

behaviour  necessary  for  social  welfare.  But  it  is  fatal  to  ex¬ 
tend  this  dominion  beyond  the  barest  limits  necessary  for 
this  co-ordination.  The  progressive  societies  are  those  which 
most  decisively  have  trusted  themselves  to  the  fourth  factor 
which  is  the  way  of  persuasion.  Amidst  all  the  activities  of 
mankind  there  are  three  which  chiefly  have  promoted  this 
last  factor  in  human  life.  They  are  family  affections  aroused 
in  sex  relations  and  in  the  nurture  of  children,  intellectual 
curiosity  leading  to  enjoyment  in  the  interchange  of  ideas, 
and — as  soon  as  large-scale  societies  arose — the  practice  of 
Commerce.  But  beyond  these  special  activities  a  greater 
bond  of  sympathy  has  arisen.  This  bond  is  the  growth  of 
reverence  for  that  power  in  virtue  of  which  nature  harbours 
ideal  ends,  and  produces  individual  beings  capable  of  con¬ 
scious  discrimination  of  such  ends.  This  reverence  is  the 
foundation  of  the  respect  for  man  as  man.  It  thereby  secures 
that  liberty  of  thought  and  action,  required  for  the  upward 
adventure  of  life  on  this  Earth. 


CHAPTER  VI 


FORESIGHT 

Section  I.  By  the  phrase  Historical  Foresight,  I  mean 
something  quite  different  from  the  accurate  exercise  of 
Scientific  Induction.  Science  is  concerned  with  generalities. 
The  generalities  apply,  but  they  do  not  determine  the  course 
of  history  apart  from  some  anchorage  in  fact.  There  might 
have  been  many  alternative  courses  of  history  conditioned  by 
the  same  laws.  Perhaps,  if  we  knewr  enough  of  the  laws, 
then  we  should  understand  that  the  development  of  the 
future  from  the  past  is  completely  determined  by  the  details 
of  the  past  and  by  these  scientific  laws  which  condition  all 
generation.  Unfortunately  our  knowledge  of  scientific  laws 
is  woefully  defective,  and  our  knowledge  of  the  relevant 
facts  of  the  present  and  the  past  is  scanty  in  the  extreme. 
Thus  as  the  result  of  all  our  science,  we  are  ignorant  of  that 
remote  epoch  when  there  will  be  a  second  collision  between 
the  sun  and  a  passing  star,  we  are  ignorant  of  the  future  of 
life  on  the  earth,  we  are  ignorant  of  the  future  of  mankind, 
we  are  ignorant  of  the  course  of  history  a  year  hence,  we 
are  ignorant  of  most  of  the  domestic  details  of  our  lives  to¬ 
morrow,  we  are  even  ignorant  of  the  term  that  has  been  set 
to  our  own  existence. 

This  catalogue  of  ignorances  at  once  reminds  us  that  our 
state  is  not  that  of  blank  absence  of  knowledge.  Our  ignor¬ 
ance  is  suffused  with  Foresight.  Also  the  basis  of  our  defect 
in  foresight  is  our  scant  knowledge  of  the  relevant  detailed 


FORESIGHT 


I  I  I 


facts  in  past  and  present  which  are  required  for  the  appli¬ 
cation  of  the  scientific  laws.  Where  the  circumstances  are 
comparatively  simple,  as  in  Astronomy,  we  know  that  the 
facts  and  the  astronomical  laws  provide  an  apparatus  of 
great  accuracy  in  forecast.  The  main  difficulty  in  Historical 
Foresight  is  the  power  of  collecting  and  selecting  the  facts 
relevant  to  the  particular  type  of  forecast  which  we  wish 
to  make.  Discussions  on  the  method  of  science  wander  off 
on  to  the  topic  of  experiment.  But  experiment  is  nothing  else 
than  a  mode  of  cooking  the  facts  for  the  sake  of  exemplifying 
the  law.  Unfortunately  the  facts  of  history,  even  those  of 
private  individual  history,  are  on  too  large  a  scale.  They 
surge  forward  beyond  control. 

It  is  thus  evident  that  this  topic  of  Historical  Foresight 
is  not  to  be  exhausted  by  a  neat  description  of  some  definite 
methods.  It  is  faced  with  two  sources  of  difficulty,  where 
science  has  only  one.  Science  seeks  the  laws  only,  but  Fore¬ 
sight  requires  in  addition  due  emphasis  on  the  relevant  facts 
from  which  the  future  is  to  emerge.  Of  the  two  tasks  re¬ 
quired  for  Foresight,  this  selection  amid  the  welter  is  the 
more  difficult.  Probably  a  neat  doctrine  of  Foresight  is 
impossible.  But  what  can  be  done  is  to  confine  attention 
to  one  field  of  human  activity,  and  to  describe  the  type 
of  mentality  which  seems  requisite  for  the  attainment  of 
Foresight  within  that  field.  The  present  state  of  the  world, 
and  the  course  of  the  discussions  in  this  book,  suggest  the 
field  of  Commercial  relations.  This  field  will  therefore  be 
chosen  to  illustrate  the  function  of  ideas  in  the  provision  of 
anticipation  and  purpose. 

To  avoid  misunderstanding  I  must  disclaim  the  foolish 
notion  that  it  is  possible  for  anyone,  devoid  of  personal 
experience  of  commerce,  to  provide  useful  suggestions  for 
its  detailed  conduct.  There  is  no  substitute  for  first-hand 


1 12 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


practice.  Adso  the  word  ‘commerce’  is  here  used  in  the 
largest  sense  of  that  term,  in  which  it  includes  a  variety  of 
activities.  Any  useful  theory,  capable  of  immediate  applica¬ 
tion  to  specific  instances,  must  depend  on  a  direct  knowledge 
of  the  relevant  reactions  of  men  and  women  composing  that 
society,  or  perhaps  group  of  nations,  within  which  the  specific 
business  in  question  is  to  flourish.  In  this  discussion  there  is 
no  pretence  of  such  detailed  knowledge. 

There  remains,  however,  the  question  of  the  general  type 
of  mentality  which  in  the  present  condition  of  the  world  will 
promote  the  general  success  of  a  commercial  community. 
Such  a  type  is,  of  course,  very  complex.  But  we  are  con¬ 
sidering  one  unquestioned  element  in  it,  namely  Foresight, 
and  will  discuss  the  conditions  for  its  development  and  its 
successful  exercise. 

Some  people  are  born  with  astounding  knacks  of  the 
mind.  For  example,  there  are  calculating  boys  who  can 
perform  intricate  operations  of  mental  arithmetic  in  a  flash, 
there  are  also  other  sorts  of  peculiar  faculties  of  divination; 
in  particular  there  are  men  with  a  knack  of  shrewdness  in 
judging  circumstances  within  the  narrow  range  of  their 
immediate  observation.  But  after  all,  bankers  prefer  that 
their  clerks  should  learn  arithmetic,  and  trained  geologists 
are  preferred  to  men  with  divining  rods.  In  the  same  way, 
there  are  general  conditions  of  training  which  promote  the 
development  of  a  wider  type  of  foresight. 

It  is  a  great  mistake  to  divide  people  into  sharp  classes, 
namely,  people  with  such-and-such  a  knack  and  people 
without  it.  These  trenchant  divisions  are  simply  foolish. 
Most  humans  are  born  with  certain  aptitudes.  But  these 
aptitudes  can  easily  remain  latent  unless  they  are  elicited  into 
activity  by  fortunate  circumstances.  If  anyone  has  no  apti¬ 
tude  of  a  certain  type,  no  training  can  elicit  it.  But,  granted 


FORESIGHT 


1  13 

the  aptitude,  we  can  discuss  the  ways  of  training  it.  Fore¬ 
sight  depends  upon  understanding.  In  practical  affairs  it  is 
a  habit.  But  the  habit  of  foreseeing  is  elicited  by  the  habit 
of  understanding.  To  a  large  extent,  understanding  can  be 
acquired  by  a  conscious  effort  and  it  can  be  taught.  Thus  the 
training  of  Foresight  is  by  the  medium  of  Understanding. 
Foresight  is  the  product  of  Insight. 

Section  II.  The  general  topic  to  be  understood  is  the 
entire  internal  functioning  of  human  society,  including  its 
technologies,  the  biological  and  physical  laws  on  which 
these  technologies  depend,  and  including  the  sociological 
reactions  of  humans  depending  on  fundamental  psycho¬ 
logical  principles.  In  fact,  the  general  topic  is  sociology  in 
the  broadest  sense  of  the  term,  including  its  auxiliary  sciences. 
Such  a  width  of  understanding  is,  of  course,  beyond  the 
grasp  of  any  single  human.  But  no  part  of  it  is  entirely 
foreign  to  the  provision  of  foresight  in  business.  Such  a 
complete  understanding  is  a  co-operative  enterprise;  and  a 
business  community  maintains  its  success  for  long  periods  so 
far  as  its  average  foresight  is  dominated  by  some  approach 
to  such  general  understanding. 

We  shall  comprehend  better  the  varieties  of  individual 
understanding  which  go  to  complete  this  general  equipment 
of  an  ideal  business  community,  if  we  commence  by  con¬ 
sidering  the  contrast  between  understanding  and  routine. 

Routine  is  the  god  of  every  social  system ;  it  is  the  seventh 
heaven  of  business,  the  essential  component  in  the  success 
of  every  factory,  the  ideal  of  every  statesman.  The  social 
machine  should  run  like  clockwork.  Every  crime  should  be 
followed  by  an  arrest,  every  arrest  by  a  judicial  trial,  every 
trial  by  a  conviction,  every  conviction  by  a  punishment, 
every  punishment  by  a  reformed  character.  Or,  you  can 
conceive  an  analogous  routine  concerning  the  making  of  a 

8 


wi 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


I  14 

motor  car,  starting  with  the  iron  in  the  ore,  and  the  coal  in 
the  mine,  and  ending  with  the  car  driving  out  of  the  factory 
and  with  the  President  of  the  Corporation  signing  the  divi¬ 
dend  warrants,  and  renewing  his  contracts  with  the  mining 
Corporations.  In  such  a  routine  everyone  from  the  humblest 
miner  to  the  august  president  is  exactly  trained  for  his 
special  job.  Every  action  of  miner  or  president  is  the  product 
of  conditioned  reflexes,  according  to  current  physiological 
phraseology.  When  the  routine  is  perfect,  understanding 
can  be  eliminated,  except  such  minor  flashes  of  intelligence 
as  are  required  to  deal  with  familiar  accidents,  such  as  a 
flooded  mine,  a  prolonged  drought,  or  an  epidemic  of 
influenza.  A  system  will  be  the  product  of  intelligence. 
But  when  the  adequate  routine  is  established,  intelligence 
vanishes,  and  the  system  is  maintained  by  a  co-ordination  of 
conditioned  reflexes.  What  is  then  required  from  the  humans 
is  receptivity  of  special  training.  No  one,  from  President  to 
miner,  need  understand  the  system  as  a  whole.  There  will 
be  no  foresight,  but  there  will  be  complete  success  in  the 
maintenance  of  the  routine. 

Now  it  is  the  beginning  of  wisdom  to  understand  that  social 
life  is  founded  upon  routine.  Unless  society  is  permeated, 
through  and  through,  with  routine,  civilization  vanishes.  So 
many  sociological  doctrines,  the  products  of  acute  intellects, 
are  wrecked  by  obliviousness  to  this  fundamental  sociological 
truth.  Society  requires  stability,  foresight  itself  presupposes 
stability,  and  stability  is  the  product  of  routine.  But  there 
are  limits  to  routine,  and  it  is  for  the  discernment  of  these 
limits,  and  for  the  provision  of  the  consequent  action,  that 
foresight  is  required. 

The  two  extremes  of  complete  understanding  and  of  com¬ 
plete  routine  are  never  realized  in  human  society.  But  of 
the  two,  routine  is  more  fundamental  than  understanding, 


FORESIGHT 


“5 

that  is  to  say,  routine  modified  by  minor  flashes  of  short-range 
intelligence.  Indeed  the  notion  of  complete  understanding 
controlling  action  is  an  ideal  in  the  clouds,  grotesquely  at 
variance  with  practical  life.  But  we  have  under  our  eyes 
countless  examples  of  societies  entirely  dominated  by  routine. 
The  elaborate  social  organizations  of  insects  appear  to  be 
thoroughgoing  examples  of  routine.  Such  organizations 
achieve  far-reaching,  complex  purposes :  they  involve  a 
differentiation  of  classes,  from  cows  to  serfs,  from  serfs  to 
workers,  from  workers  to  warriors,  from  warriors  to  janitors, 
and  from  janitors  to  queens.  Such  organizations  have  regard 
to  needs  in  a  distant  future,  especially  if  the  comparatively 
short  space  of  life  of  the  individual  insects  is  taken  into 
account  as  the  unit  of  measurement. 

These  insect  societies  have  been  astoundingly  successful,  so 
far  as  concerns  survival  power.  They  seem  to  have  a  past  ex¬ 
tending  over  tens  of  thousands  of  years,  perhaps  of  millions 
of  years.  It  is  the  greatest  of  mistakes  to  believe  that  it  has 
required  the  high-grade  intelligence  of  mankind  to  construct 
an  elaborate  social  organization.  A  particular  instance  of 
this  error  is  the  prevalent  assumption  that  any  social  routine 
whose  purposes  are  not  obvious  to  our  analysis  is  thereby  to 
be  condemned  as  foolish.  We  can  observe  insects  performing 
elaborate  routine  actions  whose  purposes  they  cannot  possibly 
understand,  which  yet  are  essential  either  for  their  own 
individual  survival  or  for  race-survival. 

But  these  insect  societies  have  one  great  characteristic  in 
common.  They  are  not  progressive.  It  is  exactly  this  cha¬ 
racteristic  that  discriminates  communities  of  mankind  from 
communities  of  insects.  Further,  this  great  fact  of  progres¬ 
siveness,  be  it  from  worse  to  better,  or  from  better  to  worse, 
has  become  of  greater  and  greater  importance  in  Western 
civilization  as  we  come  to  modern  times.  The  rate  of 

8-2 


n6 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


change  has  increased  even  in  my  life-time.  It  is  possible  that 
in  future  ages  mankind  may  relapse  into  the  stage  of  stable 
societies.  But  such  a  relapse  is  extremely  unlikely  within  any 
span  of  time  which  we  need  take  into  account. 

Section  III.  The  recent  shortening  of  the  time-span  be¬ 
tween  notable  changes  in  social  customs  is  very  obvious,  if 
we  examine  history.  Originally  it  depended  upon  some  slow 
development  of  physical  causes.  For  example,  a  gradual 
change  of  physical  configuration  such  as  the  elevadon  of 
mountains :  the  time-span  for  such  a  change  is  of  the  order 
of  a  million  years.  Again,  a  gradual  change  of  climate:  the 
time-span  for  such  a  change  is  of  the  order  of  five  thousand 
years.  Again  a  gradual  over-population  of  the  region  occu¬ 
pied  by  some  community  with  its  consequent  swarming 
into  new  territories:  having  regard  to  the  huge  death-rate 
of  pre-scientific  ages,  the  time-span  for  such  a  change  was  of 
the  order  of  five  hundred  years.  Again,  the  sporadic  inven¬ 
tions  of  new  technologies,  such  as  the  chipping  of  flints,  the 
invention  of  fire,  the  taming  of  animals,  the  invention  of 
metallurgy:  in  the  pre-scientific  ages,  the  average  time-span 
for  such  changes  was,  at  least,  of  the  order  of  five  hundred 
years.  If  we  compare  the  technologies  of  civilizations  west 
of  Mesopotamia  at  the  epochs  ioo  a.d.,  the  culmination  of 
the  Roman  Empire,  and  1400  a.d.,  the  close  of  the  Middle 
Ages,  we  find  practically  no  advance  in  technology.  There 
was  some  gain  in  metallurgy,  some  elaboration  of  clock¬ 
work,  the  recent  invention  of  gunpowder  with  its  influence 
all  in  the  future,  some  advance  in  the  art  of  navigation,  also 
with  its  influence  in  the  future.  If  we  compare  1400  a.d.  with 
1700  a.d.,  there  is  a  great  advance;  gunpowder,  and  printing, 
and  navigation,  and  the  technique  of  commerce,  had  pro¬ 
duced  their  effect.  But  even  then,  the  analogy  between  life 
in  the  eighteenth  century  and  life  in  the  great  period  of 


FORESIGHT 


“7 

ancient  Rome  was  singularly  close,  so  that  the  peculiar 
relevance  of  Latin  literature  was  felt  vividly.  In  the  fifty 
years  between  1780  and  1830,  a  number  of  inventions  came 
with  a  rush  into  effective  operation.  The  age  of  steam  power 
and  of  machinery  was  introduced.  But  for  two  generations, 
from  1830  to  1890,  there  was  a  singular  uniformity  in  the 
principles  of  technology  which  were  regulating  the  structure 
of  society  and  the  usages  of  business. 

The  conclusion  to  be  drawn  from  this  survey  is  a  momen¬ 
tous  one.  Our  sociological  theories,  our  political  philosophy, 
our  practical  maxims  of  business,  our  political  economy, 
and  our  doctrines  of  education,  are  derived  from  an  un¬ 
broken  tradition  of  great  thinkers  and  of  practical  examples, 
from  the  age  of  Plato  in  the  fifth  century  before  Christ  to 
the  end  of  the  last  century.  The  whole  of  this  tradition  is 
warped  by  the  vicious  assumption  that  each  generation  will 
substantially  live  amid  the  conditions  governing  the  lives  of 
its  fathers  and  will  transmit  those  conditions  to  mould  with 
equal  force  the  lives  of  its  children.  We  are  living  in  the 
first  period  of  human  history  for  which  this  assumption  is 
false. 

Of  course  in  the  past,  there  were  great  catastrophes:  for 
example,  plagues,  floods,  barbarian  invasions.  But,  if  such 
catastrophes  were  warded  off,  there  was  a  stable,  well-known 
condition  of  civilized  life.  This  assumption  subtly  pervades 
the  premises  of  political  economy,  and  has  permitted  it  to 
confine  attention  to  a  simplified  edition  of  human  nature. 
It  is  at  the  basis  of  our  conception  of  the  reliable  business 
man,  who  has  mastered  a  technique  and  never  looks  be¬ 
yond  his  contracted  horizon.  It  colours  our  political  philo¬ 
sophy  and  our  educational  theory,  with  their  overwhelming 
emphasis  on  past  experience.  The  note  of  recurrence  domi¬ 
nates  the  wisdom  of  the  past,  and  still  persists  in  many 


I  1 8  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

forms  even  where  explicitly  the  fallacy  of  its  modern  appli¬ 
cation  is  admitted.  The  point  is  that  in  the  past  the  time-span 
of  important  change  was  considerably  longer  than  that  of  a 
single  human  life.  Thus  mankind  was  trained  to  adapt  itself 
to  fixed  conditions. 

To-day  this  time-span  is  considerably  shorter  than  that  of 
human  life,  and  accordingly  our  training  must  prepare  in¬ 
dividuals  to  face  a  novelty  of  conditions.  But  there  can  be 
no  preparation  for  the  unknown.  It  is  at  this  point  that  we 
recur  to  the  immediate  topic,  Foresight.  We  require  such  an 
understanding  of  the  present  conditions,  as  may  give  us  some 
grasp  of  the  novelty  which  is  about  to  produce  a  measurable 
influence  on  the  immediate  future.  Yet  the  doctrine,  that 
routine  is  dominant  in  any  society  that  is  not  collapsing,  must 
never  be  lost  sight  of.  Thus  the  grounds,  in  human  nature 
and  in  the  successful  satisfaction  of  purpose,  these  grounds 
for  the  current  routine  must  be  understood ;  and  at  the  same 
time  the  sorts  of  novelty  just  entering  into  social  effectiveness 
have  got  to  be  weighed  against  the  old  routine.  In  this  way 
the  type  of  modification  and  the  type  of  persistence  exhibited 
in  the  immediate  future  may  be  foreseen. 

Section  IV.  It  is  now  time  to  give  some  illustrations  of 
assertions  already  made.  Consider  our  main  conclusions  that 
our  traditional  doctrines  of  sociology,  of  political  philosophy, 
of  the  practical  conduct  of  large  business,  and  of  political 
economy  are  largely  warped  and  vitiated  by  the  implicit  as¬ 
sumption  of  a  stable  unchanging  social  system.  With  this 
assumption  it  is  comparatively  safe  to  base  reasoning  upon 
a  simplified  edition  of  human  nature.  For  well-known 
stimuli  working  under  well-known  conditions  produce  well- 
known  reactions.  It  is  safe  then  to  assume  that  human 
nature,  for  the  purpose  in  hand,  is  adequately  described  in 
terms  of  some  of  the  major  reactions  to  some'  of  the  major 


FORESIGHT  II9 

stimuli.  For  example,  we  can  all  remember  our  old  friend, 
the  economic  man. 

The  beauty  of  the  economic  man  was  that  we  knew  exactly 
what  he  was  after.  Whatever  his  wants  were,  he  knew  them 
and  his  neighbours  knew  them.  His  wants  were  those 
developed  in  a  well-defined  social  system.  His  father  and 
grandfather  had  the  same  wants,  and  satisfied  them  in  the 
same  way.  So  whenever  there  was  a  shortage,  everyone — 
including  the  economic  man  himself — knew  what  was  short, 
and  knew  the  way  to  satisfy  the  consumer.  In  fact,  the 
consumer  knew  what  he  wanted  to  consume.  This  was  the 
demand.  The  producer  knew  how  to  produce  the  required 
articles,  hence  the  supply.  The  men  who  got  the  goods  on 
to  the  spot  first,  at  the  cheapest  price,  made  their  fortunes; 
the  other  producers  were  eliminated.  This  was  healthy 
competition.  This  is  beautifully  simple  and  with  proper 
elaboration  is  obviously  true.  It  expresses  the  dominant 
truth  exactly  so  far  as  there  are  stable  well-tried  conditions. 
But  when  we  are  concerned  with  a  social  system  which  in 
important  ways  is  changing,  this  simplified  conception  of 
human  relations  requires  severe  qualification. 

It  is,  of  course,  common  knowledge  that  the  whole  trend 
of  political  economy  during  the  last  thirty  or  forty  years 
has  been  away  from  these  artificial  simplifications.  Such 
sharp-cut  notions  as  The  economic  man’,  ‘supply  and 
demand’,  ‘competition’,  are  now  in  process  of  dilution  by 
a  close  study  of  the  actual  reactions  of  various  populations 
to  the  stimuli  which  are  relevant  to  modern  commerce. 
This  exactly  illustrates  the  main  thesis.  The  older  political 
economy  reigned  supreme  for  about  a  hundred  years  from  the 
time  of  Adam  Smith,  because  in  its  main  assumptions  it  did 
apply  to  the  general  circumstances  of  life  as  led,  then  and 
for  innumerable  centuries  in  the  past.  These  circumstances 


120 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


were  then  already  passing  away.  But  it  still  remained  a 
dominant  truth  that  in  commercial  relations  men  were 
dominated  by  well-conditioned  reactions  to  completely 
familiar  stimuli. 

In  the  present  age,  the  element  of  novelty  which  life 
affords  is  too  prominent  to  be  omitted  from  our  calcu¬ 
lations.  A  deeper  knowledge  of  the  varieties  of  human 
nature  is  required  to  determine  the  reaction,  in  its  character 
and  its  strength,  to  those  elements  of  novelty  which  each 
decade  of  years  introduces  into  social  life.  The  possibility 
of  this  deeper  knowledge  constitutes  the  Foresight  under 
discussion. 

Another  example  which  concerns  sociological  habits,  and 
thence  business  relations  and  the  shifting  values  of  property, 
is  to  be  seen  in  the  history  of  cities.  Throughout  the  whole 
span  of  civilization  up  to  the  present  moment,  the  growth 
of  condensed  aggregates  of  humans,  which  we  call  cities, 
has  been  an  inseparable  accompaniment  of  the  growth  of 
civilization.  There  are  many  obvious  reasons,  the  defence 
of  accumulated  wealth  behind  city  walls,  the  concentra¬ 
tion  of  materials  requisite  for  manufacture,  the  concen¬ 
tration  of  power  in  the  form  of  human  muscles  and,  later, 
in  the  form  of  available  heat  energy,  the  ease  of  mutual 
intercourse  required  for  business  relations,  the  pleasure 
arising  from  a  concentration  of  aesthetic  and  cultural  oppor¬ 
tunities,  the  advantages  of  a  concentration  of  governmental 
and  other  directing  agencies,  administrative,  legal,  and 
military. 

But  there  are  disadvantages  in  cities.  As  yet  no  civiliza¬ 
tion  has  been  self-supporting.  Each  civilization  is  born,  it 
culminates,  and  it  decays.  There  is  a  widespread  testimony 
that  this  ominous  fact  is  due  to  inherent  biological  defects 
in  the  crowded  life  of  cities.  Now,  slowly  and  at  first  faintly, 


FORESIGHT 


1 2  I 


an  opposite  tendency  is  showing  itself.  Better  roads  and 
better  vehicles  at  first  induced  the  wealthier  classes  to  live 
on  the  outskirts  of  the  cities.  The  urgent  need  for  defence 
had  also  vanished.  This  tendency  is  now  spreading  rapidly 
downwards.  But  a  new  set  of  conditions  is  just  showing 
itself.  Up  to  the  present  time,  throughout  the  eighteenth 
and  nineteenth  centuries,  this  new  tendency  placed  the  homes 
in  the  immediate  suburbs,  but  concentrated  manufacturing 
activity,  business  relations,  government,  and  pleasure,  in 
the  centres  of  the  cities.  Apart  from  the  care  of  children, 
and  periods  of  sheer  rest,  the  active  lives  were  spent  in 
the  cities.  In  some  ways,  the  concentration  of  such  activities 
was  even  more  emphasized,  and  the  homes  were  pushed 
outwards  even  at  the  cost  of  the  discomfort  of  commuting. 
But,  if  we  examine  the  trend  of  technology  during  the  past 
generation,  the  reasons  for  this  concentration  are  largely 
disappearing.  Still  more,  the  reasons  for  the  choice  of  sites 
for  cities  are  also  altering.  Mechanical  power  can  be  trans¬ 
mitted  for  hundreds  of  miles,  men  can  communicate  almost 
instantaneously  by  telephone,  the  chiefs  of  great  organiza¬ 
tions  can  be  transported  by  airplanes,  the  cinemas  can  produce 
plays  in  every  village,  music,  speeches,  and  sermons  can  be 
broadcast.  Almost  every  reason  for  the  growth  of  cities,  con¬ 
currently  with  the  growth  of  civilization,  has  been  profoundly 
modified. 

What  then  is  to  be  the  future  of  cities,  three  hundred 
years  hence,  a  hundred  years  hence,  or  even  thirty  years 
hence?  I  do  not  know.  But  I  venture  a  guess:  that  those 
who  are  reasonably  fortunate  in  this  foresight  will  make 
their  fortunes,  and  that  others  will  be  ruined  by  mistakes  in 
calculation. 

My  second  point  that  the  reasons  for  the  choice  of  sites 
for  cities  have  also  been  modified  is  illustrated  by  recent 


122 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


changes  in  my  own  country,  England.  The  first  effect  of 
the  new  industrial  age  of  the  eighteenth  and  nineteenth 
centuries  was  to  concentrate  population  round  the  coal¬ 
fields.  Thus  the  central  portion  of  England  on  its  northern 
edge  has  become  one  huge  city,  disguised  under  different 
names  for  its  various  regional  parts.  But  the  novel  con¬ 
ditions  are  shifting  population  and  manufactures  to  the  south 
of  England,  near  to  the  great  southern  ports  which  look 
towards  the  Mediterranean,  the  South  Atlantic  Ocean,  and 
the  Panama  Canal.  They  are  the  best  ports,  with  the  easiest 
navigation,  and  with  uncrowded  land  around  them.  At 
present  the  transmission  of  electric  power  is  one  of  the  major 
pre-occupations  of  the  government  of  England. 

The  effect  of  new  technologies  on  the  sites  of  cities,  and 
on  transformations  of  cities,  is  one  of  the  fundamental 
problems  which  must  enter  into  all  sociological  theories, 
including  the  forecasting  of  business  relations.  We  must  not 
exaggerate  the  importance  of  these  particular  examples.  They 
are  just  two  examples  selected  from  a  whole  situation  which 
can  be  analysed  into  innumerable  examples  with  the  same 
moral.  I  mean  nothing  so  absurd  as  that  all  industrialists 
should  meditate  on  the  future  of  cities.  The  topic  may  be 
quite  irrelevant  to  the  future  activities  of  most  of  them. 
Also  I  am  ignorant  as  to  how  much  Political  Economy  they 
should  study. 

But  we  are  faced  with  a  fluid,  shifting  situation  in  the 
immediate  future.  Rigid  maxims,  a  rule-of-thumb  routine, 
and  cast-iron  particular  doctrines  will  spell  ruin.  The 
business  of  the  future  must  be  controlled  by  a  somewhat 
different  type  of  men  to  that  of  previous  centuries.  The  type 
is  already  changing,  and  has  already  changed  so  far  as  the 
leaders  are  concerned.  The  Business  Schools  of  Universities 
are  concerned  with  spreading  this  newer  type  throughout 


FORESIGHT  123 

the  nations  by  aiming  at  the  production  of  the  requisite 
mentality. 

Section  V.  I  will  conclude  this  chapter  by  a  sketch  of  the 
Business  Mind  of  the  future.  In  the  first  place  it  is  funda¬ 
mental  that  there  be  a  power  of  conforming  to  routine, 
of  supervising  routine,  of  constructing  routine,  and  of  un¬ 
derstanding  routine  both  as  to  its  internal  structure  and  as 
to  its  external  purposes.  Such  a  power  is  the  bedrock  of  all 
practical  efficiency.  But  for  the  production  of  the  requisite 
Foresight,  something  more  is  wanted.  This  extra  endowment 
can  only  be  described  as  a  philosophic  power  of  understanding 
the  complex  flux  of  the  varieties  of  human  societies:  for 
instance,  the  habit  of  noting  varieties  of  demands  on  life, 
of  serious  purposes,  of  frivolous  amusements.  Such  instinctive 
grasp  of  the  relevant  features  of  social  currents  is  of  supreme 
importance.  For  example,  the  time-span  of  various  types  of 
social  behaviour  is  of  the  essence  of  their  effect  on  policy. 
A  widespread  type  of  religious  interest,  with  its  consequent 
modes  of  behaviour,  has  a  dominant  life  of  about  a  hundred 
years,  while  a  fashion  of  dress  survives  any  time  between 
three  months  and  three  years.  Methods  of  agriculture  change 
slowly.  But  the  scientific  world  seems  to  be  on  the  verge  of 
far-reaching  biological  discoveries.  The  assumption  of  slow 
changes  in  agriculture  must  therefore  be  scanned  vigilantly. 
This  example  of  time-spans  can  be  generalized.  The  quanti¬ 
tative  aspect  of  social  changes  is  of  the  essence  of  business 
relations.  Thus  the  habit  of  transforming  observation  of 
qualitative  changes  into  quantitative  estimates  should  be  a 
characteristic  of  business  mentality. 

I  have  said  enough  to  show  that  the  modern  commercial 
mentality  requires  many  elements  of  discipline,  scientific 
and  sociological.  But  the  great  fact  remains  that  details  of 
relevant  knowledge  cannot  be  foreseen.  Thus  even  for  mere 


124 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


success,  and  apart  from  any  question  of  intrinsic  quality  of 
life,  an  unspecialized  aptitude  for  eliciting  generalizations 
from  particulars  and  for  seeing  the  divergent  illustration 
of  generalities  in  diverse  circumstances  is  required.  Such  a 
reflective  power  is  essentially  a  philosophic  habit:  it  is  the 
survey  of  society  from  the  standpoint  of  generality.  This 
habit  of  general  thought,  undaunted  by  novelty,  is  the  gift 
of  philosophy,  in  the  widest  sense  of  that  term. 

Section  VI.  But  the  motive  of  success  is  not  enough.  It 
produces  a  short-sighted  world  which  destroys  the  sources 
of  its  own  prosperity.  The  cycles  of  trade  depression  which 
afflict  the  world  warn  us  that  business  relations  are  infected 
through  and  through  with  the  disease  of  short-sighted 
motives.  The  robber  barons  did  not  conduce  to  the  pros¬ 
perity  of  Europe  in  the  Middle  Ages,  though  some  of  them 
died  prosperously  in  their  beds.  Their  example  is  a  warning 
to  our  civilization.  Also  we  must  not  fall  into  the  fallacy 
of  thinking  of  the  business  world  in  abstraction  from  the 
rest  of  the  community.  The  business  world  is  one  main  part 
of  the  very  community  which  is  the  subject-matter  of  our 
study.  The  behaviour  of  the  community  is  largely  dominated 
by  the  business  mind.  A  great  society  is  a  society  in  which 
its  men  of  business  think  greatly  of  their  functions.  Low 
thoughts  mean  low  behaviour,  and  after  a  brief  orgy  of 
exploitation  low  behaviour  means  a  descending  standard  of 
life.  The  general  greatness  of  the  community,  qualitatively 
as  well  as  quantitatively,  is  the  first  condition  for  steady 
prosperity,  buoyant,  self-sustained,  and  commanding  credit. 
The  Greek  philosopher  who  laid  the  foundation  of  all  our 
finer  thoughts  ended  his  most  marvellous  dialogue  with  the 
reflection  that  the  ideal  state  could  never  arrive  till  philo¬ 
sophers  are  kings.  To-day,  in  an  age  of  democracy,  the  kings 
are  the  plain  citizens  pursuing  their  various  avocations. 


FORESIGHT  1 25 

There  can  be  no  successful  democratic  society  till  general 
education  conveys  a  philosophic  outlook. 

Philosophy  is  not  a  mere  collection  of  noble  sentiments. 
A  deluge  of  such  sentiments  does  more  harm  than  good. 
Philosophy  is  at  once  general  and  concrete,  critical  and 
appreciative  of  direct  intuition.  It  is  not — or,  at  least,  should 
not  be — a  ferocious  debate  between  irritable  professors.  It  is 
a  survey  of  possibilities  and  their  comparison  with  actualities. 
In  philosophy,  the  fact,  the  theory,  the  alternatives,  and  the 
ideal,  are  weighed  together.  Its  gifts  are  insight  and  fore¬ 
sight,  and  a  sense  of  the  worth  of  life,  in  short,  that  sense  of 
importance  which  nerves  all  civilized  effort.  Mankind  can 
flourish  in  the  lower  stages  of  life  with  merely  barbaric 
flashes  of  thought.  But  when  civilization  culminates,  the 
absence  of  a  co-ordinating  philosophy  of  life,  spread  through¬ 
out  the  community,  spells  decadence,  boredom,  and  the 
slackening  of  effort. 

Every  epoch  has  its  character  determined  by  the  way  its 
populations  react  to  the  material  events  which  they  en¬ 
counter.  This  reaction  is  determined  by  their  basic  beliefs — 
by  their  hopes,  their  fears,  their  judgments  of  what  is  worth 
while.  They  may  rise  to  the  greatness  of  an  opportunity, 
seizing  its  drama,  perfecting  its  art,  exploiting  its  adventure, 
mastering  intellectually  and  physically  the  network  of  re¬ 
lations  that  constitutes  the  very  being  of  the  epoch.  On 
the  other  hand,  they  may  collapse  before  the  perplexities 
confronting  them.  How  they  act  depends  partly  on  their 
courage,  partly  on  their  intellectual  grasp.  Philosophy  is  an 
attempt  to  clarify  those  fundamental  beliefs  which  finally 
determine  the  emphasis  of  attention  that  lies  at  the  base  of 
character. 

Mankind  is  now  in  one  of  its  rare  moods  of  shifting  its 
outlook.  The  mere  compulsion  of  tradition  has  lost  its  force. 


126 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


It  is  our  business — philosophers,  students,  and  practical  men 
— to  re-create  and  re-enact  a  vision  of  the  world,  including 
those  elements  of  reverence  and  order  without  which  society 
lapses  into  riot,  and  penetrated  through  and  through  with 
unflinching  rationality.  Such  a  vision  is  the  knowledge 
which  Plato  identified  with  virtue.  Epochs  for  which, 
within  the  limits  of  their  development,  this  vision  has  been 
widespread  are  the  epochs  unfading  in  the  memory  of 
mankind. 

Our  discussion  has  insensibly  generalized  itself.  It  has 
passed  beyond  the  topic  of  Commercial  Relations  to  the 
function  of  a  properly  concrete  philosophy  in  guiding  the 
purposes  of  mankind. 


EPILOGUE  TO  PART  I 


At  this  stage  we  conclude  the  consideration  of  that  group 
of  ideas  that  most  directly  contributed  to  the  civilization  of 
the  behaviour-systems  of  human  beings  in  their  intercourse 
with  each  other.  This  improvement  depended  on  the  slow 
growth  of  mutual  respect,  sympathy,  and  general  kindliness. 
All  these  feelings  can  exist  with  the  minimum  of  intellec¬ 
tuality.  Their  basis  is  emotional,  and  humanity  acquired 
these  emotions  by  reason  of  its  unthinking  activities  amid 
the  course  of  nature. 

But  mentality  as  it  emerges  into  co-ordinated  activity  has 
a  tremendous  effect  in  selecting,  emphasizing,  and  disin¬ 
tegrating.  We  have  been  considering  the  emergence  of  ideas 
from  activities,  and  the  effect  of  ideas  in  modifying  the 
activities  from  which  they  emerge.  Ideas  arise  as  explanatory 
of  customs  and  they  end  by  founding  novel  methods  and 
novel  institutions.  In  the  preceding  chapters  we  have  watched 
instances  of  their  transition  from  one  to  other  of  these  two 
modes  of  functioning. 


PART  II 


COSMOLOGICAL 


CHAPTER  VII 


LAWS  OF  NATURE 

Section  I.  The  previous  part  of  this  book  dealt  with  the 
influence  exerted  by  the  Platonic  and  Christian  doctrines  of 
the  human  soul  upon  the  sociological  development  of  the 
European  races.  In  this  second  part  of  the  book,  I  shall  deal 
with  the  influence  of  scientific  ideas  upon  European  culture, 
and  with  the  more  general  cosmological  ideas  thus  generated 
and  presupposed. 

It  would  be  useless  to  attempt  a  history  of  science  within 
this  compass.  Accordingly,  I  shall  confine  myself  to  the 
most  general  ideas  at  the  base  of  the  whole  development  of 
science.  I  mean  the  concepts  of  Speculation  and  of  Scholar¬ 
ship,  and  the  various  notions  of  the  Order  of  Nature,  and 
of  Nature  itself.  In  short,  my  topic  is  4  Cosmologies,  Ancient 
and  Modern5,  together  with  the  variety  of  methods,  specu¬ 
lative  and  scholarly,  employed  in  their  production.  Special 
developments  of  learning  will  only  be  cited  in  order  to 
exemplify  the  specializations  of  general  ideas  amid  changing 
epochs  of  Western  Culture. 

Modern  Europe  and  America  have  derived  their  civiliza¬ 
tion  from  the  races  whose  countries  border  the  Eastern 
Mediterranean.  In  the  earlier  chapters,  Greece  and  Pales¬ 
tine  were  the  regions  providing  the  initial  formulations  of 
the  ideas  concerning  the  essence  of  human  nature.  When 
we  examine  the  history  of  science,  to  these  two  countries 

9-2 


132 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


we  must  add  Egypt.  These  three  countries  are  the  direct 
ancestors  of  our  modern  civilization. 

Of  course  there  is  a  long  tale  of  civilization  behind  them. 
Mesopotamia,  Crete,  Phoenicia,  and  India,  China,  also  con¬ 
tributed.  But  whatever  of  scientific  or  religious  value  has 
passed  into  modern  life,  finally  reached  us  through  the 
mediation  of  these  three  countries,  Egypt,  Greece,  Palestine. 
Of  these  countries,  Egypt  provided  the  mature  technology, 
arising  from  three  thousand  years  of  secure  civilization, 
Palestine  provided  the  final  religious  cosmology,  Greece  pro¬ 
vided  the  clear-cut  generalizations  leading  to  philosophy 
and  science.  This  logical  lucidity  also  tinges  the  remaining 
legacy  from  Greece,  its  art  and  imaginative  literature.  Every 
Greek  statue  expresses  the  welding  of  beauty  to  regularity 
of  geometrical  form:  every  Greek  play  investigates  the  inter¬ 
weaving  of  physical  circumstances  arising  from  the  Order 
of  Nature  with  states  of  mind  which  issue  from  the  urge  of 
the  Moral  Order. 

£Canst  thou  by  searching  find  out  God?5  is  good  Hebrew, 
but  it  is  bad  Greek.  The  effort  to  comprehend  the  great 
fact  which  procures  the  order  in  the  Universe  urged  Greek 
thinkers  to  that  culmination  when  Plato  and  Aristotle  de¬ 
fined  the  complex  of  general  ideas  forming  the  imperishable 
origin  of  Western  thought.  The  work  was  only  accom¬ 
plished  just  in  time.  In  the  very  lifetime  of  Aristotle  the 
political  and  cultural  barriers  collapsed;  and  the  subsequent 
Hellenistic  development  at  Alexandria  and  elsewhere  was 
the  joint  enterprise  of  Greeks,  Egyptians,  Semites,  and  the 
mixed  races  of  Syria  and  Asia  Minor.  The  untroubled  faith 
in  lucidity  within  the  depths  of  things,  to  be  captured  by 
some  happy  glance  of  speculation,  was  lost  for  ever.  Duller 
men  were  content  with  limited  accuracy  and  constructed 
special  sciences :  thicker  intellects  gloried  in  the  notion  that 


LAWS  OF  NATURE 


133 

the  foundations  of  the  world  were  laid  amid  impenetrable 
fog.  They  conceived  God  in  their  own  image,  and  depicted 
him  with  a  positive  dislike  of  efforts  after  understanding 
beyond  assigned  methodologies.  Satan  acquired  an  intel¬ 
lectual  character,  and  fell  by  reason  of  an  indecent  desire  to 
understand  his  Creator.  It  was  the  downfall  of  Greece. 

Section  II.  The  progress  of  mankind  proceeds  by  de¬ 
vious  paths.  The  shift  from  the  bright  Hellenic  age,  whose 
final  period  was  centred  in  Athens,  to  the  Hellenistic  age, 
with  Alexandria  as  its  intellectual  capital,  corresponds  to 
a  new  direction  of  constructive  genius.  The  special  sciences 
were  founded.  Their  principles  were  defined,  their  methods 
were  determined,  appropriate  deductions  were  elicited. 
Learning  was  stabilized.  It  was  furnished  with  methodo¬ 
logies,  and  was  handed  over  to  University  professors  of  the 
modern  type.  Doctors  of  Medicine,  Mathematicians,  Astro¬ 
nomers,  Grammarians,  Theologians,  for  more  than  six 
hundred  years  dominated  the  schools  of  Alexandria,  issuing 
text-books,  treatises,  controversies,  and  dogmatic  definitions. 
Literature  was  replaced  by  Grammar,  and  Speculation  by 
the  Learned  Tradition. 

These  men  conventionalized  learning.  But  they  secured  it. 
Their  work  survived  two  great  religious  revolutions,  the  rise 
of  Christianity  and  the  rise  of  Mahometanism.  It  provided 
both  these  religions  with  their  philosophical  theologies.  It 
fitted  them  out  with  heresies  and  with  orthodoxies. 

In  the  Western  Roman  Empire,  the  Christian  Church, 
armed  with  Hellenistic  thought,  captured  the  intellects  of 
the  victorious  barbarians  and  civilized  Western  Europe  up 
to  the  Arctic  Ocean.  Along  the  south  of  the  Mediterranean 
the  Mahometan  conquerors  carried  Hellenistic  thought,  as 
coloured  by  the  mentalities  of  Arabs,  Jews,  and  Persians, 
through  Africa  into  Spain.  From  Spain,  the  Mahometan 


134 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


and  Jewish  versions  made  contact  with  the  Christian  version 
of  Alexandrian  culture.  This  fusion  produced  the  brilliant 
culmination  of  Christian  Scholasticism  in  the  thirteenth 
century;  and,  in  the  seventeenth  century,  Spinoza. 

The  note  of  Hellenism  is  delight,  speculation,  discoursive 
literature:  the  note  of  Hellenistic  Alexandria  is  concentra¬ 
tion,  thoroughness,  investigation  of  the  special  types  of  order 
appertaining  to  special  topics.  The  great  Alexandrians  were 
either  right  or  wrong:  Euclid  either  did,  or  did  not  make 
his  text-book  of  Geometry  logically  coherent:  the  Ptolemaic 
doctrine  of  the  heavens  is  true  or  false :  Athanasius  is  directly 
opposed  to  Arius:  and  Cyril  to  Nestorius.  The  nearest 
analogues  to  the  Alexandrian  theological  debates  are  the 
modern  debates  among  mathematical  physicists  on  the  nature 
of  the  atom.  The  special  topics  differ  slightly ;  but  the  methods 
and  the  men  are  identical. 

It  is  unmeaning  bluntly  to  ask  of  Plato,  whether  he  be 
right  or  wrong,  in  the  same  exact  sense  in  which  we  frame 
the  question  about  the  Alexandrians.  When  any  eminent 
scholar  has  converted  Plato  into  a  respectable  professor,  by 
providing  him  with  a  coherent  system,  we  quickly  find  that 
Plato  in  a  series  of  Dialogues  has  written  up  most  of  the 
heresies  from  his  own  doctrines.  It  is  as  though  Ptolemy 
had  emitted  the  speculations  of  Aristarchus,  and  as  though 
Athanasius  had  suggested  the  profanities  of  Arius. 

I  am  not  alluding  to  the  mere  fact  that  men  change  their 
opinions,  with  the  advance  of  age,  or  with  the  advance  or 
decay  of  knowledge.  The  important  point  is  the  way  in 
which  opinions  are  held,  and  the  weight  attached  to  parti¬ 
cular  modes  of  statement.  St  Augustine  changed  his  opinions. 
He  not  only  published  for  all  ages  the  tragic  intensity 
of  feeling  which  the  conversion  involved,  but  also  he  de¬ 
voted  himself  to  exact  statements  of  his  new  doctrines.  He 


LAWS  OF  NATURE 


135 

remained  a  Platonist,  and  his  interest  in  the  doctrine  of 
Grace  was  a  Platonic  interest  in  the  exact  expression  how 
finite  human  life  can  participate  in  the  Divine  Perfections. 
He  performed  an  immense  service  to  civilization  by  pro¬ 
viding  Western  Europe  with  accurate  definitions  on  great 
topics  just  before  the  oncoming  of  the  Barbarians.  He 
secured  that  western  Christianity  should  persist  as  a  civilizing 
influence,  and  not  degenerate  into  hereditary  superstition 
of  the  Abyssinian  type.  But  his  attitude  to  his  own  doctrines 
was  very  different  from  that  of  Plato.  Consider  some  of 
Plato’s  phrases  about  his  own  ideas:  “If,  then,  Socrates, 
we  find  ourselves  in  many  points  unable  to  make  our  dis¬ 
course  of  the  generation  of  gods  and  the  universe  in  every 
way  wholly  consistent  and  exact,  you  must  not  be  surprised. 
Nay,  we  must  be  well  content  if  we  can  provide  an  account 
not  less  likely  than  another’s;  we  must  remember  that 
I  who  speak,  and  you  who  are  my  audience,  are  but  men 
and  should  be  satisfied  to  ask  for  no  more  than  the  likely 
story”.1 

Again:  “Perhaps  they  may  be  in  a  difficulty;  and  if  this 
is  the  case,  there  is  a  possibility  that  they  may  accept  a 
suggestion  of  ours  respecting  the  nature  of  essence,  having 
nothing  of  their  own  to  offer”.2 

Can  we  imagine  Augustine  urbanely  approaching  Pelagius 
with  £a  suggestion  of  ours  respecting  the  nature  of  Grace’? 
It  is  quite  true  that  passages  can  be  quoted  from  Plato, 
more  particularly  from  The  Laws ,  which  would  justify  all 
the  persecution  of  atheists  that  has  disgraced  Europe.  But  the 
passages  quoted  above  give  the  general  tone  of  the  Dialogues 
in  their  handling  of  the  precise  expression  of  speculative 
notions. 

1  The  Timaeus,  A.  E.  Taylor’s  translation. 

a  The  Sophist ,  Jowett’s  translation. 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


136 

Section  III.  In  many  ways  Aristotle  and  Epicurus  fore¬ 
shadow  the  transition  from  Hellenic  speculation  to  the  exact 
scholarship  of  Alexandria.  In  both  of  them  we  find  an  effort 
towards  system,  explicitly  stated  and  exactly  phrased.  Of 
course,  Lucretius  is  our  main  authority  for  the  Epicurean 
doctrines. 

If  we  merely  knew  that  great  schools  of  exact  scientific 
investigation  had  arisen  in  the  succeeding  generation,  un¬ 
doubtedly  modern  critical  scholarship  would  have  assigned 
to  Aristotle’s  influence  the  honour  of  their  origination.  We 
can  imagine  the  contrast  which  would  have  been  drawn 
between  the  barrenness  of  mere  speculation  and  the  fruit¬ 
fulness  of  Aristotle’s  power  of  detailed  observation. 

Unfortunately,  cold  fact  points  in  exactly  the  opposite 
direction.  In  the  first  place  Aristotle  himself  derived  his 
own  sources  of  thought  from  Plato’s  theoretical  activity. 
He  dissected  fishes  with  Plato’s  thoughts  in  his  head.  He 
systematized  the  welter  of  Platonic  suggestions,  and  in  the 
course  of  his  work  he  modified,  improved,  and  spoilt.  But 
he  did  introduce  into  sciences  other  than  Astronomy  the 
much-needed  systematic  practice  of  passing  beyond  theory 
to  direct  observation  of  details.  Unfortunately  this  was  the 
one  aspect  of  his  life  which  never  had  any  direct  influence 
on  any  succeeding  epoch. 

Again,  in  point  of  fact  the  Alexandrian  culture  derived 
directly  from  Plato.  Its  thought  was  through  and  through 
Platonic  both  in  science  and  theology.  But  it  was  not  for 
nothing  that  Alexandria  was  situated  in  a  land  of  old,  secure 
technology.  There  were  crafts  and  learned  professions  with 
traditions  of  detailed  procedure  stretching  back  for  thou¬ 
sands  of  years.  The  schools  of  Alexandria  were  thronged 
with  sons  of  priests,  sons  of  metallurgists,  sons  of  makers 
of  implements  for  irrigation  and  agriculture,  sons  of  land- 


LAWS  OF  NATURE 


137 


surveyors.  It  is  no  wonder  that  the  first  emergence  of  modern 
scholarship  studied  in  a  modern  university,  took  place  when 
Platonic  speculation  was  transferred  to  a  land  of  old  pro¬ 
fessional  activity. 

Undoubtedly  the  chasm  between  Hellenic  mentality  and 
mediaeval  scholastic  learning  was  due  to  many  influences 
accumulating  their  effects  through  a  period  of  a  thousand 
years.  But  the  greatest  gap  in  the  transition  is  the  first  one, 
when  the  capital  of  Mediterranean  learning  was  transferred 
from  Athens  to  Alexandria.  The  general  type  of  the  cul¬ 
tural  development  of  Western  Civilization  was  then  pre¬ 
determined.  How  science  should  be  developed:  How  mathe¬ 
matics  should  evolve:  How  religion,  Jewish,  Christian, 
Mahometan,  should  shape  its  various  theologies.  The 
modern  world  is  primarily  Alexandrian;  and  only  for  a 
short  period  of  about  a  hundred  years,  to  be  placed  some¬ 
where  between  the  Council  of  Constance  and  the  Sack  of 
Rome  in  1527,  did  the  Athenian  tone  of  mind  prevail: 
perhaps  also  earlier  in  the  Italy  of  the  Augustan  epoch.  The 
difference  between  the  two,  namely  the  Hellenic  and  the 
Hellenistic  types  of  mentality,  may  be  roughly  described  as 
that  between  speculation  and  scholarship.  For  progress,  both 
are  necessary.  But,  in  fact,  on  the  stage  of  history  they  are 
apt  to  appear  as  antagonists.  Speculation,  by  entertaining 
alternative  theories,  is  superficially  sceptical,  disturbing  to 
established  modes  of  prejudice.  But  it  obtains  its  urge  from 
a  deep  ultimate  faith,  that  through  and  through  the  nature 
of  things  is  penetrable  by  reason.  Scholarship,  by  its  strict 
attention  to  accepted  methodologies,  is  superficially  con¬ 
servative  of  belief.  But  its  tone  of  mind  leans  towards  a 
fundamental  negation.  For  scholars  the  reasonable  topics  in 
the  world  are  penned  in  isolated  regions,  this  subject-matter 
or  that  subject-matter.  Your  thorough-going  scholar  resents 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


138 

the  airy  speculation  which  connects  his  own  patch  of  know¬ 
ledge  with  that  of  his  neighbour.  He  finds  his  fundamental 
concepts  interpreted,  twisted,  modified.  He  has  ceased  to 
be  king  of  his  own  castle,  by  reason  of  speculations  of  un¬ 
comfortable  generality,  violating  the  very  grammar  of  his 
thoughts.  Pope  Adrian  the  Sixth  exhibited  himself  as  a 
typical  scholar  by  remarking  that  in  Luther’s  theological 
works  so  many  errors  could  be  found  that  any  tyro  could 
point  them  out. 

New  directions  of  thought  arise  from  flashes  of  intuition 
bringing  new  material  within  the  scope  of  scholarly  learning. 
They  commence  as  the  sheer  ventures  of  rash  speculation. 
They  may  fortunately  obtain  quick  acceptance,  or  they  may 
initiate  a  quarrel  of  scholars  from  which  all  tinge  of  specu¬ 
lation  has  faded.  Pope  Leo  the  Tenth  voiced  the  vanishing 
Athenian  epoch  when  he  characterized  the  Lutheran  disputes 
as  a  quarrel  of  monks. 

Pure  speculation,  undisciplined  by  the  scholarship  of  de¬ 
tailed  fact  or  the  scholarship  of  exact  logic,  is  on  the  whole 
more  useless  than  pure  scholarship,  unrelieved  by  speculation. 
The  proper  balance  of  the  two  factors  in  progressive  learning 
depends  on  the  character  of  the  epoch  in  question  and  on 
the  capacities  of  particular  individuals.  Also  it  is  a  curious 
fact,  somewhat  lost  sight  of  in  Greek  thought,  that,  notwith¬ 
standing  the  law  of  the  Golden  Mean  between  contrasted 
components,  yet  a  certain  excessiveness  seems  a  necessary 
element  in  all  greatness.  In  some  direction  or  other  we  must 
devote  ourselves  beyond  what  would  be  warranted  by  the 
analysis  of  pure  reason. 

One  aspect  of  the  adventure  of  ideas  is  this  story  of  the 
interplay  of  speculation  and  scholarship,  a  strife  sustained 
through  the  ages  of  progress.  This  history  discloses  the 
happy  balance  attained  in  periods  of  culminating  greatness, 


LAWS  OF  NATURE  I39 

and  it  also  exhibits  the  tinge  of  excessiveness  in  all  such 
peaks  of  achievement.  Thereby  it  gives  the  reason  for  the 
tragic  transience  of  supreme  moments  in  human  life. 

Section  IV.  The  notion  of  Law,  that  is  to  say,  of  some 
measure  of  regularity  or  of  persistence  or  of  recurrence, 
is  an  essential  element  in  the  urge  towards  technology, 
methodology,  scholarship,  and  speculation.  Apart  from  a 
certain  smoothness  in  the  nature  of  things,  there  can  be 
no  knowledge,  no  useful  method,  no  intelligent  purpose. 
Lacking  an  element  of  Law,  there  remains  a  mere  welter 
of  details  with  no  foothold  for  comparison  with  any  other 
such  welter,  in  the  past,  in  the  future,  or  circumambient  in 
the  present.  But  the  expression  of  this  notion  of  Law  with 
due  accuracy,  and  with  due  regard  to  what  in  fact  is  pre¬ 
supposed  in  human  purposes,  is  a  matter  of  extreme  difficulty. 
Analogously  to  the  histories  of  all  the  more  general  ideas,  the 
notion  of  Law  has  entered  into  the  explicit  consciousness  of 
various  epochs  under  every  variety  of  specialization,  arising 
from  its  coalescence  with  other  components  in  the  popular 
cosmology. 

The  difficulty  in  all  such  notions  of  supreme  generality 
is  that  conscious  attention  is  not  naturally  directed  to  any 
factor  which  is  a  ‘matter  of  course’  in  experience.  Attention 
is  riveted  upon  ‘news’,  and  ‘news’  involves  some  aroma  of 
capriciousness.  It  is  useless  to  recur  to  periods  of  human 
history  which  lie  beyond  the  reach  of  direct  evidence.  But 
anthropologists  report  the  almost  universal  prevalence  of 
tribal  ceremonies  having  reference  to  the  succession  of  the 
yearly  seasons,  more  particularly  to  the  Spring,  the  Harvest, 
and  Mid-winter.  Undoubtedly,  as  we  view  them  now,  there 
is  a  reference  to  agriculture  in  such  celebrations.  Now 
agriculture  marks  the  first  decisive  step  towards  modern 
civilization.  Its  introduction  marks  the  arrival  of  a  stage  of 


140 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


high-grade  reflection  upon  the  course  of  events.  It  requires 
a  forecast  of  the  course  of  nature  months  ahead.  Many  an 
ape-man  must  have  snatched  up  a  stone  wherewith  to  hit 
somebody,  either  another  man  or  other  animal,  on  the  head, 
without  any  reflection  upon  the  course  of  nature  beyond  the 
next  few  minutes.  Also  he  might  notice  that  some  stones 
are  better  than  others  as  lethal  weapons,  and  he  might  even 
help  them  out  by  chipping  them.  He  is  then  approaching 
civilization.  But  he — or  more  probably,  she — has  crossed  the 
great  divide,  when  he  puts  seeds  into  a  patch  of  earth  and 
waits  for  a  season. 

It  is  obvious  that  seasonal  ceremonies  must  extend  back¬ 
wards  in  time  far  beyond  the  introduction  of  agriculture. 
The  differences  between  the  seasons  impose  differences  of 
behaviour  upon  all  living  things,  vegetables  and  animals 
alike.  The  seasonal  urge  towards  change  of  habit,  hiberna¬ 
tion  or  migration,  must  have  begotten  some  expression  of 
emotional  restlessness.  The  interest  of  agriculture  comes  in 
when  we  consider  the  later  interpretation  of  the  seasonal 
ceremonies  in  which  the  tribe  had  been  indulging  for  count¬ 
less  ages.  Civilization  did  not  start  with  a  social  contract 
determining  modes  of  behaviour.  Its  earliest  effort  was  the 
slow  introduction  of  ideas  explanatory  of  modes  of  be¬ 
haviour  and  of  inrushes  of  emotion  which  already  dominated 
their  lives.  Undoubtedly  ideas  modified  the  practice.  But 
in  the  main  practice  precedes  thought;  and  thought  is 
mainly  concerned  with  the  justification  or  the  modification 
of  a  pre-existing  situation. 

Now,  apart  from  the  practice  of  agriculture,  animal  habits 
are  mainly  based  on  the  massive  recurrence  of  the  seasons, 
heat  and  frost,  rain  and  drought,  day  and  night.  There 
was  stolid  recurrent  matter  of  fact,  with  accompanying 
rhythms  of  emotion  and  ritual.  Vagrant  questions  may  have 


LAWS  OF  NATURE 


I4I 

disturbed  exceptional  minds.  But  there  was  little  to  provoke 
tribal  interest  in  explanation.  There  must  have  been  some 
instances  to  provoke  attention,  because  there  was,  in  fact, 
among  some  tribes  of  our  ancestors,  a  drift  towards  better 
ways  of  life.  But  I  am  seeking  to  determine  the  dividing 
line  after  which  the  curiously  quick  acceleration  of  civilized 
thought  may  conceivably  have  arisen.  In  the  earlier  stage 
the  convenient  unit  of  time  is  of  the  order  of  a  hundred 
thousand  years.  In  the  later  phases  it  shortens  up  to  ten 
thousand  years,  to  five  thousand  years,  to  one  thousand  years, 
to  a  hundred  years. 

Probably  there  was  a  concurrence  of  many  causes.  But 
among  such  causes  the  introduction  of  agriculture  must  be 
given  a  high  place  for  its  effectiveness  in  quickening  pro¬ 
gress.  It  at  once  introduced  the  capriciousness  of  the 
weather  as  a  major  topic  of  tribal  interest.  Also  it  provoked 
attention  to  the  mystery  of  germination,  and  to  the  de¬ 
pendence  of  vegetable  growth  upon  the  seasonal  phases.  It 
compelled  the  tribe  to  descend  from  passive  acquiescence 
in  a  general  matter  of  course  towards  active  interest  in  the 
details.  It  led  to  a  search  for  precautions,  and  discovery 
requires  understanding.  Of  course,  as  we  all  know,  the  novel 
situation  did  not  require  every  tribe  to  advance.  Also  the 
masses  of  mankind  are  always  liable  to  reach  some  stable 
level  of  custom,  and  to  halt  progress  there.  But  human  life 
had  then  reached  a  stage  at  which  obvious  problems  were 
presented  to  the  more  active  minds,  wherever  such  existed. 

We  inherit  legends,  weird,  horrible,  beautiful,  expressing 
in  curious,  specialized  ways  the  interweaving  of  law  and 
capriciousness  in  the  mystery  of  things.  It  is  the  problem 
of  good  and  evil.  Sometimes  the  law  is  good  and  the 
capriciousness  evil;  sometimes  the  law  is  iron  and  evil  and 
the  capriciousness  is  merciful  and  good.  But  from  savage 


142 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


legends  up  to  Hume’s  civilized  Dialogues  on  Natural  religion, 
with  the  conversation  between  Job  and  his  friends  as  an 
intermediate  between  the  two,  the  same  problem  is  discussed. 
Science  and  technology  are  based  upon  law.  Human  be¬ 
haviour  exhibits  custom  mitigated  by  impulse.  What  exactly 
do  we  mean  by  the  notion  of  the  Laws  of  Nature? 

Section  V.  At  the  present  time,  there  are  prevalent  four 
main  doctrines  concerning  the  Laws  of  Nature:  the  doctrine 
of  Law  as  immanent,  the  doctrine  of  Law  as  imposed,  and 
the  doctrine  of  Law  as  observed  order  of  succession,  in  other 
words,  Law  as  mere  description,  and  lastly  the  later  doctrine 
of  Law  as  conventional  interpretation.  It  will  be  convenient 
first  to  discuss  these  four  alternative  doctrines  from  the 
standpoint  of  to-day.  We  shall  then  be  in  a  better  position 
to  understand  the  chequered  history  of  the  notion  in  civilized 
thought. 

By  the  doctrine  of  Law  as  immanent  it  is  meant  that  the 
order  of  nature  expresses  the  characters  of  the  real  things 
which  jointly  compose  the  existences  to  be  found  in  nature. 
When  we  understand  the  essences  of  these  things,  we  thereby 
know  their  mutual  relations  to  each  other.  Thus,  according 
as  there  are  common  elements  in  their  various  characters, 
there  will  necessarily  be  corresponding  identities  in  their 
mutual  relations.  In  other  words,  some  partial  identity  of 
pattern  in  the  various  characters  of  natural  things  issues  in 
some  partial  identity  of  pattern  in  the  mutual  relations  of 
those  things.  These  identities  of  pattern  in  the  mutual 
relations  are  the  Laws  of  Nature.  Conversely,  a  Law  is 
explanatory  of  some  community  in  character  pervading  the 
things  which  constitute  Nature.  It  is  evident  that  the  doctrine 
involves  the  negation  of ‘absolute  being’.  It  presupposes  the 
essential  interdependence  of  things. 

There  are  some  consequences  to  this  doctrine*.  In  the  first 


LAWS  OF  NATURE 


143 


place,  it  follows  that  scientists  are  seeking  for  explanations 
and  not  merely  for  simplified  descriptions  of  their  observa¬ 
tions.  In  the  second  place  the  exact  conformation  of  nature 
to  any  law  is  not  to  be  expected.  If  all  the  things  concerned 
have  the  requisite  common  character,  then  the  pattern  of 
mutual  relevance  which  expresses  that  character  will  be 
exactly  illustrated.  But  in  general  we  may  expect  that  a 
large  proportion  of  things  do  possess  the  requisite  character 
and  a  minority  do  not  possess  it.  In  such  a  case,  the  mutual 
relations  of  these  things  will  exhibit  lapses  when  the  law  fails 
to  obtain  illustration.  In  so  far  as  we  are  merely  interested 
in  a  confused  result  of  many  instances,  then  the  law  can  be 
said  to  have  a  statistical  character.  It  is  now  the  opinion  of 
physicists  that  most  of  the  laws  of  physics,  as  known  in  the 
nineteenth  century,  are  of  this  character. 

Thirdly,  since  the  laws  of  nature  depend  on  the  individual 
characters  of  the  things  constituting  nature,  as  the  things 
change,  then  correspondingly  the  laws  will  change.  Thus 
the  modern  evolutionary  view  of  the  physical  universe  should 
conceive  of  the  laws  of  nature  as  evolving  concurrently 
with  the  things  constituting  the  environment.  Thus  the 
conception  of  the  Universe  as  evolving  subject  to  fixed, 
eternal  laws  regulating  all  behaviour  should  be  abandoned. 
Fourthly,  a  reason  can  now  be  produced  why  we  should 
put  some  limited  trust  in  induction.  For  if  we  assume  an 
environment  largely  composed  of  a  sort  of  existences  whose 
natures  we  partly  understand,  then  we  have  some  knowledge 
of  the  laws  of  nature  dominating  that  environment.  But 
apart  from  that  premise  and  apart  from  the  doctrine  of 
Immanent  Law,  we  can  have  no  knowledge  of  the  future. 
We  should  then  acknowledge  blank  ignorance,  and  not  make 
pretences  about  probability. 

Fifthly,  the  doctrine  of  Immanent  Law  is  untenable  unless 


144 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


we  can  construct  a  plausible  metaphysical  doctrine  according 
to  which  the  characters  of  the  relevant  things  in  nature  are  the 
outcome  of  their  interconnections,  and  their  interconnections 
are  the  outcome  of  their  characters.  This  involves  some 
doctrine  of  Internal  Relations. 

Finally,  the  doctrine  of  Immanence  is  through  and  through 
a  rationalistic  doctrine.  It  is  explanatory  of  the  possibility  of 
understanding  nature. 

Section  VI.  The  doctrine  of  Imposed  Law  adopts  the 
alternative  metaphysical  doctrine  of  External  Relations  be¬ 
tween  the  existences  which  are  the  ultimate  constituents  of 
nature.  The  character  of  each  of  these  ultimate  things  is 
thus  conceived  as  its  own  private  qualification.  Such  an  ex¬ 
istent  is  understandable  in  complete  disconnection  from  any 
other  such  existent:  the  ultimate  truth  is  that  it  requires 
nothing  but  itself  in  order  to  exist.  But  in  fact  there  is 
imposed  on  each  such  existent  the  necessity  of  entering  into 
relationships  with  the  other  ultimate  constituents  of  nature. 
These  imposed  behaviour  patterns  are  the  Laws  of  Nature. 
But  you  cannot  discover  the  natures  of  the  relata  by  any 
study  of  the  Laws  of  their  relations.  Nor,  conversely,  can 
you  discover  the  laws  by  inspection  of  the  natures. 

The  explanation  of  the  doctrine  of  Imposition  both  sug¬ 
gests  a  certain  type  of  Deism,  and  conversely  it  is  the  out¬ 
come  of  such  a  Deistic  belief  if  already  entertained.  For 
example,  we  know  from  Newton’s  own  statements  that  this 
was  exactly  how  the  Deistic  problem  presented  itself  to  him. 
He  definitely  stated  that  the  correlated  modes  of  behaviour 
of  the  bodies  forming  the  solar  system  required  God  for  the 
imposition  of  the  principles  on  which  all  depended.  He 
was  certainly  doubtful,  indeed  more  than  doubtful,  as  to 
whether  the  Law  of  Gravity  was  the  ultimate  statement  of 
principles  imposed  by  God.  But  he  certainly <  thought  that 


LAWS  OF  NATURE 


145 


the  conception  of  the  solar  system  exhibited  in  his  Principia 
was  sufficiently  ultimate  to  make  obvious  the  necessity  of 
a  God  imposing  Law.  Newton  was  certainly  right  to  this 
extent,  that  the  whole  doctrine  of  Imposition  is  without 
interest  apart  from  the  correlative  doctrine  of  a  transcendent 
imposing  Deity.  This  is  also  a  Cartesian  doctrine. 

The  doctrine  of  Imposition  very  naturally  follows  from 
Descartes’  notion  of  ‘substance’.  Indeed  the  phrase  ‘re¬ 
quiring  nothing  but  itself  in  order  to  exist’  occurs  in  his 
Principles  of  Philosophy.  The  whole  Cartesian  apparatus  of 
Deism,  substantial  materialism,  and  imposed  law,  in  con¬ 
junction  with  the  reduction  of  physical  relations  to  the  notion 
of  correlated  motions  with  mere  spatio-temporal  character, 
constitutes  the  simplified  notion  of  Nature  with  which 
Galileo,  Descartes,  and  Newton  finally  launched  modern 
science  on  its  triumphant  career.  If  success  be  a  guarantee 
of  truth,  no  other  system  of  thought  has  enjoyed  a  tithe  of 
such  success  since  mankind  started  on  its  job  of  thinking. 
Within  three  hundred  years  it  has  transformed  human  life, 
in  its  intimate  thoughts,  its  technologies,  its  social  behaviour, 
and  its  ambitions. 

It  follows  from  the  Deism,  which  is  part  of  the  whole 
conception,  that  the  Laws  of  Nature  will  be  exactly  obeyed. 
Certainly,  what  God  meant  he  did.  When  he  said,  Let 
there  be  light,  there  was  light  and  not  a  mere  imitation  or 
a  statistical  average.  Thus  the  statistical  notion,  though  it 
may  explain  some  facts  of  our  confused  perception,  is  not 
applicable  to  the  ultimate,  imposed  laws. 

But  even  before  Descartes,  it  was  the  implicit  belief  in 
some  form  of  imposition,  with  its  consequent  exactness, 
that  constituted  the  motive  force  in  scientific  research.  Why 
should  educated  men  have  believed  that  there  was  anything 
to  find  out?  Suppose  that  the  doctrine  of  immanence  had 


wi 


10 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


I46 

prevailed  in  Europe  and  in  Mahometan  Asia.  Why  should 
men  assume  that  there  were  definite  laws  which  even 
beyond  the  limits  of  meticulous  observation  underlie  the 
apparent  capriciousness  of  physical  details?  There  are 
certain  grand  obvious  uniformities,  Day  follows  Night,  and 
again  relapses  into  Night,  the  Mountains  endure,  and  Birth 
proceeds.  But  these  grand  regularities  are  shot  through 
and  through  with  details  apparently  capricious.  The  very 
savages  saw  that,  and  tremblingly  worshipped  malignant 
demons.  But  civilized  men,  who  understand  the  doctrine  of 
immanence,  should  draw  the  conclusion  that  the  dominance 
of  common  traits  of  character  throughout  the  constituents 
of  nature  is  only  very  partial.  There  is  no  reason  why 
it  should  be  otherwise.  A  restless  search  for  detailed  ex¬ 
planation  is  futile,  based  upon  no  approach  to  probability. 
If  in  the  past  men  had  believed  thus,  to-day  there  would  be 
no  science.  And  even  to-day,  how  little  do  we  know  about 
physiology.  Also  an  individual  electron  is  a  rare  bird  whose 
behaviour  is  unpredictable:  our  information  about  electrons 
mostly  concerns  flocks  numbering  millions.  What  reason  is 
there  to  expect  success  if  we  seek  to  push  the  reign  of  law 
one  step  further  towards  minute  detail?  Indeed,  physicists 
in  their  recent  researches  have  disclosed  a  novel  illustration 
of  capriciousness.  These  men,  trained  in  the  Positivist  doc¬ 
trine,  have  at  once  suggested  the  uselessness  of  further  search 
for  Taw’.  Unless  the  psychology  of  mental  behaviour  still 
include  some  traces  derived  from  the  notion  of  Deistic 
imposition,  even  to-day  the  progress  of  science  would  cease 
by  reason  of  the  failure  of  hope.  A  considerable  proportion 
of  present-day  philosophy  is  devoted  to  the  endeavour  by 
means  of  subtle  argument  to  evade  this  plain  inexorable 
conclusion. 

Lastly  apart  from  some  notion  of  imposed*  Law,  the  doc- 


LAWS  OF  NATURE 


147 


trine  of  immanence  provides  absolutely  no  reason  why  the 
Universe  should  not  be  steadily  relapsing  into  lawless  chaos. 
In  fact,  the  Universe,  as  understood  in  accordance  with  the 
doctrine  of  Immanence,  should  exhibit  itself  as  including  a 
stable  actuality  whose  mutual  implication  with  the  remainder 
of  things  secures  an  inevitable  trend  towards  order.  The 
Platonic  'persuasion’  is  required. 

Section  VII.  Of  the  three  earlier  theories,  there  remains 
the  Positivist  doctrine  concerning  Law,  namely,  that  a  Law 
of  Nature  is  merely  an  observed  persistence  of  pattern  in  the 
observed  succession  of  natural  things:  Law  is  then  merely 
Description.  There  is  an  attractive  simplicity  about  this  doc¬ 
trine.  The  two  preceding  doctrines  lead  us  to  the  dubieties 
of  metaphysics,  such  as  the  doctrine  of  internal  relations 
or  the  existence  and  nature  of  God.  But  this  third  doctrine 
evades  all  such  difficulties. 

It  presupposes  that  we  have  direct  acquaintance  with  a 
succession  of  things.  This  acquaintance  is  analysable  into  a 
succession  of  things  observed.  But  our  direct  acquaintance 
consists  not  only  in  distinct  observations  of  the  distinct 
things  in  succession,  but  also  it  includes  a  comparative 
knowledge  of  the  successive  observations.  Acquaintance  is 
thus  cumulative  and  comparative.  The  laws  of  nature  are 
nothing  else  than  the  observed  identities  of  pattern  per¬ 
sisting  throughout  the  series  of  comparative  observations. 
Thus  a  law  of  nature  says  something  about  things  observed 
and  nothing  more. 

The  pre-occupation  of  science  is  then  the  search  for  simple 
statements  which  in  their  joint  effect  will  express  every¬ 
thing  of  interest  concerning  the  observed  recurrences.  This 
is  the  whole  tale  of  science,  that  and  nothing  more.  It  is  the 
great  Positivist  doctrine,  largely  developed  in  the  first  half  of 
the  nineteenth  century,  and  ever  since  growing  in  influence. 


10-2 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


I48 

It  tells  us  to  keep  to  things  observed,  and  to  describe  them 
as  simply  as  we  can.  This  is  all  we  can  know.  Laws  are 
statements  of  observed  facts.  This  doctrine  dates  back  to 
Epicurus,  and  embodies  his  appeal  to  the  plain  man,  away 
from  metaphysics  and  mathematics.  The  observed  facts  of 
clear  experience  are  understandable,  and  nothing  else.  Also 
‘understanding’  means  ‘simplicity  of  description’. 

Without  doubt  this  Positivist  doctrine  contains  a  funda¬ 
mental  truth  about  scientific  methodology.  For  example, 
consider  the  greatest  of  all  scientific  generalizations,  Newton’s 
Law  of  Gravitation:  Two  particles  of  matter  attract  each 
other  with  a  force  directly  proportional  to  the  product  of 
their  masses  and  inversely  proportional  to  the  square  of 
their  distance.  The  notion  of  ‘force’  refers  to  the  notion  of 
the  addition  of  a  component  to  the  vector  acceleration  of 
either  particle.  It  also  refers  to  the  notion  of  the  masses  of  the 
particles.  Again  the  notion  of  mass  is  also  explicitly  referred 
to  in  the  statement.  Thus  the  mutual  spatial  relations  of 
the  particles,  and  their  individual  masses,  are  required  for 
the  Law.  To  this  extent  the  Law  is  an  expression  of  the 
presumed  characters  of  the  particles  concerned.  But  the 
form  of  the  Law,  namely  the  product  of  the  masses  and  the 
inverse  square  of  the  distance,  is  purely  based  upon  descrip¬ 
tion  of  observed  fact.  A  large  part  of  Newton’s  Principia 
is  devoted  to  a  mathematical  investigation  proving  that 
the  description  is  adequate  for  his  purposes ;  it  collects 
many  details  under  one  principle.  Newton  himself  insisted 
upon  this  very  point.  He  was  not  speculating:  he  was  not 
explaining.  Whatever  your  cosmological  doctrines  may  be, 
the  motions  of  the  planets  and  the  fall  of  the  stones,  so  far  as 
they  have  been  directly  measured,  conform  to  his  Law.  He  is 
enunciating  a  formula  which  expresses  observed  correlations 
of  observed  facts. 


LAWS  OF  NATURE 


149 


Without  the  shadow  of  a  doubt,  all  science  bases  itself 
upon  this  procedure.  It  is  the  first  rule  of  scientific  method — 
Enunciate  observed  correlations  of  observed  fact.  This  is  the 
great  Baconian  doctrine,  namely,  Observe  and  observe,  until 
finally  you  detect  a  regularity  of  sequence.  The  scholastics 
had  trusted  to  metaphysical  dialectic  giving  them  secure 
knowledge  about  the  nature  of  things,  including  the  physical 
world,  the  spiritual  world,  and  the  existence  of  God.  Thence 
they  deduced  the  various  laws,  immanent  and  imposed,  which 
reigned  throughout  Nature. 

Another  difference  between  Scholasticism  and  the  Moderns 
is  in  respect  to  criticism  and  reliance  upon  authority.  But 
this  distinction  has  been  overstressed  and  misunderstood. 
The  Scholastics  were  intensely  critical,  but  they  were  critical 
within  a  different  sphere  of  thought  from  that  occupying 
the  Moderns.  Again  modern  scientists  rely  upon  authority, 
but  they  rely  upon  different  authorities  from  those  to  whom 
the  Scholastics  appealed.  Undoubtedly  the  later  Scholastics 
were  uncritical  in  their  appeal  to  their  chosen  authority, 
Aristotle,  especially  and  most  unfortunately  in  regard  to 
his  physics.  The  Moderns  push  their  criticism  further.  But 
the  Scholastics  and  the  modern  Scientists  are  alike  scholars 
of  the  Alexandrian  type.  They  have  the  same  sort  of  merit 
and  the  same  sort  of  defect.  Also,  the  sort  of  person  who 
was  a  scholastic  doctor  in  a  mediaeval  university,  to-day 
is  a  scientific  professor  in  a  modern  university.  Again  the 
Scholastics  differed  among  themselves  in  opinion  widely.  The 
earlier  set  were  not  even  Aristotelians,  the  later  set  were  not 
all  Thomists.  Analogously,  modern  scientists  differ  among 
themselves,  about  details  and  about  the  general  doctrine  of 
the  Laws  of  Nature. 

Within  the  sphere  of  dialectic  debate,  the  Scholastics 
were  supremely  critical.  They  trusted  Aristotle  because  they 


I5° 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


could  derive  from  him  a  coherent  system  of  thought.  It  was 
a  criticized  trust.  Unfortunately,  they  did  not  reflect  that 
some  of  his  main  ideas  depended  upon  his  direct  acquaintance 
with  experienced  fact.  They  trusted  to  the  logical  coherence 
of  the  system  as  a  guarantee  of  the  unrestricted  relevance 
of  his  primary  notions.  They  thus  accepted  his  confusion — 
when  there  was  confusion — of  superficial  aspects  with  funda¬ 
mental  principles  of  widest  generality.  Their  method  for  the 
furtherance  of  natural  knowledge  was  endless  debate,  un¬ 
relieved  by  recurrence  to  direct  observation.  Unfortunately 
also  their  instrument  of  debate,  Aristotelian  Logic,  was  a 
more  superficial  weapon  than  they  deemed  it.  Automatically 
it  kept  in  the  background  some  of  the  more  fundamental 
topics  for  thought.  Such  topics  are  the  quantitative  relations 
examined  in  mathematics,  and  the  complex  possibilities 
of  multiple  relationship  within  a  system.  All  these  topics, 
and  others,  were  kept  in  the  background  by  Aristotelian 
Logic. 

Fortunately  the  scholastic  age  of  Alexandrian  scholarship 
dominated  Europe  for  centuries,  and  bestowed  upon  civi¬ 
lization  priceless  treasures  of  thought.  It  was  an  age  of 
immense  progress.  But  a  scholarly  age  works  within  rigid 
limitations.  Fortunately,  a  revival  of  Hellenism  over¬ 
whelmed  the  Hellenistic  unity  of  the  Middle  Age.  Plato 
arose  as  if  from  his  tomb.  Vagrant  speculation  and  direct 
observation  broke  up  the  scholarly  system.  New  interests, 
new  gods,  prevailed.  The  new  basis  for  thought  was  the 
report  upon  facts,  directly  observed,  directly  employed. 
Fortunately,  in  the  subsidence  of  the  Italian  Renaissance  of 
the  fifteenth  century,  the  drama  of  the  transference  of  culture 
from  Athens  to  Alexandria  was  again  repeated.  Europe 
gradually  entered  upon  a  new  scholarly  age.  The  modern 
historian  appeared,  the  modern  critical  literature  appeared, 


LAWS  OF  NATURE 


!5I 

the  modern  man  of  science  appeared,  modern  technology 
appeared.  The  old  Egyptian  metallurgists,  the  Semitic 
mathematicians,  and  the  mediaeval  scholastics  were  avenged. 

But  modern  scholarship  and  modern  science  reproduce  the 
same  limitations  as  dominated  the  bygone  Hellenistic  epoch, 
and  the  bygone  Scholastic  epoch.  They  canalize  thought 
and  observation  within  predetermined  limits,  based  upon 
inadequate  metaphysical  assumptions  dogmatically  assumed. 
The  modern  assumptions  differ  from  older  assumptions,  not 
wholly  for  the  better.  They  exclude  from  rationalistic  thought 
more  of  the  final  values  of  existence.  The  intimate  timidity  of 
professionalized  scholarship  circumscribes  reason  by  reducing 
its  topics  to  triviality,  for  example,  to  bare  sensa  and  to 
tautologies.  It  then  frees  itself  from  criticism  by  dogmatically 
handing  over  the  remainder  of  experience  to  an  animal  faith 
or  a  religious  mysticism,  incapable  of  rationalization.  The 
world  will  again  sink  into  the  boredom  of  a  drab  detail  of 
rational  thought,  unless  we  retain  in  the  sky  some  reflection 
of  light  from  the  sun  of  Hellenism. 


CHAPTER  VIII 


COSMOLOGIES 

Section  I.  At  the  close  of  the  previous  chapter  we  were 
left  with  four  antagonistic  schools  of  thought  regarding  the 
analysis  of  the  notion  of  Law,  The  School  of  Immanence, 
The  School  of  Imposition,  The  Positivist  School  of  Obser¬ 
vation,  that  is  to  say,  of  mere  Description,  and  finally  The 
School  of  Conventional  Interpretation.  We  find  that  each  of 
these  schools  could  produce  grave  reasons  in  confirmation  of 
its  own  doctrine. 

There  is  no  greater  hindrance  to  the  progress  of  thought 
than  an  attitude  of  irritated  party-spirit.  Urbanity,  the 
urbanity  of  Plato  and,  if  we  may  trust  his  Dialogues ,  the 
urbanity  of  Athenian  society,  were  part  of  the  intellectual 
genius  of  those  times.  The  vicious  antagonisms  of  subsequent 
theologians,  some  centuries  later,  hid  from  them  considera¬ 
tions  which  they  ought  never  to  have  forgotten,  and  have 
hidden  from  us  the  metaphysical  genius  of  their  own  con¬ 
tributions  to  thought. 

We  will  recommence  by  scanning  the  history  of  these 
doctrines  of  Natural  Law,  with  the  view  of  determining 
their  exact  points  of  divergence,  and  the  measure  of  con¬ 
ciliation  of  which  they  are  capable.  In  the  previous  chapter 
Plato’s  urbane  preface  to  a  philosophical  suggestion  was 
quoted.  The  suggestion  itself  is  now  relevant  to  the  present 
lecture : 

“My  suggestion  would  be,  that  anything  which  possesses 
any  sort  of  power  to  affect  another,  or  to  be  affected  by 


COSMOLOGIES 


r53 


another  even  for  a  moment,  however  trifling  the  cause  and 
however  slight  and  momentary  the  effect,  has  real  existence; 
and  I  hold  that  the  definition  of  being  is  simply  power.”1 

In  the  subsequent  conduct  of  the  dialogue  Plato  rises 
to  the  height  of  his  genius  as  a  metaphysician.  But  he  also 
wrestles  with  the  difficulty  of  making  language  express  any¬ 
thing  beyond  the  familiarities  of  daily  life.  It  is  misleading 
to  study  the  history  of  ideas  without  constant  remembrance 
of  the  struggle  of  novel  thought  with  the  obtuseness  of 
language. 

Also  it  is  interesting  to  notice  that,  according  to  Plato, 
the  distinguishing  mark  of  the  Philosopher  in  contrast  to 
the  Sophist  is  his  resolute  attempt  to  reconcile  conflicting 
doctrines,  each  with  its  own  solid  ground  of  support.  In 
the  history  of  ideas  the  doctrine  of  Speculation  is  at  least  as 
important  as  the  doctrines  for  Speculation. 

Section  II.  But,  to  return  to  Plato’s  suggestion — “and 
I  hold  that  the  definition  of  being  is  simply  power”. 

This  statement  can  be  construed  in  terms  of  the  notion  of 
imposed  law,  namely,  that  it  is  an  external  imposition  on 
each  existent,  that  it  be  correlated  with  determinate  causal 
action  on  other  such  existents.  But  such  an  interpretation 
neglects  the  exact  wording,  Plato  says  that  it  is  the  definition 
of  being  that  it  exert  power  and  be  subject  to  the  exertion 
of  power.  This  means  that  the  essence  of  being  is  to  be 
implicated  in  causal  action  on  other  beings.  It  is  the  doctrine 
of  Law  as  immanent.  Further,  a  few  sentences  later  he  pro¬ 
ceeds:  “.  .  .being,  as  being  known,  is  acted  on  by  knowledge, 
and  is  therefore  in  motion,  for  that  which  is  in  a  state  of 
rest  cannot  be  acted  upon  as  we  affirm. .  .  .  Can  we  imagine 
being  to  be  devoid  of  life  and  mind,  and  to  remain  in  awful 
unmeaningness  an  everlasting  fixture?” 

1  Sophist,  247,  Jowett’s  translation. 


154 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


Notice  that  in  this  argument,  that  which  is  not  acted  upon 
is  a  fixture.  Plato  denies  that  being  can  be  conceived  “in 
awful  unmeaningness  an  everlasting  fixture”.  It  is  therefore 
acted  upon.  This  agrees  with  his  primary  definition,  that 
‘being’  is  the  agent  in  action,  and  the  recipient  of  action. 
Thus,  in  these  passages  Plato  enunciates  the  doctrine  that 
‘  action  and  reaction  ’  belong  to  the  essence  of  being :  though 
the  mediation  of  ‘life  and  mind’  is  invoked  to  provide  the 
medium  of  activity.  This  notion  of  a  medium,  connecting  the 
eternality  of  being  with  the  fluency  of  becoming,  takes  many 
shapes  in  Plato’s  Dialogues.  Very  probably,  indeed  almost 
certainly,  passages  inconsistent  with  this  doctrine  can  be  found 
in  the  Dialogues.  For  the  moment,  the  interesting  fact  is  that 
in  these  passages  in  this  Dialogue  we  find  a  clear  enunciation 
of  the  doctrine  of  Law  as  immanent. 

The  early,  naive  trend  of  Semitic  monotheism,  Jewish  and 
Mahometan,  is  towards  the  notion  of  Law  imposed  by  the  fiat 
of  the  One  God.  Subsequent  speculation  wavers  between 
these  two  extremes,  seeking  their  reconciliation.  In  this,  as 
in  most  other  matters,  the  history  of  Western  thought  consists 
in  the  attempted  fusion  of  ideas  which  in  their  origin  are 
predominantly  Hellenic,  with  ideas  which  in  their  origin  are 
predominantly  Semitic.  The  modern  scholar,  with  his  tinge 
of  speculation,  is  an  Egyptian  employing  his  wisdom  upon 
his  Hellenic  and  Semitic  heritage. 

In  this  instance,  the  extremes  of  the  two  doctrines  of  Law 
lead  on  the  one  hand  to  the  extreme  monotheistic  doctrine 
of  God,  as  essentially  transcendent  and  only  accidentally 
immanent,  and  on  the  other  hand  to  the  pantheistic  doctrine 
of  God,  as  essentially  immanent  and  in  no  way  transcendent. 

Plato  in  the  Timaeus  affords  an  early  instance  of  this 
wavering  between  the  two  doctrines  of  Law,  Immanence 
and  Imposition.  In  the  first  place,  Plato’s  cosmology  includes 


COSMOLOGIES 


*55 

an  ultimate  creator,  shadowy  and  undefined,  imposing  his 
design  upon  the  Universe.  Secondly,  the  action  and  reaction 
of  the  internal  constituents  is — for  Plato — the  self-sufficient 
explanation  of  the  flux  of  the  world:  “Nothing  was  given 
off  from  it,  nothing  entered  it — there  was  nothing  but 
itself”. 

We  have  here  been  examining  the  basic  notion  of  the  initial 
cosmology  which  dominated  the  world,  Pagan,  Christian, 
and  Mahometan,  before  the  rise  of  the  modern  period. 
It  was  modified  by  Aristotle,  by  the  Alexandrians,  by  the 
Scholastics.  But  this  fusion  of  the  doctrines  of  Imposition  and 
Immanence,  with  adjustments  this  way  or  that  way,  is  the 
great  conception  which  reigned  supreme  till  the  beginning  of 
the  seventeenth  century. 

Section  III.  But  Greek  thought  provided  a  rival  cos¬ 
mology,  in  the  shape  of  the  Atomic  theory,  as  adumbrated 
by  Democritus,  systematized  by  Epicurus,  and  as  finally 
explained  in  Epic  shape  by  Lucretius.  According  to  Lucretius 
the  world  is  an  interminable  shower  of  atomic  particles, 
streaming  through  space,  swerving,  intermingling,  disen¬ 
tangling  their  paths,  recombining  them.  For  this  doctrine 
qualitative  differences  are  merely  the  statistical  expression  of 
geometrical  patterns  of  intermingled  paths,  the  outcome  of 
swerving,  combined  with  a  finite  number  of  diversities  of 
shape. 

Plato  and  Lucretius  both  appeal  to  geometry,  Plato  to  the 
regular  solids,  and  Lucretius  to  the  shapes  of  paths,  and 
unspecified  shapes  of  atoms.  In  this  respect,  their  general 
attitude  has  been  sustained  by  modern  science.  It  seems 
necessary  however  for  Epicurus  to  treat  space  and  motion 
with  the  metaphysical  naivety  exhibited  later  in  Newton’s 
Principia.  Plato’s  doctrine  of  space,  as  stated  in  the  Timaeus , 
has  a  superior  metaphysical  subtlety;  although  the  Platonic 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


!56 

doctrine  of  a  Receptacle,  intrinsically  devoid  of  any  geo¬ 
metrical  form,  has  some  analogy  to  the  doctrine  of  the  4  Void’ 
in  Lucretius.  It  is  probable  however  that  if  Lucretius  had 
possessed  the  penetration  to  explain  Epicurus  further,  he 
would  have  found  it  necessary  to  endow  his  Void  with 
exactly  those  geometrical  forms  which  Plato  denied  to  his 
Receptacle  considered  in  abstraction,  and  which  Aristotle 
denied  to  his  Matter  in  abstraction. 

Plato’s  cosmology  tends  to  a  fusion  of  the  doctrines  of 
Imposition  and  Immanence;  the  Atomic  Theory  of  Epicurus 
lends  itself  most  readily  to  a  fusion  of  the  doctrines  of 
Imposition  and  of  Description. 

The  reason  for  this  distinction  between  the  two  cosmo¬ 
logies  is  that  for  Plato  behaviour  is  a  function  of  the  various 
characters  of  the  things  concerned — the  intelligent  activities 
of  indwelling  souls,  and  the  geometric  necessities  of  the  in¬ 
dwelling  shapes.  But  for  Epicurus  the  paths  of  the  atoms 
are  derived  from  no  necessities  of  their  natures.  It  is  intrinsic 
to  their  natures  that  they  partake  of  spatial  relations  and 
are  moveable.  But  the  special  path  of  a  special  atom  seems 
to  be  a  fact  entirely  extrinsic  to  its  nature.  The  modern 
wave-theory  of  the  atom  sides  with  Plato  rather  than  with 
Democritus:  Newtonian  dynamics  sides  with  Democritus 
against  Plato.  Some  passages  of  Lucretius  surreptitiously 
introduce  the  doctrine  of  immanence.  What  Lucretius 
mainly  cared  about  was  the  reign  of  law  as  opposed  to  the 
capricious  intervention  of  demons  and  gods,  to  be  coaxed  by 
superstition. 

As  to  the  paths  of  the  atoms,  two  views  are  possible.  One 
theory  can  conceive  them  as  imposed,  and  imposition  re¬ 
quires  a  transcendent  God  as  imposer.  This  is  practically 
the  cosmology  adopted  by  Newton.  The  Newtonian  forces, 
whatever  their  ultimate  mathematical  formulation,  are 


COSMOLOGIES 


*57 

nothing  else  than  the  imposed  conditions  provided  by  God. 
This  point  of  view  was  the  working  formula  of  the  eighteenth 
century.  God  made  his  appearance  in  religion  under  the  frigid 
title  of  the  First  Cause,  and  was  appropriately  worshipped  in 
white-washed  churches. 

Another  theory  as  to  the  paths  can  be  adopted  by  the 
Positivist  School  of  Mere  Description.  For  this  reason,  the 
atomic  theory,  of  the  Lucretian  type,  has  always  been  a 
favourite  first  principle  of  cosmology  with  this  School  of 
Thought.  The  paths  of  the  molecules  can  be  ascribed  to 
mere  chance.  They  are  random  distributions,  each  path 
being  entirely  disconnected  from  any  other  path,  and  each 
continuation  of  one  path  being  unconditioned  by  the  earlier 
portion  of  the  same  path. 

Thus  the  world,  as  we  know  it,  exhibits  for  our  confused 
perception  an  involution  of  paths  and  a  concatenation  of 
circumstances  which  have  arisen  entirely  by  chance.  We 
can  describe  what  has  happened,  but  with  that  description 
all  possibility  of  knowledge  ends. 

Lucretius  wavers  between  the  notion  of  imposed  law  and 
the  notion  of  chance.  For  example:  “This  point  too  we 
wish  you  to  apprehend:  when  bodies  are  borne  downwards 
sheer  through  void  by  their  own  weights,  at  quite  uncertain 
times  and  uncertain  spots  they  push  themselves  a  little  from 
their  course:  you  just  and  only  just  can  call  it  a  change  of 
inclination.  If  they  were  not  used  to  swerve,  they  would  all 
fall  down,  like  drops  of  rain,  through  the  deep  void,  and 
no  clashing  would  have  been  begotten  nor  blow  produced 
among  the  first-beginnings  [i.e.  the  atoms]  :  thus  nature  never 
would  have  produced  aught”.1 

1  Book  ii,  lines  216-224.  Translated  by  H.  A.  J.  Monro,  published  separately 
in  Bohn’s  series,  by  G.  Bell  and  Sons,  Ltd.:  Cf.  also  Cyril  Bailey’s  translation, 
Lucretius  on  the  Nature  of  Things ,  Oxford  University  Press,  1929. 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


158 

But  he  rigidly  limits  his  suggestion  of  chance:1 

“But  lest  you  haply  suppose  that  living  things  alone  are 
bound  by  these  conditions,  such  a  law  keeps  all  things  within 
their  limits.” 

The  objection  to  the  extreme  Positivist  doctrine  at  once 
suggests  itself,  that  the  enormous  aspect  of  regular  evolution 
through  vast  regions  embracing  the  remotest  star-galaxies, 
and  through  vast  periods  of  time,  is  an  unlikely  product  of 
mere  chance. 

There  are  two  answers  to  this  objection.  In  the  first  place, 
there  is  plenty  of  time  and  plenty  of  space.  We  are  dealing 
with  all  space,  from  infinity  to  infinity,  we  are  dealing  with 
all  time  from  eternity  to  eternity,  and  we  are  dealing  with 
the  unbounded  wealth  of  all  existence,  to  be  comprehended 
in  terms  of  no  finite  number.  In  any  finite  region  of  space 
and  time,  with  its  finite  cargo  of  atoms,  any  pre-conceived 
arrangement  of  paths,  however  simple  or  however  complex, 
is  equally  unlikely,  indeed  there  is  an  infinite  probability 
against  it.  But  we  are  not  dealing  with  a  pre-conceived  con¬ 
cept,  we  observe  what  in  fact  is  the  case  in  a  limited  region. 
Something  must  be  the  case,  and  what  we  have  observed 
is  what  in  fact  has  been  the  case.  There  is  nothing  pre¬ 
conceived,  and  thus  there  is  no  question  of  infinite  improb¬ 
ability.  It  is  true  that  expectations  float  through  our  minds, 
but  they  are  vague  memories  of  what  in  fact  has  happened, 
combined  with  suggestions  as  to  the  more  detailed  analysis 
of  past  fact.  The  fact  in  the  past  is  neither  probable  nor 
improbable,  it  is  what  in  fact  took  place  within  the  ambit 
of  our  observation. 

The  second  answer  takes  the  same  point  of  view  as  that 
derived  from  the  doctrine  of  immanence.  There  is  no  need — 
indeed  there  is  not  the  slightest  reason— to  exaggerate  the 

1  Cf.  Book  n,  lines  718,  719. 


COSMOLOGIES 


159 


order  in  the  spatio-temporal  region  under  our  observation. 
In  the  remote  regions  and  epochs  we  have  only  intelligence 
of  very  general  aspects  of  order.  That  is  all  we  know.  In 
the  present  epoch  we  have  more  detail,  but  our  observation 
is  rough,  inaccurate,  and  sporadic.  Again,  that  is  all  we 
know.  We  must  not  ascribe,  we  must  not  expect,  one  step 
beyond  our  direct  knowledge.  The  Positivist  has  no  foothold 
on  which  he  can  rely  for  speculation  beyond  the  region  of 
direct  observation. 

Section  IV.  The  great  Positivist  school  of  thought,  whose 
epic  is  the  poem  of  Lucretius,  at  the  present  time  reigns 
supreme  in  the  domain  of  science.  Its  aim  is  to  confine  itself 
to  fact,  with  a  discard  of  all  speculation.  Unfortunately, 
among  all  the  variant  schools  of  opinion,  it  is  the  one  which 
can  least  bear  confrontation  with  the  facts.  It  has  never  been 
acted  on.  It  can  never  be  acted  on,  for  it  gives  no  foothold 
for  any  forecast  of  the  future  around  which  purpose  can 
weave  itself. 

But  before  confronting  Positivism  with  the  practice  of 
mankind,  it  is  interesting  to  note  that  atomism  has  taken  on 
a  new  form  of  modern  thought.  Epistemology  has  arisen, 
in  its  function  of  a  critic  of  all  pretensions  to  knowledge. 
To-day,  the  question,  How  do  we  know?  takes  precedence  of 
the  question — What  do  we  know? 

Again,  the  doctrine  of  atomism  re-appears.  The  atomism 
of  Democritus  in  the  science  of  Cosmology  is  replaced  by 
the  atomism  of  Hume  in  the  science  of  Epistemology. 
Epicurus  enunciates  the  doctrine  that  the  ultimate  elements 
of  the  physical  universe  are  physical  atoms,  showering 
through  space  with  paths  associated  in  complexes.  Hume 
enunciates  the  doctrine  that  the  ultimate  elements,  sub¬ 
jectively  given  in  the  activity  of  knowing,  are  the  impressions 
of  sensation,  showering  through  the  stream  of  experience, 


l6o  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

associated  as  memories,  provocative  of  emotions  and  re¬ 
flexions,  and  expectations.  But  for  Hume,  each  impression 
is  a  distinct  existence  arising  in  soul  from  unknown  causes. 
Epicurus  bases  himself  upon  an  epistemology  closely  allied 
to  that  of  Hume. 

Positivism  has  seized  on  Hume’s  atomism,  with  Hume 
himself  as  its  leader.  The  task  of  science  is  explained  to  be 
merely  the  formulation  of  observed  identities  of  pattern 
persistent  and  recurrent  in  each  stream  of  experience.  But 
since  Hume  is  dealing  with  subjective  experience,  he  can 
add  a  corollary  not  open  to  the  more  objective  doctrine  of 
Epicurus.  Hume  adds  that  we  expect  the  recurrences  ob¬ 
served  in  the  past,  also  to  recur  in  the  future.  At  this  stage, 
Hotspur’s  question  arises  in  our  mind,  “But  will  they  come, 
when  you  do  call  for  them?”  To  this  question  Hume, 
following  the  example  of  Glendower,  returns  no  answer.  It 
is  an  observed  fact  in  the  past  that  expected  recurrences 
have  recurred.  But  Positivistic  science  is  solely  concerned 
with  observed  fact,  and  must  hazard  no  conjecture  as  to 
the  future.  If  observed  fact  be  all  we  know,  then  there  is 
no  other  knowledge.  Probability  is  relative  to  knowledge. 
There  is  no  probability  as  to  the  future  within  the  doctrine 
of  Positivism. 

Of  course  most  men  of  science,  and  many  philosophers,  use 
the  Positivistic  doctrine  to  avoid  the  necessity  of  considering 
perplexing  fundamental  questions — in  short,  to  avoid  meta¬ 
physics — and  then  save  the  importance  of  science  by  an 
implicit  recurrence  to  their  metaphysical  persuasion  that  the 
past  does  in  fact  condition  the  future. 

Indeed,  as  Hume  pointed  out,  human  life  cannot  be 
carried  on  without  this  persuasion.  In  this  way  the  Positi¬ 
vistic  doctrine  of  to-day  bases  itself  on  some  form  of  atomism, 
objective  or  subjective,  and  deduces  that  the  sole  occupation 


COSMOLOGIES  l6l 

of  science  is  to  elaborate  simple  descriptions  of  things  ob¬ 
served. 

There  is  a  curious  misconception  that  somehow  the  mathe¬ 
matical  mysteries  of  Statistics  help  Positivism  to  evade  its 
proper  limitation  to  the  observed  past.  But  statistics  tell  you 
nothing  about  the  future  unless  you  make  the  assumption  of 
the  permanence  of  statistical  form.  For  example,  in  order  to 
use  statistics  for  prediction,  assumptions  are  wanted  as  to  the 
stability  of  the  mean,  the  mode,  the  probable  error,  and  the 
symmetry  or  skewness  of  the  statistical  expression  of  functional 
correlation.  Mathematics  can  tell  you  the  consequences  of 
your  beliefs.  For  example,  if  your  apple  is  composed  of  a 
finite  number  of  atoms,  mathematics  will  tell  you  that  the 
number  is  odd  or  even.  But  you  must  not  ask  mathematics 
to  provide  you  with  the  apple,  the  atoms,  and  the  finiteness 
of  their  number.  There  is  no  valid  inference  from  mere 
possibility  to  matter  of  fact,  or,  in  other  words,  from  mere 
mathematics  to  concrete  nature. 

Section  V.  It  is  now  time  to  confront  the  Positivist  doc¬ 
trine  with  the  facts  of  the  History  of  Science.  We  want  to 
discover  the  type  of  purpose  exhibited  in  the  practices  of 
men  of  science.  In  order  to  avoid  the  suspicion  of  biased 
selection,  consider  the  last  discovery,  which  at  the  time  of 
writing  this  chapter,  has  occupied  a  leading  position  in 
American  newspapers.  I  mean  the  discovery  of  the  new 
planet  by  the  Lowell  Observatory  in  Arizona.  The  final 
interpretation  of  this  discovery  is  irrelevant:  Nature,  even  in 
the  act  of  satisfying  anticipation,  often  provides  a  surprise. 
The  story  is  typical  of  the  previous  discovery  of  Neptune, 
and  of  many  discoveries  of  the  faint  members  of  double 
stars,  and  of  the  famous  empirical  term  in  the  formula  for 
the  moon’s  motion. 

The  recent  discovery  is  based  upon  the  observed  devia- 

1 1 


wi 


1 62 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


tions  of  the  orbits  of  the  planets  Uranus  and  Neptune  from 
the  calculated  order.  This  calculation  embraces  the  effect 
produced  by  all  the  previously  known  bodies  of  the  solar 
system  upon  the  motions  of  these  two  planets,  assuming  the 
Law  of  Gravitation.  But  their  observed  motions  deviate 
slightly  from  their  orbits  as  thus  calculated.  There  is  how¬ 
ever  no  difficulty  in  producing  a  mathematical  formula 
which  describes  the  observed  deviation.  Such  a  formula 
will  be  of  the  most  elementary  mathematical  character.  It 
will  consist  of  a  few  terms  involving  trigonometrical  sines 
and  cosines,  with  certain  numerical  components  defining 
their  periods,  with  other  numerical  components  defining 
their  amplitudes,  and  other  numerical  components  defining 
their  epochs — or  in  modern  popular  phraseology,  their  c  zero 
times’.  Altogether  a  description  of  charming  simplicity, 
which  would  have  delighted  Plato  by  its  exemplification  of 
his  most  daring  speculations  as  to  the  future  of  mathematics. 

Every  Positivist  must  have  been  completely  satisfied.  A 
simple  description  had  been  evolved  which  fitted  the  ob¬ 
served  facts.  They  could  now  relapse  into  their  unexplained 
persuasion  that  in  the  future  these  formulae  would  continue 
to  describe  the  motions  of  Uranus  and  Neptune.  Positivism 
had  exhausted  its  message.  But  astronomers  were  not  satis¬ 
fied.  They  remembered  the  Law  of  Gravitation.  Percy 
Lowell  calculated  the  direction  and  magnitude  of  the  vector 
component  of  acceleration,  directed  to  an  imaginary  point 
moving  round  the  sun  in  an  elliptic  path,  even  more  remote 
than  the  orbit  of  Neptune.  He  succeeded  in  choosing  his 
assumed  path  so  that  the  magnitude  of  the  acceleration 
varies  as  the  inverse  square  of  the  distance  between  Neptune 
and  the  moving  point.  A  new  description  had  been  dis¬ 
covered,  requiring  some  complex  mathematics  to  connect 
it  with  the  successive  positions  of  Uranus,  but  conforming 


COSMOLOGIES 


163 

to  the  general  form  of  Newton’s  Law.  There  has  been  a 
gain  in  generality,  pleasing  if  you  cherish  a  virtuosity  in 
descriptions.  But  we  have  forgotten  the  main  interest:  We 
have  only  got  to  look  in  the  sky,  towards  Percy  Lowell’s 
moving  point,  and  we  shall  see  a  new  planet.  Certainly 
we  shall  not.  All  that  any  person  has  seen  is  a  few  faint 
dots  on  photographic  plates,  involving  the  intervention  of 
photography,  excellent  telescopes,  elaborate  apparatus,  long 
exposures  and  favourable  nights.  The  new  explanation  is 
now  involved  in  the  speculative  extension  of  a  welter  of 
physical  laws,  concerning  telescopes,  light,  and  photography, 
laws  which  merely  claim  to  register  observed  facts.  It  is  in¬ 
volved  in  the  speculative  application  of  such  laws  to  particular 
circumstances  within  the  observatories,  for  which  circum¬ 
stances  these  laws  are  not  concurrently  verified.  The  result  of 
this  maze  of  speculative  extensions  is  to  connect  the  deviations 
of  Uranus  and  Neptune  with  the  dots  on  the  photographic 
plates. 

This  narrative,  framed  according  to  the  strictest  require¬ 
ments  of  the  Positivist  theory,  is  a  travesty  of  the  plain  facts. 
The  civilized  world  has  been  interested  at  the  thought  of 
the  newly  discovered  planet,  solitary  and  remote,  for  endless 
ages  circling  the  sun  and  adding  its  faint  influence  to  the 
tide  of  affairs.  At  last  it  is  discovered  by  human  reason, 
penetrating  into  the  nature  of  things  and  laying  bare  the 
necessities  of  their  interconnection.  The  speculative  ex¬ 
tensions  of  laws,  baseless  on  the  Positivist  theory,  are  the 
obvious  issue  of  speculative  metaphysical  trust  in  the  material 
permanences,  such  as  telescopes,  observatories,  mountains, 
planets,  which  are  behaving  towards  each  other  according 
to  the  necessities  of  the  Universe,  including  theories  of  their 
own  natures.  The  point  is,  that  speculative  extension  beyond 
direct  observation  spells  some  trust  in  metaphysics,  however 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


164 

vaguely  these  metaphysical  notions  may  be  entertained  in 
explicit  thought.  Our  metaphysical  knowledge  is  slight, 
superficial,  incomplete.  Thus  errors  creep  in.  But,  such  as 
it  is,  metaphysical  understanding  guides  imagination  and 
justifies  purpose.  Apart  from  metaphysical  presupposition 
there  can  be  no  civilization. 

There  is  a  moral  to  be  drawn  as  to  the  method  of  science. 
All  scientific  progress  depends  on  first  framing  a  formula 
giving  a  general  description  of  observed  fact.  Lowell  worked 
with  such  a  formula  in  front  of  him,  namely,  the  simple 
mathematical  expression  for  the  deviations.  At  one  stage,  the 
method  of  all  discovery  conforms  to  the  Positivist  doctrine. 
There  can  be  no  doubt  that,  with  this  restriction  of  meaning, 
the  Positivist  doctrine  is  correct. 

Certain  branches  of  science  halt  for  centuries  in  this 
stage.  Then  their  votaries  embrace  the  unguarded  Positivist 
doctrine.  There  is  however  a  motive  of  unrest  which  urves 

o 

scientists  beyond  mere  satisfaction  with  the  simple  descrip¬ 
tion,  beyond  even  the  general  description.  It  is  the  desire 
to  obtain  the  explanatory  description  which  may  justify  the 
speculative  extension  of  Laws,  beyond  actual,  particular 
instances  of  observation. 

This  urge  towards  explanatory  description  provides  the 
interplay  between  science  and  metaphysics.  The  doctrines 
of  metaphysics  are  modified,  so  as  to  be  capable  of  providing 
the  explanation,  and  the  explanations  of  science  are  framed  in 
terms  of  the  popular  metaphysics  lingering  in  the  imaginations 
of  these  scientists. 

One  aspect  of  the  history  of  thought  from  the  time  of 
Plato  to  the  present  day  is  the  struggle  between  meta¬ 
physicians  and  Positivists  over  the  interpretation  of  the  Laws 
of  Nature.  The  Greeks,  as  distinguished  from  the  Alexan¬ 
drians,  are  to  be  looked  on  as  the  discoverers  of  ideas,  rather 


COSMOLOGIES 


165 

than  their  systematizers.  Thus  it  is  not  surprising,  that  the 
attitude  of  Plato  on  this  topic  is  not  as  clearly  defined  as 
the  preceding  quotations  might  imply.  In  some  of  his 
Dialogues  his  attention  is  fixed  on  the  distinction  between 
the  eternal  world  of  ideas,  completely  open  to  the  under¬ 
standing,  and  the  fluent  world  disclosed  by  the  senses  which 
fails  to  participate  with  any  exact  clarity  in  the  eternal 
forms.  To  that  extent  the  sensible  world  is  closed  to  the 
understanding.  Its  history  is  reduced  to  matter  of  fact,  in¬ 
capable  of  complete  rationalization.  It  is  but  a  short  step 
from  the  Plato  who  composed  the  myth  of  the  shadows  on 
the  wall  of  the  cave  to  the  full  Positivist  doctrine  of  Hume 
[i.e.  the  c  Hume 5  of  the  Treatise ],  Mill,  Comte  and  Huxley. 
The  main  distinction  between  Plato  in  this  mood  and  the 
Moderns — and  it  is  a  great  distinction — is  that  the  Platonic 
emphasis  on  the  eminent  reality  of  the  eternal  world  of 
ideas  must  be  replaced  by  the  nominalism  of  most  of  these 
moderns. 

But  in  his  later  Dialogues  Plato’s  interest  is  concentrated  on 
cosmology;  and,  as  the  quotations  show,  his  final  judgment, 
or  the  decay  of  his  old  age,  leads  him  to  an  intermediate 
position  between  the  doctrines  of  Immanent  Law  and  of 
Imposed  Law. 

Section  VI.  It  was  Plato  in  his  later  mood  who  put  for¬ 
ward  the  suggestion,  “and  I  hold  that  the  definition  of 
being  is  simply  power”.  This  suggestion  is  the  charter  of 
the  doctrine  of  Immanent  Law. 

The  next  important  landmark  in  the  history  of  this  doctrine 
is  provided  by  the  theological  Alexandrians,  some  four  to  six 
hundred  years  later.  It  is  customary  to  undervalue  theology 
in  a  secular  history  of  philosophical  thought.  This  is  a  mistake, 
since  for  a  period  of  about  thirteen  hundred  years  the  ablest 
thinkers  were  mostly  theologians. 


i66 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


The  theologians  of  Alexandria  were  greatly  exercised  over 
the  immanence  of  God  in  the  world.  They  considered  the 
general  question,  how  the  primordial  Being,  who  is  the 
source  of  the  inevitable  recurrence  of  the  world  towards 
order,  shares  his  nature  with  the  world.  In  some  sense  he 
is  a  component  in  the  natures  of  all  fugitive  things.  Thus, 
an  understanding  of  the  nature  of  temporal  things  involves 
a  comprehension  of  the  immanence  of  the  Eternal  Being. 
This  doctrine  effects  an  important  reconciliation  between 
the  doctrines  of  Imposed  Law  and  Immanent  Law.  For, 
with  this  doctrine,  the  necessity  of  the  trend  towards  order 
does  not  arise  from  the  imposed  will  of  a  transcendent  God. 
It  arises  from  the  fact  that  the  exis tents  in  nature  are  sharing 
in  the  nature  of  the  immanent  God. 

This  doctrine,  in  any  clear  form,  is  not  Platonic,  though 
it  is  a  natural  modification  from  Plato’s  own  doctrine.  But 
in  the  Timaeus ,  Plato  provides  a  soul  of  this  world  who 
definitely  is  not  the  ultimate  creator.  By  this  notion,  Plato 
prepared  the  way  for  the  Gnostics  with  their  fantastic 
machinery  of  emanations,  and  for  the  Arians.  In  the  Timaeus 
the  doctrine  can  be  read  as  an  allegory.  In  that  case  it 
was  Plato’s  most  unfortunate  essay  in  mythology.  The 
World-Soul,  as  an  emanation,  has  been  the  parent  of  puerile 
metaphysics,  which  only  obscures  the  ultimate  question  of 
the  relation  of  reality  as  permanent  with  reality  as  fluent: 
the  mediator  must  be  a  component  in  common,  and  not  a 
transcendent  emanation. 

The  Western  doctrine  of  Grace,  derived  from  St  Augustine, 
leans  heavily  towards  the  notion  of  a  wholly  transcendent 
God  imposing  his  partial  favours  on  the  world.  Indeed, 
Calvin’s  rigid  version  of  the  same  doctrine  suggests  the 
Manichean  doctrine  of  a  wholly  evil  material  world  par¬ 
tially  rescued  by  God’s  arbitrary  selection.  For  Calvinistic 


COSMOLOGIES 


167 

thought  the  physical  order  of  the  world  was  an  arbitrary 
imposition  of  God’s  will.  Indeed,  the  Augustinian  doctrine 
takes  on  diverse  aspects  according  as  it  is  derived  from  the 
will  of  a  transcendent  God,  or  the  nature  of  an  immanent 
God. 

This  unquestioned  belief  in  order,  with  this  chequered 
history — Plato  and  Epicurus,  the  Gnostics,  the  Alexandrian 
theologians,  the  rationalists  of  Antioch  and  Mopsuetia,  the 
Manicheans,  Augustine,  Calvin — finally  started  the  first 
phase  of  the  modern  world  in  the  sixteenth  century  with 
the  unquestioning  presupposition  that  there  is  an  order  of 
nature  which  lies  open  in  every  detail  to  human  under¬ 
standing. 

This  belief  can  be  traced  back  to  the  initiation  of  Plato 
and  the  Jewish  prophets.  But,  in  all  probability,  it  is  more 
than  any  of  them  clearly  formulated  or  consistently  believed. 
Lucretius  gives  the  clearest  formulation  of  the  doctrine  of  an 
exact  detailed  order  of  nature.  But  even  he  has  to  make 
everything  depend  upon  swervings  of  atoms  which  take  place 
“at  no  fixed  part  of  space  and  no  fixed  time”. 

Section  VII.  The  conclusion  of  the  seventeenth  century 
marks  a  new  stabilization  of  cosmological  doctrine  for  the  next 
two  hundred  years.  For  the  moment  the  extreme  Positivistic 
doctrine  was  eliminated.  But,  curiously  enough,  the  three 
great  figures,  Newton,  Leibniz,  Locke,  then  dominating  the 
world  of  thought,  gave  three  diverse  interpretations  of  the 
Platonic  and  Lucretian  problems. 

Newton’s  position  was  the  more  useful  as  a  justification  of 
the  methodology  required  for  the  state  of  science,  then  and 
in  the  immediate  future.  He  held  the  most  simple-minded 
version  of  the  Lucretian  doctrine  of  the  Void,  the  most 
simple-minded  version  of  the  Lucretian  doctrine  of  material 
atoms,  and  the  most  simple-minded  version  of  Law  imposed 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


1 68 

by  Divine  decree.  His  only  approach  to  any  metaphysical 
penetration  arises  from  his  way  of  connecting  the  Void  with 
the  Sensorium  of  the  Divine  Nature.  His  cosmology  is  very 
easy  to  understand  and  very  hard  to  believe.  Pragmatically 
it  experienced  a  supreme  justification,  for  two  centuries.  Thus 
its  truth  was  pragmatically  established,  for  the  same  period. 
His  doctrine  will  stand  for  all  time  as  a  clear  and  distinct 
system  of  ideas,  with  large  applications.  Any  cosmology  must 
be  capable  of  interpreting  this  system  and  of  expressing  its 
limitations. 

The  monads  of  Leibniz  constitute  another  version  of  an 
atomic  doctrine  of  the  Universe.  It  is  true  that  Newton 
adopted  without  question  some  of  the  main  positions  of  the 
Cartesian  physics.  But  Newton  was  entirely  innocent  of 
the  subjectivist  bias  of  thought  introduced  by  Descartes. 
Newton  found  himself  knowing  a  lot  of  things,  as  inter¬ 
preted  in  Cartesian  fashion;  and  he  successfully  introduced 
a  systematization  of  this  knowledge,  thus  interpreted.  But 
Descartes,  before  he  attacked  the  problem  of  physics,  asked 
the  momentous  questions — How  do  I  know,  and  How  can 
I  divest  my  knowledge  of  doubtful  interpretation?  The  final 
issue  of  this  subjective  train  of  thought  after  a  century  of 
philosophizing  is  given  by  Hume’s  mental  atomism,  already 
mentioned  in  this  chapter. 

Leibniz  was  acutely  conscious  of  this  problem  of  the 
criticism  of  knowledge.  Thus  he  approached  the  problem  of 
cosmology  from  the  subjective  side,  whereas  Lucretius  and 
Newton  approach  it  from  the  objective  point  of  view.  They 
implicitly  ask  the  question,  What  does  the  world  of  atoms 
look  like  to  an  intellect  surveying  it?  What  would  such  an 
intellect  say  about  the  spectacle  of  an  atomic  Universe?  The 
answer  is  contained  in  the  Epic  of  Lucretius  and  the  Principia 
of  Newton,  immortal  works. 

J  4 


COSMOLOGIES 


l6g 

But  Leibniz  answered  another  question.  He  explained 
what  it  must  be  like  to  be  an  atom.  Lucretius  tells  us  what 
an  atom  looks  like  to  others,  and  Leibniz  tells  us  how  an 
atom  is  feeling  about  itself.  In  this  account  Leibniz  wrestles 
with  a  difficulty  which  infects  modern  cosmologies,  a  diffi¬ 
culty  which  Plato,  Aristotle,  Lucretius,  and  Newton  entirely 
ignore — perhaps  because  they  would  have  declared  it  to  be 
founded  upon  a  mistake.  Descartes,  as  is  usual  with  the 
founders  of  new  schools  of  thought,  exactly  balanced  himself 
between  the  old  way  and  the  new  way  of  which  he  was  the 
founder.  The  modern  outlook  arises  from  the  slow  influence 
of  Aristotle’s  Logic,  during  a  period  of  two  thousand  years. 
Also  Aristotle’s  Logic  is  founded  upon  an  analysis  of  the 
simplest  form  of  a  verbal  sentence.  For  example,  the 
sentence  ‘This  water  is  hot’  attributes  the  character  of  high 
temperature  to  the  particular  mass  of  water  in  the  particular 
bath-tub.  The  quality  of  ‘being  hot’  is  an  abstraction. 
Many  different  things  can  be  hot,  and  we  can  think  of 
being  hot  without  thinking  of  any  particular  thing  in  a 
bath-tub  which  is  hot.  But  in  the  real  physical  world,  the 
quality  of  ‘being  hot’  can  only  appear  as  a  characteristic  of 
concrete  things  which  are  hot. 

Again,  still  keeping  to  the  point  of  view  derived  from 
Aristotelian  Logic,  if  we  ask  for  a  complete  account  of  a  real 
particular  thing  in  the  physical  world,  the  adequate  answer 
is  expressed  in  terms  of  a  set  of  these  abstract  characteristics, 
which  are  united  into  an  individualized  togetherness  which 
is  the  real  thing  in  question. 

This  answer  is  beautifully  simple.  But  it  entirely  leaves 
out  of  account  the  interconnections  between  real  things. 
Each  substantial  thing  is  thus  conceived  as  complete  in 
itself,  without  any  reference  to  any  other  substantial  thing. 
Such  an  account  of  the  ultimate  atoms,  or  of  the  ultimate 


170 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


monads,  or  of  the  ultimate  subjects  enjoying  experience, 
renders  an  interconnected  world  of  real  individuals  un¬ 
intelligible.  The  universe  is  shivered  into  a  multitude  of 
disconnected  substantial  things,  each  thing  in  its  own  way 
exemplifying  its  private  bundle  of  abstract  characters  which 
have  found  a  common  home  in  its  own  substantial  indi¬ 
viduality.  But  substantial  thing  cannot  call  unto  substantial 
thing.  A  substantial  thing  can  acquire  a  quality,  a  credit — 
but  real  landed  estate,  never.  In  this  way,  Aristotle’s  doc¬ 
trines  of  Predication  and  of  Primary  Substance  have  issued 
into  a  doctrine  of  the  conjunction  of  attributes  and  of  the 
disjunction  of  primary  substances. 

All  modern  epistemologies,  all  modern  cosmologies,  wrestle 
with  this  problem.  There  is,  for  their  doctrine,  a  mysterious 
reality  in  the  background,  intrinsically  unknowable  by  any 
direct  intercourse.  In  the  foreground  of  direct  enjoyment, 
there  is  the  play  and  interplay  of  various  qualities  diversifying 
the  surface  of  the  substantial  unity  of  the  solitary  individual 
in  question. 

But  one  characteristic  of  each  experiencing  subject  is  a 
mysterious  impulse  to  interpret  its  private  world  of  enjoyed 
qualifications  as  indicating  and  symbolically  defining  a 
complex  of  communication  between  ultimate  realities.  Yet, 
according  to  the  doctrine  of  these  modern  cosmologies,  the 
how,  or  the  why,  of  such  communication  must  for  ever  lie 
beyond  reason :  for  reason  can  only  discern  the  set  of  qualities 
constituting  the  nature  of  an  individual  substance. 

Such  has  been  the  long  slow  influence  of  Aristotelian 
Logic  upon  cosmological  theory.  Leibniz  was  the  first,  and 
by  far  the  greatest  philosopher,  who  both  accepted  the 
modern  doctrine  and  frankly  faced  its  difficulty.  He  boldly 
excepted  God  from  the  scope  of  the  doctrine.  God  and  each 
individual  monad  were  in  communication.  Thus  there  is, 


COSMOLOGIES 


171 

on  his  doctrine,  an  indirect  communication  between  monads 
by  the  mediation  of  God.  But  each  monad  independently 
develops  its  own  experience  according  to  its  character  which 
is  imposed  on  it  aboriginally  by  communication  with  God. 
This  Leibnizian  doctrine  of  Law  by  pre-established  harmony 
is  an  extreme  example  of  the  doctrine  of  imposition,  capable 
in  some  ways  of  being  mitigated  by  the  notion  of  the  imman¬ 
ence  of  God.  But  no  reason  can  be  given  why  the  supreme 
monad,  God,  is  exempted  for  the  common  fate  of  isolation. 
Monads,  according  to  this  doctrine,  are  windowless  for  each 
other.  Why  have  they  windows  towards  God,  and  Why  has 
God  windows  towards  them? 

It  is  interesting  to  enquire  how  the  ancient  cosmologists — 
Plato  and  Lucretius — evaded  this  difficulty. 

In  the  first  place  it  must  be  acknowledged  that  in  Plato’s 
Dialogues  many  unguarded  statements,  and  many  trains  of 
thought,  can  be  found  which  in  themselves  would  lead 
straight  to  the  modern  difficulty.  In  fact,  in  this  respect 
Aristotle’s  Logic  can  be  found  in  germ  in  Plato.  But  in  the 
ancient  cosmologies,  including  Aristotle’s  own  doctrine  of 
matter,  another  train  of  thought  can  be  found,  which  is  in 
fact  an  emphatic  doctrine  of  real  communication.  Plato’s 
doctrine  of  the  real  Receptacle  [uttoSo^  and  x°Va]  ?  and 
Epicurus’  doctrine  of  the  real  Void  [to  Kevov ],  differ  in 
some  details.  But  both  doctrines  are  emphatic  assertions  of  a 
real  communication  between  ultimate  realities.  This  com¬ 
munication  is  not  accidental.  It  is  part  of  the  essential  nature 
of  each  physical  actuality  that  it  is  itself  an  element  quali¬ 
fying  the  Receptacle,  and  that  the  qualifications  of  the  Re¬ 
ceptacle  enter  into  its  own  nature.  In  itself,  with  the  various 
actualities  abstracted  from  it,  the  Receptacle  participates  in 
no  forms,  according  to  Plato.  But  he  designates  it  as  The 
foster-mother  of  all  becoming  ’.  Later  in  the  same  Dialogue  he 


172 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


calls  it  ca  natural  matrix  for  all  things’.  It  receives  its  forms 
by  reason  of  its  inclusion  of  actualities,  and  in  a  way  not  to 
be  abstracted  from  those  actualities.  The  Receptacle,  as  dis¬ 
cussed  in  the  Timaeus ,  is  the  way  in  which  Plato  conceived 
the  many  actualities  of  the  physical  world  as  components  in 
each  other’s  natures.  It  is  the  doctrine  of  the  immanence  of 
Law,  derived  from  the  mutual  immanence  of  actualities.  It  is 
Plato’s  doctrine  of  the  medium  of  intercommunication.1 

Thus  finally  we  can  understand  that  the  Receptacle,  ac¬ 
cording  to  Plato,  the  Void,  according  to  Lucretius,  and  God, 
according  to  Leibniz,  play  the  same  part  in  cosmological 
theory.  Also  in  his  general  scholium,  Newton  definitely  con¬ 
nects  the  Lucretian  Void  with  the  Leibnizian  God.  For  he 
calls  Empty  space  the  ‘sensorium  of  God’.  We  have  here  a 
formidable  display  of  men  of  diverse  genius,  Plato  and 
Aristotle,  Epicurus  and  Lucretius,  Newton  and  Leibniz. 
The  modern  cosmologies  are  all  detailed  variations  of  the 
great  types  which  we  have  discussed.  They  revolve  round 
the  diverse  notions  of  Law,  the  diverse  notions  of  the  com¬ 
munication  between  real  individuals,  the  diverse  notions  of 
the  mediating  basis  in  virtue  of  which  such  communication 
is  attained.  One  other  problem,  derivative  from  these  general 
principles,  but  of  major  importance  for  human  life  is  the 
doctrine  of  the  status  of  the  spirit  of  man  in  the  scheme  of 
things. 

This  more  special  problem  of  cosmological  theory  was  the 
theme  of  the  former  part  of  this  book.  Its  important  in- 

1  On  this  topic,  it  is  interesting  to  note  the  extreme  difficulty  of  determining, 
whether  or  no  Descartes  held  to  the  doctrine  of  one  individual  corporeal  substance 
with  many  modal  diversities  of  motion,  or  to  the  doctrine  of  many  diverse  indi¬ 
vidual  coporeal  substances  essentially  connected  by  extensive  relations.  Almost 
all  his  phrases  are  ambiguous  on  this  point,  with  the  exception  of  Principle  LX, 
Part  1,  of  his  Principles  of  Philosophy.  Here  he  unambiguously  speaks  of  every 
corporeal  substance ,  thus — at  least  in  this  place — deciding  for  a  multiplicity  of  such 
substances.  Either  alternative  leads  him  into  difficulties. 


COSMOLOGIES 


*73 


fluence  upon  the  course  of  human  history  was  illustrated. 
But  it  must  not  be  thought  that  the  more  general  problem 
of  cosmology  lies  outside  the  scope  of  practical  interest.  The 
directions  of  human  activities  in  various  epochs,  and  the 
clashings  of  such  directions  in  the  same  epoch,  are  the 
outcome  of  rough  and  ready  solutions  of  the  problem  of 
cosmology,  popularized  throughout  masses  of  mankind. 
Millions  of  men  have  marched  to  battle  fiercely  nerved  by 
intense  faith  in  Law  imposed  by  the  will  of  inflexible  Allah, 
Law  sharing  out  to  each  human  his  inevitable  fate,  Law 
sharing  out  to  each  faithful  Mahometan  either  victory,  or 
death  and  Paradise.  Millions  of  Buddhists  have  shunned  the 
intrinsic  evils  of  such  fierce  Mahometan  emotion  relying  on 
the  impersonal  immanence  of  Law,  made  clear  to  them  by 
the  doctrines  of  the  Buddha.  Millions  of  humans  have  shaped 
their  lives  according  to  the  compromise  between  these  two 
doctrines  due  to  the  Platonism  of  Christianity. 

Finally,  the  restless  modern  search  for  increased  ac¬ 
curacy  of  observation  and  for  increased  detailed  explanation 
is  based  upon  unquestioning  faith  in  the  reign  of  Law. 
Apart  from  such  faith,  the  enterprise  of  science  is  foolish, 
hopeless. 

Section  VIII.  The  most  recent  of  the  four  doctrines  of 
the  Laws  of  Nature  still  remains  for  discussion — -The  Doc¬ 
trine  of  Conventional  Interpretation.  This  doctrine  certainly 
expresses  the  procedure  by  which  free  speculation  passes 
into  an  interpretation  of  Nature.  We  elaborate  a  system  of 
ideas,  in  detachment  from  any  direct,  detailed  observation  of 
matter  of  fact.  For  example,  such  detachment  from  detailed 
observation  seems,  on  the  surface,  to  be  characteristic  of 
Plato’s  Dialogues.  They  do  not  bear  the  aspect  of  patient  in¬ 
duction  from  the  facts.  They  are  dominated  by  speculation 
and  dialectics.  Also  Mathematics  has  developed,  especially  in 


174 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


recent  years,  by  a  speculative  interest  in  types  of  order, 
without  any  determination  of  particular  entities  illustrative 
of  those  types.  But  Nature  has  subsequently  been  interpreted 
in  terms  of  such  mathematical  laws.  The  conclusion  seems  to 
be,  that  Nature  is  patient  of  interpretation  in  terms  of  Laws 
which  happen  to  interest  us. 

Yet  another  consideration  supports  this  point  of  view. 
There  is  an  element  of  arbitrary  choice  in  our  interpretation 
of  the  geometrical  character  of  the  physical  world.  Mathe¬ 
maticians  have  proved  that  any  region  which  exemplifies 
metrical  geometry  of  the  Euclidean  type,  also  exemplifies 
metrical  geometry  of  the  Elliptic  type,  and  also  metrical 
geometry  of  the  Hyperbolic  type.  Further,  if  we  start  with 
any  one  of  the  three  types,  we  can  prove  that  both  the  re¬ 
maining  types  are  severally  exemplified  in  the  same  subject- 
matter. 

But  it  is  an  entire  misconception,  which  has  been  enter¬ 
tained  even  by  some  mathematicians,  to  deduce  that  this 
mathematical  truth  has  any  bearing  upon  the  notion  of  the 
Laws  of  Nature  as  arbitrary  convention.  For  in  the  three 
metrical  geometries  as  applying  to  the  same  subject-matter, 
the  definitions  of  distance  are  different.  Thus  mathematicians 
have  proved  that  if  there  be  a  metrical  geometry  of  the 
Euclidean  type,  then  with  another  definition  of  distance, 
and  hence  with  another  definition  of  congruence,  there  is  a 
metrical  geometry  of  the  Elliptic  type  also  applying  to  the 
same  subject-matter.  There  are  three  diverse  systems  of 
relationship  within  the  subject-matter,  so  related  that  if  one 
be  present  then  the  others  are  present.  Also,  of  course,  the 
description  of  one  set  of  relationships  can  be  achieved,  though 
very  clumsily,  in  terms  of  any  one  of  the  other  two  sets. 
There  is  nothing  ‘conventional’  in  this,  except  the  obvious 
fact  that  we  can  direct  attention  to  any  selected  group 


COSMOLOGIES 


175 

of  facts.  Of  course  the  question  remains,  What  set  of  geo¬ 
metrical  relationships  are  we  referring  to,  when  we  say  that 
we  have  walked  thirty  miles  and  are  tired?  Are  they  thirty 
Euclidean  miles,  or  thirty  Elliptic  miles,  or  thirty  Hyperbolic 
miles?  Here  the  standard  of  reference  can  be  the  same  in 
both  cases,  namely,  the  interval  between  two  assigned  marks 
fixed  securely  in  Washington,  D.C. 

Again  there  is  yet  another  geometrical  ambiguity.  For 
keeping  to  the  same  type  of  geometry — Euclidean,  say,  but 
either  of  the  other  two  would  serve  equally  well — keeping 
to  Euclidean  geometry,  there  are  an  infinite  number  of 
different  alternative  ways  of  defining  distance  so  as  to 
produce  alternative  systems  of  Euclidean  geometry.  Thus 
granting  that  one  Euclidean  system  holds,  an  infinite  number 
of  other  Euclidean  systems  also  hold.  Thus  when  a  friend  says 
that  he  has  motored  a  hundred  miles  to  see  us,  we  should 
enquire  what  particular  geometrical  system  of  metrics  he 
has  adopted.  And  he  had  not  settled  the  question  by  merely 
answering  Euclidean.  Also  the  differences  are  not  neces¬ 
sarily  slight.  A  thousand  miles  between  particular  towns  on 
one  system  may  be  two  miles  on  another  system.  It  follows 
that  every  legislature  should  anxiously  settle  the  metric  system 
that  it  means  to  adopt.  This  question  has  nothing  to  do 
with  the  difference  between  miles  and  kilometres,  or  with 
mere  imperfections  of  measurement.  That  is  a  much  slighter 
point. 

It  is  fairly  obvious  that,  apart  from  minor  inaccuracies  of 
perception,  we  all  do  in  fact  adopt  the  same  system.  It  is 
a  fact  of  nature  that  a  distance  of  thirty  miles  is  a  long 
walk  for  anyone.  There  is  no  convention  about  that.  Thus 
the  appeal  to  geometry  can  be  dismissed  when  we  are  dis¬ 
cussing  the  question  of  the  conventionality  of  the  Laws  of 
Nature. 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


176 

Section  IX.  But  the  analogy  of  Geometry  suggests  an 
important  reflection.  It  is  well  known  that  Geometry  can 
be  developed  without  any  reference  to  measurement — and 
thus  without  any  reference  to  distance,  and  without  any 
reference  to  numerical  co-ordinates  for  the  indication  of 
points.  Geometry,  developed  in  this  fashion,  has  been  termed 
‘ Non-metrical  Projective  Geometry’.  Elsewhere1 2  I  have 
termed  it  ‘the  science  of  cross-classification’.  Aristotle’s 
science  of  classification  into  genera,  and  species,  and  sub¬ 
species,  is  the  science  of  mutually  exclusive  classification.  It 
develops  Plato’s  suggestion  of  a  science  of ‘Division’. 

Projective  Geometry  is  only  one  example  of  a  science  of 
cross-classification.  Other  such  sciences  have  not  been  de¬ 
veloped,  partly  because  no  obvious  applications  have  obtruded 
themselves,  and  partly  because  the  abstract  interest  of  such 
sciences  have  not  engaged  the  interest  of  any  large  group 
of  mathematicians.  For  example,  in  Principia  Mathematical 
Section  93,  ‘On  the  Inductive  Analysis  of  the  Field  of  a 
Relation’,  is  a  suggestion  for  another  science  of  that  type. 
Indeed,  the  whole  of  Vol.  1  is  devoted  to  the  initiation  of 
non-numerical  quasi-geometrical  sciences,  together  with  a 
technique  for  their  elaboration.  The  subsequent  parts  of  the 
book  specialize  on  those  more  special  mathematical  sciences 
which  involve  number  and  quantity. 

This  reference  to  Principia  Mathematica  has  been  made  to 
remind  ourselves  that  numerical  relations  derived  from 
measurements  constitute  the  subject-matter  of  a  very  special 
development  of  mathematics.  This  development  has  as  yet 
constituted  the  only  really  important  part  of  mathematics, 
except  for  the  impressive  disclosure  of  the  extent  to  which 

1  The  Axioms  of  Projective  Geometry,  Cambridge  Tracts  in  Mathematics,  No.  4, 
Cambridge  University  Press,  1906.  The  reference  is  to  Chapter  1,  Section  3. 

2  Cambridge  University  Press,  1910. 


COSMOLOGIES  1 77 

ordinary  Geometry  is  independent  of  measurement  and 
number. 

It  follows  that  there  are  an  indefinite  number  of  purely 
abstract  sciences,  with  their  laws,  their  regularities,  and  their 
complexities  of  theorems — all  as  yet  undeveloped.  We  can 
hardly  avoid  the  conclusion  that  Nature  in  her  procedures 
illustrates  many  such  sciences.  We  are  blind  to  such  illustra¬ 
tion  because  we  are  ignorant  of  the  type  of  regularities  to  look 
for.  In  such  cases,  we  may  dimly  sense  a  sort  of  familiarity 
attached  to  novel  circumstances,  without  any  notion  how  to 
proceed  in  the  analysis  of  the  vague  feeling. 

There  is  thus  a  certain  amount  of  convention  as  to  the 
emergence  into  human  consciousness  of  sorts  of  Laws  of 
Nature.  The  order  of  emergence  depends  upon  the  abstract 
sciences  which  civilized  mankind  have  in  fact  chosen  to 
develop. 

But  such  ‘convention’  should  not  be  twisted  to  mean  that 
any  facts  of  nature  can  be  interpreted  as  illustrating  any  laws 
that  we  like  to  assign. 

Section  X.  This  discussion  of  the  possible  variety  of  types 
of  Laws  of  Nature  draws  attention  to  a  three-fold  distinction 
which  it  is  important  to  keep  in  mind  during  philosophic 
discussion.  There  are:  (i)  our  direct  intuitions  which  we 
enjoy  prior  to  all  verbalization:  (ii)  our  literary  modes  of 
verbal  expression  of  such  intuitions,  together  with  the  dialectic 
deductions  from  such  verbal  formulae:  (iii)  the  set  of  purely 
deductive  sciences,  which  have  been  developed  so  that  the 
network  of  possible  relations  with  which  they  deal  are  familiar 
in  civilized  consciousness. 

The  sciences  under  the  heading  (iii)  direct  attention  for 
the  exploration  of  the  recesses  of  experience,  and  also  assist 
in  providing  the  verbal  formulae  belonging  to  the  heading 
(ii).  The  chief  danger  in  philosophy  is  that  the  dialectic 


wi 


12 


178  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

deductions  from  inadequate  formulae  should  exclude  direct 
intuitions  from  explicit  attentions.  In  fact  the  abstract 
sciences  tend  to  correct  the  evil  effects  of  the  inadequacy  of 
language,  and  the  consequent  dangers  of  a  logic  which  pre¬ 
supposes  linguistic  adequacy. 


CHAPTER  IX 


SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY 

Section  I.  In  one  sense,  Science  and  Philosophy  are 
merely  different  aspects  of  one  great  enterprise  of  the 
human  mind.  We  will  dwell  upon  their  co-operation  in 
the  task  of  raising  humanity  above  the  general  level  of 
animal  life.  At  this  low,  animal  level,  flashes  of  aesthetic 
insight,  of  technological  attainment,  of  sociological  organiza¬ 
tion,  of  affectionate  feeling,  display  themselves.  Nightingales, 
beavers,  ants,  the  kindly  nurture  of  the  young,  all  witness 
to  the  existence  of  this  level  of  life  in  the  animal  world. 
Of  course  all  these  modes  of  functioning  are  carried  to 
an  immeasurably  higher  level  among  mankind.  In  human 
beings  these  various  modes  of  functioning  exhibit  more 
variety  of  adaptation  to  special  circumstances,  they  are  more 
complex,  and  they  are  more  interwoven  with  each  other. 
But  without  question,  among  animals  they  are  there,  plainly 
demonstrated  to  our  observation. 

Among  living  things  on  this  planet,  so  far  as  direct  evidence 
reaches,  Science  and  Philosophy  belong  to  men  alone.  They 
are  both  concerned  with  the  understanding  of  individual 
facts  as  illustrations  of  general  principles.  The  principles  are 
understood  in  the  abstract,  and  the  facts  are  understood  in 
respect  to  their  embodiment  of  the  principles. 

For  example,  animals  seem  quite  familiar  with  the  habit 
of  bodies  to  fall  down.  They  show  no  surprise  at  such  an 
occurrence,  and  they  often  knock  things  over.  But  quite 


12-2 


i8o 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


early  in  the  history  of  modern  European  science  we  find 
Aristotle  formulating  the  law  that  there  is  a  tendency  for 
material  bodies  to  seek  the  centre  of  the  Earth.  This  law 
was  almost  certainly  not  a  discovery  of  Aristotle’s.  It  was 
a  reigning  commonplace  of  Greek  thought,  although  not 
accepted  unanimously.  But  it  is  plainly  set  forth  in  his 
writings,  and  it  is  beside  our  point  to  indulge  further  in 
archaeological  conjectures.  This  scientific  law  seems  rather 
antiquated  to  us,  and  in  fact  not  quite  true.  It  is  over  special, 
and  yet  requires  severe  limitation  before  the  quantitative 
measurements  bear  out  its  statements  with  any  exactness.  We 
shall  find  that  the  subsequent  history  of  this  law  and  of  its 
successive  modifications  throws  great  light  upon  the  relative 
functions  of  Science  and  Philosophy. 

But  let  us  first  examine  Aristotle’s  Law,  which  is  one  of 
the  earlier  doctrines  of  that  Western  Science  whose  history 
stretches  from  Thales  of  Miletus,  alive  at  the  date  600  b.c., 
to  the  present  day.  Roughly  speaking,  it  is  a  history  of  about 
twenty-five  hundred  years.  Of  course  there  were  anticipa¬ 
tions  in  Egypt,  Mesopotamia,  India,  and  China.  But  modern 
science,  urged  onward  by  the  curiosity  of  the  human  spirit, 
permeated  with  criticism,  and  divorced  from  hereditary 
superstitions,  had  its  birth  with  the  Greeks;  and  among  the 
Greeks  Thales  was  the  earliest  exponent  known  to  us. 

In  this  general  characterization  science  and  philosophy 
are  not  discriminated.  But  the  word  ‘curiosity’  somewhat 
trivializes  that  inward  motive  which  has  driven  men.  In  the 
greater  sense,  in  which  it  is  here  used,  ‘curiosity’  means  the 
craving  of  reason  that  the  facts  discriminated  in  experience 
be  understood.  It  means  the  refusal  to  be  satisfied  with  the 
bare  welter  of  fact,  or  even  with  the  bare  habit  of  routine. 
The  first  step  in  science  and  philosophy  has  been  made 
when  it  is  grasped  that  every  routine  exemplifies  a  principle 


SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY  1 8 1 

which  is  capable  of  statement  in  abstraction  from  its  par¬ 
ticular  exemplifications.  The  curiosity,  which  is  the  gadfly 
driving  civilization  from  its  ancient  safeties,  is  this  desire  to 
state  the  principles  in  their  abstraction.  In  this  curiosity 
there  is  a  ruthless  element  which  in  the  end  disturbs.  We 
are  American,  or  French,  or  English;  and  we  love  our  modes 
of  life,  with  their  beauties  and  tendernesses.  But  curiosity 
drives  us  to  an  attempt  to  define  civilization;  and  in  this 
generalization  we  soon  find  that  we  have  lost  our  beloved 
America,  our  beloved  France,  and  our  beloved  England. 
The  generality  stands  with  a  cold  impartiality,  where  our 
affections  cling  to  one  or  other  of  the  particulars. 

An  examination  of  Aristotle’s  Law  of  Gravitation  exem¬ 
plifies  this  abstractive  process  inherent  in  science.  The  Law 
involves  a  classification  of  the  things  around  us.  There  are 
the  heavy  bodies  with  the  property  of  tending  downwards, 
and  there  are  the  other  elements  such  as  flames,  with  the 
intrinsic  nature  that  they  tend  upwards  though  they  are 
component  things  on  the  earth’s  surface.  These  upward 
moving  things  tend  to  their  proper  place  which  is  the 
heavens.  The  stars  and  planets  form  yet  a  third  class  of 
things  which  by  their  own  nature  are  in  the  heavens,  things 
which  are  ingenerable  and  incorruptible.  In  this  classification 
of  the  components  of  physical  nature  yet  a  fourth  component 
remains  over,  in  its  character  unique  and  thus  the  only 
member  of  its  class.  This  component  is  the  Earth,  the  centre 
of  the  Universe,  by  reference  to  which  all  these  other  types 
of  being  are  defined. 

In  this  classification  of  the  various  components  of 
physical  nature  Aristotle  has  given  to  Science  and  Philo¬ 
sophy  its  first  sweeping  analysis  of  the  facts  of  physical 
nature.  You  will  notice  that  the  classification  proceeds 
entirely  by  reference  to  function,  quite  in  the  modern 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


l82 

spirit.  In  the  place  of  an  uninterpreted  swamp,  pestilential 
with  mystery  and  magic,  he  sets  before  our  understanding 
a  majestic,  co-ordinated  scheme,  lucid  to  the  understanding 
and  based  upon  the  obvious,  persistent  facts  of  our  ex¬ 
perience.  In  the  generality  of  its  scope,  it  is  equally  philo¬ 
sophic  and  scientific,  and  later  on  it  provided  the  physical 
background  for  the  Christian  scheme  of  salvation.  Its 
overthrow,  eighteen  hundred  years  later,  was  resisted  equally 
by  Luther  and  the  Church  of  Rome.  As  an  example 
of  a  majestic  inductive  generalization,  appealing  to  the 
obvious  facts,  and  neglecting  the  welter  of  minor  differences, 
Aristotle’s  general  conception  of  the  physical  universe  remains 
unsurpassed.  For  every  feature  in  it,  there  is  an  appeal  to 
observation;  and  for  every  observation  to  which  appeal  is 
made,  there  is  the  possibility  of  its  indefinite  repetition.  With 
Aristotle  and  Epicurus,  the  science  of  modern  civilization 
reached  adolescence. 

Section  II.  There  is  a  clear-cut  obviousness  about  Aristotle’s 
doctrines  which  is  entirely  lacking  to  Plato’s  cosmology.  Of 
course  neither  Plato,  nor  Aristotle,  originated  his  own  par¬ 
ticular  line  of  thought.  There  was  a  history  behind  them 
of  three  or  four  generations  of  thinkers,  back  to  the  dim 
figures  of  Thales  and  Pythagoras,  and  even  beyond  them. 
Also  Aristotle  worked  for  twenty  years  in  the  Academy  of 
Plato,  and  derived  ideas  from  that  active,  speculative  group 
of  thinkers,  to  whom  the  modern  world  owes  its  speculation, 
its  criticism,  its  deductive  and  inductive  sciences,  and  the 
civilization  of  its  religious  concepts.  They  were  the  narrow 
channel  through  which  passed  the  confused  traditions  of 
Egypt,  Mesopotamia,  Syria,  and  of  the  sea-borne  Greek  civili¬ 
zation.  From  this  Academy  and  its  Aristotelian  off-shoot, 
there  emerged  the  various  lines  of  thought  which  the  sub¬ 
sequent  schools  of  Alexandria  turned  into  the  .first  phase  of 


SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY  183 

modern  science,  natural  and  humane.  Undoubtedly  the 
world  then  lost  picturesqueness.  For  prophets  were  super¬ 
seded  by  professors.  In  other  words,  as  the  movement  has 
penetrated  into  habits  of  thought,  intuitive  conviction  has 
wilted  in  the  face  of  criticism.  But  amid  all  the  limitations 
of  humanity,  wandering  dazed  in  the  abundant  universe, 
knowledge  has  re-conditioned  human  life,  and  has  made  pos¬ 
sible  that  virtue  which  requires  such  measure  of  intellectual 
analysis. 

Between  them,  Plato  and  Aristotle  succeed  in  illustrating 
the  chief  connections  between  science  and  philosophy.  The 
emphasis  of  science  is  upon  observation  of  particular  occur¬ 
rences,  and  upon  inductive  generalizations,  issuing  in  wide 
classifications  of  things  according  to  their  modes  of  func¬ 
tioning,  in  other  words  according  to  the  laws  of  nature 
which  they  illustrate.  The  emphasis  of  philosophy  is  upon 
generalizations  which  almost  fail  to  classify  by  reason  of 
their  universal  application.  For  example,  all  things  are  in¬ 
volved  in  the  creative  advance  of  the  Universe,  that  is,  in 
the  general  temporality  which  affects  all  things,  even  if  at 
all  times  they  remain  self-identical.  Thus  the  consideration 
of  time  does  not  lead  to  classification  in  the  same  direct  way 
in  which  the  consideration  of  weight  led  Aristotle  to  his 
four-fold  classification. 

Now  Plato  had  already  emphasized  the  importance  of  this 
Aristotelian  notion  of  classification,  that  is  to  say,  of ‘division’ 
as  he  called  it.  Perhaps  indeed  he  invented  the  method. 
It  would  have  been  quite  in  accordance  with  his  clear-cut 
intellectual  subtlety  to  have  done  so.  We  find  in  his  dialogues 
the  first  explicit  formulations  of  the  science  of  Logic.  But 
his  applications  of  the  method  are  feeble  in  the  extreme, 
from  the  point  of  view  of  the  advancement  of  natural 
science.  Whereas  Aristotle  in  his  life’s  work  seized  upon 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


184 

the  general  notion  of  classification,  he  gave  a  masterly 
analysis  of  the  complexities  inherent  in  the  mutual  relation 
of  classes.  He  also  applied  his  theoretical  doctrine  to  the 
immense  material  to  be  collected  by  direct  observation  in 
the  fields  of  zoology,  physics,  sociology.  Indeed,  we  must 
trace  to  him  nearly  all  our  special  sciences,  both  the  natural 
sciences,  and  those  concerning  the  activities  of  the  spirit  of 
mankind.  He  is  the  origin  of  the  striving  towards  an  accurate 
analysis  of  each  given  situation  which  in  the  end  has  created 
modern  European  Science.  We  can  see  in  the  labours  of  his 
life  the  first  clear  example  of  a  philosophic  intuition  passing 
into  a  scientific  method. 

Section  III.  This  transition  from  philosophic  intuitions  to 
scientific  methods  is  in  fact  the  whole  topic  of  this  chapter. 
A  philosophic  system,  viewed  as  an  attempt  to  co-ordinate 
all  such  intuitions,  is  rarely  of  any  direct  importance  for 
particular  sciences.  Each  such  science  in  tracing  its  ideas 
backward  to  their  basic  notions  stops  at  a  half-way  house.  It 
finds  a  resting  place  amid  notions  which  for  its  immediate 
purposes  and  for  its  immediate  methods  it  need  not  analyse 
any  further.  These  basic  notions  are  a  specialization  from 
the  philosophic  intuitions  which  form  the  background  of 
the  civilized  thought  of  the  epoch  in  question.  They  are 
intuitions  which,  apart  from  their  use  in  science,  ordinary 
language  rarely  expresses  in  any  defined  accuracy,  but  habit¬ 
ually  presupposes  in  its  current  words  and  expressions.  For 
example,  the  words  Tables’,  ‘chairs’,  ‘rocks’,  presuppose  the 
scientific  notion  of  material  bodies,  which  has  governed 
natural  science  from  the  seventeenth  century  to  the  end  of 
the  nineteenth. 

But,  even  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  special  sciences, 
philosophic  systems,  with  their  ambitious  aims  at  full  com¬ 
prehensiveness,  are  not  useless.  They  are  the  way  in  which 


SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY  185 

the  human  spirit  cultivates  its  deeper  intuitions.  Such 
systems  give  life  and  motion  to  detached  thoughts.  Apart 
from  these  efforts  at  co-ordination,  detached  thoughts  would 
flash  out  in  idle  moments,  illuminate  a  passing  phase  of 
reflection,  and  would  then  perish  and  be  forgotten.  The 
scope  of  an  intuition  can  only  be  defined  by  its  co-ordination 
with  other  notions  of  equal  generality.  Even  the  discordance 
of  competing  philosophic  systems  is  a  factor  essential  for 
progress.  The  history  of  European  thought,  even  to  the 
present  day,  has  been  tainted  by  a  fatal  misunderstanding. 
It  may  be  termed  The  Dogmatic  Fallacy.  The  error  consists 
in  the  persuasion  that  we  are  capable  of  producing  notions 
which  are  adequately  defined  in  respect  to  the  complexity  of 
relationship  required  for  their  illustration  in  the  real  world. 
Canst  thou  by  searching  describe  the  Universe?  Except  per¬ 
haps  for  the  simpler  notions  of  arithmetic,  even  our  more 
familiar  ideas,  seemingly  obvious,  are  infected  with  this  in¬ 
curable  vagueness.  Our  right  understanding  of  the  methods 
of  intellectual  progress  depends  on  keeping  in  mind  this 
characteristic  of  our  thoughts.  The  notions  employed  in 
every  systematic  topic  require  enlightenment  from  the  per¬ 
spective  of  every  standpoint.  They  must  be  criticized  from 
the  standpoint  of  their  own  internal  consistency  within  that 
topic,  and  from  the  standpoint  of  other  topics  of  analogous 
generality,  and  from  the  standpoint  of  so-called  philosophic 
topics  with  a  wider  range.  During  the  mediaeval  epoch  in 
Europe,  the  theologians  were  the  chief  sinners  in  respect  to 
dogmatic  finality.  During  the  last  three  centuries,  their  bad 
pre-eminence  in  this  habit  passed  to  the  men  of  science.  Our 
task  is  to  understand  how  in  fact  the  human  mind  can  suc¬ 
cessfully  set  to  work  for  the  gradual  definition  of  its  habitual 
ideas.  It  is  a  step  by  step  process,  achieving  no  triumphs  of 
finality.  We  cannot  produce  that  final  adjustment  of  well- 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


1 86 

defined  generalities  which  constitute  a  complete  metaphysics.  • 
But  we  can  produce  a  variety  of  partial  systems  of  limited 
generality.  The  concordance  of  ideas  within  any  one  such 
system  shows  the  scope  and  virility  of  the  basic  notions  of 
that  scheme  of  thought.  Also  the  discordance  of  system 
with  system,  and  success  of  each  system  as  a  partial  mode  of 
illumination,  warns  us  of  the  limitations  within  which  our 
intuitions  are  hedged.  These  undiscovered  limitations  are  the 
topics  for  philosophic  research. 

This  doctrine  of  the  limitations  to  which  our  best  ideas  are 
subject  is  illustrated  by  that  very  notion  of  material  bodies 
which  has  just  been  mentioned.  That  notion  is  so  obvious 
that  it  has  haunted  language  so  far  as  we  can  trace  history 
backwards.  Finally  in  the  seventeenth  century  it  was  given 
a  new  precision  for  the  purposes  of  physical  science.  Also 
physical  science,  thus  re-conditioned,  proved  an  overwhelming 
success  for  three  centuries.  It  has  transformed  thought,  and 
has  transformed  the  physical  activities  of  mankind.  It  seemed 
that  at  last  mankind  had  achieved  the  fundamental  notion 
for  all  practical  purposes,  and  that  beyond  it  in  the  way 
of  generality  there  lay  mere  aimless  speculation.  But  in 
the  twentieth  century  this  great  notion,  as  shaped  for  use 
by  Galileo  and  Newton,  has  completely  collapsed  so  far  as 
concerns  its  use  as  a  fundamental  notion  for  physical  science. 
In  the  modern  science,  it  is  a  limited  notion  confined  to 
special  purposes. 

This  collapse  of  nineteenth-century  dogmatism  is  a  warn¬ 
ing  that  the  special  sciences  require  that  the  imaginations 
of  men  be  stored  with  imaginative  possibilities  as  yet  un¬ 
utilized  in  the  service  of  scientific  explanation.  The  nearest 
analogy  is  to  be  seen  in  the  history  of  some  species  of  animal, 
or  plant,  or  microbe,  which  lurks  for  ages  as  an  obscure 


SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY  '  1 87 

by-product  of  nature  in  some  lonely  jungle,  or  morass,  or 
island.  Then  by  some  trick  of  circumstance  it  escapes  into 
the  outer  world  and  transforms  a  civilization,  or  destroys  an 
empire  or  the  forests  of  a  continent.  Such  is  the  potential 
power  of  the  ideas  which  live  in  the  various  systems  of 
philosophy. 

Of  course  in  this  action,  and  reaction,  between  science  and 
philosophy  either  helps  the  other.  It  is  the  task  of  philo¬ 
sophy  to  work  at  the  concordance  of  ideas  conceived  as 
illustrated  in  the  concrete  facts  of  the  real  world.  It  seeks 
those  generalities  which  characterize  the  complete  reality 
of  fact,  and  apart  from  which  any  fact  must  sink  into  an 
abstraction.  But  science  makes  the  abstraction,  and  is  content 
to  understand  the  complete  fact  in  respect  to  only  some 
of  its  essential  aspects.  Science  and  Philosophy  mutually 
criticize  each  other,  and  provide  imaginative  material  for 
each  other.  A  philosophic  system  should  present  an  elucida¬ 
tion  of  concrete  fact  from  which  the  sciences  abstract.  Also 
the  sciences  should  find  their  principles  in  the  concrete  facts 
which  a  philosophic  system  presents.  The  history  of  thought 
is  the  story  of  the  measure  of  failure  and  success  in  this  joint 
enterprise. 

Section  IV.  Plato’s  contribution  to  the  basic  notions  con¬ 
necting  Science  and  Philosophy,  as  finally  settled  in  the  later 
portion  of  his  life,  has  virtues  entirely  different  from  that  of 
Aristotle,  although  of  equal  use  for  the  progress  of  thought. 
It  is  to  be  found  by  reading  together  the  Theaetetus ,  the 
Sophist ,  the  Timaeus ,  and  the  fifth  and  tenth  books  of  the 
Laws',  and  then  by  recurrence  to  his  earlier  work,  the 
Symposium.  He  is  never  entirely  self-consistent,  and  rarely  ex¬ 
plicit  and  devoid  of  ambiguity.  He  feels  the  difficulties,  and 
expresses  his  perplexities.  No  one  could  be  perplexed  over 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


1 88 

Aristotle’s  classifications;  whereas  Plato  moves  about  amid 
a  fragmentary  system  like  a  man  dazed  by  his  own  pene¬ 
tration. 

A  few  main  doctrines  stand  out  and  they  are  of  priceless 
importance  for  science,  in  the  largest  sense  of  that  term.  As 
to  their  co-ordination  into  a  system,  he  is  undogmatic  and 
can  only  tell  ‘the  most  likely  tale’.  Indeed,  in  his  seventh 
Epistle1  he  denounces  the  notion  that  a  final  system  can  be 
verbally  expressed.  His  later  thought  circles  round  the  inter¬ 
weaving  of  seven  main  notions  namely,  The  Ideas,  The 
Physical  Elements,  The  Psyche,  The  Eros,  The  Harmony, 
The  Mathematical  Relations,  The  Receptacle.  These  notions 
are  as  important  for  us  now,  as  they  were  then  at  the  dawn 
of  the  modern  world,  when  civilizations  of  the  old  type 
were  dying.  From  their  point  of  view  the  Athenians  were 
right  to  condemn  Socrates.  After  the  coalescence  of  Greek 
and  Semitic  thought  the  old  order  of  life  was  doomed. 
Western  Civilization  acquired  a  new  intellectuality,  clarified, 
humanized,  moralized. 

Considering  the  Ideas  by  themselves,  Plato  points  out  that 
any  selections  are  either  compatible  for  joint  exemplification, 
or  are  incompatible.  It  thus  follows,  as  he  notes,  that  the 
determinations  of  compatibilities  and  incompatibilities  are 
the  key  to  coherent  thought,  and  to  the  understanding  of  the 
world  in  its  function  as  the  theatre  for  the  temporal  realization 
of  ideas.  The  Aristotelian  Logic  is  only  a  specialized  derivative 
from  this  general  notion. 

Plato  then  passes  on  to  the  agency  whereby  ideas  obtain 
efficiency  in  the  creative  advance.  As  he  conceives  them  in 
abstraction,  he  finds  ideas  to  be  static,  frozen,  and  lifeless. 
They  obtain  ‘life  and  motion’  by  their  entertainment  in  a 
living  intelligence.  Such  a  living  intelligence  with  its  ‘gaze 

1  Cf.  341,  G. 


SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY  189 

fixed  upon  ideas’  was  what  Plato  termed  a  Psyche,  a  word 
we  can  translate  as  ‘soul’.  We  must,  however,  be  careful  to 
divest  the  associations  of  the  English  word  from  the  accretions 
due  to  centuries  of  Christianity.  He  conceives  of  a  basic 
Psyche  whose  active  grasp  of  ideas  conditions  impartially 
the  whole  process  of  the  Universe.  This  is  the  Supreme 
Craftsman,  on  whom  depends  that  degree  of  orderliness 
which  the  world  exhibits.  There  is  a  perfection  in  this  Psyche, 
which  Plato  finds  out  of  his  power  to  explain.  There  are 
also  finite  souls  of  varying  grades,  including  human  souls, 
all  playing  their  part  in  conditioning  nature  by  the  inherent 
persuasiveness  of  ideas. 

But  the  notion  of  mere  knowledge,  that  is  to  say,  of  mere 
understanding,  is  quite  alien  to  Plato’s  thought.  The  age 
of  professors  had  not  yet  arrived.  In  his  view,  the  enter¬ 
tainment  of  ideas  is  intrinsically  associated  with  an  inward 
ferment,  an  activity  of  subjective  feeling,  which  is  at  once 
immediate  enjoyment,  and  also  an  appetition  which  melts 
into  action.  This  is  Plato’s  Eros,  which  he  sublimates  into 
the  notion  of  the  soul  in  the  enjoyment  of  its  creative 
function,  arising  from  its  entertainment  of  ideas.  The  word 
Eros  means  ‘Love’,  and  in  the  Symposium  Plato  gradually 
elicits  his  final  conception  of  the  urge  towards  ideal  per¬ 
fection.  It  is  obvious  that  he  should  have  written  a  com¬ 
panion  dialogue  which  might  have  been  named  The 
Furies,  dwelling  on  the  horrors  lurking  within  imperfect 
realization. 

Plato,  although  he  neglected  to  write  this  missing  dia¬ 
logue,  did  not  overlook  the  confusion  and  disorder  in 
Nature.  He  expressly  denies  omnipotence  to  his  Supreme 
Craftsman.  The  influence  of  the  entertainment  of  ideas  is 
always  persuasive,  and  can  only  produce  such  order  as  is 
possible.  However,  on  this  point  he  wavers,  and  sometimes 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


190 

writes  as  if  the  Craftsman  were  disposing  the  world  according 
to  his  supreme  will. 

This  notion  of  an  excellence,  partly  attained  and  partly 
missed,  raises  another  problem  which  greatly  exercised 
Greek  thought  at  the  time  of  Plato.  The  problem  can 
take  many  special  forms.  In  what  does  beauty  consist,  for 
example,  the  beauty  of  a  musical  melody,  the  beauty  of  a 
statue,  or  of  a  building  such  as  the  Parthenon?  Also,  there 
is  that  other  form  of  beauty,  which  is  rightness  of  conduct. 
Probably,  in  this  naive  shape,  the  question  has  no  answer; 
since  ‘The  Good’  is  an  ultimate  qualification  not  to  be 
analysed  in  terms  of  any  things  more  final  than  itself.  But 
an  analogous  question  can  be  asked,  to  which  Greek  thought 
was  unanimous  as  to  its  answer.  To  what  sort  of  things 
does  the  concept  apply,  and  in  particular  what  sort  of  con¬ 
ditions  are  requisite  for  its  evocation?  The  Greek  answer 
to  this  latter  pair  of  questions  was  that  beauty  belonged 
to  composite  things,  and  that  the  composition  is  beautiful 
when  the  many  components  have  obtained  in  some  sense 
their  proper  proportions.  This  was  the  Greek  doctrine  of 
Harmony,  in  respect  to  which  neither  Plato  nor  Aristotle 
ever  waver. 

In  respect  to  Harmony,  the  Greeks  made  a  discovery 
which  is  a  landmark  in  the  history  of  thought.  They  found 
out  that  exact  Mathematical  Relationships,  as  they  exist  in 
Geometry  and  in  the  numerical  proportions  of  measure¬ 
ments,  are  realized  in  various  outstanding  examples  of 
beautiful  composition.  For  instance,  Archytas  discovered 
that,  other  circumstances  being  equal,  the  note  given  out  by 
a  stretched  string  depends  on  the  length  of  the  string,  and  that 
beautiful  compositions  of  notes  correspond  to  certain  simple 
laws  as  to  the  proportional  lengths  of  the  strings.  Also  they 
investigated  the  dependence  of  the  beauty  of  architecture 


SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY  igi 

upon  the  preservation  of  the  proper  proportions  in  the 
various  dimensions.  This  was  an  immense  discovery,  the 
dependence  of  the  qualitative  elements  in  the  world  upon 
mathematical  relations.  The  facts  had  gradually  accumu¬ 
lated  through  thousands  of  years.  The  early  Babylonians 
knew  that  the  qualitative  fact  of  the  succession  of  seasons 
depended  upon  the  lapse  of  definite  numbers  of  days.  In 
fact,  they  constructed  very  creditable  calendars.  But  the 
Greeks,  with  their  power  of  generalization,  grasped  the  full 
law  of  the  interweaving  of  qualitative  fact  with  geometrical 
and  quantitative  composition.  They  had  the  genius  to  be 
astonished. 

Plato  drew  the  conclusion  that  the  key  to  the  under¬ 
standing  of  the  natural  world,  and  in  particular  of  the 
physical  elements,  was  the  study  of  mathematics.  There  is 
good  reason  to  believe  that  the  greater  part  of  the  studies 
of  his  Academy  was  devoted  to  mathematics.  The  mathe¬ 
maticians  of  the  succeeding  generation,  and  indeed  of  the 
next  two  hundred  years,  ending  with  the  astronomers 
Ptolemy  and  Hipparchus,  are  the  product  of  the  systematic 
tradition  shaped  by  the  example  and  the  doctrine  of  Plato. 
Of  course  the  Academy  inherited  the  Pythagorean  tradition 
of  Mathematics. 

Thus  with  Plato  and  Aristotle,  a  new  epoch  commences. 
Science  acquires  the  cleansing  of  logical  and  mathematical 
lucidity.  Aristotle  established  the  importance  of  scientific 
classification  into  species  and  genera;  Plato  divined  the 
future  scope  of  applied  mathematics.  Unfortunately,  later 
on,  the  explicit  development  of  Plato’s  doctrines  has  been 
exclusively  in  the  hands  of  religious  mystics,  of  literary 
scholars,  and  of  literary  artists.  Plato,  the  mathematician, 
for  long  intervals  disappeared  from  the  explicit  Platonic 
tradition. 


192 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


The  notions  of  Harmony  and  of  Mathematical  Relations 
are  only  special  exemplifications  of  a  yet  more  general 
philosophic  concept,  namely,  that  of  the  general  inter¬ 
connectedness  of  things,  which  transforms  the  manifoldness 
of  the  many  into  the  unity  of  the  one.  We  speak  in  the 
singular  of  the  Universe,  of  Nature,  of  (f)vais,  which  can  be 
translated  as  Process.  There  is  the  one  all-embracing  fa.ct 
which  is  the  advancing  history  of  the  one  Universe.  This 
community  of  the  world,  which  is  the  matrix  for  all  be¬ 
getting,  and  whose  essence  is  process  with  retention  of 
connectedness — this  community  is  what  Plato  terms  The 
Receptacle  [in roSox^].  In  our  effort  to  divine  his  meaning, 
we  must  remember  that  Plato  says  that  it  is  an  obscure  and 
difficult  concept,  and  that  in  its  own  essence  the  Receptacle 
is  devoid  of  all  forms.  It  is  thus  certainly  not  the  ordinary 
geometrical  space  with  its  mathematical  relations.  Plato  calls 
his  Receptacle,  ‘The  foster-mother  of  all  becoming’.  He 
evidently  conceived  it  as  a  necessary  notion  without  which 
our  analysis  of  Nature  is  defective.  It  is  dangerous  to  neglect 
Plato’s  intuitions.  He  carefully  varies  his  phrases  in  referring 
to  it,  and  implies  that  what  he  says  is  to  be  taken  in  its  most 
abstract  sense.  The  Receptacle  imposes  a  common  relation¬ 
ship  on  all  that  happens,  but  does  not  impose  what  that 
relationship  shall  be.  It  seems  to  be  a  somewhat  more  subtle 
notion  than  Aristotle’s  ‘matter’  which,  of  course,  is  not  the 
‘matter’  of  Galileo  and  Newton.  Plato’s  Receptacle  may  be 
conceived  as  the  necessary  community  within  which  the 
course  of  history  is  set,  in  abstraction  from  all  the  particular 
historical  facts.  I  have  directed  attention  to  Plato’s  doctrine 
of  the  Receptacle  because,  at  the  present  moment,  physical 
science  is  nearer  to  it  than  at  any  period  since  Plato’s  death. 
The  space-time  of  modern  mathematical  physics,  conceived 
in  abstraction  from  the  particular  mathematical  formulae 

4 


SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY 


193 

which  applies  to  the  happenings  in  it,  is  almost  exactly  Plato’s 
Receptacle.  It  is  to  be  noted  that  mathematical  physicists 
are  extremely  uncertain  as  to  what  these  formulae  are  exactly, 
nor  do  they  believe  that  any  such  formulae  can  be  derived 
from  the  mere  notion  of  space-time.  Thus,  as  Plato  declares, 
space-time  in  itself  is  bare  of  all  forms. 

Section  V.  In  the  preceding  sketch  only  one  incidental 
generalization,  selected  from  one  topic  comprised  in  the 
enormous  labours  of  Aristotle’s  life,  has  been  brought 
forward.  Aristotle  was  at  once  a  man  of  science,  a  philo¬ 
sopher,  a  literary  critic,  and  a  student  of  political  theory. 
This  particular  classification  of  the  things  constitutive  of 
the  visible  universe  has  been  dwelt  upon  because  it  is  an 
almost  perfect  example  of  a  scientific  induction  satisfying 
all  the  conditions  insisted  on  by  the  modern  philosophy 
of  science.  It  was  a  generalization  from  observed  fact, 
and  could  be  confirmed  by  repeated  observation.  In  its 
day — and  its  day  lasted  for  eighteen  hundred  years — it 
was  extremely  useful;  and  now  that  it  is  dead,  it  is  stone- 
dead,  an  archaeological  curiosity.  This  is  the  fate  of  scientific 
generalizations,  so  long  as  they  are  considered  in  relation  to 
their  strict  scientific  purpose.  Towards  the  end  of  its  long 
life,  the  doctrine  lost  its  utility  and  turned  into  an  obstructive 
agency. 

The  Platonic  group  of  notions  which  have  been  con¬ 
sidered  have  none  of  the  merits  of  the  Aristotelian  set.  In 
fact,  they  are  philosophic,  and  in  the  narrow  sense  are  not 
scientific.  They  suggest  no  detailed  observation.  Indeed  it 
has  always  been  a  reproach  to  Plato  that  he  diverted  interest 
from  observation  of  the  particular  facts.  So  far  as  concerns 
political  theory,  and  in  particular  jurisprudence,  this  ac¬ 
cusation  is  certainly  untrue,  and  arises  from  the  habit  of 
concentrating  interest  on  his  Dialogues  in  proportion  to  their 

13 


wi 


194 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


literary  brilliance.  Nevertheless  the  assertion  is  undoubtedly 
true  in  respect  to  physical  science.  But  Plato  had  another 
message.  Where  Aristotle  said  ‘observe5  and  ‘classify5,  the 
moral  of  Plato’s  teaching  is  the  importance  of  the  study  of 
mathematics.  Of  course,  neither  of  them  was  so  stupid  as  to 
dissuade  from  observation  or,  on  the  other  hand,  to  deny  the 
utility  of  mathematics.  Probably  Aristotle  thought  that  the 
mathematical  knowledge  of  his  day  was  about  as  much  as 
was  wanted  for  the  purposes  of  physical  science.  Any  further 
progress  could  only  minister  to  an  unpractical  curiosity  about 
subtle  abstractions. 

An  intense  belief  that  a  knowledge  of  mathematical  re¬ 
lations  would  prove  the  key  to  unlock  the  mysteries  of  the 
relatedness  within  Nature  was  ever  at  the  back  of  Plato’s 
cosmological  speculations.  In  one  passage  he  reprobates  the 
swinish1  ignorance  of  those  who  have  failed  to  study  the 
doctrine  of  proportions  incapable  of  expression  as  numerical 
ratios.  He  evidently  feels  that  the  chance  of  some  subtle 
elucidation  of  the  nature  of  Harmony  is  being  crassly  lost. 
His  own  speculations  as  to  the  course  of  nature  are  all 
founded  upon  the  conjectural  application  of  some  mathe¬ 
matical  construction.  So  far  as  I  can  remember,  in  every 
case  he  made  a  sensible  shot  which,  in  fact,  went  wide  of 
the  mark. 

Although  the  Timaeus  was  widely  influential,  yet  for  about 
eighteen  hundred  years  after  their  epoch,  it  seemed  that 
Aristotle  was  right  and  Plato  wrong.  Some  mathematical 
formulae  were  interwoven  with  scientific  ideas,  but  no  more 
than  would  have  been  perfectly  familiar  to  Aristotle  apart 
from  what  were  in  his  day  the  latest  refinements.  The 
cosmological  scheme  of  the  active  scientists  was  in  fact  that 
of  Aristotle.  But  Plato’s  divination  exemplifies  another  im- 

1  vrjvos,  cf.  Laws ,  Book  vn,  819  D. 


SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY 


195 


portant  function  for  philosophy.  It  evokes  interest  in  topics 
as  yet  remote  from  our  crude  understanding  of  the  interplay 
of  natural  forces.  The  science  of  the  future  depends  for  its 
ready  progress  upon  the  antecedent  elucidation  of  hypo¬ 
thetical  complexities  of  connection,  as  yet  unobserved  in 
nature.  Plato’s  mathematical  speculations  have  been  treated 
as  sheer  mysticism  by  scholars  who  follow  the  literary 
traditions  of  the  Italian  Renaissance.  In  truth,  they  are  the 
products  of  genius  brooding  on  the  future  of  intellect  exploring 
a  world  of  mystery. 

Greeks,  Egyptians,  Arabs,  Jews,  and  Mesopotamians  ad¬ 
vanced  the  science  of  mathematics  beyond  the  wildest  dreams 
of  Plato.  Unfortunately  this  side  of  Plato’s  interest  was 
notably  absent  among  the  Christian  populations.  I  believe 
it  to  be  true  that  no  Christian  made  any  original  contribution 
to  mathematical  science  before  the  revival  of  science  at  the 
time  of  the  Renaissance.  Pope  Silvester  II — Gerbert,  who 
reigned  in  the  year  1000  a.d. — studied  mathematics.  But  he 
added  nothing.  Roger  Bacon  proclaimed  the  importance  of 
mathematics  and  named  contemporary  mathematicians.  In 
the  thirteenth  and  fourteenth  centuries  the  University  of 
Oxford  cherished  mathematics.  But  none  of  these  mediaeval 
Europeans  advanced  the  subject.  An  exception  must  be 
made  in  favour  of  Leonardo  of  Pisa  who  flourished  at 
the  beginning  of  the  thirteenth  century.  He  was  the  first 
Christian  to  make  an  advance  in  the  science  which  in  its 
early  history  illustrates  the  cultural  union  of  the  Hellenistic 
Greeks  with  the  Near  East.  But,  subject  to  this  qualification, 
sixteenth-century  mathematics  was  entirely  based  upon  non- 
Christian  sources.  Among  the  Christians  mathematics  and 
magic  were  confused.  The  Pope  himself  hardly  escaped.  We 
can  hardly  hope  for  a  better  illustration  of  the  curious  limi¬ 
tations  of  epochs  and  schools  of  civilization.  It  is  especially 

13-2 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


196 

interesting  in  view  of  the  dominant  influence  of  Plato  upon 
Christian  thought. 

But  the  Platonic  doctrine  of  the  interweaving  of  Harmony 
with  mathematical  relations  has  been  triumphantly  vindi¬ 
cated.  The  Aristotelian  classifications  based  upon  qualitative 
predicates  have  a  very  restricted  application  apart  from  the 
introduction  of  mathematical  formulae.  Indeed,  Aristotelian 
Logic,  by  its  neglect  of  mathematical  notions,  has  done  almost 
as  much  harm  as  good  for  the  advancement  of  science.  We 
can  never  get  away  from  the  questions:  How  much — In 
what  proportions — and,  In  what  pattern  of  arrangement  with 
other  things.  The  exact  laws  of  chemical  proportions  make 
all  the  difference;  CO  will  kill  you,  when  C02  will  only 
give  you  a  headache.  Also  COa  is  a  necessary  element  for 
the  dilution  of  oxygen  in  the  atmosphere;  but  too  much 
or  too  little  is  equally  harmful.  Arsenic  deals  out  either 
health  or  death,  according  to  its  proportions  amid  a  pattern 
of  circumstances.  Also  when  the  health-giving  proportion 
of  C02  to  free  oxygen  has  been  obtained,  a  rearrangement 
of  these  proportional  quantities  of  carbon  and  oxygen  into 
carbon  monoxide  and  free  oxygen  will  provide  a  poisonous 
mixture.  In  Political  Economy,  the  Law  of  Diminishing 
Returns  points  to  the  conditions  for  the  maximum  efficiency 
of  a  dose  of  capital.  In  fact,  there  is  hardly  a  question  to  be 
asked  which  should  not  be  fenced  round  with  qualifications 
as  to  how  much,  and  as  to  what  pattern  of  circumstances. 
Aristotelian  Logic,  apart  from  the  guardianship  of  mathe¬ 
matics,  is  the  fertile  matrix  of  fallacies.  It  deals  with  pro- 
positional  forms  only  adapted  for  the  expression  of  high 
abstractions,  the  sort  of  abstractions  usual  in  current  con¬ 
versation  where  the  presupposed  background  is  ignored. 

But  it  is  evident  that  even  the  appeal  to  mathematics  is 
too  narrow,  at  least  if  mathematics  is  taken  to  mean  those 


SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY 


J97 


branches  hitherto  developed.  The  general  science  of  mathe¬ 
matics  is  concerned  with  the  investigation  of  patterns  of 
connectedness,  in  abstraction  from  the  particular  relata  and 
the  particular  modes  of  connection.  It  is  only  in  some  special 
branches  of  mathematics  that  notions  of  quantity  and  number 
are  dominant  themes.  The  real  point  is  that  the  essential 
connectedness  of  things  can  never  be  safely  omitted.  This  is 
the  doctrine  of  the  thoroughgoing  relativity  which  infects  the 
universe  and  which  makes  the  totality  of  things  as  it  were 
a  Receptacle  uniting  all  that  happens. 

The  Greek  doctrine  of  Composition  and  Harmony  has 
been  vindicated  by  the  progress  of  thought.  Yet  the  vivid 
fancy  of  the  Greeks  was  also  apt  to  invest  each  factor  in  the 
Universe  with  an  independent  individuality,  for  example, 
the  self-sufficient  realm  of  ideas  which  dominated  Plato’s 
earlier  thought,  and  which  intermittently  intrudes  into  his 
later  Dialogues.  But  we  must  not  blame  the  Greeks  for  this 
excess  of  individualization.  All  language  witnesses  to  the 
same  error.  We  habitually  speak  of  stones,  and  planets,  and 
animals,  as  though  each  individual  thing  could  exist,  even 
for  a  passing  moment,  in  separation  from  an  environment 
which  is  in  truth  a  necessary  factor  in  its  own  nature.  Such 
an  abstraction  is  a  necessity  of  thought,  and  the  requisite 
background  of  systematic  environment  can  be  presupposed. 
That  is  true.  But  it  also  follows  that,  in  the  absence  of 
some  understanding  of  the  final  nature  of  things,  and  thus 
of  the  sorts  of  backgrounds  presupposed  in  such  abstract 
statements,  all  science  suffers  from  the  vice  that  it  may  be 
combining  various  propositions  which  tacitly  presuppose  in¬ 
consistent  backgrounds.  No  science  can  be  more  secure  than 
the  unconscious  metaphysics  which  tacitly  it  presupposes. 
The  individual  thing  is  necessarily  a  modification  of  its 
environment,  and  cannot  be  understood  in  disjunction.  All 


ig8  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

reasoning,  apart  from  some  metaphysical  reference,  is 
vicious. 

Section  VI,  Thus  the  Certainties  of  Science  are  a  delusion. 
They  are  hedged  around  with  unexplored  limitations.  Our 
handling  of  scientific  doctrines  is  controlled  by  the  diffused 
metaphysical  concepts  of  our  epoch.  Even  so,  we  are  con¬ 
tinually  led  into  errors  of  expectation.  Also,  whenever  some 
new  mode  of  observational  experience  is  obtained  the  old 
doctrines  crumble  into  a  fog  of  inaccuracies. 

Our  co-ordinated  knowledge,  which  in  the  general  sense 
of  the  term  is  Science,  is  formed  by  the  meeting  of  two 
orders  of  experience.  One  order  is  constituted  by  the  direct, 
immediate  discriminations  of  particular  observations.  The 
other  order  is  constituted  by  our  general  way  of  conceiving 
the  Universe.  They  will  be  called,  the  Observational  Order, 
and  the  Conceptual  Order.  The  first  point  to  remember  is 
that  the  observational  order  is  invariably  interpreted  in  terms 
of  the  concepts  supplied  by  the  conceptual  order.  The  ques¬ 
tion  as  to  the  priority  of  one  or  the  other  is,  for  the  purpose 
of  this  discussion,  academic.  We  inherit  an  observational 
order,  namely  types  of  things  which  we  do  in  fact  dis¬ 
criminate;  and  we  inherit  a  conceptual  order,  namely  a 
rough  system  of  ideas  in  terms  of  which  we  do  in  fact 
interpret.  We  can  point  to  no  epoch  in  human  history,  or 
even  in  animal  history,  at  which  this  interplay  began.  Also 
it  is  true  that  novel  observations  modify  the  conceptual 
order.  But  equally,  novel  concepts  suggest  novel  possibilities 
of  observational  discrimination. 

The  history  of  thought  cannot  be  understood  unless  we 
take  account  of  a  grave  weakness  in  the  observational  order. 
Observational  discrimination  is  not  dictated  by  the  im¬ 
partial  facts.  It  selects  and  discards,  and  what  it  retains  is 
rearranged  in  a  subjective  order  of  prominence.  This  order  of 


SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY 


199 


prominence  in  observation  is  in  fact  a  distortion  of  the  facts. 
Thus  we  have  to  rescue  the  facts  as  they  are  from  the  facts 
as  they  appear.  We  have  to  rescue  the  facts  in  the  discard, 
and  we  have  to  discard  the  subjective  order  of  prominence 
which  is  itself  a  fact  of  observation.  For  example,  consider 
the  observed  facts  in  early  stages  of  civilization.  The  observed 
fact  was  a  flat  Earth  with  the  arched  dome  of  the  Sky.  Even 
to  the  contemporaries  of  Pope  Silvester  the  antipodes  were 
inconceivable,  and  his  reputed  belief  in  them  did  no  credit 
to  the  old  wizard  of  a  Pope. 

Again  we  view  the  sky  at  noon  on  a  fine  day.  It  is  blue, 
flooded  by  the  light  of  the  Sun.  The  direct  fact  of  observation 
is  the  sun  as  the  sole  origin  of  light,  and  the  bare  heavens. 
Conceive  the  myth  of  Adam  and  Eve  in  the  Garden  on 
the  first  day  of  human  life.  They  watch  the  sunset,  the  stars 
appear: 

‘And,  Lo!  creation  widened  to  man’s  view’. 

The  excess  of  light  discloses  facts  and  also  conceals  them. 
It  distorts  the  facts  for  human  observation.  It  is  one  task  of 
speculation  to  urge  observation  beyond  the  boundaries  of  its 
delusive  completeness,  and  to  urge  the  doctrines  of  science 
beyond  their  delusive  air  of  finality. 

We  can  now  briefly  characterize  the  history  of  the  transfor¬ 
mation  of  mediaeval  cosmology  into  our  modern  standpoint. 
The  effective  agency  in  this  transformation  has  a  history 
of  about  eighteen  hundred  years  entirely  divorced  from 
physical  observation.  It  is  a  history  of  abstract  thought, 
namely,  of  the  development  of  mathematics.  The  interest, 
which  was  the  motive  in  its  development,  was  the  interest  in 
the  co-ordination  of  theoretical  notions  and  in  the  theoretical 
constructions  arising  from  the  domination  of  such  notions. 
Yet,  if  many  modern  philosophers  and  men  of  science  could 
have  had  their  way,  they  would  have  been  dissuading 


200 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


Greeks,  Jews,  and  Mahommedans  from  such  useless  studies, 
from  such  pure  abstractions  for  which  no  foresight  could 
divine  the  ghost  of  an  application.  Luckily  they  could  not 
get  at  their  ancestors. 

Section  VII.  The  services  to  mankind  rendered  by  the 
Newtonian  System  of  Nature  are  incalculable.  It  combines 
ideas  derived  from  Plato,  Aristotle,  and  Epicurus,  into  a  con¬ 
sistent  scheme  of  thought  which  elucidates  an  incredible 
number  of  observed  facts.  Thereby  it  has  enabled  men  to 
obtain  a  new  command  over  Nature.  Where  we  formerly 
obeyed,  we  now  direct.  But  at  last  the  Newton  cosmology 
has  broken  down. 

The  story  of  the  breakdown  extends  over  more  than  a 
century.  For  by  far  the  greater  part  of  that  period  men  of 
science  were  quite  unaware  that  the  ideas  which  they  were 
introducing,  slowly,  one  after  the  other,  were  finally  to 
accumulate  into  a  body  of  thought  inconsistent  with  the 
Newtonian  ideas  dominating  their  thoughts  and  shaping 
their  modes  of  expression.  The  story  commences  with  the 
wave-theory  of  light  and  ends  with  the  wave- theory  of  matter. 
It  finally  leaves  us  with  the  philosophic  question,  What  are 
the  concrete  facts  which  exhibit  this  mathematical  attribute 
of  wave-vibration? 

The  story  in  detail  is  the  history  of  modern  physics,  which 
lies  beyond  the  scope  of  this  discussion.  We  merely  require 
to  understand  the  contrast  between  the  most  general  notions 
respectively  underlying  Newtonian  physics  and  modern 
physics.  Newtonian  physics  is  based  upon  the  independent 
individuality  of  each  bit  of  matter.  Each  stone  is  conceived 
as  fully  describable  apart  from  any  reference  to  any  other 
portion  of  matter.  It  might  be  alone  in  the  Universe,  the 
sole  occupant  of  uniform  space.  But  it  would  still  be  that 
stone  which  it  is.  Also  the  stone  could  be  adequately  de- 


SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY 


201 


scribed  without  any  reference  to  past  or  future.  It  is  to  be 
conceived  fully  and  adequately  as  wholly  constituted  within 
the  present  moment. 

This  is  the  full  Newtonian  concept,  which  bit  by  bit  was 
given  away,  or  dissolved,  by  the  advance  of  modern  physics. 
It  is  the  thorough-going  doctrine  of  ‘simple  location5  and  of 
‘external  relations5.  There  was  some  divergence  of  opinion 
as  to  the  external  relations.  Newton  himself  was  inclined  to 
construe  them  in  terms  of  shock  and  of  stress  between  con¬ 
tiguous  bodies.  But  his  immediate  followers,  such  as  Roger 
Cotes,  added  the  notion  of  force  at  a  distance.  But  either 
alternative  was  wholly  and  completely  a  fact  in  the  present, 
namely,  the  fact  of  that  external  relation  between  two  bits 
of  matter  either  contiguous  or  distant.  The  opposed  doctrine 
of  internal  relations  has  been  distorted  by  reason  of  its  de¬ 
scription  in  terms  of  language  adapted  to  the  presupposition 
of  external  relations  of  the  Newtonian  type.  Even  its  ad¬ 
herents,  such  as  F.  H.  Bradley  for  instance,  fall  into  this  pitfall. 
It  must  be  remembered  that  just  as  the  relations  modify  the 
natures  of  the  relata,  so  the  relata  modify  the  nature  of  the 
relation.  The  relationship  is  not  a  universal.  It  is  a  concrete 
fact  with  the  same  concreteness  as  the  relata.  The  notion  of 
the  immanence  of  the  cause  in  the  effect  illustrates  this  truth. 
We  have  to  discover  a  doctrine  of  nature  which  expresses 
the  concrete  relatedness  of  physical  functionings  and  mental 
functionings,  of  the  past  with  the  present,  and  also  expresses 
the  concrete  composition  of  physical  realities  which  are 
individually  diverse. 

Modern  physics  has  abandoned  the  doctrine  of  Simple 
Location.  The  physical  things  which  we  term  stars,  planets, 
lumps  of  matter,  molecules,  electrons,  protons,  quanta  of 
energy,  are  each  to  be  conceived  as  modifications  of  con¬ 
ditions  within  space-time,  extending  throughout  its  whole 


202 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


range.  There  is  a  focal  region,  which  in  common  speech  is 
where  the  thing  is.  But  its  influence  streams  away  from  it 
with  finite  velocity  throughout  the  utmost  recesses  of  space 
and  time.  Of  course,  it  is  natural,  and  for  certain  purposes 
entirely  proper,  to  speak  of  the  focal  region,  thus  modified, 
as  the  thing  itself  situated  there.  But  difficulties  arise  if  we 
press  this  way  of  thought  too  far.  For  physics,  the  thing  itself 
is  what  it  does,  and  what  it  does  is  this  divergent  stream 
of  influence.  Again  the  focal  region  cannot  be  separated 
from  the  external  stream.  It  obstinately  refuses  to  be  con¬ 
ceived  as  an  instantaneous  fact.  It  is  a  state  of  agitation,  only 
differing  from  the  so-called  external  stream  by  its  superior 
dominance  within  the  focal  region.  Also  we  are  puzzled 
how  to  express  exactly  the  existence  of  these  physical  things 
at  any  definite  moment  of  time.  For  at  every  instantaneous 
point-event,  within  or  without  the  focal  region,  the  modifica¬ 
tion  to  be  ascribed  to  this  thing  is  antecedent  to,  or  successive 
to,  the  corresponding  modification  introduced  by  that  thing 
at  another  point-event.  Thus  if  we  endeavour  to  conceive 
a  complete  instance  of  the  existence  of  the  physical  thing 
in  question,  we  cannot  confine  ourselves  to  one  part  of  space 
or  to  one  moment  of  time.  The  physical  thing  is  a  certain 
co-ordination  of  spaces  and  times  and  of  conditions  in 
those  spaces  at  those  times,  this  co-ordination  illustrating 
one  exemplification  of  a  certain  general  rule,  expressible  in 
terms  of  mathematical  relations.  Here  we  have  returned  to 
a  fundamental  Platonic  doctrine. 

Again,  with  the  denial  of  simple  location  we  must  admit 
that  within  any  region  of  space-time  the  innumerable  mul¬ 
titude  of  these  physical  things  are  in  a  sense  superposed. 
Thus  the  physical  fact  at  each  region  of  space-time  is  a  com¬ 
position  of  what  the  physical  entities  throughout  the  Universe 
mean  for  that  region.  But  a  complete  existence  is  not  a  com- 


SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY 


203 


position  of  mathematical  formulae,  mere  formulae.  It  is  a 
concrete  composition  of  things  illustrating  formulae.  There 
is  an  interweaving  of  qualitative  and  quantitative  elements. 
For  example,  when  a  living  body  assimilates  food,  the  fact 
cannot  be  merely  that  one  mathematical  formula  assimilates 
another  mathematical  formula.  The  fact  cannot  be  merely 
that  the  equality  of  two  and  three  with  five  assimilates  the 
fact  of  the  equality  of  thrice  three  with  nine,  nor  can  the 
number  eleven  assimilate  the  number  sixteen.  Any  of  these 
mathematical  notions  may  be  illustrated,  but  the  fact  is  more 
than  the  formulae  illustrated. 

Section  VIII.  The  final  problem  is  to  conceive  a  complete 
[77avreA^s“]  fact.1  We  can  only  form  such  a  conception  in 
terms  of  fundamental  notions  concerning  the  nature  of 
reality.  We  are  thrown  back  upon  philosophy.  Centuries  ago 
Plato  divined  the  seven  main  factors  interwoven  in  fact: 
The  Ideas,  The  Physical  Elements,  The  Psyche,  The  Eros, 
The  Harmony,  The  Mathematical  Relations,  The  Receptacle. 
All  philosophical  systems  are  endeavours  to  express  the  inter¬ 
weaving  of  these  components.  Of  course,  it  is  most  un- 
scholarly  to  identify  our  modern  notions  with  these  archaic 
thoughts  of  Plato.  For  us  everything  has  a  subtle  difference. 
But  for  all  these  differences,  human  thought  is  now  en¬ 
deavouring  to  express  analogous  elements  in  the  composition  of 
nature.  It  only  dimly  discerns,  it  misdescribes,  and  it  wrongly 
associates.  But  always  there  remain  the  same  beacons  that 
lure.  Systems,  scientific  and  philosophic,  come  and  go.  Each 
method  of  limited  understanding  is  at  length  exhausted.  In 
its  prime  each  system  is  a  triumphant  success:  in  its  decay 
it  is  an  obstructive  nuisance.  The  transitions  to  new  fruitful- 

1  Cf.  Sophist ,  248  E,  to)  7ravre\co9  ovri.  Here  1 ravreXcos  is  often  wrongly 
translated  by  ‘absolute’.  For  Plato’s  reference  to  ‘absolute’  and  ‘relative’,  cf. 
Sophist ,  255  C. 


204 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


ness  of  understanding  are  achieved  by  recurrence  to  the 
utmost  depths  of  intuition  for  the  refreshment  of  imagination. 
In  the  end — though  there  is  no  end — what  is  being  achieved, 
is  width  of  view,  issuing  in  greater  opportunities.  But  oppor¬ 
tunity  leads  upwards  or  downwards.  In  unthinking  Nature 
‘natural  selection’  is  a  synonym  for  ‘waste’.  Philosophy 
should  now  perform  its  final  service.  It  should  seek  the 
insight,  dim  though  it  be,  to  escape  the  wide  wreckage  of  a 
race  of  beings  sensitive  to  values  beyond  those  of  mere  animal 
enjoyment. 


CHAPTER  X 


THE  NEW  REFORMATION 

Section  I.  The  theme  of  this  chapter  can  be  introduced 
by  directing  attention  to  a  contrast.  Protestant  Christianity, 
so  far  as  concerns  the  institutional  and  dogmatic  forms  in 
which  it  flourished  for  three  hundred  years  as  derived  from 
Luther,  Calvin,  and  the  Anglican  Settlement,  is  showing  all 
the  signs  of  a  steady  decay.  Its  dogmas  no  longer  dominate: 
its  divisions  no  longer  interest:  its  institutions  no  longer  direct 
the  patterns  of  life.  That  is  one  side  of  the  contrast. 

The  other  side  is  that  the  religious  spirit  as  an  effective 
element  in  the  affairs  of  men  has  just  [April,  1931]  obtained 
one  of  its  most  signal  triumphs.  In  India  the  forces  of 
violence  and  strife,  between  rulers  and  people,  between  races, 
between  religions,  between  social  grades— forces  threatening 
to  overwhelm  with  violence  hundreds  of  millions  of  man¬ 
kind — these  forces  have  for  the  moment  been  halted  by  two 
men  acting  with  the  moral  authority  of  religious  conviction, 
the  Mahatma  Gandhi  and  the  Viceroy  of  India  [Lord 
Irwin] . 

They  may  fail.  More  than  two  thousand  years  ago,  the 
wisest  of  men  proclaimed  that  the  divine  persuasion  is  the 
foundation  of  the  order  of  the  world,  but  that  it  could  only 
produce  such  a  measure  of  harmony  as  amid  brute  forces 
it  was  possible  to  accomplish.  This,  I  suggest,  is  a  plain 
anticipation  by  Plato  of  a  doctrine  of  Grace,  seven  hundred 
years  before  the  age  of  Pelagius  and  Augustine. 


206 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


But  the  dramatic  halt  effected  by  Gandhi  and  the  Viceroy, 
requiring  as  it  does  an  effective  response  from  uncounted 
millions  in  India,  in  England,  in  Europe,  and  America, 
witnesses  that  the  religious  motive,  I  mean  the  response  to 
the  divine  persuasion,  still  holds  its  old  power,  even  more 
than  its  old  power,  over  the  minds  and  the  consciences  of  men. 
In  this  response  the  protestant  populations  of  the  British 
Empire,  and  importantly,  though  more  remotely,  that  of 
the  United  States,  have  sustained  their  part.  We  stand  at  a 
moment  when  the  course  of  history  depends  upon  the  calm 
reasonableness  arising  from  a  religious  public  opinion.  An 
initial  triumph  has  already  been  gained. 

There  is  the  contrast,  decay  and  survival.  We  have  to 
estimate  what  has  decayed,  and  what  has  survived.  My 
thesis  is  that  a  new  Reformation  is  in  full  progress.  It  is 
a  reformation;  but  whether  its  issue  be  fortunate  or  un¬ 
fortunate  depends  largely  on  the  actions  of  comparatively 
few  men,  and  notably  upon  the  leaders  of  the  protestant 
clergy. 

I  do  not  hold  it  to  be  possible,  or  even  desirable,  that 
identity  of  detailed  belief  can  be  attained.  But  it  is  possible 
that  amid  diversities  of  belief,  arising  from  differences  of 
stress  exhibited  in  metaphysical  insight  and  from  differences 
of  sympathetic  intuition  respecting  historical  events — that  it 
is  possible,  amid  these  differences,  to  reach  a  general  agree¬ 
ment  as  to  those  elements,  in  intimate  human  experience 
and  in  general  history,  which  we  select  to  exemplify  that 
ultimate  theme  of  the  divine  immanence,  as  a  completion 
required  by  our  cosmological  outlook.  In  other  words,  we 
may  agree  as  to  the  qualitative  aspects  of  religious  facts, 
and  as  to  their  general  way  of  co-ordination  in  meta¬ 
physical  theory,  while  disagreeing  in  various  explanatory 
formulations. 


THE  NEW  REFORMATION 


207 


The  problem,  however,  is  not  nearly  so  simple  as  this 
exordium  suggests.  We  are  dealing  with  a  topic,  complex 
and  many-sided.  It  comprises  the  deliverances  of  the  under¬ 
standing  as  it  harmonizes  our  deepest  intuitions.  It  com¬ 
prises  emotional  responses  to  formulations  of  thought  and  to 
modes  of  behaviour.  It  comprises  the  direction  of  purposes 
and  the  modifications  of  behaviour.  It  cuts  into  every  aspect 
of  human  existence.  So  far  as  concerns  religious  problems, 
simple  solutions  are  bogus  solutions.  It  is  written,  that  he 
who  runs,  may  read.  But  it  is  not  said,  that  he  provides 
the  writing. 

For  religion  is  concerned  with  our  reactions  of  purpose 
and  emotion  due  to  our  personal  measure  of  intuition  into 
the  ultimate  mystery  of  the  universe.  We  must  not  postulate 
simplicity.  The  witness  of  history  and  of  common  sense 
tells  us  that  systematic  formulations  are  potent  engines  of 
emphasis,  of  purification,  and  of  stability.  Christianity  would 
long  ago  have  sunk  into  a  noxious  superstition,  apart  from 
the  Levantine  and  European  intellectual  movement,  sus¬ 
tained  from  the  very  beginning  until  now.  This  movement 
is  the  effort  of  Reason  to  provide  an  accurate  system  of 
theology.  Indeed,  in  outlying  districts  where  this  effort  at 
rationalization  died  away,  the  religion  has  in  fact  sunk  into 
the  decrepitude  of  failure. 

Section  II.  Thus  the  attack  of  the  liberal  clergy  and  lay¬ 
men,  during  the  eighteenth  and  nineteenth  centuries,  upon 
systematic  theology  was  entirely  misconceived.  They  were 
throwing  away  the  chief  safeguard  against  the  wild  emo¬ 
tions  of  superstition.  A  civilized  religion  should  aim  at  the 
training  of  such  emotions  as  naturally  arise  from  a  civilized 
rational  criticism  of  the  metaphysical  intuitions  powerfully 
influential  in  great  epochs  of  human  history.  The  appeal 
to  history  is  the  appeal  to  summits  of  attainment  beyond  any 


208 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


immediate  clarity  in  our  own  individual  existence.  It  is  an 
appeal  to  authority.  The  appeal  to  reason  is  the  appeal  to 
that  ultimate  judge,  universal  and  yet  individual  to  each, 
to  which  all  authority  must  bow.  History  has  authority  so 
far,  and  exactly  so  far,  as  it  admits  of  some  measure  of 
rational  interpretation. 

Thus  an  attack  upon  systematic  thought  is  treason  to 
civilization.  Yet  the  great  minds  who  laid  the  foundations 
of  our  modern  mentality — John  Locke,  for  example — had 
reason  for  their  dissatisfaction  with  the  traditional  dogmatic 
theology,  though  they  partially  misconceived  the  grounds 
upon  which  they  should  base  their  attitude.  Their  true 
enemy  was  the  doctrine  of  dogmatic  finality,  a  doctrine 
which  flourished  and  is  flourishing  with  equal  vigour  through¬ 
out  Theology,  Science,  and  Metaphysics.  The  methodology 
of  rational  thought  from  the  Greeks  to  our  own  times  has 
been  vitiated  by  this  fundamental  misconception.  These 
errors  are  not  confined  to  religious  thought.  They  have 
infected  all  departments.  Their  total  effect  has  been  to  intro¬ 
duce  in  each  age  a  dogmatic  sense  of  finality.  The  emphasis 
of  certainty  has  been  wrongly  placed,  and  with  equal  error 
dogmatic  rejection. 

From  the  very  beginning  of  critical  thought,  we  find  the 
distinction  between  topics  susceptible  of  certain  knowledge, 
and  topics  about  which  only  uncertain  opinions  are  available. 
The  dawn  of  this  distinction,  explicitly  entertained,  is  the 
dawn  of  modern  mentality.  It  introduces  criticism.  Such 
a  notion  hardly  enters  into  any  book  of  the  Bible,  either 
in  the  mind  of  Jehovah,  or  of  any  of  his  worshippers.  The 
first  effect  of  this  new  distinction  was  very  unfortunate. 
For  it  was  much  too  simple-minded,  and  the  area  of  cer¬ 
tainty  was  misconceived.  For  example,  we  find  Plato  in  his 
old  age  advocating  religious  persecution,  and  justifying  him- 


THE  NEW  REFORMATION  209 

self  by  the  importance  of  the  topic  and  the  certainty  of  his 
own  demonstrations.1 

I  suggest  that  the  development  of  systematic  theology 
should  be  accompanied  by  a  critical  understanding  of  the 
relation  of  linguistic  expression  to  our  deepest  and  most 
persistent  intuitions.  Language  was  developed  in  response 
to  the  excitements  of  practical  actions.  It  is  concerned  with 
the  prominent  facts.  Such  facts  are  those  seized  upon  by 
consciousness  for  detailed  examination,  with  the  view  of 
emotional  response  leading  to  immediate  purposeful  action. 
These  prominent  facts  are  the  variable  facts — the  appearance 
of  a  tiger,  of  a  clap  of  thunder,  or  of  a  spasm  of  pain.  They 
are  the  facts  entering  into  experience  by  the  medium  of  our 
sense-organs.  Hence  the  sensationalist  doctrine  concerning 
the  data  which  are  the  origin  of  experience. 

But  the  prominent  facts  are  the  superficial  facts.  They 
vary  because  they  are  superficial;  and  they  enter  into  con¬ 
scious  discrimination  because  they  vary.  There  are  other 
elements  in  our  experience,  on  the  fringe  of  consciousness, 
and  yet  massively  qualifying  our  experience.  In  regard  to 
these  other  facts,  it  is  our  consciousness  that  flickers,  and  not 
the  facts  themselves.  They  are  always  securely  there,  barely 
discriminated,  and  yet  inescapable.  For  example,  consider 
our  derivation  from  our  immediate  past  of  a  quarter  of  a 
second  ago.  We  are  continuous  with  it,  we  are  the  same 
as  it,  prolonging  its  affective  tone,  enjoying  its  data.  And 
yet  we  are  modifying  it,  deflecting  it,  changing  its  pur¬ 
poses,  altering  its  tone,  re-conditioning  its  data  with  new 
elements. 

We  reduce  this  past  to  a  perspective,  and  yet  retain  it 
as  the  basis  of  our  present  moment  of  realization.  We  are 
different  from  it,  and  yet  we  retain  our  individual  identity  with 

1  Gf.  Plato’s  Laws ,  Book  x. 


wi 


14 


210 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


it.  This  is  the  mystery  of  personal  identity,  the  mystery  of 
the  immanence  of  the  past  in  the  present,  the  mystery  of 
transience.  All  our  science,  all  our  explanations  require  con¬ 
cepts  originating  in  this  experience  of  derivation.  In  respect 
to  such  intuitions,  language  is  peculiarly  inadequate.  Our 
powers  of  analysis,  and  of  expression,  flicker  with  our  con¬ 
sciousness.  It  is  not  true  that  there  is  a  definite  area  of  human 
consciousness,  within  which  there  is  clear  discrimination  and 
beyond  which  mere  darkness.  Nor  is  it  true  that  elements 
of  experience  are  important  in  proportion  to  their  clarity  in 
consciousness. 

The  appeal  to  history  gains  its  importance  by  reason  of 
this  complex  character  of  human  experience.  Metaphysics 
and  theology  alike  require  it.  The  requisite  evidence  cannot 
be  gained  by  mere  acts  of  direct  introspection  conducted  at 
one  epoch  by  a  few  clear-sighted  individuals.  If  a  flood  of 
oblivion  should  overwhelm  human  memory,  we  could  in 
this  way  of  introspection  recover  the  multiplication  table. 
But  not  much  else.  In  each  age  of  the  world,  the  actions 
of  men  and  their  interpretations  of  feelings,  motives,  and 
purposes,  throw  light  upon  the  recesses  of  their  experience. 
In  this  elucidation  of  what  it  means  to  live,  to  act,  and  feel, 
age  differs  from  age.  In  the  discrimination  of  this  historical 
evidence,  there  is  required  a  criticism  founded  upon  taste, 
and  a  criticism  founded  upon  logical  analysis  and  inductive 
probability. 

The  two  grounds  of  criticism,  aesthetic  and  logical,  are 
welded  together  in  the  final  judgment  of  reason  as  to  the 
comparison  of  historical  periods,  one  with  the  other.  Each 
age  deposits  its  message  as  to  the  secret  character  of  the 
nature  of  things.  Civilizations  can  only  be  understood  by 
those  who  are  civilized.  And  they  have  this  property,  that 
the  appropriation  of  them  in  the  understanding  unveils 


THE  NEW  REFORMATION 


21 1 


truths  concerning  our  own  natures.  It  has  been  said  that 
the  great  dramatic  tragedies  in  their  representations  before 
audiences  act  as  a  purification  of  the  passions.  In  the  same 
way,  the  great  periods  of  history  act  as  an  enlightenment. 
They  reveal  ourselves  to  ourselves. 

Section  III.  Christianity  bases  itself  upon  an  intensive 
study  of  the  significance  of  certain  historical  occasions  scat¬ 
tered  irregularly  within  a  period  of  about  twelve  hundred 
years,  from  the  earlier  Hebrew  prophets  and  historians  to 
the  stabilization  of  western  theology  by  Augustine.  The  story 
wanders  around  the  shores  of  the  Eastern  Mediterranean, 
from  the  Palestine  of  the  prophets  to  the  Athens  of  Plato: 
it  culminates  in  Galilee  and  Jerusalem:  the  main  interest 
then  fluctuates  uncertainly  backwards  and  forwards  between 
Antioch,  Ephesus,  Egypt,  Rome,  Constantinople  and  Africa. 
When  Augustine  died  at  Hippo  in  the  year  430,  the  religion 
of  the  European  races  was  in  its  main  outlines  settled. 
All  its  capacities  for  variant  forms  were  already  inherent 
in  it.  The  Papal  Church,  the  Eastern  Church,  Wycliffe  and 
Huss,  Luther  and  Calvin,  Archbishop  Cranmer,  Jonathan 
Edwards  and  John  Wesley,  Erasmus,  Ignatius  Loyola,  the 
Socinians,  George  Fox,  and  the  Vatican  Council  could  with 
equal  right  appeal  to  history.  The  conclusion  to  be  drawn 
from  the  appeal  entirely  depends  upon  the  value-judgments 
guiding  your  selection,  and  upon  the  metaphysical  presup¬ 
positions  dictating  your  notions  of  a  coherent  theology.  The 
appeal  is  to  the  actions,  thoughts,  emotions,  and  institutions, 
which  great  persons  and  great  occasions  had  made  effective 
on  the  shores  of  the  Mediterranean  within  that  earlier  period 
of  time. 

In  this  appeal  to  history  we  must  remember  the  gaps  in 
time  between  the  extant  written  Gospels  and  the  events 
which  they  relate:  the  discordances  in  accounts,  the  transla- 

14-2 


212 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


tions  of  tradition  from  language  to  language,  the  suspicious 
passages:  also  the  seeming  indifference  to  direct  historical 
evidence,  notably  in  the  case  of  St  Paul,  who  retired  to 
Arabia  when  we  should  have  expected  him  to  have  recourse 
to  the  disciples  who  had  seen  his  Lord.  I  mention  these 
latter  points,  upon  which  whole  libraries  have  been  written, 
merely  to  draw  the  unquestioned  conclusion  that  any  modern 
re-formation  of  the  religion  must  first  concentrate  upon  the 
moral  and  metaphysical  intuitions  scattered  throughout  the 
whole  epoch.  This  conclusion  is  a  commonplace  of  modern 
thought. 

I  suggest,  with  the  diffidence  due  to  my  entire  lack  of 
expertness  in  the  literature  of  this  immense  stretch  of  history, 
that  even  now  there  is  room  for  a  new  appeal  to  the  lesson 
to  be  derived  from  it.  In  this  chapter  I  shall  deal  wholly  in 
general  principles.  My  personal  conclusions  as  to  the  details 
of  reconstruction  have  none  of  the  importance  to  be  ascribed 
;  to  scholarship.  Also  to  speak  with  complete  candour,  I  cannot 
place  any  of  the  events  within  that  period  as  out  of  scale  in 
type  of  happenings  with  analogous  occurrences  elsewhere. 
I  do  hold,  however,  that  the  culminating  points  of  the  period 
embody  the  greatest  advances  in  the  expression  of  moral 
and  intellectual  intuitions  which  mark  the  growth  of  recent 
civilization. 

The  period  as  a  whole  begins  in  barbarism  and  ends  in 
failure.  The  failure  consisted  in  the  fact  that  barbaric  ele¬ 
ments  and  the  defects  in  intellectual  comprehension  had  not 
been  discarded,  but  remained  as  essential  elements  in  the 
various  formulations  of  Christian  theology,  orthodox  and 
heretical  alike.  Also  the  later  Protestant  Reformation  was, 
in  this  respect,  an  even  more  complete  failure,  in  no  way 
improving  Catholic  theology.  The  Quakers  perhaps  form  a 
minor  exception  to  this  statement.  But  George  Fox  lived  a 


THE  NEW  REFORMATION  213 

hundred  years  after  the  age  of  Luther.  The  issue  of  these 
failures  is  the  tragic  history  of  Christianity. 

Section  IV.  I  suggest  that  in  the  whole  period  there  are 
three  culminating  phases  which,  in  theological  language, 
constitute  its  threefold  revelation.  The  first  and  the  last 
phases  were  primarily  intellectual  with  a  sufficient  back¬ 
ground  of  moral  insight.  The  middle  phase,  which  forms 
the  driving  power  of  the  religion,  is  primarily  an  exhibition 
in  life  of  moral  intuition,  with  a  sufficiency  of  intellectual 
insight  to  give  an  articulate  expression  of  singular  beauty. 
The  three  phases  are  bound  together  as  intellectual  discovery 
— then  exemplification — finally  metaphysical  interpretation. 
The  discovery  and  the  exemplification  are  historically  in¬ 
dependent. 

The  first  phase  is  constituted  by  Plato’s  publication  of  his 
final  conviction,  towards  the  end  of  his  life,1  that  the  divine 
element  in  the  world  is  to  be  conceived  as  a  persuasive 
agency  and  not  as  a  coercive  agency.  This  doctrine  should 
be  looked  upon  as  one  of  the  greatest  intellectual  discoveries 
in  the  history  of  religion.  It  is  plainly  enunciated  by  Plato, 
though  he  failed  to  co-ordinate  it  systematically  with  the  rest 
of  his  metaphysical  theory.  Indeed,  Plato  always  failed  in 
his  attempts  at  systematization,  and  always  succeeded  in  dis¬ 
playing  depth  of  metaphysical  intuition — the  greatest  meta¬ 
physician,  the  poorest  systematic  thinker.  The  alternative 
doctrine,  prevalent  then  and  now,  sees  either  in  the  many 
gods  or  in  the  one  God,  the  final  coercive  forces  wielding 
the  thunder.  By  a  metaphysical  sublimation  of  this  doctrine 
of  God  as  the  supreme  agency  of  compulsion,  he  is  trans¬ 
formed  into  the  one  supreme  reality,  omnipotently  disposing 
a  wholly  derivative  world.  Plato  wavered  inconsistently  be¬ 
tween  these  diverse  conceptions.  But  he  does  finally  enunciate 

1  Cf.  the  Sophist  and  the  Timaeus. 


214 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


without  qualification  the  doctrine  of  the  divine  persuasion, 
by  reason  of  which  ideals  are  effective  in  the  world  and  forms 
of  order  evolve. 

The  second  phase  is  the  supreme  moment  in  religious 
history,  according  to  the  Christian  religion.  The  essence  of 
Christianity  is  the  appeal  to  the  life  of  Christ  as  a  revelation 
of  the  nature  of  God  and  of  his  agency  in  the  world.  The 
record  is  fragmentary,  inconsistent,  and  uncertain.  It  is  not 
necessary  for  me  to  express  any  opinion  as  to  the  proper 
reconstruction  of  the  most  likely  tale  of  historic  fact.  Such 
a  procedure  would  be  useless,  without  value,  and  entirely 
out  of  place  in  this  book.  But  there  can  be  no  doubt  as  to 
what  elements  in  the  record  have  evoked  a  response  from 
all  that  is  best  in  human  nature.  The  Mother,  the  Child, 
and  the  bare  manger:  the  lowly  man,  homeless  and  self- 
forgetful,  with  his  message  of  peace,  love,  and  sympathy: 
the  suffering,  the  agony,  the  tender  words  as  life  ebbed,  the 
final  despair:  and  the  whole  with  the  authority  of  supreme 
victory. 

I  need  not  elaborate.  Can  there  be  any  doubt  that  the 
power  of  Christianity  lies  in  its  revelation  in  act,  of  that 
which  Plato  divined  in  theory? 

The  third  phase  is  again  intellectual.  It  is  the  first  period 
in  the  formation  of  Christian  theology  by  the  schools  of 
thought  mainly  associated  with  Alexandria  and  Antioch.  The 
originality  and  value  of  their  contribution  to  the  thought  of 
the  world  has  been  greatly  underestimated.  This  is  partly 
their  own  fault.  For  they  persisted  in  declaring  that  they 
were  only  stating  the  faith  once  delivered  to  the  saints; 
whereas  in  fact  they  were  groping  after  the  solution  of  a 
fundamental  metaphysical  problem,  although  presented  to 
them  in  a  highly  special  form. 

These  Christian  theologians  have  the  distinction  of  being 


THE  NEW  REFORMATION 


215 


the  only  thinkers  who  in  a  fundamental  metaphysical  doc¬ 
trine  have  improved  upon  Plato.  It  is  true  that  this  period 
of  Christian  theology  was  Platonic.  But  it  is  also  true  that 
Plato  is  the  originator  of  the  heresies  and  of  the  feeblest 
side  of  Christian  Theology.  When  Plato  is  faced  with  the 
problem  of  expressing  the  relationship  of  God  to  the  World, 
and  of  the  relation  to  the  World  of  those  Ideas  which  it  is 
in  God’s  nature  to  contemplate,  Plato’s  answer  is  invariably 
framed  in  terms  of  mere  dramatic  imitation.  When  Plato 
turns  to  the  World,  after  considering  God  as  giving  life  and 
motion  to  the  ideas  by  the  inclusion  of  them  in  the  divine 
nature,  he  can  find  only  second-rate  substitutes  and  never 
the  originals.  For  Plato  there  is  a  derivative  second-rate 
God  of  the  World,  who  is  a  mere  Icon,  that  is  to  say  an 
image.  Also  when  he  looks  for  the  ideas,  he  can  only  find, 
in  the  World,  imitations.  Thus  the  World,  for  Plato,  includes 
only  the  image  of  God,  and  imitations  of  his  ideas,  and  never 
God  and  his  ideas. 

Plato  has  definite  reasons  for  this  gap  between  the  transient 
world  and  the  eternal  nature  of  God.  He  is  avoiding 
difficulties,  although  he  only  achieves  the  feeblest  of  solu¬ 
tions.  What  metaphysics  requires  is  a  solution  exhibiting 
the  plurality  of  individuals  as  consistent  with  the  unity  of 
the  Universe,  and  a  solution  which  exhibits  the  World  as 
requiring  its  union  with  God,  and  God  as  requiring  his 
union  with  the  World.  Sound  doctrine  also  requires  an 
understanding  how  the  Ideals  in  God’s  nature,  by  reason  of 
their  status  in  his  nature,  are  thereby  persuasive  elements 
in  the  creative  advance.  Plato  grounded  these  derivations 
from  God  upon  his  will;  whereas  metaphysics  requires  that 
the  relationships  of  God  to  the  World  should  lie  beyond 
the  accidents  of  will,  and  that  they  be  founded  upon  the 
necessities  of  the  nature  of  God  and  the  nature  of  the  World. 


2l6 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


These  problems  came  before  the  Christian  theologians  in 
highly  special  forms.  They  had  to  consider  the  nature  of 
God.  On  this  topic,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  Arian 
solution,  involving  a  derivative  Image,  is  orthodox  Platonism, 
though  it  be  heterodox  Christianity.  The  accepted  solution  of 
a  multiplicity  in  the  nature  of  God,  each  component  being  un¬ 
qualifiedly  Divine,  involves  a  doctrine  of  mutual  immanence 
in  the  divine  nature.  I  am  not  in  any  way  venturing  upon 
a  decision  upon  the  correctness  of  the  original  assumption 
of  this  multiplicity.  The  point  is  the  recourse  to  a  doctrine 
of  mutual  immanence. 

Again,  the  theologians  had  also  to  construct  a  doctrine  of 
the  person  of  Christ.  And  again  they  rejected  the  doctrine 
of  an  association  of  the  human  individual  with  a  divine  indi¬ 
vidual,  involving  responsive  imitations  in  the  human  person. 
They  decided  for  the  direct  immanence  of  God  in  the  one 
person  of  Christ.  They  also  decided  for  some  sort  of  direct 
immanence  of  God  in  the  World  generally.  This  was  their 
doctrine  of  the  third  person  of  the  Trinity.  I  am  not  making 
any  judgment  about  the  details  of  their  theology,  for  example, 
about  the  Trinitarian  doctrine.  My  point  is  that  in  the  place 
of  Plato’s  solution  of  secondary  images  and  imitations,  they 
demanded  a  direct  doctrine  of  immanence.  It  is  in  this  respect 
that  they  made  a  metaphysical  discovery.  They  pointed  out 
the  way  in  which  Platonic  metaphysics  should  develop,  if  it 
was  to  give  a  rational  account  of  the  role  of  the  persuasive 
agency  of  God. 

Unfortunately,  the  theologians  never  made  this  advance 
into  general  metaphysics.  The  reason  for  this  check  was 
another  unfortunate  presupposition.  The  nature  of  God  was 
exempted  from  all  the  metaphysical  categories  which  applied 
to  the  individual  things  in  this  temporal  world.  The  con¬ 
cept  of  him  was  a  sublimation  from  its  barbaric,  origin.  He 


THE  NEW  REFORMATION 


217 

stood  in  the  same  relation  to  the  whole  World  as  early 
Egyptian  or  Mesopotamian  kings  stood  to  their  subject 
populations.  Also  the  moral  characters  were  very  analogous. 
In  the  final  metaphysical  sublimation,  he  became  the  one 
absolute,  omnipotent,  omniscient  source  of  all  being,  for  his 
own  existence  requiring  no  relations  to  anything  beyond 
himself.  He  was  internally  complete.  Such  a  conception 
fitted  on  very  well  to  the  Platonic  doctrine  of  subordinate 
derivations.  The  final  insistence,  after  much  wavering, 
on  the  immanence  of  God  was  therefore  all  the  more  a 
fine  effort  of  metaphysical  imagination  on  the  part  of  the 
theologians  of  the  early  Christian  ages.  But  their  general 
concept  of  the  Deity  stopped  all  further  generalization. 
They  made  no  effort  to  conceive  the  World  in  terms  of  the 
metaphysical  categories  by  means  of  which  they  interpreted 
God,  and  they  made  no  effort  to  conceive  God  in  terms 
of  the  metaphysical  categories  which  they  applied  to  the 
World.  For  them,  God  was  eminently  real,  and  the  World 
was  derivatively  real.  God  was  necessary  to  the  World,  but 
the  World  was  not  necessary  to  God.  There  was  a  gulf 
between  them. 

The  worst  of  a  gulf  is,  that  it  is  very  difficult  to  know 
what  is  happening  on  the  further  side  of  it.  This  has  been 
the  fate  of  the  God  of  traditional  theology.  It  is  only  by 
drawing  the  long  bow  of  mysticism  that  evidences  for  his 
existence  can  be  collected  from  our  temporal  World.  Also 
the  worst  of  unqualified  omnipotence  is  that  it  is  accom¬ 
panied  by  responsibility  for  every  detail  of  every  happening. 
This  whole  topic  is  discussed  by  Hume  in  his  famous 
Dialogues. 

Section  V.  I  am  suggesting  that  Protestant  theology 
should  develop  as  its  foundation  an  interpretation  of  the 
Universe  which  grasps  its  unity  amid  its  many  diversities. 


2l8 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


The  interpretation  to  be  achieved  is  a  reconciliation  of 
seeming  incompatibilities.  But  these  incompatibilities  are 
not  hypothetical.  They  are  there  on  the  stage  of  history, 
undoubted  and  claiming  interpretation.  There  stand  in  the 
public  view  the  persuasiveness  of  the  eternal  ideals,  the  same 
to-day  as  when  realized  in  the  Founder  of  Christianity,  and 
the  compulsoriness  of  physical  nature,  which  passes  and  yet 
remains,  and  the  compulsoriness  of  that  realized  urge  tov/ard 
social  union,  such  as  the  Roman  Empire,  which  was  then,  and 
is  now  as  it  were  a  dream.  Nature  changes  and  yet  remains. 
The  ideals  declare  themselves  as  timeless;  and  yet  they  pass 
on,  as  it  were  the  flicker  of  a  brightness. 

It  is  the  business  of  philosophical  theology  to  provide  a 
rational  understanding  of  the  rise  of  civilization,  and  of  the 
tendernesses  of  mere  life  itself,  in  a  world  which  superficially 
is  founded  upon  the  clashings  of  senseless  compulsion.  I  am 
not  disguising  my  belief  that  in  this  task,  theology  has 
largely  failed.  The  notion  of  the  absolute  despot  has  stood 
in  the  way.  The  doctrine  of  Grace  has  been  degraded,  and 
the  doctrines  of  the  Atonement  are  mostly  crude.  The  defect 
of  the  liberal  theology  of  the  last  two  hundred  years  is 
that  it  has  confined  itself  to  the  suggestion  of  minor,  vapid 
reasons  why  people  should  continue  to  go  to  church  in  the 
traditional  fashion. 

The  last  book  in  the  Bible  illustrates  the  barbaric  elements 
which  have  been  retained  to  the  undoing  of  Christian  in¬ 
tuition.  In  itself  and  apart  from  its  bearing  upon  religious 
sentiment,  it  is  one  of  the  finest  examples  of  imaginative 
literature  as  it  stands  translated  in  King  James’s  Bible.  Also, 
as  an  historical  document,  whether  its  origin  be  Christian  or 
Jewish,  it  is  of  priceless  value  for  the  understanding  of 
strains  of  thought  prevalent  when  the  Christian  religion  was 
in  process  of  formation.  Finally,  the  book  only  states,  more 


THE  NEW  REFORMATION 


219 


pointedly  and  more  vividly,  ideas  spread  throughout  the 
Old  Testament  and  the  New  Testament,  even  in  the  Gospels 
themselves.  Yet  it  is  shocking  to  think  that  this  book  has 
been  retained  for  the  formation  of  religious  sentiment,  while 
the  speech  of  Pericles,  descriptive  of  the  Athenian  ideal  of 
civilization,  has  remained  neglected  in  this  connection.  What 
I  am  advocating  can  be  symbolized  by  this  shift  in  the  final 
book  of  the  authoritative  collection  of  religious  literature, 
namely,  the  replacement  of  the  book  of  the  Revelation  of 
St  John  the  Divine  by  the  imaginative  account  given  by 
Thucydides  of  the  Speech  of  Pericles  to  the  Athenians. 
Neither  of  them  is  history:  St  John  never  received  just  that 
revelation,  nor  did  Pericles  ever  make  just  that  speech. 

Section  VI.  There  remains  for  discussion  one  final  ques¬ 
tion.  I  wish  to  emphasize  the  importance  that,  amid  many 
divergencies  of  interpretation,  the  leaders  of  religious  thought 
should  to-day  concentrate  upon  the  Christian  tradition  and 
more  particularly  upon  its  historical  origins.  In  the  case  of  the 
more  conservative  schools  of  thought  such  advice  is,  of  course, 
unnecessary,  and  indeed  impertinent.  But  it  is  a  question 
for  discussion  why  the  more  radical  schools  should  not  cut 
entirely  free  from  any  appeal  to  the  past,  and  concentrate 
entirely  upon  the  contemporary  world  and  contemporary 
examples.  The  summary  answer  is  that  in  so  far  as  such  an 
appeal  to  tradition  can  be  made  with  complete  honesty, 
without  any  shadow  of  evasion,  there  is  an  enormous  gain 
in  popular  effectiveness. 

Civilization  is  constituted  out  of  four  elements,  (1)  Patterns 
of  Behaviour,  (2)  Patterns  of  Emotion,  (3)  Patterns  of  Belief, 
and  (4)  Technologies.  We  can  at  once  dismiss  Technologies 
as  beyond  our  topic,  though  all  four  constitutive  elements 
interact  upon  each  other.  Also  patterns  of  behaviour  are 
in  the  long  run  sustained  or  modified  by  patterns  of 


220 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


emotion  and  patterns  of  belief.  It  is  the  primary  business 
of  religion  to  concentrate  upon  emotion  and  belief. 

Now,  so  far  as  concerns  beliefs  of  a  general  character,  it 
is  much  easier  for  them  to  destroy  emotion  than  to  generate 
it.  In  any  survey  of  the  adventure  of  ideas  nothing  is  more 
surprising  than  the  ineffectiveness  of  novel  general  ideas  to 
acquire  for  themselves  an  appropriate  emotional  pattern  of 
any  intensity.  Profound  flashes  of  insight  remain  ineffective 
for  centuries,  not  because  they  are  unknown,  but  by  reason 
of  dominant  interests  which  inhibit  reaction  to  that  type  of 
generality.  The  history  of  religion  is  the  history  of  the 
countless  generations  required  for  interest  to  attach  itself  to 
profound  ideas.  For  this  reason  religions  are  so  often  more 
barbarous  than  the  civilizations  in  which  they  flourish. 

This  faintness  of  impress  of  general  ideas  upon  the  human 
mind  has  another  effect.  It  is  difficult  even  for  acute 
thinkers  to  understand  the  analogies  between  ideas  expressed 
in  diverse  phraseologies  and  illustrated  by  different  sorts  of 
examples.  Desperate  intellectual  battles  have  been  fought  by 
philosophers  who  have  expressed  the  same  idea  in  different 
ways.  For  both  these  reasons,  if  you  want  to  make  a  new 
start  in  religion,  based  upon  ideas  of  profound  generality, 
you  must  be  content  to  wait  a  thousand  years.  Religions  are 
like  species  of  animals:  they  do  not  originate  from  special 
creations. 

Finally,  if  there  be  any  truth  in  the  contention  that  dog¬ 
matic  finality  of  verbal  expression  is  a  mistaken  notion, 
there  is  an  enormous  advantage  in  keeping  together,  with 
common  modes  of  procedure,  religious  opinions  of  analogous 
types.  They  can  learn  from  each  other,  borrow  from  each 
other,  and  individuals  can  make  imperceptible  transitions. 
Above  all,  they  can  learn  to  understand  each  other  and  to 
lovec 


THE  NEW  REFORMATION 


22  I 


Must  ‘  religion 5  always  remain  as  a  synonym  for  ‘  hatred  ’  ? 
The  great  social  ideal  for  religion  is  that  it  should  be  the 
common  basis  for  the  unity  of  civilization.  In  that  way  it 
justifies  its  insight  beyond  the  transient  clash  of  brute  forces. 

This  discussion  has  concentrated  upon  three  culminating 
phases,  the  thought  of  Plato,  the  life  of  Christ,  and  the  first 
formative  period  of  Christian  theology.  But  this  whole  period 
of  twelve  centuries,  with  its  legendary  antecedents  and  its 
modern  successors,  is  required  to  complete  the  tale  of  the 
Christian  religion.  The  story  is  wholly  concerned  with  the 
interplay  of  ideas  belonging  to  different  levels  of  insight.  The 
religious  spirit  is  always  in  process  of  being  explained  away, 
distorted,  buried.  Yet,  since  the  travel  of  mankind  toward 
civilization,  it  is  always  there. 

The  task  of  Theology  is  to  show  how  the  World  is  founded 
on  something  beyond  mere  transient  fact,  and  how  it  issues 
in  something  beyond  the  perishing  of  occasions.  The  tem¬ 
poral  World  is  the  stage  of  finite  accomplishment.  We  ask  of 
Theology  to  express  that  element  in  perishing  lives  which 
is  undying  by  reason  of  its  expression  of  perfections  proper 
to  our  finite  natures.  In  this  way  we  shall  understand  how 
life  includes  a  mode  of  satisfaction  deeper  than  joy  or  sorrow. 


PART  III 


PHILOSOPHICAL 


CHAPTER  XI 


OBJECTS  AND  SUBJECTS 


HTM  \  r  /  /n  e  >  n  /  a 

.  .  .  1  o  rrapov  eKacrrcp  ttcluos ,  cov  at  aicrcnjaet?  /cat 
raura?  8o£a t  yLyvovrai,  .  .  .  Theaetetus ,  1 79  C. 


at  zcaTa 


§  i.  Prefatory.  When  Descartes,  Locke,  and  Hume  under¬ 
take  the  analysis  of  experience,  they  utilize  those  elements 
in  their  own  experience  which  lie  clear  and  distinct,  fit  for 
the  exactitude  of  intellectual  discourse.  It  is  tacitly  assumed, 
except  by  Plato,  that  the  more  fundamental  factors  will  ever 
lend  themselves  for  discrimination  with  peculiar  clarity.  This 
assumption  is  here  directly  challenged. 

§  2.  Structure  of  Experience.  No  topic  has  suffered  more 
from  this  tendency  of  philosophers  than  their  account  of  the 
object-subject  structure  of  experience.  In  the  first  place,  this 
structure  has  been  identified  with  the  bare  relation  of  knower 
to  known.  The  subject  is  the  knower,  the  object  is  the 
known.  Thus,  with  this  interpretation,  the  object-subject 
relation  is  the  known-knower  relation.  It  then  follows  that 
the  more  clearly  any  instance  of  this  relation  stands  out  for 
discrimination,  the  more  safely  we  can  utilize  it  for  the  inter¬ 
pretation  of  the  status  of  experience  in  the  universe  of  things. 
Hence  Descartes’  appeal  to  clarity  and  distinctness. 

This  deduction  presupposes  that  the  subject-object  relation 
is  the  fundamental  structural  pattern  of  experience.  I  agree 
with  this  presupposition,  but  not  in  the  sense  in  which  subject- 
object  is  identified  with  knower-known.  I  contend  that  the 
notion  of  mere  knowledge  is  a  high  abstraction,  and  that 

15 


wi 


226 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


conscious  discrimination  itself  is  a  variable  factor  only  present 
in  the  more  elaborate  examples  of  occasions  of  experience. 
The  basis  of  experience  is  emotional.  Stated  more  generally, 
the  basic  fact  is  the  rise  of  an  affective  tone  originating  from 
things  whose  relevance  is  given. 

§  3.  Phraseology.  Thus  the  Quaker  word  ‘concern5,  divested 
of  any  suggestion  of  knowledge,  is  more  fitted  to  express  this 
fundamental  structure.  The  occasion  as  subject  has  a 4  concern 5 
for  the  object.  And  the  ‘concern5  at  once  places  the  object 
as  a  component  in  the  experience  of  the  subject,  with  an 
affective  tone  drawn  from  this  object  and  directed  towards  it. 
With  this  interpretation  the  subject-object  relation  is  the 
fundamental  structure  of  experience. 

Quaker  usages  of  language  are  not  widely  spread.  Also 
each  phraseology  leads  to  a  crop  of  misunderstandings. 
The  subject-object  relation  can  be  conceived  as  Recipient 
and  Provoker,  where  the  fact  provoked  is  an  affective  tone 
about  the  status  of  the  provoker  in  the  provoked  experience. 
Also  the  total  provoked  occasion  is  a  totality  involving  many 
such  examples  of  provocation.  Again  this  phraseology  is  un¬ 
fortunate  ;  for  the  word  ‘  recipient 5  suggests  a  passivity  which 
is  erroneous. 

§  4.  Prehensions.  A  more  formal  explanation  is  as  follows. 
An  occasion  of  experience  is  an  activity,  analysable  into 
modes  of  functioning  which  jointly  constitute  its  process  of 
becoming.  Each  mode  is  analysable  into  the  total  experi¬ 
ence  as  active  subject,  and  into  the  thing  or  object  with 
which  the  special  activity  is  concerned.  This  thing  is  a 
datum,  that  is  to  say,  is  describable  without  reference  to  its 
entertainment  in  that  occasion.  An  object  is  anything  per¬ 
forming  this  function  of  a  datum  provoking  some  special 
activity  of  the  occasion  in  question.  Thus  subject  and  object 
are  relative  terms.  An  occasion  is  a  subject  in  respect  to  its 


OBJECTS  AND  SUBJECTS 


227 

special  activity  concerning  an  object;  and  anything  is  an 
object  in  respect  to  its  provocation  of  some  special  activity 
within  a  subject.  Such  a  mode  of  activity  is  termed  a  ‘pre¬ 
hension5.  Thus  a  prehension  involves  three  factors.  There 
is  the  occasion  of  experience  within  which  the  prehension 
is  a  detail  of  activity;  there  is  the  datum  whose  relevance 
provokes  the  origination  of  this  prehension;  this  datum  is 
the  prehended  object;  there  is  the  subjective  form,  which 
is  the  affective  tone  determining  the  effectiveness  of  that 
prehension  in  that  occasion  of  experience.  How  the  ex¬ 
perience  constitutes  itself  depends  on  its  complex  of  subjective 
forms. 

§  5.  Individuality.  The  individual  immediacy  of  an  occasion 
is  the  final  unity  of  subjective  form,  which  is  the  occasion 
as  an  absolute  reality.  This  immediacy  is  its  moment  of  sheer 
individuality,  bounded  on  either  side  by  essential  relativity. 
The  occasion  arises  from  relevant  objects,  and  perishes  into 
the  status  of  an  object  for  other  occasions.  But  it  enjoys 
its  decisive  moment  of  absolute  self-attainment  as  emotional 
unity.  As  used  here  the  words  ‘individual5  and  ‘atom5  have 
the  same  meaning,  that  they  apply  to  composite  things 
with  an  absolute  reality  which  their  components  lack.  These 
words  properly  apply  to  an  actual  entity  in  its  immediacy 
of  self-attainment  when  it  stands  out  as  for  itself  alone,  with 
its  own  affective  self-enjoyment.  The  term  ‘monad5  also 
expresses  this  essential  unity  at  the  decisive  moment,  which 
stands  between  its  birth  and  its  perishing.  The  creativity 
of  the  world  is  the  throbbing  emotion  of  the  past  hurling 
itself  into  a  new  transcendent  fact.  It  is  the  flying  dart,  of 
which  Lucretius  speaks,  hurled  beyond  the  bounds  of  the 
world. 

§  6.  Knowledge.  All  knowledge  is  conscious  discrimination 
of  objects  experienced.  But  this  conscious  discrimination, 

15-2 


228 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


which  is  knowledge,  is  nothing  more  than  an  additional 
factor  in  the  subjective  form  of  the  interplay  of  subject  with 
object.  This  interplay  is  the  stuff  constituting  those  individual 
things  which  make  up  the  sole  reality  of  the  Universe.  These 
individual  things  are  the  individual  occasions  of  experience, 
the  actual  entities. 

But  we  do  not  so  easily  get  rid  of  knowledge.  After  all, 
it  is  knowledge  that  philosophers  seek.  And  all  knowledge 
is  derived  from,  and  verified  by,  direct  intuitive  observation. 
I  accept  this  axiom  of  empiricism  as  stated  in  this  general 
form.  The  question  then  arises  how  the  structure  of  ex¬ 
perience  outlined  above  is  directly  observed.  In  answering 
this  challenge  I  remind  myself  of  the  old  advice  that  the 
doctrines  which  best  repay  critical  examination  are  those 
which  for  the  longest  period  have  remained  unquestioned. 

§  7.  Sense-Perception.  The  particular  age-long  group  of 
doctrines  which  I  have  in  mind  is:  (1)  that  all  perception  is 
by  the  mediation  of  our  bodily  sense-organs,  such  as  eyes, 
palates,  noses,  ears,  and  the  diffused  bodily  organization 
furnishing  touches,  aches,  and  other  bodily  sensations;  (2) 
that  all  percepta  are  bare  sensa,  in  patterned  connections, 
given  in  the  immediate  present;  (3)  that  our  experience 
of  a  social  world  is  an  interpretative  reaction  wholly  de¬ 
rivative  from  this  perception;  (4)  that  our  emotional  and 
purposive  experience  is  a  reflective  reaction  derived  from 
the  original  perception,  and  intertwined  with  the  interpre¬ 
tative  reaction  and  partly  shaping  it.  Thus  the  two  reactions 
are  different  aspects  of  one  process,  involving  interpretative, 
emotional,  and  purposive  factors.  Of  course,  we  are  all 
aware  that  there  are  powerful  schools  of  philosophy  which 
explicitly  reject  this  doctrine.  Yet  I  cannot  persuade  myself 
that  this  rejection  has  been  taken  seriously  by  writers  be- 


OBJECTS  AND  SUBJECTS 


229 


longing  to  the  schools  in  question.  When  the  direct  question 
as  to  things  perceived  arises,  it  seems  to  me  that  the  answer 
is  always  returned  in  terms  of  sensa  perceived. 

§  8.  Perceptive  Functions.  In  the  examination  of  the  sen¬ 
sationalist  doctrine,  the  first  question  to  be  asked  concerns 
the  general  definition  of  what  we  mean  by  those  functions 
of  experience  which  we  term  ‘perceptions’.  If  we  define 
them  as  those  experiential  functions  which  arise  directly 
from  the  stimulation  of  the  various  bodily  sense-organs,  then 
argument  ceases.  The  traditional  doctrine  then  becomes  a 
mere  matter  of  definition  of  the  use  of  the  word  ‘perception’. 
Indeed,  having  regard  to  long-standing  usage,  I  am  inclined 
to  agree  that  it  may  be  advisable  for  philosophers  to  confine 
the  word  ‘  perception  ’  to  this  limited  meaning.  But  the  point 
on  which  I  am  insisting  is  that  this  meaning  is  limited,  and 
that  there  is  a  wider  meaning  with  which  this  limited  use  of 
the  term  ‘perception’  has  been  tacitly  identified. 

§  9.  Objects.  The  process  of  experiencing  is  constituted  by 
the  reception  of  entities,  whose  being  is  antecedent  to  that 
process,  into  the  complex  fact  which  is  that  process  itself. 
These  antecedent  entities,  thus  received  as  factors  into  the 
process  of  experiencing,  are  termed  ‘objects’  for  that  experi¬ 
ential  occasion.  Thus  primarily  the  term  ‘object’  expresses 
the  relation  of  the  entity,  thus  denoted,  to  one  or  more  occa¬ 
sions  of  experiencing.  Two  conditions  must  be  fulfilled  in 
order  that  an  entity  may  function  as  an  object  in  a  process 
of  experiencing:  (1)  the  entity  must  be  antecedent ,  and 
(2)  the  entity  must  be  experienced  in  virtue  of  its  ante¬ 
cedence;  it  must  be  given.  Thus  an  object  must  be  a  thing 
received,  and  must  not  be  either  a  mode  of  reception  or 
a  thing  generated  in  that  occasion.  Thus  the  process  of 
experiencing  is  constituted  by  the  reception  of  objects  into 


230 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


the  unity  of  that  complex  occasion  which  is  the  process  itself. 
The  process  creates  itself,  but  it  does  not  create  the  objects 
which  it  receives  as  factors  in  its  own  nature. 

‘Objects5  for  an  occasion  can  also  be  termed  the  ‘data5  for 
that  occasion.  The  choice  of  terms  entirely  depends  on  the 
metaphor  which  you  prefer.  One  word  carries  the  literal 
meaning  of  Tying  in  the  way  of5,  and  the  other  word  carries 
the  literal  meaning  of ‘being  given  to5.  But  both  words  suffer 
from  the  defect  of  suggesting  that  an  occasion  of  experiencing 
arises  out  of  a  passive  situation  which  is  a  mere  welter  of 
many  data. 

§  io.  Creativity .  The  exact  contrary  is  the  case.  The 
initial  situation  includes  a  factor  of  activity  v/hich  is  the 
reason  for  the  origin  of  that  occasion  of  experience.  This 
factor  of  activity  is  what  I  have  called  ‘Creativity5.  The 
initial  situation  with  its  creativity  can  be  termed  the  initial 
phase  of  the  new  occasion.  It  can  equally  well  be  termed 
the  ‘actual  world5  relative  to  that  occasion.  It  has  a  certain 
unity  of  its  own,  expressive  of  its  capacity  for  providing  the 
objects  requisite  for  a  new  occasion,  and  also  expressive  of 
its  conjoint  activity  whereby  it  is  essentially  the  primary 
phase  of  a  new  occasion.  It  can  thus  be  termed  a  ‘  real  poten¬ 
tiality5.  The  ‘potentiality5  refers  to  the  passive  capacity,  the 
term  ‘real5  refers  to  the  creative  activity,  where  the  Platonic 
definition  of  ‘real5  in  the  Sophist  is  referred  to.  This  basic 
situation,  this  actual  world,  this  primary  phase,  this  real 
potentiality — however  you  characterize  it — as  a  whole  is 
active  with  its  inherent  creativity,  but  in  its  details  it  provides 
the  passive  objects  which  derive  their  activity  from  the 
creativity  of  the  whole.  The  creativity  is  the  actualization 
of  potentiality,  and  the  process  of  actualization  is  an  occasion 
of  experiencing.  Thus  viewed  in  abstraction,  objects  are 
passive,  but  viewed  in  conjunction  they  carry  the  creativity 


OBJECTS  AND  SUBJECTS  23I 

which  drives  the  world.  The  process  of  creation  is  the  form 
of  unity  of  the  Universe. 

§  11.  Perception.  In  the  preceding  sections,  the  discovery 
of  objects  as  factors  in  experience  was  explained.  The  dis¬ 
cussion  was  phrased  in  terms  of  an  ontology  which  goes 
beyond  the  immediate  purpose,  although  the  status  of  objects 
cannot  be  understood  in  the  absence  of  some  such  ontology 
explaining  their  function  in  experience,  that  is  to  say,  ex¬ 
plaining  why  an  occasion  of  experience  by  reason  of  its  nature 
requires  objects. 

The  objects  are  the  factors  in  experience  which  function 
so  as  to  express  that  that  occasion  originates  by  including  a 
transcendent  universe  of  other  things.  Thus  it  belongs  to 
the  essence  of  each  occasion  of  experience  that  it  is  concerned 
with  an  otherness  transcending  itself.  The  occasion  is  one 
among  others,  and  including  the  others  which  it  is  among. 
Consciousness  is  an  emphasis  upon  a  selection  of  these  objects. 
Thus  perception  is  consciousness  analysed  in  respect  to  those 
objects  selected  for  this  emphasis.  Consciousness  is  the  acme 
of  emphasis. 

It  is  evident  that  this  definition  of  perception  is  wider  than 
the  narrow  definition  based  upon  sense-perception,  sensa,  and 
the  bodily  sense-organs. 

§  12.  Non-Sensuous  Perception.  This  wider  definition  of 
perception  can  be  of  no  importance  unless  we  can  detect 
occasions  of  experience  exhibiting  modes  of  functioning  which 
fall  within  its  wider  scope.  If  we  discover  such  instances 
of  non-sensuous  perception,  then  the  tacit  identification  of 
perception  with  sense-perception  must  be  a  fatal  error  barring 
the  advance  of  systematic  metaphysics. 

Our  first  step  must  involve  the  clear  recognition  of  the 
limitations  inherent  in  the  scope  of  sense-perception.  This 
special  mode  of  functioning  essentially  exhibits  percepta  as 


232 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


here ,  now ,  immediate ,  and  discrete.  Every  impression  of  sensation 
is  a  distinct  existence,  declares  Hume;  and  there  can  be  no 
reasonable  doubt  of  this  doctrine.  But  even  Hume  clothes 
each  impression  with  force  and  liveliness.  It  must  be  distinctly 
understood  that  no  prehension,  even  of  bare  sensa,  can  be 
divested  of  its  affective  tone,  that  is  to  say,  of  its  character 
of  a  ‘concern’  in  the  Quaker  sense.  Concernedness  is  of  the 
essence  of  perception. 

Gaze  at  a  patch  of  red.  In  itself  as  an  object,  and  apart 
from  other  factors  of  concern,  this  patch  of  red,  as  the  mere 
object  of  that  present  act  of  perception,  is  silent  as  to  the 
past  or  the  future.  How  it  originates,  how  it  will  vanish, 
whether  indeed  there  was  a  past,  and  whether  there  will  be 
a  future,  are  not  disclosed  by  its  own  nature.  No  material 
for  the  interpretation  of  sensa  is  provided  by  the  sensa  them¬ 
selves,  as  they  stand  starkly,  barely,  present  and  immediate. 
We  do  interpret  them;  but  no  thanks  for  the  feat  is  due  to 
them.  The  epistemologies  of  the  last  two  hundred  years 
are  employed  in  the  tacit  introduction  of  alien  considera¬ 
tions  by  the  uncritical  use  of  current  forms  of  speech. 
A  copious  use  of  simple  literary  forms  can  thus  provide 
a  philosophy  delightful  to  read,  easy  to  understand,  and 
entirely  fallacious.  Yet  the  usages  of  language  do  prove 
that  our  habitual  interpretations  of  these  barren  sensa  are  in 
the  main  satisfying  to  common  sense,  though  in  particular 
instances  liable  to  error.  But  the  evidence  on  which  these 
interpretations  are  based  is  entirely  drawn  from  the  vast 
background  and  foreground  of  non-sensuous  perception  with 
which  sense-perception  is  fused,  and  without  which  it  can 
never  be.  We  can  discern  no  clean-cut  sense-perception  wholly 
concerned  with  present  fact. 

In  human  experience,  the  most  compelling  example  of 
non-sensuous  perception  is  our  knowledge  of  our  own  im- 


OBJECTS  AND  SUBJECTS 


233 


mediate  past.  I  am  not  referring  to  our  memories  of  a  day 
past,  or  of  an  hour  past,  or  of  a  minute  past.  Such  memories 
are  blurred  and  confused  by  the  intervening  occasions  of 
our  personal  existence.  But  our  immediate  past  is  consti¬ 
tuted  by  that  occasion,  or  by  that  group  of  fused  occasions, 
which  enters  into  experience  devoid  of  any  perceptible 
medium  intervening  between  it  and  the  present  immediate 
fact.  Roughly  speaking,  it  is  that  portion  of  our  past  lying 
between  a  tenth  of  a  second  and  half  a  second  ago.  It  is 
gone,  and  yet  it  is  here.  It  is  our  indubitable  self,  the 
foundation  of  our  present  existence.  Yet  the  present  occasion 
while  claiming  self-identity,  while  sharing  the  very  nature 
of  the  bygone  occasion  in  all  its  living  activities,  never¬ 
theless  is  engaged  in  modifying  it,  in  adjusting  it  to  other 
influences,  in  completing  it  with  other  values,  in  deflecting 
it  to  other  purposes.  The  present  moment  is  constituted  by 
the  influx  of  the  other  into  that  self-identity  which  is  the 
continued  life  of  the  immediate  past  within  the  immediacy 
of  the  present. 

§  13.  Illustration.  Consider  a  reasonably  rapid  speaker 
enunciating  the  proper  name  c United  States’.  There  are  four 
syllables  here.  When  the  third  syllable  is  reached,  probably 
the  first  is  in  the  immediate  past;  and  certainly  during  the 
word  ‘States’  the  first  syllable  of  the  phrase  lies  beyond 
the  immediacy  of  the  present.  Consider  the  speaker’s  own 
occasions  of  existence.  Each  occasion  achieves  for  him  the 
immediate  sense-presentation  of  sounds,  the  earlier  syllables 
in  the  earlier  occasions,  the  word  ‘States’  in  the  final 
occasion.  As  mere  sensuous  perception,  Hume  is  right  in 
saying  that  the  sound  ‘United’  as  a  mere  sensum  has  nothing 
in  its  nature  referent  to  the  sound  ‘States’,  yet  the  speaker  is 
carried  from  ‘United’  to  ‘States’,  and  the  two  conjointly  live 
in  the  present,  by  the  energizing  of  the  past  occasion  as  it 


234 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


claims  its  self-identical  existence  as  a  living  issue  in  the 
present.  The  immediate  past  as  surviving  to  be  again  lived 
through  in  the  present  is  the  palmary  instance  of  non- 
sensuous  perception. 

The  Humian  explanation,  involving  the  ‘association  of 
ideas’,  has  its  importance  for  this  topic.  But  it  is  not  to  the 
point  for  this  example.  The  speaker,  a  citizen  of  the  United 
States  and  therefore  dominated  by  an  immense  familiarity 
with  that  phrase,  may  in  fact  have  been  enunciating  the 
phrase  ‘United  Fruit  Company5 — a  corporation  which,  for 
all  its  importance,  he  may  not  have  heard  of  till  half  a 
minute  earlier.  In  his  experience  the  relation  of  the  later  to 
the  earlier  parts  of  this  phrase  is  entirely  the  same  as  that 
described  above  for  the  phrase  ‘United  States'.  In  this  latter 
example  it  is  to  be  noted  that  while  association  would  have 
led  him  to  ‘States5,  the  fact  of  the  energizing  of  the  imme¬ 
diate  past  compelled  him  to  conjoin  ‘Fruit5  in  the  im¬ 
mediacy  of  the  present.  He  uttered  the  word  ‘United5  with 
the  non-sensuous  anticipation  of  an  immediate  future  with  the 
sensum  ‘Fruit5,  and  he  then  uttered  the  word  ‘Fruit5  with 
the  non-sensuous  perception  of  the  immediate  past  with  the 
sensum  ‘United5.  But,  unfamiliar  as  he  was  with  the  United 
Fruit  Company,  he  had  no  association  connecting  the  various 
words  in  the  phrase  ‘United  Fruit  Company5;  while,  patriot 
as  he  was,  the  orator  had  the  strongest  association  con¬ 
necting  the  words  ‘United5  and  ‘States5.  Perhaps,  indeed, 
he  was  the  founder  of  the  Company,  and  also  invented  the 
name.  He  then  uttered  the  mere  sounds  ‘United  Fruit 
Company5  for  the  first  time  in  the  history  of  the  English 
language.  There  could  not  have  been  the  vestige  of  an 
association  to  help  him  along.  The  final  occasion  of  his  ex¬ 
perience  which  drove  his  body  to  the  utterance  of  the  sound 
‘Company5  is  only  explicable  by  his  concern  with  the  earlier 


OBJECTS  AND  SUBJECTS 


235 

occasions  with  their  subjective  forms  of  intention  to  procure 
the  utterance  of  the  complete  phrase.  Also,  in  so  far  as  there 
was  consciousness,  there  was  direct  observation  of  the  past 
with  its  intention  finding  its  completion  in  the  present  fact. 
This  is  an  instance  of  direct  intuitive  observation  which  is 
incapable  of  reduction  to  the  sensationalist  formula.  Such 
observations  have  not  the  clear  sharp-cut  precision  of  sense- 
perception.  But  surely  there  can  be  no  doubt  about  them. 
For  instance,  if  the  speaker  had  been  interrupted  after  the 
words  ‘United  Fruit’,  he  might  have  resumed  his  speech 
with  the  words  ‘I  meant  to  add  the  word  Company’.  Thus 
during  the  interruption,  the  past  was  energizing  in  his  ex¬ 
perience  as  carrying  in  itself  an  unfulfilled  intention. 

§  14.  Conformation  of  Feeling.  Another  point  emerges  in 
this  explanation,  namely,  the  doctrine  of  the  continuity  of 
nature.  This  doctrine  balances  and  limits  the  doctrine  of 
the  absolute  individuality  of  each  occasion  of  experience. 
There  is  a  continuity  between  the  subjective  form  of  the 
immediate  past  occasion  and  the  subjective  form  of  its 
primary  prehension  in  the  origination  of  the  new  occasion. 
In  the  process  of  synthesis  of  the  many  basic  prehensions 
modifications  enter.  But  the  subjective  forms  of  the  immediate 
past  are  continuous  with  those  of  the  present.  I  will  term 
this  doctrine  of  continuity,  the  Doctrine  of  Conformation  of 
Feeling. 

Suppose  that  for  some  period  of  time  some  circumstance 
of  his  life  has  aroused  anger  in  a  man.  How  does  he  now 
know  that  a  quarter  of  a  second  ago  he  was  angry?  Of 
course,  he  remembers  it;  we  all  know  that.  But  I  am  en¬ 
quiring  about  this  very  curious  fact  of  memory,  and  have 
chosen  an  overwhelmingly  vivid  instance.  The  mere  word 
‘memory’  explains  nothing.  The  first  phase  in  the  imme¬ 
diacy  of  the  new  occasion  is  that  of  the  conformation  of 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


236 

feelings.  The  feeling  as  enjoyed  by  the  past  occasion  is 
present  in  the  new  occasion  as  datum  felt,  with  a  subjective 
form  conformal  to  that  of  the  datum.  Thus  if  A  be  the 
past  occasion,  D  the  datum  felt  by  A  with  subjective  form 
describable  as  A  angry,  then  this  feeling — namely,  A  feeling 
D  with  subjective  form  of  anger — is  initially  felt  by  the  new 
occasion  B  with  the  same  subjective  form  of  anger.  The 
anger  is  continuous  throughout  the  successive  occasions  of 
experience.  This  continuity  of  subjective  form  is  the  initial 
sympathy  of  B  for  A.  It  is  the  primary  ground  for  the  con¬ 
tinuity  of  nature. 

Let  us  elaborate  the  consideration  of  the  angry  man.  His 
anger  is  the  subjective  form  of  his  feeling  some  datum  D. 
A  quarter  of  a  second  later  he  is,  consciously,  or  uncon¬ 
sciously,  embodying  his  past  as  a  datum  in  the  present,  and 
maintaining  in  the  present  the  anger  which  is  a  datum  from 
the  past.  In  so  far  as  that  feeling  has  fallen  within  the 
illumination  of  consciousness,  he  enjoys  a  non-sensuous  per¬ 
ception  of  the  past  emotion.  He  enjoys  this  emotion  both 
objectively,  as  belonging  to  the  past,  and  also  formally,  as 
continued  in  the  present.  This  continuation  is  the  continuity 
of  nature.  I  have  laboured  this  point,  because  traditional 
doctrines  involve  its  denial. 

Thus  non-sensuous  perception  is  one  aspect  of  the  con¬ 
tinuity  of  nature. 

§  15.  Hume’s  Doctrine  of  Custom .  Hume  appeals  to  a 
doctrine  of  force  and  liveliness  as  an  essential  factor  in  an 
impression  of  sensation.  This  doctrine  is  nothing  but  a  special 
case  of  the  doctrine  of  subjective  forms.  Again  he  holds 
that  the  force  and  liveliness  of  one  occasion  of  experience 
enter  into  the  character  of  succeeding  occasions.  The  whole 
doctrine  of  ‘custom5  depends  on  this  assumption.  If  the 
occasions  be  entirely  separate,  as  Hume  contends*,  this  transi- 


OBJECTS  AND  SUBJECTS 


237 

tion  of  character  is  without  any  basis  in  the  nature  of  things. 
What  Hume,  in  his  appeal  to  memory,  is  really  doing  is  to 
appeal  to  an  observed  immanence  of  the  past  in  the  future, 
involving  a  continuity  of  subjective  form. 

With  this  addition,  every  argument  of  Part  111  of  Hume’s 
Treatise  can  be  accepted.  But  the  conclusion  follows  that 
there  is  an  observed  relation  of  causation  between  such 
occasions.  The  general  character  of  this  observed  relation 
explains  at  once  memory  and  personal  identity.  They  are  all 
different  aspects  of  the  doctrine  of  the  immanence  of  occa¬ 
sions  of  experience.  The  additional  conclusion  can  also  be 
derived,  that  in  so  far  as  we  apply  notions  of  causation  to  the 
understanding  of  events  in  nature,  we  must  conceive  these 
events  under  the  general  notions  which  apply  to  occasions  of 
experience.  For  we  can  only  understand  causation  in  terms  of 
our  observations  of  these  occasions.  This  appeal  to  Hume  has 
the  sole  purpose  of  illustrating  the  common-sense  obviousness 
of  the  present  thesis. 

§  16.  The  Flux  of  Energy.  An  occasion  of  experience  which 
includes  a  human  mentality  is  an  extreme  instance,  at  one 
end  of  the  scale,  of  those  happenings  which  constitute  nature. 
As  yet  this  discussion  has  fixed  attention  upon  this  extreme. 
But  any  doctrine  which  refuses  to  place  human  experience 
outside  nature,  must  find  in  descriptions  of  human  ex¬ 
perience  factors  which  also  enter  into  the  descriptions  of  less 
specialized  natural  occurrences.  If  there  be  no  such  factors, 
then  the  doctrine  of  human  experience  as  a  fact  within 
nature  is  mere  bluff,  founded  upon  vague  phrases  whose  sole 
merit  is  a  comforting  familiarity.  We  should  either  admit 
dualism,  at  least  as  a  provisional  doctrine,  or  we  should  point 
out  the  identical  elements  connecting  human  experience  with 
physical  science. 

The  science  of  physics  conceives  a  natural  occasion  as  a 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


238 

locus  of  energy.  Whatever  else  that  occasion  may  be,  it  is 
an  individual  fact  harbouring  that  energy.  The  words  elec¬ 
tron,  proton,  photon,  wave-motion,  velocity,  hard  and  soft 
radiation,  chemical  elements,  matter,  empty  space,  tempera¬ 
ture,  degradation  of  energy,  all  point  to  the  fact  that  physical 
science  recognizes  qualitative  differences  between  occasions 
in  respect  to  the  way  in  which  each  occasion  entertains  its 
energy. 

These  differences  are  entirely  constituted  by  the  flux  of 
energy,  that  is  to  say,  by  the  way  in  which  the  occasions 
in  question  have  inherited  their  energy  from  the  past  of 
nature,  and  in  which  they  are  about  to  transmit  their  energy 
to  the  future.  The  discussion  of  the  Poynting  Flux  of  Energy 
is  one  of  the  most  fascinating  chapters  of  Electrodynamics. 
Forty-seven  years  ago,  when  a  young  graduate  student,  I 
first  heard  of  it  in  a  lecture  delivered  by  Sir  J.  J.  Thomson. 
It  was  then  a  new  discovery  recently  published  by  Poynting. 
But  its  father  was  the  great  Clerk-Maxwell  who  had  ex¬ 
pounded  all  the  requisite  principles.  The  sole  conclusion 
with  which  we  are  concerned  is  that  energy  has  recognizable 
paths  through  time  and  space.  Energy  passes  from  particular 
occasion  to  particular  occasion.  At  each  point  there  is  a  flux, 
with  a  quantitative  flow  and  a  definite  direction. 

This  is  a  conception  of  physical  nature  in  terms  of  con¬ 
tinuity.  In  fact,  the  concept  of  continuity  was  dominant  in 
Clerk-Maxwell’s  thought.  But  the  alternative  concept  of 
distinguishable  individualities  has  again  emerged  into  im¬ 
portance  in  the  more  recent  physics.  Electrons  and  protons 
and  photons  are  unit  charges  of  electricity;  also  there  are 
the  quanta  of  the  flux  of  energy.  These  contrasted  aspects 
of  nature,  continuity,  and  atomicity,  have  a  long  history  in 
European  thought,  reaching  back  to  the  origin  of  science 
among  the  Greeks.  The  more  probable  conclusion  is  that 


OBJECTS  AND  SUBJECTS 


239 


neither  can  be  dispensed  with,  and  that  we  are  only  witnessing 
that  modern  phase  of  the  contrast  which  is  relevant  to  the 
present  stage  of  science. 

§  17.  Mind  and  Nature  Compared.  The  doctrine  of  human 
experience  which  I  have  outlined  above,  also  for  its  own 
purposes  preserves  a  doctrine  of  distinguishable  individualities 
which  are  the  separate  occasions  of  experience,  and  a  doc¬ 
trine  of  continuity  expressed  by  the  identity  of  subjective 
form  inherited  conformally  from  one  occasion  to  the  other. 
The  physical  flux  corresponds  to  the  conformal  inheritance 
at  the  base  of  each  occasion  of  experience.  This  inheritance, 
in  spite  of  its  continuity  of  subjective  form,  is  nevertheless 
an  inheritance  from  definite  individual  occasions.  Thus,  if 
the  analogy  is  to  hold,  in  the  account  of  the  general  system 
of  relations  binding  the  past  to  the  present,  we  should 
expect  a  doctrine  of  quanta,  where  the  individualities  of 
the  occasions  are  relevant,  and  a  doctrine  of  continuity 
where  the  conformal  transference  of  subjective  form  is  the 
dominating  fact. 

The  notion  of  physical  energy,  which  is  at  the  base  of 
physics,  must  then  be  conceived  as  an  abstraction  from  the 
complex  energy,  emotional  and  purposeful,  inherent  in  the 
subjective  form  of  the  final  synthesis  in  which  each  occasion 
completes  itself.  It  is  the  total  vigour  of  each  activity  of 
experience.  The  mere  phrase  that  ‘physical  science  is  an 
abstraction’,  is  a  confession  of  philosophic  failure.  It  is  the 
business  of  rational  thought  to  describe  the  more  concrete 
fact  from  which  that  abstraction  is  derivable. 

§  18.  Personality.  In  our  account  of  human  experience 
we  have  attenuated  human  personality  into  a  genetic  rela¬ 
tion  between  occasions  of  human  experience.  Yet  personal 
unity  is  an  inescapable  fact.  The  Platonic  and  Christian  doc¬ 
trine  of  the  Soul,  the  Epicurean  doctrine  of  a  Concilium  of 


240 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


subtle  atoms,  the  Cartesian  doctrine  of  Thinking  Substance, 
the  Humanitarian  doctrine  of  the  Rights  of  man,  the  general 
Common  Sense  of  civilized  mankind — these  doctrines  be¬ 
tween  them  dominate  the  whole  span  of  Western  thought. 
Evidently  there  is  a  fact  to  be  accounted  for.  Any  philosophy 
must  provide  some  doctrine  of  personal  identity.  In  some 
sense  there  is  a  unity  in  the  life  of  each  man,  from  birth  to 
death.  The  two  modern  philosophers  who  most  consistently 
reject  the  notion  of  a  self-identical  Soul-Substance  are  Hume 
and  William  James.  But  the  problem  remains  for  them,  as 
it  does  for  the  philosophy  of  organism,  to  provide  an  adequate 
account  of  this  undoubted  personal  unity,  maintaining  itself 
amidst  the  welter  of  circumstance. 

§  19.  Plato's  Receptacle.  In  mathematical  studies,  where 
there  is  a  problem  to  be  solved  it  is  a  sound  method  to 
generalize,  so  as  to  divest  the  problem  of  details  irrelevant  to 
the  solution.  Let  us  therefore  give  a  general  description  of 
this  personal  unity,  divesting  it  of  minor  details  of  humanity. 
For  this  purpose  it  is  impossible  to  improve  upon  a  passage 
from  one  of  Plato’s  Dialogues.  I  summarize  it  with  the 
insertion  of  such  terms  as  ‘personal  unity’,  ‘events’,  ‘ex¬ 
perience’,  and  ‘personal  identity’,  for  two  or  three  of  its  own 
phrases:  “In  addition  to  the  notions  of  the  welter  of  events 
and  of  the  forms  which  they  illustrate,  we  require  a  third 
term,  personal  unity.  It  is  a  perplexed  and  obscure  concept. 
We  must  conceive  it  the  receptacle,  the  foster-mother  as  I 
might  say,  of  the  becoming  of  our  occasions  of  experience. 
This  personal  identity  is  the  thing  which  receives  all  occa¬ 
sions  of  the  man’s  existence.  It  is  there  as  a  natural  matrix 
for  all  transitions  of  life,  and  is  changed  and  variously 
figured  by  the  things  that  enter  it;  so  that  it  differs  in  its 
character  at  different  times.  Since  it  receives  all  manner  of 
experiences  into  its  own  unity,  it  must  itself  be  bare  of  all 


OBJECTS  AND  SUBJECTS 


241 


forms.  We  shall  not  be  far  wrong  if  we  describe  it  as  in¬ 
visible,  formless,  and  all-receptive.  It  is  a  locus  which  per¬ 
sists,  and  provides  an  emplacement  for  all  the  occasions  of 
experience.  That  which  happens  in  it  is  conditioned  by  the 
compulsion  of  its  own  past,  and  by  the  persuasion  of  its 
immanent  ideals”. 

You  will  have  recognized  that  in  this  description  I  have 
been  adapting  from  Plato’s  Timaeus ,l  with  the  slightest  of 
changes.  But  this  is  not  Plato’s  description  of  the  Soul.  It  is 
his  doctrine  of  the  Receptacle  [wt-oSo^]  or  Locus  [xcopa] 
whose  sole  function  is  the  imposition  of  a  unity  upon  the 
events  of  nature.  These  events  are  together  by  reason  of  their 
community  of  locus,  and  they  obtain  their  actuality  by  reason 
of  emplacement  within  this  community. 

§  20.  Immanence.  This  is  at  once  the  doctrine  of  the  unity 
of  nature,  and  of  the  unity  of  each  human  life.  The  conclusion 
follows  that  our  consciousness  of  the  self-identity  pervading 
our  life-thread  of  occasions  is  nothing  other  than  knowledge 
of  a  special  strand  of  unity  within  the  general  unity  of 
nature.  It  is  a  locus  within  the  whole,  marked  out  by  its  own 
peculiarities,  but  otherwise  exhibiting  the  general  principle 
which  guides  the  constitution  of  the  whole.  This  general 
principle  is  the  object-to-subject  structure  of  experience.  It 
can  be  otherwise  stated  as  the  vector-structure  of  nature. 
Or  otherwise,  it  can  be  conceived  as  the  doctrine  of  the 
immanence  of  the  past  energizing  in  the  present. 

This  doctrine  of  immanence  is  practically  that  doctrine 
adumbrated  by  the  Hellenistic  Christian  theologians  of 
Egypt.  But  they  applied  the  doctrine  only  to  the  relation  of 
God  to  the  World,  and  not  to  all  actualities. 

§  21.  Space  and  Time.  The  notion  of  Space-Time  repre- 

1  I  have  used  A.  E.  Taylor’s  translation,  with  compression  and  changes  of 
phrase. 


wi 


16 


242  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

sents  a  compromise  between  Plato’s  basic  Receptacle,  im¬ 
posing  no  forms,  and  the  Actual  World  imposing  its  own 
variety  of  forms.  This  imposition  of  forms  is  subject  to  the 
perspective  elimination  required  by  incompatibilities  of  affec¬ 
tive  tone.  Geometry  is  the  doctrine  of  loci  of  intermediaries 
imposing  perspective  in  the  process  of  inheritance.  In 
geometry  this  doctrine  is  restricted  to  its  barest  generalities 
of  co-ordination  prevailing  for  this  epoch  of  the  Uni¬ 
verse.  These  generalities  solely  concern  the  complex  of 
serial  relations  persistently  illustrated  in  the  connection  of 
events. 

Our  perception  of  this  geometrical  order  of  the  Universe 
brings  with  it  the  denial  of  the  restriction  of  inheritance 
to  mere  personal  order.  For  personal  order  means  one¬ 
dimensional  serial  order.  And  space  is  many-dimensional. 
Spatiality  involves  separation  by  reason  of  the  diversity  of 
intermediate  occasions,  and  also  it  involves  connection  by 
reason  of  the  immanence  involved  in  the  derivation  of 
present  from  past.  There  is  thus  an  analogy  between  the 
transference  of  energy  from  particular  occasion  to  particular 
occasion  in  physical  nature  and  the  transference  of  affective 
tone,  with  its  emotional  energy,  from  one  occasion  to  another 
in  any  human  personality.  The  object-to-subject  structure 
of  human  experience  is  reproduced  in  physical  nature  by 
this  vector  relation  of  particular  to  particular.  It  was  the 
defect  of  the  Greek  analysis  of  generation  that  it  conceived 
it  in  terms  of  the  bare  incoming  of  novel  abstract  form. 
This  ancient  analysis  failed  to  grasp  the  real  operation  of 
the  antecedent  particulars  imposing  themselves  on  the  novel 
particular  in  process  of  creation.  Thus  the  geometry  ex¬ 
emplified  in  fact  was  disjoined  from  their  account  of  the 
generation  of  fact. 

§  22.  The  Human  Body.  But  this  analogy  of  physical 


OBJECTS  AND  SUBJECTS 


243 


nature  to  human  experience  is  limited  by  the  fact  of  the  linear 
seriality  of  human  occasions  within  any  one  personality  and 
of  the  many-dimensional  seriality  of  the  occasions  in  physical 
Space-Time. 

In  order  to  prove  that  this  discrepancy  is  only  superficial, 
it  now  remains  for  discussion  whether  the  human  ex¬ 
perience  of  direct  inheritance  provides  any  analogy  to  this 
many-dimensional  character  of  space.  If  human  occasions 
of  experience  essentially  inherit  in  one-dimensional  personal 
order,  there  is  a  gap  between  human  occasions  and  the 
physical  occasions  of  nature. 

The  peculiar  status  of  the  human  body  at  once  presents 
itself  as  negating  this  notion  of  strict  personal  order  for 
human  inheritance.  Our  dominant  inheritance  from  our 
immediately  past  occasion  is  broken  into  by  innumerable 
inheritances  through  other  avenues.  Sensitive  nerves,  the 
functionings  of  our  viscera,  disturbances  in  the  composition 
of  our  blood,  break  in  upon  the  dominant  line  of  inheritance. 
In  this  way,  emotions,  hopes,  fears,  inhibitions,  sense-per¬ 
ceptions,  arise,  which  physiologists  confidently  ascribe  to 
the  bodily  functionings.  So  intimately  obvious  is  this  bodily 
inheritance  that  common  speech  does  not  discriminate  the 
human  body  from  the  human  person.  Soul  and  body  are 
fused  together.  Also  this  common  identification  has  survived 
the  scientific  investigation  of  physiologists,  who  are  apt  to  see 
more  body  than  soul  in  human  beings. 

But  the  human  body  is  indubitably  a  complex  of  occasions 
which  are  part  of  spatial  nature.  It  is  a  set  of  occasions 
miraculously  co-ordinated  so  as  to  pour  its  inheritance 
into  various  regions  within  the  brain.  There  is  thus  every 
reason  to  believe  that  our  sense  of  unity  with  the  body  has 
the  same  original  as  our  sense  of  unity  with  our  immediate 
past  of  personal  experience.  It  is  another  case  of  non- 

16-2 


244 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


sensuous  perception,  only  now  devoid  of  the  strict  personal 
order. 

But  physiologists  and  physicists  are  equally  agreed  that 
the  body  inherits  physical  conditions  from  the  physical  en¬ 
vironment  according  to  the  physical  laws.  There  is  thus  a 
general  continuity  between  human  experience  and  physical 
occasions.  The  elaboration  of  such  a  continuity  is  one  most 
obvious  task  for  philosophy. 

§  23.  Dualism.  This  discussion  has  begged  attention  to  a 
complex  argument.  I  will  conclude  it  by  drawing  attention 
to  a  general  question  which  is  relevant. 

Is  this  discussion  to  be  looked  upon  as  another  example 
of  The  Revolt  against  Dualism ?  We  have  all  read  with  high 
appreciation  Professor  Lovejoy’s  brilliant  book  in  criticism 
of  this  revolt.  Now  superficially  the  position  which  I  have 
here  put  forward  is  certainly  an  instance  of  the  revolt  which 
he  criticizes.  But  in  another  sense  I  have  endeavoured  to 
put  forward  a  defence  of  dualism,  differently  interpreted. 
Plato,  Descartes,  Locke,  prepared  the  way  for  Hume;  and 
Kant  followed  upon  Hume.  The  point  of  this  discussion 
is  to  show  an  alternative  line  of  thought  which  evades 
Hume’s  deduction  from  philosophical  tradition,  and  at  the 
same  time  preserves  the  general  trend  of  thought  received 
from  his  three  great  predecessors.  The  dualism  in  the  later 
Platonic  dialogues  between  the  Platonic  ‘souls’  and  the 
Platonic  c  physical  ’  nature,  the  dualism  between  the  Cartesian 
‘  thinking  substances  ’  and  the  Cartesian  ‘  extended  sub¬ 
stances ’,  the  dualism  between  the  Lockian  ‘human  under¬ 
standing’  and  the  Lockian  ‘external  things’  described  for 
him  by  Galileo  and  Newton — all  these  kindred  dualisms 
are  here  found  within  each  occasion  of  actuality.  Each 
occasion  has  its  physical  inheritance  and  its  mental  reaction 
which  drives  it  on  to  its  self-completion.  The 'world  is  not 


OBJECTS  AND  SUBJECTS 


245 


merely  physical,  nor  is  it  merely  mental.  Nor  is  it  merely  one 
with  many  subordinate  phases.  Nor  is  it  merely  a  complete 
fact,  in  its  essence  static  with  the  illusion  of  change.  Wherever 
a  vicious  dualism  appears,  it  is  by  reason  of  mistaking  an 
abstraction  for  a  final  concrete  fact. 

The  Universe  is  dual  because,  in  the  fullest  sense,  it  is  both 
transient  and  eternal.  The  Universe  is  dual  because  each  final 
actuality  is  both  physical  and  mental.  The  Universe  is  dual  be¬ 
cause  each  actuality  requires  abstract  character.  The  Universe 
is  dual  because  each  occasion  unites  its  formal  immediacy 
with  objective  otherness.  The  Universe  is  many  because  it 
is  wholly  and  completely  to  be  analysed  into  many  final 
actualities — or  in  Cartesian  language,  into  many  res  verae. 
The  Universe  is  one ,  because  of  the  universal  immanence. 
There  is  thus  a  dualism  in  this  contrast  between  the  unity 
and  multiplicity.  Throughout  the  Universe  there  reigns  the 
union  of  opposites  which  is  the  ground  of  dualism. 


CHAPTER  XII 


PAST,  PRESENT,  FUTURE 

Section  I.  The  doctrine  of  the  immanence  of  past  occa¬ 
sions  in  the  occasions  which  are  future,  relatively  to  them, 
has  been  sufficiently  discussed  in  the  previous  chapter.  The 
past  has  an  objective  existence  in  the  present  which  lies  in 
the  future  beyond  itself.  But  the  sense  in  which  the  future 
can  be  said  to  be  immanent  in  occasions  antecedent  to  itself, 
and  the  sense  in  which  contemporary  occasions  are  im¬ 
manent  in  each  other,  are  not  so  evident  in  terms  of  the 
doctrine  of  the  subject-object  structure  of  experience.  It  will 
be  simpler  first  to  concentrate  upon  the  relation  of  the 
future  to  the  present.  It  is  evident  that  the  future  certainly 
is  something  for  the  present.  The  most  familiar  habits  of 
mankind  witness  to  this  fact  Legal  contracts,  social  under¬ 
standings  of  every  type,  ambitions,  anxieties,  railway  time¬ 
tables,  are  futile  gestures  of  consciousness  apart  from  the 
fact  that  the  present  bears  in  its  own  realized  constitution 
relationships  to  a  future  beyond  itself.  Cut  away  the  future, 
and  the  present  collapses,  emptied  of  its  proper  content. 
Immediate  existence  requires  the  insertion  of  the  future  in 
the  crannies  of  the  present. 

Here  again  the  habits  of  a  literary  training  with  its  long- 
range  forecast  and  back-cast  of  critical  thought  exercise 
an  unfortunate  effect  upon  philosophy.  We  think  of  the 
future  in  time-spans  of  centuries,  or  of  decades,  or  of  years, 
or  of  days.  We  dwell  critically  upon  the  mass  of  fables 


PAST,  PRESENT,  FUTURE 


247 

termed  history.  As  a  result  we  conceive  ourselves  as  related 
to  past  or  to  future  by  a  mere  effort  of  purely  abstract 
imagination,  devoid  of  direct  observation  of  particular  fact. 
If  we  admit  this  conclusion,  there  is  no  real  evidence  that 
there  was  a  past,  or  that  there  will  be  a  future.  Our  ignorance 
on  this  point  is  complete.  All  that  we  can  observe  consists  of 
conceptual  persuasions  in  the  present.  Such  is  the  outcome 
of  the  literary  habit  of  dwelling  upon  the  long  future  or 
upon  the  long  past.  Literature  preserves  the  wisdom  of  the 
human  race;  but  in  this  way  it  enfeebles  the  emphasis  of 
first-hand  intuition.  In  considering  our  direct  observation  of 
past,  or  of  future,  we  should  confine  ourselves  to  time-spans 
of  the  order  of  magnitude  of  a  second,  or  even  of  fractions 
of  a  second. 

Section  II.  If  we  keep  ourselves  to  this  short-range  in¬ 
tuition,  assuredly  the  future  is  not  nothing.  It  lives  actively 
in  its  antecedent  world.  Each  moment  of  experience  con¬ 
fesses  itself  to  be  a  transition  between  two  worlds,  the 
immediate  past  and  the  immediate  future.  This  is  the  per¬ 
sistent  delivery  of  common  sense.  Also  this  immediate 
future  is  immanent  in  the  present  with  some  degree  of 
structural  definition.  The  difficulty  lies  in  the  explanation 
of  this  immanence  in  terms  of  the  subject-object  structure 
of  experience.  In  the  present,  the  future  occasions,  as  indi¬ 
vidual  realities  with  their  measure  of  absolute  completeness, 
are  non-existent.  Thus  the  future  must  be  immanent  in  the 
present  in  some  different  sense  to  the  objective  immortality  of 
the  individual  occasions  of  the  past.  In  the  present  there  are 
no  individual  occasions  belonging  to  the  future.  The  present 
contains  the  utmost  verge  of  such  realized  individuality.  The 
whole  doctrine  of  the  future  is  to  be  understood  in  terms  of  the 
account  of  the  process  of  self-completion  of  each  individual 
actual  occasion. 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


248 

This  process  can  be  shortly  characterized  as  a  passage 
from  re-enaction  to  anticipation.  The  intermediate  stage  in 
this  transition  is  constituted  by  the  acquisition  of  novel  con¬ 
tent,  which  is  the  individual  contribution  of  the  immediate 
subject  for  the  re-shaping  of  its  primary  phase  of  re-enaction 
into  its  final  phase  of  anticipation.  This  final  phase  is  other¬ 
wise  termed  the  ‘satisfaction5,  since  it  marks  the  exhaustion 
of  the  creative  urge  for  that  individuality.  This  novel  content 
is  composed  of  positive  conceptual  prehensions,  that  is  to 
say,  of  conceptual  feelings.  These  conceptual  feelings  become 
integrated  with  the  physical  prehensions  of  antecedent  oc¬ 
casions,  and  thus  yield  propositions  concerning  the  past. 
These  propositions  are  again  integrated  and  re-integrated 
with  each  other  and  with  conceptual  feelings,  and  yield  other 
propositions. 

Finally  propositions  emerge  concerning  the  constitution 
of  the  immediate  subject.  It  belongs  to  the  essence  of  this 
subject  that  it  pass  into  objective  immortality.  Thus  its  own 
constitution  involves  that  its  own  activity  in  ^//'-formation 
passes  into  its  activity  of  o^rr-formation.  It  is  by  reason 
of  the  constitution  of  the  present  subject  that  the  future 
will  embody  the  present  subject  and  will  re-enact  its  patterns 
of  activity.  But  the  future  individual  occasions  are  non¬ 
existent.  The  sole  immediate  actuality  is  the  constitution 
of  the  present  subject  which  embodies  its  own  necessity 
for  objective  immortality  beyond  its  own  immediacy  of 
self-formation.  This  objective  immortality  is  a  stubborn 
fact  for  the  future,  involving  its  pattern  of  perspective 
re-enaction. 

The  final  phase  of  anticipation  is  a  propositional  realiza¬ 
tion  of  the  essence  of  the  present-subject,  in  respect  to 
the  necessities  which  it  lays  upon  the  future  to  embody  it 
and  to  re-enact  it  so  far  as  compatibility  may  permit.  Thus 


PAST,  PRESENT,  FUTURE 


249 


the  self-enjoyment  of  an  occasion  of  experience  is  initiated  by 
an  enjoyment  of  the  past  as  alive  in  itself  and  is  terminated 
by  an  enjoyment  of  itself  as  alive  in  the  future.  This  is  the 
account  of  the  creative  urge  of  the  Universe  as  it  functions 
in  each  single  individual  occasion.  In  this  sense,  the  future 
is  immanent  in  each  present  occasion,  with  its  particular 
relations  to  the  present  settled  in  various  degrees  of  domin¬ 
ance.  But  no  future  individual  occasion  is  in  existence.  The 
anticipatory  propositions  all  concern  the  constitution  of  the 
present  occasion  and  the  necessities  inherent  in  it.  This  con¬ 
stitution  necessitates  that  there  be  a  future,  and  necessitates 
a  quota  of  contribution  for  re-enaction  in  the  primary  phases 
of  future  occasions. 

The  point  to  remember  is  that  the  fact  that  each  indi¬ 
vidual  occasion  is  transcended  by  the  creative  urge,  belongs 
to  the  essential  constitution  of  each  such  occasion.  It  is  not 
an  accident  which  is  irrelevant  to  the  completed  constitution 
of  any  such  occasion. 

In  the  formation  of  each  occasion  of  actuality  the  swing 
over  from  re-enaction  to  anticipation  is  due  to  the  intervening 
touch  of  mentality.  Whether  the  ideas  thus  introduced  by 
the  novel  conceptual  prehension  be  old  or  new,  they  have 
this  decisive  result,  that  the  occasion  arises  as  an  effect  facing 
its  past  and  ends  as  a  cause  facing  its  future.  In  between 
there  lies  the  teleology  of  the  Universe. 

If  the  mental  activity  involves  no  introduction  of  ideal 
novelty,  the  data  of  the  conceptual  feelings  are  merely 
eternal  objects  already  illustrated  in  the  initial  phase  of  re¬ 
enaction.  In  that  case,  the  re-integration  with  the  primary 
phase  merely  converts  the  initial  conformal  reception  into  the 
anticipation  of  preservation  of  types  of  order  and  of  patterns 
of  feeling  already  dominant  in  the  inheritance.  There  is  a 
reign  of  acquiescence.  In  this  way,  a  region  of  such  occa- 


250 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


sions  assumes  the  aspect  of  passive  submission  to  imposed 
laws  of  nature.  But  when  there  is  conceptual  novelty  made 
effective  by  its  re-iteration  and  by  the  added  emphasis  on 
it  throughout  a  chain  of  co-ordinated  occasions,  we  have 
the  aspect  of  an  enduring  person  with  a  sustained  purpose 
originated  by  that  person  and  made  effective  in  that  per¬ 
son’s  environment.  Thus  in  this  case  the  anticipation  of 
kinship  with  the  future  assumes  the  form  of  purpose  to 
transform  concept  into  fact.  In  either  case,  whether  or  no 
there  be  conceptual  novelty,  the  subjective  forms  of  the 
conceptual  prehensions  constitute  the  drive  of  the  Uni¬ 
verse,  whereby  each  occasion  precipitates  itself  into  the 
future. 

Section  III.  It  is  now  possible  to  determine  the  sense  in 
which  the  future  is  immanent  in  the  present.  The  future 
is  immanent  in  the  present  by  reason  of  the  fact  that  the 
present  bears  in  its  own  essence  the  relationships  which  it 
will  have  to  the  future.  It  thereby  includes  in  its  essence  the 
necessities  to  which  the  future  must  conform.  The  future 
is  there  in  the  present,  as  a  general  fact  belonging  to  the 
nature  of  things.  It  is  also  there  with  such  general  deter¬ 
minations  as  it  lies  in  the  nature  of  the  particular  present 
to  impose  on  the  particular  future  which  must  succeed  it. 
All  this  belongs  to  the  essence  of  the  present,  and  constitutes 
the  future,  as  thus  determined,  an  object  for  prehension  in 
the  subjective  immediacy  of  the  present.  In  this  way  each 
present  occasion  prehends  the  general  metaphysical  character 
of  the  Universe,  and  thereby  it  prehends  its  own  share  in 
that  character.  Thus  the  future  is  to  the  present  as  an 
object  for  a  subject.  It  has  an  objective  existence  in  the 
present.  But  the  objective  existence  of  the  future  in  the 
present  differs  from  the  objective  existence  of  the  past  in 
the  present.  The  various  particular  occasions*  of  the  past 


PAST,  PRESENT,  FUTURE 


251 


are  in  existence,  and  are  severally  functioning  as  objects 
for  prehension  in  the  present.  This  individual  objective 
existence  of  the  actual  occasions  of  the  past,  each  functioning 
in  each  present  occasion,  constitutes  the  causal  relationship 
which  is  efficient  causation.  But  there  are  no  actual  occasions 
in  the  future,  already  constituted.  Thus  there  are  no  actual 
occasions  in  the  future  to  exercise  efficient  causation  in  the 
present.  What  is  objective  in  the  present  is  the  necessity 
of  a  future  of  actual  occasions,  and  the  necessity  that  these 
future  occasions  conform  to  the  conditions  inherent  in  the 
essence  of  the  present  occasion.  The  future  belongs  to  the 
essence  of  present  fact,  and  has  no  actuality  other  than 
the  actuality  of  present  fact.  But  its  particular  relation¬ 
ships  to  present  fact  are  already  realized  in  the  nature  of 
present  fact. 

Section  IV.  It  is  the  definition  of  contemporary  events 
that  they  happen  in  causal  independence  of  each  other. 
Thus  two  contemporary  occasions  are  such  that  neither 
belongs  to  the  past  of  the  other.  The  two  occasions  are  not 
in  any  direct  relation  of  efficient  causation.  The  vast  causal 
independence  of  contemporary  occasions  is  the  preservative 
of  the  elbow-room  within  the  Universe.  It  provides  each 
actuality  with  a  welcome  environment  for  irresponsibility. 
‘Am  I  my  brother’s  keeper?5  expresses  one  of  the  earliest 
gestures  of  self-consciousness.  Our  claim  for  freedom  is 
rooted  in  our  relationship  to  our  contemporary  environment. 
Nature  does  provide  a  field  for  independent  activities.  The 
understanding  of  the  Universe  requires  that  we  conceive 
in  their  proper  relations  to  each  other  the  various  roles,  of 
efficient  causation,  of  teleological  self-creation,  and  of  con¬ 
temporary  independence.  This  adequate  conception  requires 
also  understanding  of  perspective  elimination,  and  of  types 
of  order  dominating  vast  epochs,  and  of  minor  endurances 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


252 

with  their  own  additional  modes  of  order  diversifying  each 
larger  epoch  within  which  they  find  themselves. 

The  mutual  independence  of  contemporary  occasions  lies 
strictly  within  the  sphere  of  their  teleological  self-creation. 
The  occasions  originate  from  a  common  past  and  their  ob¬ 
jective  immortality  operates  within  a  common  future.  Thus 
indirectly,  via  the  immanence  of  the  past  and  the  immanence 
of  the  future,  the  occasions  are  connected.  But  the  immediate 
activity  of  self-creation  is  separate  and  private,  so  far  as 
contemporaries  are  concerned. 

There  is  thus  a  certain  indirect  immanence  of  contemporary 
occasions  in  each  other.  For  if  A  and  B  be  contemporaries, 
and  C  be  in  the  past  of  both  of  them,  then  A  and  B  are  each 
in  a  sense  immanent  in  G,  in  the  way  in  which  the  future 
can  be  immanent  in  its  past.  But  G  is  objectively  immortal 
in  both  A  and  B.  Thus,  in  this  indirect  sense,  A  is  immanent 
in  B,  and  B  is  immanent  in  A.  But  the  objective  immortality 
of  A  does  not  operate  in  B,  nor  does  that  of  B  operate  in  A. 
As  individual  complete  actualities,  A  is  shrouded  from  B, 
and  B  is  shrouded  from  A.  It  is  not  wholly  true  that  two 
contemporaries  A  and  B  enjoy  a  common  past.  In  the  first 
place,  even  if  the  occasions  in  the  past  of  A  be  identical 
with  the  occasions  in  the  past  of  B,  yet  A  and  B  by  reason 
of  their  difference  of  status,  enjoy  that  past  under  a  difference 
of  perspective  elimination.  Thus  the  objective  immortality 
of  the  past  in  A  differs  from  the  objective  immortality  of 
that  same  past  in  B.  Thus  two  contemporary  occasions, 
greatly  remote  from  each  other,  are  in  effect  derived  from 
different  pasts. 

Again,  according  to  the  notions  of  time  recently  developed 
in  modern  physics,  if  A  and  B  are  contemporaries  and  P 
is  contemporary  with  A,  then  it  is  not  necessarily  true  that 
P  is  contemporary  with  B.  It  is  possible  that  P  may  be 


PAST,  PRESENT,  FUTURE 


253 


earlier  than  B,  or  that  it  may  be  later  than  B.  Thus  even  the 
occasions  in  the  past  of  A  are  not  wholly  identical  with  those 
in  the  past  of  B.  When  A  and  B  are  neighbouring,  then  this 
distinction  between  their  pasts  may  be  negligible.  But  when 
they  are  remote  from  each  other,  the  distinction  may  be  of 
major  importance. 

It  follows  from  this  discussion  that  in  so  far  as  the  relevant 
environment  is  dominated  by  any  uniform  type  of  co-ordi¬ 
nation,  any  occasion  will  experience  its  past  as  ‘anticipating’ 
the  prolongation  of  that  type  of  order  into  the  future  beyond 
that  past.  But  this  future  includes  the  occasion  in  question 
and  its  contemporary  environment.  In  this  way  there  is 
an  indirect  immanence  of  its  contemporary  world  in  that 
occasion;  not  in  respect  to  its  particular  individual  occa¬ 
sions,  but  as  the  general  substratum  for  that  relation  of 
order.  This  type  of  order  will  both  relate  the  various  parts 
of  the  contemporary  world  among  themselves,  and  will 
also  relate  these  parts  to  the  occasion  in  question.  But  the 
parts  of  the  contemporary  world  will  only  belong  to  the 
experience  of  the  occasion  in  their  function  of  relata  for 
this  type  of  order.  This  is  the  general  explanation  why 
the  contemporary  world  should  be  perceived  as  the  field  of 
the  uniform  spatial  relations.  It  gives  no  reason  why  any 
special  system  of  relationships  should  dpminate  this  epoch. 
But  the  explanation  does  give  a  reason  why  some  system 
of  uniform  relations  should  dominate  our  perceptions  of  the 
contemporary  world.  Also  the  intrinsic  activity  has  been 
lost.  The  contemporary  world  enters  into  experience  as  the 
passive  subject  of  relations  and  qualities. 

Section  V.  The  actualities  of  the  Universe  are  processes 
of  experience,  each  process  an  individual  fact.  The  whole 
Universe  is  the  advancing  assemblage  of  these  processes. 
The  Aristotelian  doctrine,  that  all  agency  is  confined  to 


254 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


actuality,  is  accepted.  So  also  is  the  Platonic  dictum  that 
the  very  meaning  of  existence  is  ‘to  be  a  factor  in  agency5, 
or  in  other  words  ‘to  make  a  difference5.  Thus,  ‘to  be  some¬ 
thing  5  is  to  be  discoverable  as  a  factor  in  the  analysis  of  some 
actuality.  It  follows  that  in  one  sense  everything  is  ‘real5, 
according  to  its  own  category  of  being.  In  this  sense  the 
word  ‘real5  can  only  mean  that  some  sound  or  mark  is  a 
word  with  a  denotation.  But  the  term  ‘realization5  refers  to 
the  actual  entities  which  include  the  entity  in  question  as 
a  positive  factor  in  their  constitutions.  Thus  though  every¬ 
thing  is  real,  it  is  not  necessarily  realized  in  some  particular 
set  of  actual  occasions.  But  it  is  necessary  that  it  be  dis¬ 
coverable  somewhere,  realized  in  some  actual  entity.  There 
is  not  anything  which  has  failed  in  some  sense  to  be  realized, 
physically  or  conceptually.  The  term  ‘real5  can  also  mark 
the  differences  arising  in  the  contrast  between  physical  and 
conceptual  realization. 

Section  VI.  Any  set  of  actual  occasions  are  united  by 
the  mutual  immanence  of  occasions,  each  in  the  other.  To 
the  extent  that  they  are  united  they  mutually  constrain  each 
other.  Evidently  this  mutual  immanence  and  constraint  of 
a  pair  of  occasions  is  not  in  general  a  symmetric  relation. 
For,  apart  from  contemporaries,  one  occasion  will  be  in  the 
future  of  the  other.  Thus  the  earlier  will  be  immanent  in 
the  later  according  to  the  mode  of  efficient  causality,  and  the 
later  in  the  earlier  according  to  the  mode  of  anticipation, 
as  explained  above.  Any  set  of  occasions,  conceived  as  thus 
combined  into  a  unity,  will  be  termed  a  nexus.  The  unity  of 
such  a  nexus  may  be  of  a  trivial  description,  if  the  various 
occasions  are  dispersed  through  the  Universe,  each  with  a 
widely  different  status  from  the  other.  When  the  unity  of 
the  nexus  is  of  dominating  importance,  nexus  of  different 
types  emerge,  which  may  be  respectively  termed  Regions, 


PAST,  PRESENT,  FUTURE 


255 


Societies,  Persons,  Enduring  Objects,  Corporal  Substances, 
Living  Organisms,  Events,  with  other  analogous  terms  for 
the  various  shades  of  complexity  of  which  Nature  is  capable. 
It  will  be  sufficient  in  the  next  chapter  to  indicate  a  few  of 
these  special  types  of  nexus. 

Section  VII.  We  think  of  Constraint  and  Freedom  in 
terms  of  the  values  realized  in  connection  with  them,  and 
also  in  terms  of  the  antithesis  between  them.  But  there  is 
another  way  of  considering  them.  We  can  ask  what  there 
is  in  the  physical  nature  of  things  constituting  the  physical 
realization  either  of  freedom,  or  of  constraint,  or  of  a  com¬ 
patible  association  of  both  in  a  suitable  pattern. 

In  fact  we  do  habitually  interpret  human  history  in  terms 
of  freedom  and  constraint.  Apart  from  the  realization  of 
this  antithesis  in  physical  occurrences,  the  history  of  civilized 
humanity  is  a  meaningless  succession  of  events,  involving  a 
play  of  emotions  concerned  with  concepts  entirely  irrelevant 
to  the  physical  facts. 

The  causal  independence  of  contemporary  occasions  is  the 
ground  for  the  freedom  within  the  Universe.  The  novelties 
which  face  the  contemporary  world  are  solved  in  isolation 
by  the  contemporary  occasions.  There  is  complete  con¬ 
temporary  freedom.  It  is  not  true  that  whatever  happens 
is  immediately  a  condition  laid  upon  everything  else.  Such 
a  conception  of  complete  mutual  determination  is  an  ex¬ 
aggeration  of  the  community  of  the  Universe.  The  notions  of 
4  sporadic  occurrences 5  and  of c  mutual  irrelevance 5  have  a  real 
application  to  the  nature  of  things.  Again  the  perspective 
imposed  by  incompatibilities  of  subjective  form  in  another 
way  provides  for  freedom.  The  antecedent  environment  is 
not  wholly  efficacious  in  determining  the  initial  phase  of  the 
occasion  which  springs  from  it.  There  are  factors  in  the 
environment  which  are  eliminated  from  any  function  as 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


256 

explicit  facts  in  the  new  creation.  The  running  stream  purifies 
itself,  or  perhaps  loses  some  virtue  which  in  happier  circum¬ 
stances  might  have  been  retained.  The  initial  phase  of  each 
fresh  occasion  represents  the  issue  of  a  struggle  within  the 
past  for  objective  existence  beyond  itself.  The  determinant  of 
the  struggle  is  the  supreme  Eros  incarnating  itself  as  the  first 
phase  of  the  individual  subjective  aim  in  the  new  process 
of  actuality.  Thus  in  any  two  occasions  of  the  Universe 
there  are  elements  in  either  one  which  are  irrelevant  to  the 
constitution  of  the  other.  The  forgetfulness  of  this  doctrine 
leads  to  an  over-moralization  in  the  view  of  the  nature  of 
things.  Fortunately  there  are  a  great  many  things  which  do 
not  much  matter,  and  we  can  have  them  how  we  will.  The 
opposite  point  of  view  has  been  the  nursery  of  fanaticism, 
and  has  tinged  history  with  ferocity. 

Section  VIII.  The  understanding  of  the  Universe,  in 
terms  of  the  type  of  metaphysic  here  put  forward,  requires 
that  the  various  roles  of  efficient  causation,  of  teleological 
self-creation,  of  perspective  elimination,  of  contemporary  in¬ 
dependence,  of  the  laws  of  order  dominating  vast  epochs,  and 
of  the  minor  endurances  within  each  epoch,  be  conceived 
in  their  various  relations  to  each  other.  Another  summary 
expression  of  this  type  of  understanding  is  contained  in  the 
phrases,  Constraint  and  Freedom,  Survival  and  Destruction, 
Depth  of  Feeling  and  Triviality  of  Feeling,  Conceptual 
realization  and  Physical  realization,  Appearance  and  Reality. 
Any  account  of  the  Adventure  of  Ideas  is  concerned  with 
Ideas  threading  their  way  among  the  alternatives  presented 
by  these  various  phrases. 

When  we  examine  the  structure  of  the  epoch  of  the  Uni¬ 
verse  in  which  we  find  ourselves,  this  structure  exhibits  suc¬ 
cessive  layers  of  types  of  order,  each  layer  introducing  some 
additional  type  of  order  within  some  limited  region  which 


PAST,  PRESENT,  FUTURE 


257 

shares  in  the  more  general  type  of  order  of  some  larger 
environment.  Also  this  larger  environment  in  its  turn  is  a 
specialized  region  within  the  general  epoch  of  creation  as 
we  know  it.  Each  one  of  these  regions,  with  its  dominant 
set  of  ordering  relations,  can  either  be  considered  from  the 
point  of  view  of  the  mutual  relations  of  its  parts  to  each 
other,  or  it  can  be  considered  from  the  point  of  view  of  its 
impact,  as  a  unity,  upon  the  experience  of  an  external  per¬ 
cipient.  There  is  yet  a  third  mode  of  consideration  which 
combines  the  other  two.  The  percipient  may  be  an  occasion 
within  the  region,  and  may  yet  grasp  the  region  as  one, 
including  the  percipient  itself  as  a  member  of  it. 

A  region,  analysed  in  the  first  way,  is  thereby  conceived 
as  subject  to  certain  Laws  of  Nature,  which  laws  are  its 
dominant  set  of  ordering  relations.  In  the  second  mode  of 
consideration,  synthesis  replaces  analysis.  The  region  in  ques¬ 
tion  assumes  the  guise  of  an  enduring  unity,  of  which  the 
essence  is  a  certain  complex  internal  character.  This  essential 
character,  as  it  appears  in  the  second  approach,  is  nothing 
other  than  the  set  of  Laws  of  Nature  reigning  within  the 
region,  as  they  appear  in  the  first  approach.  Either  mode 
of  approach  simply  lays  stress  upon  the  dominant  identity 
of  character  pervading  the  concrete  connexity  of  the  many 
occasions  constituting  the  region.  The  unity  of  the  region  is 
two-fold :  first,  by  reason  of  the  sheer  connexity  arising  from 
the  mutual  immanence  of  the  various  occasions  included 
in  it,  and  secondly,  by  reason  of  a  pervasive  identity  of 
character  whereby  the  various  parts  play  an  analogous  role 
in  any  external  occasion.  Thus  the  region  with  its  Laws 
of  Nature  is  a  synonym  for  the  enduring  substance  with  its 
Essential  Character. 


wi 


17 


CHAPTER  Xin 


THE  GROUPING  OF  OCCASIONS 

Section  I.  The  Grouping  of  Occasions  is  the  outcome  of 
some  common  function  performed  by  those  occasions  in  the 
percipient  experience.  The  grouped  occasions  then  acquire 
a  unity;  they  become,  for  the  experience  of  the  percipient, 
one  thing  which  is  complex  by  reason  of  its  divisibility 
into  many  occasions,  or  into  many  subordinate  groups  of 
occasions.  The  subordinate  groups  are  then  complex 
unities,  each  belonging  to  the  same  metaphysical  category 
of  existence  as  the  total  group.  This  characteristic,  namely 
divisibility  into  groups  of  analogous  type  of  being,  is  the 
general  notion  of  extensiveness.  The  peculiar  relationships 
(if  any)  diffused  systematically  between  the  extensive  groups 
of  an  epoch  constitute  the  system  of  geometry  prevalent  in 
that  epoch. 

The  general  common  function  exhibited  by  any  group  of 
actual  occasions  is  that  of  mutual  immanence.  In  Platonic 
language,  this  is  the  function  of  belonging  to  a  common 
Receptacle.  If  the  group  be  considered  merely  in  respect  to 
this  basic  property  of  mutual  immanence,  however  otherwise 
lacking  in  common  relevance,  then — conceived  as  exempli¬ 
fying  this  general  connectedness — the  group  is  termed  a 
Nexus. 

Thus  the  term  Nexus  does  not  presuppose  any  special  type 
of  order,  nor  does  it  presuppose  any  order  at  all  pervading 
its  members  other  than  the  general  metaphysical  obliga- 


THE  GROUPING  OF  OCCASIONS  259 

tion  of  mutual  immanence.  But  in  fact  the  teleology  of 
the  Universe,  with  its  aim  at  intensity  and  variety,  produces 
epochs  with  various  types  of  order  dominating  subordinate 
nexus  interwoven  with  each  other.  A  nexus  can  spread 
itself  both  spatially  and  temporally.  In  other  words,  it  can 
include  sets  of  occasions  which  are  contemporary  with  each 
other,  and  it  can  include  sets  which  are  relatively  past  and 
future.  If  the  nexus  be  purely  spatial,  then  it  will  include 
no  pair  of  occasions  such  that  one  of  the  pair  is  antecedent 
to  the  other.  The  mutual  immanence  between  the  occasions 
of  the  nexus  will  then  be  of  the  indirect  type  proper  to  con¬ 
temporary  occasions.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  the  notion  of 
externality  dominates  our  intuition  of  space.  If  the  nexus  be 
purely  temporal,  then  it  will  include  no  pair  of  contemporary 
occasions.  It  is  to  be  a  mere  thread  of  temporal  transition 
from  occasion  to  occasion.  The  idea  of  temporal  transition 
can  never  be  wholly  disengaged  from  that  of  ‘causation5. 
This  latter  notion  is  merely  a  special  way  of  considering 
direct  immanence  of  the  past  in  its  future. 

Section  II.  The  notion  of  the  contiguity  of  occasions  is 
important.  Two  occasions,  which  are  not  contemporary,  are 
contiguous  in  time  when  there  is  no  occasion  which  is 
antecedent  to  one  of  them  and  subsequent  to  the  other.  A 
purely  temporal  nexus  of  occasions  is  continuous  when,  with 
the  exception  of  the  earliest  and  the  latest  occasions,  each 
occasion  is  contiguous  with  an  earlier  occasion  and  a  later 
occasion.  The  nexus  will  then  form  an  unbroken  thread  in 
temporal  or  serial  order.  The  first  and  the  last  occasions  of 
the  thread  will,  of  course,  only  enjoy  a  one-sided  contiguity 
with  the  thread. 

Spatial  contiguity  is  more  difficult  to  define.  It  requires  a 
reference  to  the  temporal  dimension.  It  can  be  defined  by 
the  aid  of  the  doctrine  that  no  two  contemporary  occasions 

17-2 


26o 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


are  derived  from  a  past  wholly  in  common.  Thus  if  A  and 
B  be  two  contemporary  occasions,  the  past  of  A  includes 
some  occasions  not  belonging  to  the  past  of  B,  and  that  of 
B  includes  occasions  not  belonging  to  the  past  of  A.  Then 
A  and  B  are  contiguous  when  there  is  no  occasion  (i)  con¬ 
temporary  with  both  A  and  B,  and  (ii)  such  that  its  past 
includes  all  occasions,  each  belonging  both  to  the  past  of  A 
and  the  past  of  B.  The  particular  form  of  this  definition  is 
of  no  great  importance.  But  the  principle  that  the  inter¬ 
relations  of  the  present  are  derived  from  a  reference  to  the 
past  is  fundamental.  It  gives  the  reason  why  the  contem¬ 
porary  world  is  experienced  as  a  display  of  lifeless  substances 
passively  illustrating  imposed  characters. 

Anyhow  contiguity,  temporal  and  spatial,  is  definable  in 
terms  of  the  doctrine  of  immanence.  By  the  aid  of  the 
notion  of  contiguity,  the  notion  of  a  region  can  be  defined 
as  denoting  a  nexus  in  which  certain  conditions  of  contiguity 
are  preserved.  The  logical  details  of  such  a  definition  are 
irrelevant  to  this  discussion. 

So  far  we  have  been  considering  various  species  of  nexus, 
whose  sole  principle  of  unity  is  derived  from  the  bare  fact 
of  mutual  immanence.  We  will  term  this  genus  of  nexus, 
the  genus  whose  species  are  discriminated  by  differences  of 
bare  extensive  pattern.  More  briefly,  it  will  be  termed  the 
Genus  of  Patterned  Nexus.  Every  nexus  belongs  to  some  species 
of  this  genus,  if  we  abstract  from  the  qualitative  factors  which 
are  interwoven  in  its  patterns. 

Section  III.  We  now  pass  on  to  the  general  notion  of  a 
Society.  This  notion  introduces  the  general  consideration  of 
types  of  order,  and  the  genetic  propagation  of  order.  The 
definition  depends  upon  taking  into  account  factors  which  are 
omitted  in  the  analysis  of  the  Genus  of  Patterned  Nexus. 

A  Society  is  a  nexus  which  ‘illustrates5  or  ‘shares  in’,  some 


THE  GROUPING  OF  OCCASIONS  26l 

type  of  ‘Social  Order’.  ‘Social  Order’  can  be  defined1  as 
follows:  ‘A  nexus  enjoys  “social  order”  when  (i)  there  is  a 
common  element  of  form  illustrated  in  the  definiteness  of 
each  of  its  included  actual  entities,  and  (ii)  this  common 
element  of  form  arises  in  each  member  of  the  nexus  by  reason 
of  the  conditions  imposed  upon  it  by  its  prehensions  of  some 
other  members  of  the  nexus,  and  (iii)  these  prehensions 
impose  that  condition  of  reproduction  by  reason  of  their 
inclusion  of  positive  feelings  involving2  that  common  form. 
Such  a  nexus  is  called  a  “society”,  and  the  common  form 
is  the  “defining  characteristic”  of  that  society’. 

Another  rendering3  of  the  same  definition  is  as  follows: 
‘The  point  of  a  “society”  as  the  term  is  here  used,  is  that 
it  is  self-sustaining;  in  other  words,  that  it  is  its  own  reason. 
Thus  a  society  is  more  than  a  set  of  [actual]  entities  to 
which  the  same  class-name  applies :  that  is  to  say,  it  involves 
more  than  a  merely  mathematical  conception  of  “order”.  To 
constitute  a  society,  the  class-name  has  got  to  apply  to  each 
member,  by  reason  of  genetic  derivation  from  other  members 
of  that  same  society.  The  members  of  the  society  are  alike 
because,  by  reason  of  their  common  character,  they  impose 
on  other  members  of  the  society  the  conditions  which  lead 
to  that  likeness’. 

It  is  evident  from  this  description  of  the  notion  of  a 
‘Society’,  as  here  employed,  that  a  set  of  mutually  contem¬ 
porary  occasions  cannot  form  a  complete  society.  For  the 
genetic  condition  cannot  be  satisfied  by  such  a  set  of  contem¬ 
poraries.  Of  course  a  set  of  contemporaries  may  belong  to  a 
society.  But  the  society,  as  such,  must  involve  antecedents 
and  subsequents.  In  other  words,  a  society  must  exhibit  the 

1  Cf.  Process  and  Reality ,  Part  1,  Chapter  iii.  Section  II. 

2  In  the  original,  Process  and  Reality ,  ‘of  that’  in  place  of ‘involving*. 

3  Cf.  Process  and  Reality ,  Part  11,  Chapter  in,  Section  II. 


262 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


peculiar  quality  of  endurance.  The  real  actual  things  that 
endure  are  all  societies.  They  are  not  actual  occasions.  It  is 
the  mistake  that  has  thwarted  European  metaphysics  from 
the  time  of  the  Greeks,  namely,  to  confuse  societies  with 
the  completely  real  things  which  are  the  actual  occasions. 
A  society  has  an  essential  character,  whereby  it  is  the  society 
that  it  is,  and  it  has  also  accidental  qualities  which  vary  as 
circumstances  alter.  Thus  a  society,  as  a  complete  existence 
and  as  retaining  the  same  metaphysical  status,  enjoys  a 
history  expressing  its  changing  reactions  to  changing  circum¬ 
stances.1  But  an  actual  occasion  has  no  such  history.  It  never 
changes.  It  only  becomes  and  perishes.  Its  perishing  is  its 
assumption  of  a  new  metaphysical  function  in  the  creative 
advance  of  the  universe. 

The  self-identity  of  a  society  is  founded  upon  the  self- 
identity  of  its  defining  characteristic,  and  upon  the  mutual 
immanence  of  its  occasions.  But  there  is  no  definite  nexus 
which  is  the  nexus  underlying  that  society,  except  when  the 
society  belongs  wholly  to  the  past.  For  the  realized  nexus 
which  underlies  the  society  is  always  adding  to  itself,  with 
the  creative  advance  into  the  future.  For  example,  the  man 
adds  another  day  to  his  life,  and  the  earth  adds  another 
millennium  to  the  period  of  its  existence.  But  until  the 
death  of  the  man  and  the  destruction  of  the  earth,  there  is 
no  determinate  nexus  which  in  an  unqualified  sense  is  either 
the  man  or  the  earth. 

Section  IV.  Though  there  is  no  one  nexus  which  can 
claim  to  be  the  society,  so  long  as  that  society  is  in  existence, 
there  is  a  succession  of  nexus  each  of  which  is  the  whole 
realized  society  up  to  that  stage  of  its  existence.  The  ex¬ 
tensive  patterns  of  various  members  of  such  a  succession  for  a 

1  This  notion  of  ‘society’  has  analogies  to  Descartes’  notion  of  ‘substance’, 
cf.  Descartes’  Principles  of  Philosophy ,  Part  1,  Principles  LI-LVH. 


THE  GROUPING  OF  OCCASIONS  263 

given  society  may  be  different.  In  such  a  case  the  extensive 
patterns,  so  far  as  they  differ,  cannot  be  any  element  in  the 
defining  characteristic  of  the  society.  But  the  extensive  pat¬ 
terns  of  the  various  nexus  of  the  succession  may  be  identical, 
or  at  least  they  may  have  in  common  some  feature  of  their 
pattern.  In  this  case  the  common  pattern,  or  the  common 
feature,  can  be  one  element  in  the  defining  characteristic  of 
the  society  in  question. 

The  simplest  example  of  a  society  in  which  the  successive 
nexus  of  its  progressive  realization  have  a  common  extensive 
pattern  is  when  each  such  nexus  is  purely  temporal  and 
continuous.  The  society,  in  each  stage  of  realization,  then 
consists  of  a  set  of  contiguous  occasions  in  serial  order.  A  man, 
defined  as  an  enduring  percipient,  is  such  a  society.  This 
definition  of  a  man  is  exactly  what  Descartes  means  by  a 
thinking  substance.  It  will  be  remembered  that  in  his  Prin¬ 
ciples  of  Philosophy  [Part  i,  Principle  XXI;  also  Meditation  III] 
Descartes  states  that  endurance  is  nothing  else  than  suc¬ 
cessive  re-creation  by  God.  Thus  the  Cartesian  conception 
of  the  human  soul  and  that  here  put  forward  differ  only  in 
the  function  assigned  to  God.  Both  conceptions  involve  a 
succession  of  occasions,  each  with  its  measure  of  immediate 
completeness. 

Societies  of  the  general  type,  that  their  realized  nexus  are 
purely  temporal  and  continuous,  will  be  termed  ‘personal’. 
Any  society  of  this  type  may  be  termed  a  ‘person’.  Thus,  as 
defined  above,  a  man  is  a  person. 

But  a  man  is  more  than  a  serial  succession  of  occasions 
of  experience.  Such  a  definition  may  satisfy  philosophers — 
Descartes,  for  example.  It  is  not  the  ordinary  meaning  of 
the  term  ‘man’.  There  are  animal  bodies  as  well  as  animal 
minds;  and  in  our  experience  such  minds  always  occur 
incorporated.  Now  an  animal  body  is  a  society  involving 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


264 

a  vast  number  of  occasions,  spatially  and  temporally  co¬ 
ordinated.  It  follows  that  a  ‘man5,  in  the  full  sense  of 
ordinary  usage,  is  not  a  ‘person’  as  here  defined.  He  has  the 
unity  of  a  wider  society,  in  which  the  social  co-ordination  is 
a  dominant  factor  in  the  behaviours  of  the  various  parts. 

Also,  when  we  survey  the  living  world,  animal  and 
vegetable,  there  are  bodies  of  all  types.  Each  living  body  is 
a  society,  which  is  not  personal.  But  most  of  the  animals, 
including  all  the  vertebrates,  seem  to  have  their  social  system 
dominated  by  a  subordinate  society  which  is  ‘personal’.  This 
subordinate  society  is  of  the  same  type  as  ‘man’,  according 
to  the  personal  definition  given  above,  though  of  course  the 
mental  poles  in  the  occasions  of  the  dominant  personal 
society  do  not  rise  to  the  height  of  human  mentality.  Thus 
in  one  sense  a  dog  is  a  ‘person’,  and  in  another  sense  he  is 
a  non-personal  society.  But  the  lower  forms  of  animal  life, 
and  all  vegetation,  seem  to  lack  the  dominance  of  any  in¬ 
cluded  personal  society.  A  tree  is  a  democracy.  Thus  living 
bodies  are  not  to  be  identified  with  living  bodies  under 
personal  dominance.  There  is  no  necessary  connection  be¬ 
tween  ‘life’  and  ‘personality’.  A  ‘personal’  society  need  not 
be  ‘living’,  in  the  general  sense  of  the  term;  and  a  ‘living’ 
society  need  not  be  ‘personal’. 

Section  V.  The  Universe  achieves  its  values  by  reason  of 
its  co-ordination  into  societies  of  societies,  and  into  societies 
of  societies  of  societies.  Thus  an  army  is  a  society  of  regiments, 
and  regiments  are  societies  of  men,  and  men  are  societies  of 
cells,  and  of  blood,  and  of  bones,  together  with  the  dominant 
society  of  personal  human  experience,  and  cells  are  societies 
of  smaller  physical  entities  such  as  protons,  and  so  on,  and  so 
on.  Also  all  of  these  societies  presuppose  the  circumambient 
space  of  social  physical  activity. 

It  is  evident  that  the  previous  definition  of  *  society’  has 


THE  GROUPING  OF  OCCASIONS  265 

been  phrased  so  as  to  suggest  an  over-simplified  concept  of 
the  meaning.  For  the  nodon  of  a  defining  characteristic 
must  be  construed  to  include  the  notion  of  the  co-ordination 
of  societies.  Thus  there  are  societies  at  different  levels.  For 
instance,  the  army  is  a  society  at  a  level  different  from  that 
of  a  regiment,  and  similarly  for  a  regiment  and  a  man. 
Nature  is  a  complex  of  enduring  objects,  functioning  as 
subordinate  elements  in  a  larger  spatial-physical  society.  This 
larger  society  is  for  us  the  natural  universe.  There  is  how¬ 
ever  no  reason  to  identify  it  with  the  boundless  totality  of 
actual  things. 

Also  each  of  these  enduring  objects,  such  as  tables,  animal 
bodies,  and  stars,  is  itself  a  subordinate  universe  including 
subordinate  enduring  objects.  The  only  strictly  personal 
society  of  which  we  have  direct  discriminative  intuition  is 
the  society  of  our  own  personal  experiences.  We  also  have 
a  direct,  though  vaguer,  intuition  of  our  derivation  of  ex¬ 
perience  from  the  antecedent  functioning  of  our  bodies, 
and  a  still  vaguer  intuition  of  our  bodily  derivation  from 
external  nature. 

Nature  suggests  for  our  observation  gaps,  and  then  as  it 
were  withdraws  them  upon  challenge.  For  example,  ordinary 
physical  bodies  suggest  solidity.  But  solids  turn  to  liquids, 
and  liquids  to  gases.  And  from  the  gas  the  solid  can  again 
be  recovered.  Also  the  most  solid  of  solids  is  for  certain 
purposes  a  viscous  fluid.  Again  impenetrability  is  a  difficult 
notion.  Salt  dissolves  in  water,  and  can  be  recovered  from  it. 
Gases  interfuse  in  liquids.  Molecules  arise  from  a  patterned 
interfusion  of  atoms.  Food  interfuses  with  the  body,  and 
produces  an  immediate  sense  of  diffused  bodily  vigour.  This 
is  especially  fhe  case  with  liquid  stimulants.  Thus  the  direct 
immediate  experience  of  impenetrability  loses  upon  challenge 
its  sharp-cut  status. 


266 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


Section  VI.  Another  gap  is  that  between  lifeless  bodies 
and  living  bodies.  Yet  the  living  bodies  can  be  pursued 
down  to  the  .edge  of  lifelessness.  Also  the  functionings  of 
inorganic  matter  remain  intact  amid  the  functionings  of 
living  matter.  It  seems  that,  in  bodies  that  are  obviously 
living,  a  co-ordination  has  been  achieved  that  raises  into 
prominence  some  functionings  inherent  in  the  ultimate  oc¬ 
casions.  For  lifeless  matter  these  functionings  thwart  each 
other,  and  average  out  so  as  to  produce  a  negligible  total 
effect.  In  the  case  of  living  bodies  the  co-ordination  inter¬ 
venes,  and  the  average  effect  of  these  intimate  functionings 
has  to  be  taken  into  account. 

Those  activities  in  the  self-formation  of  actual  occasions 
which,  if  co-ordinated,  yield  living  societies  are  the  inter¬ 
mediate  mental  functionings  transforming  the  initial  phase 
of  reception  into  the  final  phase  of  anticipation.  In  so  far  as 
the  mental  spontaneities  of  occasions  do  not  thwart  each 
other,  but  are  directed  to  a  common  objective  amid  varying 
circumstances,  there  is  life.  The  essence  of  life  is  the  teleo¬ 
logical  introduction  of  novelty,  with  some  conformation  of 
objectives.  Thus  novelty  of  circumstance  is  met  with  novelty 
of  functioning  adapted  to  steadiness  of  purpose. 

Life  may  characterize  a  set  of  occasions  diffused  through¬ 
out  a  society,  though  not  necessarily  including  all,  or  even 
a  majority  of,  the  occasions  of  that  society.  The  common 
element  of  purpose  which  characterizes  these  various  occa¬ 
sions  must  be  reckoned  as  one  element  of  the  determining 
characteristic  of  the  society.  It  is  evident  that  according  to 
this  definition  no  single  occasion  can  be  called  living.  Life 
is  the  co-ordination  of  the  mental  spontaneities  throughout 
the  occasions  of  a  society. 

But  apart  from  life  a  high  grade  of  mentality  in  indi¬ 
vidual  occasions  seems  to  be  impossible.  A  personal  society, 


THE  GROUPING  OF  OCCASIONS  267 

itself  living  and  dominantly  influencing  a  living  society 
wider  than  itself,  is  the  only  type  of  organization  which 
provides  occasions  of  high-grade  mentality.  Thus  in  a  man, 
the  living  body  is  permeated  by  living  societies  of  low-grade 
occasions  so  far  as  mentality  is  concerned.  But  the  whole  is 
co-ordinated  so  as  to  support  a  personal  living  society  of  high- 
grade  occasions.  This  personal  society  is  the  man  defined  as 
a  person.  It  is  the  soul  of  which  Plato  spoke. 

How  far  this  soul  finds  a  support  for  its  existence  beyond 
the  body  is — another  question.  The  everlasting  nature  of 
God,  which  in  a  sense  is  non-temporal  and  in  another  sense 
is  temporal,  may  establish  with  the  soul  a  peculiarly  intense 
relationship  of  mutual  immanence.  Thus  in  some  important 
sense  the  existence  of  the  soul  may  be  freed  from  its  complete 
dependence  upon  the  bodily  organization. 

But  it  is  to  be  noticed  that  the  personality  of  an  animal 
organism  may  be  more  or  less.  It  is  not  a  mere  question  of 
having  a  soul  or  of  not  having  a  soul.  The  question  is,  How 
much,  if  any?  Any  tendency  to  a  high-grade  multiple  per¬ 
sonality  would  be  self-destructive  by  the  antagonism  of 
divergent  aims.  In  other  words,  such  multiple  personality  is 
destructive  of  the  very  essence  of  life,  which  is  conformation 
of  purpose. 


CHAPTER  XIV 


APPEARANCE  AND  REALITY 

Section  I.  The  objective  content  of  an  occasion  of  ex¬ 
perience  sorts  itself  out  under  two  contrasted  characters — 
Appearance  and  Reality.  It  is  to  be  noticed  that  this  is  not 
the  only  dichotomy  exhibited  in  experience.  There  are  the 
physical  and  the  mental  poles,  and  there  are  the  objects  pre- 
hended  and  the  subjective  forms  of  the  prehensions.  In  fact 
this  final  pair  of  opposites,  Appearance  and  Reality,  is  not 
quite  so  fundamental  metaphysically  as  the  other  two  pairs. 

In  the  first  place  the  division  between  appearance  and 
reality  does  not  cover  the  whole  of  experience.  It  only  con¬ 
cerns  the  objective  content,  and  omits  the  subjective  form  of 
the  immediate  occasion  in  question.  In  the  second  place,  its 
importance  is  negligible  except  in  the  functionings  of  the 
higher  phases  of  experience,  when  the  mental  functionings 
have  achieved  a  peculiar  complexity  of  synthesis  with  the 
physical  functionings.  But  in  these  higher  phases,  the  contrast 
Appearance  and  Reality  dominates  those  factors  of  experience 
which  are  discriminated  in  consciousness  with  peculiar  dis¬ 
tinctness.  Thus  the  foundation  of  metaphysics  should  be 
sought  in  the  understanding  of  the  subject-object  structure 
of  experience,  and  in  the  respective  roles  of  the  physical  and 
mental  functionings. 

Unfortunately  the  superior  dominance  in  consciousness 
of  the  contrast  ‘Appearance  and  Reality’  has  led  meta- 


APPEARANCE  AND  REALITY  269 

physicians  from  the  Greeks  onwards  to  make  their  start  from 
the  more  superficial  characteristic.  This  error  has  warped 
modern  philosophy  to  a  greater  extent  than  ancient  or 
mediaeval  philosophy.  The  warping  has  taken  the  form  of 
a  consistent  reliance  upon  sensationalist  perception  as  the 
basis  of  all  experiential  activity.  It  has  had  the  effect  of  de¬ 
cisively  separating  ‘  mind 5  from  ‘  nature  ’,  a  modern  separation 
which  found  its  first  exemplification  in  Cartesian  dualism. 
But  it  must  be  remembered  that  this  modern  development 
was  only  the  consistent  carrying  out  of  principles  already 
present  in  the  older  European  philosophy.  It  required  two 
thousand  years  for  the  full  implication  of  those  principles  to 
dawn  upon  men’s  minds  in  the  seventeenth  and  the  eighteenth 
centuries  after  Christ. 

Section  II.  The  distinction  between  ‘appearance  and 
reality’  is  grounded  upon  the  process  of  self-formation  of 
each  actual  occasion.  The  objective  content  of  the  initial 
phase  of  reception  is  the  real  antecedent  world,  as  given  for 
that  occasion.  This  is  the  ‘reality’  from  which  that  creative 
advance  starts.  It  is  the  basic  fact  of  the  new  occasion,  with 
its  concordances  and  discordances  awaiting  co-ordination  in 
the  new  creature.  There  is  nothing  there  apart  from  the  real 
agency  of  the  actual  past,  exercising  its  function  of  objective 
immortality.  This  is  reality,  at  that  moment,  for  that  occasion. 
Here  the  term  ‘reality’  is  used  in  the  sense  of  the  opposite 
to  ‘appearance’. 

The  intermediate  phase  of  self-formation  is  a  ferment  of 
qualitative  valuation.  These  qualitative  feelings  are  either 
derived  directly  from  qualities  illustrated  in  the  primary 
phase,  or  are  indirectly  derived  by  their  relevance  to  them. 
These  conceptual  feelings  pass  into  novel  relations  to  each 
other,  felt  with  a  novel  emphasis  of  subjective  form.  The 
ferment  of  valuation  is  integrated  with  the  physical  prehen- 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


270 

sions  of  the  physical  pole.  Thus  the  initial  objective  content 
is  still  there.  But  it  is  overlaid  by,  and  intermixed  with,  the 
novel  hybrid  prehensions  derived  from  integration  with  the 
conceptual  ferment.  In  the  higher  types  of  actual  occasions, 
propositional  feelings  are  now  dominant.  This  enlarged 
objective  content  obtains  a  co-ordination  adapting  it  to  the 
enjoyments  and  purposes  fulfilling  the  subjective  aim  of  the 
new  occasion. 

The  mental  pole  has  derived  its  objective  content  alike  by 
abstraction  from  the  physical  pole  and  by  the  immanence 
of  the  basic  Eros  which  endows  with  agency  all  ideal  possi¬ 
bilities.  The  content  of  the  objective  universe  has  passed  from 
the  function  of  a  basis  for  a  new  individuality  to  that  of 
an  instrument  for  purposes.  The  individual  process  is  now 
feeling  its  own  completion:  Cogito,  ergo  sum.  And  in 
Descartes5  phraseology,  ‘cogitatio5  is  more  than  mere  intel¬ 
lectual  understanding. 

This  difference  between  the  objective  content  of  the  initial 
phase  of  the  physical  pole  and  the  objective  content  of  the 
final  phase,  after  the  integration  of  physical  and  mental 
poles,  constitutes  ‘appearance5  for  that  occasion.  In  other 
words,  ‘appearance5  is  the  effect  of  the  activity  of  the  mental 
pole,  whereby  the  qualities  and  co-ordinations  of  the  given 
physical  world  undergo  transformation.  It  results  from  the 
fusion  of  the  ideal  with  the  actual — The  light  that  never  was, 
on  sea  or  land. 

Section  III.  There  can  be  no  general  metaphysic  prin¬ 
ciples  which  determine  how  in  any  occasion  appearance 
differs  from  the  reality  out  of  which  it  originates.  The 
divergencies  between  reality  and  appearance  depend  on  the 
type  of  social  order  dominating  the  environment  of  the 
occasion  in  question.  All  our  information  on  this  topic,  direct 
and  inferential,  concerns  this  general  epoch  of  the  Universe 


APPEARANCE  AND  REALITY  271 

and.  more  particularly,  animal  life  on  the  surface  of  the 
Earth. 

In  respect  to  the  occasions  which  compose  the  societies  of 
inorganic  bodies  or  of  the  so-called  empty  spaces,  there  is 
no  reason  to  believe  that  in  any  important  way  the  mental 
activities  depart  from  functionings  which  are  strictly  con¬ 
formal  to  those  inherent  in  the  objective  datum  of  the  first 
phase.  Thus  no  novelty  is  introduced.  The  perspective 
elimination  is  effected  according  to  the  Taws  of  nature5 
inherent  in  the  epoch.  This  composition  of  activities  consti¬ 
tutes  the  laws  of  physics.  There  is  no  effective  ‘appearance5. 

But  the  case  is  very  different  for  the  high-grade  occasions 
which  are  components  in  the  animal  life  on  the  Earth’s 
surface.  Each  animal  body  is  an  organ  of  sensation.  It  is 
a  living  society  which  may  include  in  itself  a  dominant 
‘personal5  society  of  occasions.  This  ‘personal5  society  is 
composed  of  occasions  enjoying  the  individual  experiences 
of  the  animals.  It  is  the  soul  of  man.  The  whole  body  is 
organized,  so  that  a  general  co-ordination  of  mentality  is 
finally  poured  into  the  successive  occasions  of  this  personal 
society.  Thus  in  the  constitutions  of  these  occasions,  appear¬ 
ance  is  sufficiently  co-ordinated  to  be  effective.  Also  con¬ 
sciousness  arises  in  the  subjective  forms  in  these  experiences 
of  the  higher  animals.  It  arises  peculiarly  in  connection 
with  the  mental  functions,  and  has  to  do  primarily  with 
their  product.  Now  appearance  is  one  product  of  mentality. 
Thus  in  our  conscious  perceptions  appearance  is  dominant. 
It  possesses  a  clear  distinctness,  which  is  absent  from  our 
vague  massive  feeling  of  derivation  from  our  actual  world. 
Appearance  has  shed  the  note  of  derivation.  It  lives  in  our 
consciousness  as  the  world  presented  to  us  for  our  enjoy¬ 
ment  and  our  purposes.  It  is  the  world  in  the  guise  of  a 
subject-matter  for  an  imposed  activity.  The  occasion  has 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


272 

gathered  the  creativity  of  the  Universe  into  its  own  com¬ 
pleteness,  abstracted  from  the  real  objective  content  which  is 
the  source  of  its  own  derivation. 

This  status  of  ‘appearance’  in  the  constitution  of  ex¬ 
perience  is  the  reason  for  the  disastrous  metaphysical 
doctrine  of  physical  matter  passively  illustrating  qualities, 
and  devoid  of  self-enjoyment.  As  soon  as  clarity  and  dis¬ 
tinctness  are  made  the  test  of  metaphysical  importance, 
an  entire  misapprehension  of  the  metaphysical  status  of 
appearance  is  involved. 

Section  IV.  When  the  higher  functionings  of  mentality 
are  socially  stabilized  in  an  organism,  appearance  merges 
into  reality.  To  take  the  most  conspicuous  example,  con¬ 
sider  the  personal  succession  of  experiences  in  the  life  of  a 
human  being.  The  present  occasion  in  this  personal  life 
inherits  with  peculiar  dominance  the  antecedent  experiences 
in  this  succession.  But  these  antecedent  experiences  include 
the  ‘appearances*  as  in  those  occasions.  These  antecedent 
appearances  are  part  of  the  real  functioning  of  the  real  actual 
world  as  it  stands  in  the  primary  phase  of  the  immediately 
present  occasion.  It  is  a  real  fact  of  nature  that  the  world 
has  appeared  thus  from  the  standpoint  of  these  antecedent 
occasions  of  the  personal  life.  And  more  generally  dropping 
the  special  case  of  personality,  the  objective  reality  of  the  past, 
as  it  now  functions  in  the  present,  in  its  day  was  appearance. 
They  may  be  strengthened  in  emphasis,  embroidered  upon, 
and  otherwise  modified  by  the  novel  appearances  of  the 
new  occasion.  In  this  way,  there  is  an  intimate,  inextricable 
fusion  of  appearance  with  reality,  and  of  accomplished  fact 
with  anticipation.  In  truth,  we  have  been  describing  the  exact 
situation  which  human  experience  presents  for  philosophic 
analysis. 

We  are  apt  to  think  of  this  fusion  from  the  point  of  view 


APPEARANCE  AND  REALITY  273 

of  the  higher  grades  of  human  beings.  But  it  is  a  fusion 
proceeding  throughout  nature.  It  is  the  essential  mode  in 
which  novelty  enters  into  the  functionings  of  the  world. 

Section  V.  It  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that,  at  the  level  of 
human  intellect,  the  role  of  mental  functionings  is  to  add 
subtlety  to  the  content  of  experience.  The  exact  opposite 
is  the  case.  Mentality  is  an  agent  of  simplification;  and 
for  this  reason  appearance  is  an  incredibly  simplified  edition 
of  reality.  There  should  be  no  paradox  in  this  statement. 
A  moment’s  introspection  assures  one  of  the  feebleness 
of  human  intellectual  operations,  and  of  the  dim  massive 
complexity  of  our  feelings  of  derivation.  The  point  for  dis¬ 
cussion  is  how  in  animal  experience  this  simplification  is 
effected. 

The  best  example  of  this  process  of  simplification  is  afforded 
by  the  perception  of  a  social  nexus  as  a  unity,  charac¬ 
terized  by  qualities  derived  from  its  individual  members 
and  their  interconnections.  With  some  elimination,  the 
defining  characteristic  of  the  nexus  is  directly  perceived  to 
be  qualifying  that  nexus  as  a  unity.  It  often  happens  that 
in  this  perception  of  the  nexus  as  thus  qualified  there  is  a 
wavering  between  the  ascription  of  the  quality  to  the  group 
as  one,  and  to  its  individual  components  as  many.  Thus, 
the  orchestra  is  loud  as  one  entity,  and  also  in  virtue  of  the 
perceived  loudness  of  the  individual  members  with  their 
musical  instruments.  The  transference  of  the  characteristic 
from  the  individuals  to  the  group  as  one  can  be  explained  by 
the  mental  operations.  There  is  the  conceptual  entertain¬ 
ment  of  the  qualities  illustrated  by  the  individual  actualities. 
The  qualities  shared  by  many  individuals  are  fused  into 
one  dominating  impression.  This  dominating  prehension 
is  integrated  with  the  nexus,  or  with  some  portion  of  it, 
perceived  as  a  unity  illustrating  that  quality.  The  association 

18 


wi 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


274 

of  a  nexus  as  one  with  a  quality  will,  for  the  experient 
subject,  be  in  general  a  mode  of  exemplification  which  differs 
from  the  mode  in  which  the  respective  individuals  illustrate 
it.  The  discipline  of  a  regiment  inheres  in  the  regiment  in  a 
different  mode  from  its  inherence  in  the  individual  soldiers. 
This  difference  of  mode  of  illustration  may  be  more  or  less 
evident.  But  it  is  there.  It  gives  another  reason  for  the 
aspect  of  the  passive  inherence  of  quality  in  substance. 
The  composite  group  illustrates  its  qualities  passively.  The 
activity  belongs  to  the  individual  actualities.  This  whole 
question  of  the  transference  of  quality  from  the  many  indi¬ 
viduals  to  the  nexus  as  one  is  discussed  at  length  in  Process  and 
Reality ,  Part  111,  Chapter  111,  Section  IV,  where  it  is  termed 
‘Transmutation5.  Obviously  the  transmuted  percept  belongs 
to  Appearance.  But  as  it  occurs  in  animal  experience,  it 
belongs  to  appearance  merged  with  reality.  For  it  is  inherited 
from  the  past.  It  is  thus  a  fact  of  nature  that  the  world  so 
appears.  It  is  a  structural  relationship  of  animate  nature  on 
the  Earth’s  surface.  In  all  Appearance  there  is  an  element 
of  Transmutation. 

Section  VI.  For  animal  life  on  Earth  by  far  the  most 
important  example  of  Transmutation  is  afforded  by  Sense- 
Perception.  No  doctrine  of  sense-perception  can  neglect  the 
teaching  of  physiology.  The  decisive  factor  in  sense-percep¬ 
tion  is  the  functioning  of  the  brain,  and  the  functioning 
of  the  brain  is  conditioned  by  the  antecedent  functionings 
of  the  other  parts  of  the  animal  body.  Given  requisite 
bodily  functionings,  the  sense-perception  results.  The  ac¬ 
tivities  of  nature  external  to  the  animal  body  are  irrelevant 
as  to  their  details,  so  long  as  they  have  the  general  character 
of  supporting  the  existence  of  the  total  animal  organism. 
The  human  body  is  the  self-sufficient  organ  of  human  sense- 
perception. 


APPEARANCE  AND  REALITY  275 

There  are  external  events,  such  as  the  transmission  of 
light  or  the  movements  of  material  bodies  which  respec¬ 
tively  are  the  normal  modes  of  exciting  sense-percepts  of 
particular  types.  But  in  the  first  place  these  external  events 
are  only  the  normal  modes.  A  diet  of  drugs  will  do  equally 
well,  though  its  issue  in  perception  is  not  so  definitely 
to  be  predicted.  Thus  no  one  type  of  external  event  is 
necessarily  associated  with  one  type  of  sense-percept.  Hardly 
any  percept  is  strictly  normal.  Gross  illusions  are  plentiful, 
and  some  element  of  illusion  almost  universal.  An  ordinary 
looking-glass  produces  illusive  percepts  in  almost  every 
room. 

Secondly,  confining  ourselves  to  the  normal  modes  of 
excitation,  the  only  important  factor  in  the  external  event 
is  how  it  affects  the  functionings  of  the  surface  of  the  body. 
How  the  light  enters  the  eye,  and  a  normal  healthy  state 
of  the  body,  are  the  only  important  factors  in  normal  visual 
sensation.  The  light  may  have  come  from  a  nebula  distant 
by  a  thousand  light-years,  or  it  may  have  its  origin  in  an 
electric  lamp  two  feet  off  and  have  suffered  a  complex 
arrangement  of  reflections  and  refractions.  Nothing  matters 
except  how  it  enters  the  eye,  as  to  its  composition,  its  in¬ 
tensity,  and  its  geometric  ordering.  The  body  is  supremely 
indifferent  as  to  the  past  history  of  its  exciting  agents,  and 
requires  no  certificate  of  character.  The  peculiar  bodily 
excitement  is  all  that  matters. 

The  conclusion  is  that  the  direct  information  to  be  derived 
from  sense-perception  wholly  concerns  the  functionings  of 
the  animal  body.  The  sense  of  unity  with  the  body  does 
in  fact  dominate  our  sense-experiences.  But  the  bodily 
organization  is  such  as  finally  to  promote  a  wholesale 
transmutation  of  sensa,  inherited  from  antecedent  bodily 
functionings,  into  characteristics  of  regions  with  well-marked 

18-2 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


276 

geometrical  relations  to  the  geometrical  structures  of  these 
functionings.  In  this  transmutation  the  experient  occasion 
in  question  belongs  to  the  personal  succession  of  occasions 
which  is  the  soul  of  the  animal.  The  bodily  functionings 
and  the  nexus  relevant  to  them  by  geometrical  relationship 
are  immanent  in  the  experient  occasion.  The  qualitative  in¬ 
heritance  from  the  individual  occasions  implicated  in  these 
functionings  is  transmuted  into  the  characteristics  of  regions 
conspicuously  indicated  by  their  geometrical  connections. 
This  doctrine  is  plainly  indicated  in  the  analysis  of  optical 
vision,  where  the  image  occupies  the  region  indicated  by 
geometrical  relations  within  the  eyes.  It  is  more  obscurely 
evident  in  the  case  of  other  species  of  sensa. 

It  is  to  be  remembered  also  that  along  the  personal  succes¬ 
sion  of  the  soul’s  experiences,  there  is  an  inheritance  of  sense- 
perception  from  the  antecedent  members  of  the  personal 
succession.  Also  incipient  sense-percepta  may  be  forming 
themselves  in  the  nerve-routes,  or  in  the  neighbouring  regions 
of  the  brain.  But  the  final  synthesis,  with  its  production  of 
appearance,  is  reserved  for  the  occasions  belonging  to  the 
personal  soul. 

Section  VII.  The  question  of  the  proper  description  of 
the  species  of  qualities  termed  ‘sensa5  is  important.  Un¬ 
fortunately  the  learned  tradition  of  philosophy  has  missed 
their  main  characteristic,  which  is  their  enormous  emotional 
significance.  The  vicious  notion  has  been  introduced  of  mere 
receptive  entertainment,  which  for  no  obvious  reason  by  re¬ 
flection  acquires  an  affective  tone.  The  very  opposite  is  the 
true  explanation.  The  true  doctrine  of  sense-perception  is 
that  the  qualitative  characters  of  affective  tones  inherent  in 
the  bodily  functionings  are  transmuted  into  the  characters 
of  regions.  These  regions  are  then  perceived  as  associated 
with  those  character-qualities,  but  also  these  same  qualities 


APPEARANCE  AND  REALITY  2JJ 

are  shared  by  the  subjective  forms  of  the  prehensions.  This 
is  the  reason  of  the  definite  aesthetic  attitude  imposed  by 
sense-perception.  The  pattern  of  sensa  characterizing  the 
object — that  is,  those  sensa  in  that  pattern  of  contrast — enters 
also  into  the  subjective  form  of  the  prehension.  Thus  art  is 
possible.  For  not  only  can  the  objects  be  prescribed,  but  also 
the  corresponding  affective  tones  of  their  prehensions.  This 
is  the  aesthetic  experience  so  far  as  it  is  based  upon  sense- 
perception. 

Section  VIII.  Another  point  to  be  noticed  is  that  in 
sense-perception  a  region  in  the  contemporary  world  is  the 
substratum  supporting  the  sensa.  It  is  the  region  straight¬ 
away  in  such-and-such  a  direction.  But  this  geometrical 
relation  of  being  c  straight-away  in  such-and-such  a  direction 5 
is  defined  by  the  operations  of  the  brain.  It  has  nothing 
to  do  with  any  physical  transmission  from  the  substrate 
region  to  the  brain.  To  judge  from  some  descriptions  of 
perception  in  terms  of  modern  scientific  theories,  it  might 
be  concluded  that  we  perceive  along  the  track  of  a  ray  of 
light.  There  is  not  the  slightest  warrant  for  such  a  notion. 
The  track  of  light  in  the  world  external  to  the  animal  body 
is  irrelevant.  The  coloured  region  is  perceived  straight-away 
in  such-and-such  a  direction.  This  is  the  fundamental  notion 
of  'straightness’. 

It  therefore  becomes  necessary  for  the  self-consistency  of 
this  doctrine  to  enquire  whether  the  dominant  structure  of 
geometrical  relations  includes  a  determination  of  straight¬ 
ness.  The  theory  requires  that  a  prehension  of  a  nexus 
within  the  brain  as  exhibiting  straightness  in  the  mutual 
relations  of  its  parts  should  thereby  determine  the  prolonga¬ 
tion  of  those  relations  into  regions  beyond  the  brain.  In 
simpler  language,  a  segment  of  a  straight  line  as  prehended 
within  the  brain  should  necessarily  determine  its  prolonga- 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


278 

tion  externally  to  the  body,  irrespective  of  the  particular 
characters  of  the  external  events.  The  possibility  of  trans¬ 
mutation5  involving  the  ‘Projection5  ofsensa  is  then  secured. 

I  have  discussed  this  question  elsewhere,1  and  have  given 
a  definition  of  straight  lines — and,  more  generally,  of  flat¬ 
ness — which  satisfies  the  requirements.  The  necessity  of 
basing  straightness  upon  measurement,  and  measurement 
upon  particular  happenings  is  thereby  avoided.  The  notions 
of  straightness  and  of  congruence,  and  thence  of  distance, 
can  be  derived  from  those  underlying  a  uniform  systematic 
non-metrical  geometry. 

It  may  be  noticed  in  passing  that,  if  straightness  depends 
upon  measurement,  there  can  be  no  perception  of  straightness 
in  the  unmeasured.  The  notion  of  ‘straight  in  front5  must 
then  be  meaningless. 

Section  IX.  In  this  way,  the  inheritance  from  the  past  is 
precipitated  upon  the  present.  It  becomes  sense-perception, 
which  is  the  ‘appearance5  of  the  present. 

The  ‘mutual  immanence5  of  contemporary  occasions  to 
each  other  is  allied  to  the  immanence  of  the  future  in  the 
present,  though  it  presents  some  features  of  its  own.  This 
immanence  exhibits  a  symmetrical  relation  of  causal  in¬ 
dependence.  In  human  experience,  the  prehensions  of  the 
contemporary  world  exhibit  themselves  as  sense-perceptions, 
effected  by  means  of  the  bodily  organs  of  sensation.  The 
subjective  forms  of  these  sense-perceptions  involve  con¬ 
scious  discrimination,  with  varying  degrees  of  clarity  and 
distinctness.  Indeed  sense-perceptions  can  exhibit  themselves 
as  clear  and  distinct  in  consciousness  to  a  degree  unrivalled 
by  any  other  type  of  prehension.  The  result  is  that  all  at- 

1  Cf.  Process  and  Reality,  Part  iv,  Chapters  m,  iv,  and  v.  The  required  definition 
is  given  in  Chapter  m,  and  the  theory  of  the  projection  of  sensa  is  discussed  in 
Chapters  iv  and  v. 


APPEARANCE  AND  REALITY 


279 


tempts  at  an  exact  systematic  doctrine  of  the  nature  of  things 
seeks  its  most  obvious  verification  in  the  conformity  of  its 
theory  with  sense-perception.  The  unfortunate  effect  has 
been,  that  all  direct  observation  has  been  identified  with 
sense-perception.  This  assumption  has  been  criticized  in 
Chapter  xi. 

But  sense-perception,  as  conceived  in  the  isolation  of  its 
ideal  purity,  never  enters  into  human  experience.  It  is  always 
accompanied  by  so-called  ‘interpretation’.  This  ‘interpre¬ 
tation’  does  not  seem  to  be  necessarily  the  product  of  any 
elaborate  train  of  intellectual  cogitation.  We  find  ourselves 
‘accepting’ 1  a  world  of  substantial  objects,  directly  presented 
for  our  experience.  Our  habits,  our  states  of  mind,  our 
modes  of  behaviour,  all  presuppose  this  ‘interpretation’.  In 
fact  the  concept  of  mere  sensa  is  the  product  of  high-grade 
thinking.  It  required  Plato  to  frame  the  myth  of  the  Shadows 
in  the  Cave,  and  it  required  Hume  to  construct  the  doc¬ 
trine  of  pure  sensationalist  perception.  Yet  even  animals 
share  in  some  ‘interpretation’.  There  is  every  evidence  that 
animals  enjoy  a  sensationalist  experience.  Dogs  smell,  eagles 
see,  and  noises  attract  the  attention  of  most  of  the  higher 
animals.  Also  their  consequent  modes  of  behaviour  suggest 
their  immediate  assumption  of  a  substantial  world  around 
them.  In  fact  the  hypothesis  of  a  mere  sensationalist  per¬ 
ception  does  not  account  for  our  direct  observation  of  the 
contemporary  world.  There  is  some  other  factor  present, 
which  is  equally  primitive  with  our  perception  of  sensa.  This 
factor  is  provided  by  the  immanence  of  the  past  in  the  im¬ 
mediate  occasion  whose  percipience  is  under  discussion.  The 

1  Cf.  Perception ,  by  H.  H.  Price,  especially  Chapter  vi,  ‘  Perceptual  Assurance, 
Perceptual  Acceptance’.  Published  by  Methuen,  London,  1932.  Price  in 
his  valuable  work  gives  to  sense-perception  a  more  fundamental  role  in 
experience  than  my  doctrine  allows  to  it.  Cf.  also  Santayana’s  doctrine  of 
‘Animal  Faith’. 


28o 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


immanence  of  the  past  in  this  percipient  occasion  cannot  be 
fully  understood  apart  from  due  attention  to  the  doctrine  of 
the  immanence  of  the  future  in  the  past.  Thus  the  past  as 
an  objective  constituent  in  the  experience  of  the  percipient 
occasion  carries  its  own  prehension  of  the  future  beyond 
itself.  This  prehension  survives  objectively  in  the  primary 
phase  of  the  percipient.  Accordingly  there  is  an  indirect 
prehension  of  contemporary  occasion,  via  the  efficient  causa¬ 
tion,  from  which  they  arise.  For  the  immediate  future  of  the 
immediate  past  constitutes  the  set  of  contemporary  occasions 
for  the  percipient.  Also  these  prehensions  of  immediate 
past  and  of  immediate  future  operate  dominantly  in  their 
experience  of  their  respective  subjects.  Thus  the  prehension 
of  contemporary  occasions  is  the  prehension  of  those  occa¬ 
sions  in  so  far  as  they  are  conditioned  by  the  occasions 
in  the  immediate  past  of  the  prehending  subject.  Thus 
the  present  is  perceivable  in  so  far  as  it  is  conditioned 
by  the  efficient  causation  from  the  past  of  the  perceiver. 
The  great  dominant  relationships,  fundamental  for  the 
epochal  order  of  nature,  thereby  stand  out  with  over¬ 
whelming  distinctness.  These  are  the  general,  all-pervasive, 
obligations  of  perspective.  Such  relationships  are  what  we 
term  the  spatial  relationships  as  perceivable  from  the  stand¬ 
point  of  the  observer. 

But  the  particular  occasions  of  the  contemporary  world, 
each  with  its  own  individual  spontaneity,  are  veiled  from 
the  observer.  In  this  respect,  the  contemporary  world  in  the 
experience  of  the  percipient  shares  the  characteristics  of  the 
future.  The  relevant  environment,  which  is  the  immediate 
past  of  the  human  body,  is  peculiarly  sensitive  to  its  geo¬ 
metrical  experiences  and  to  the  synthesis  of  its  qualitative 
prehensions  with  these  experiences  of  geometrical  relations. 
In  this  way,  there  is  a  basis  in  fact  for  the  association  of 


APPEARANCE  AND  REALITY 


28l 


derivates  from  significant  regions  in  the  past  with  the  geo¬ 
metrical  representatives  of  those  regions  in  the  present.  [Gf. 
Process  and  Reality ,  Part  111,  Chapter  m,  Section  IV,  and 
Part  iv,  Chapters  iv  and  v.] 

The  conclusion  is  that  the  contemporary  world  is  not  per¬ 
ceived  in  virtue  of  its  own  proper  activity,  but  in  virtue  of 
activities  derived  from  the  past,  the  past  which  conditions  it 
and  which  also  conditions  the  contemporary  percipient.  These 
activities  are  primarily  in  the  past  of  the  human  body,  and 
more  remotely  in  the  past  of  the  environment  within  which 
the  body  is  functioning.  This  environment  includes  those  oc¬ 
casions  dominantly  conditioning  the  perceived  contemporary 
regions.  This  theory  of  the  perception  of  contemporaries 
allows  for  our  habitual  belief  that  we  perceive  the  contem¬ 
porary  world  with  a  general  qualitative  relevance  to  the 
essences  of  the  occasions  making  up  its  various  regions;  and 
also  with  a  bias  of  qualitative  distortion  due  to  the  functioning 
of  the  animal  body  of  the  percipient. 

One  distortion  stands  out  immediately.  Each  actual  occa¬ 
sion  is  in  truth  a  process  of  activity.  But  the  contemporary 
regions  are  mainly  perceived  in  terms  of  their  passive  per¬ 
spective  relationship  to  the  percipient  and  to  each  other. 
They  are  thus  perceived  merely  as  passive  recipients  of  the 
qualities  with  which  in  sense-perception  they  are  associated. 
Hence  the  false  notion  of  a  substratum  with  vacuously  in¬ 
herent  qualities.  Here  the  term  ‘vacuous’  means  ‘devoid  of 
any  individual  enjoyment  arising  from  the  mere  fact  of 
realization  in  that  context5.  In  other  words,  the  substratum 
with  its  complex  of  inherent  qualities  is  wrongly  conceived 
as  bare  realization,  devoid  of  self-enjoyment,  that  is  to  say, 
devoid  of  intrinsic  worth.  In  this  way,  the  exclusive  reliance 
on  sense-perception  promotes  a  false  metaphysics.  This  error 
is  the  result  of  high-grade  intellectuality.  The  instinctive 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


282 

.  i 

interpretations  which  govern  human  life  and  animal  life 
presuppose  a  contemporary  world  throbbing  with  energetic 
values.  It  requires  considerable  ability  to  make  the  disastrous 
abstraction  of  our  bare  sense-perceptions  from  the  massive 
insistency  of  our  total  experiences.  Of  course,  whatever  we 
can  do  in  the  way  of  abstraction  is  for  some  purposes  useful 
— provided  that  we  know  what  we  are  about. 


CHAPTER  XV 


PHILOSOPHIC  METHOD 

Section  I.  In  this  final  chapter  of  Part  hi  my  aim  is  a 
discussion  of  some  methods  which  can  usefully  be  employed 
in  the  pursuit  of  speculative  philosophy.  In  illustration,  and 
as  a  subsidiary  aim,  I  shall  refer  to  some  doctrines  of  my 
own,1  and  to  some  comments  upon  them.  In  this  chapter  the 
transient  aspect  of  nature  will  be  mainly  emphasized. 

So  far  as  concerns  methodology,  the  general  issue  of  the 
discussion  will  be  that  theory  dictates  method,  and  that 
any  particular  method  is  only  applicable  to  theories  of  one 
correlate  species.  An  analogous  conclusion  holds  for  the 
technical  terms.  This  close  relation  of  theory  to  method 
partly  arises  from  the  fact  that  the  relevance  of  evidence 
depends  on  the  theory  which  is  dominating  the  discussion. 
This  fact  is  the  reason  why  dominant  theories  are  also 
termed  ‘working  hypotheses’. 

An  example  is  afforded  when  we  interrogate  experience 
for  direct  evidence  of  the  interconnectedness  of  things.  If 
we  hold  with  Hume,  that  the  sole  data  originating  reflective 
experience  are  impressions  of  sensation,  and  also  if  we  also 
admit  with  him  the  obvious  fact  that  no  one  such  impression 
by  its  own  individual  nature  discloses  any  information  as 
to  another  such  impression,  then  on  that  hypothesis  the 
direct  evidence  for  interconnectedness  vanishes.  Again,  if 

1  Cf.  Process  and  Reality ,  subsequently  cited  under  the  abbreviation  P.R. 
Also,  Science  and  The  Modern  World,  cited  as  S.M.  W. 


284  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

we  hold  the  Cartesian  doctrine  of  substantial  souls  with 
many  adventures  of  experience,  and  of  substantial  material 
bodies,  then  on  that  hypothesis  the  relations  between  two 
occasions  of  experience  qualifying  one  soul  are  no  evidence 
as  to  the  connectedness  of  two  such  occasions  respectively 
qualifying  two  different  souls,  and  are  no  evidence  as  to  the 
connectedness  of  a  soul  and  a  material  body,  and  are  no 
evidence  as  to  the  connectedness  of  two  occasions  of  agitation 
of  one  material  body,  or  of  two  such  occasions  respectively 
belonging  to  different  material  bodies.  But  if  we  hold,  as 
for  example  in  Process  and  Reality ,  that  all  final  individual 
actualities  have  the  metaphysical  character  of  occasions  of 
experience,  then  on  that  hypothesis  the  direct  evidence  as 
to  the  connectedness  of  one’s  immediate  present  occasion  of 
experience  with  one’s  immediately  past  occasions,  can  be 
validly  used  to  suggest  categories  applying  to  the  connected¬ 
ness  of  all  occasions  in  nature.  A  great  deal  of  confused 
philosophical  thought  has  its  origin  in  obliviousness  to  the 
fact  that  the  relevance  of  evidence  is  dictated  by  theory. 
For  you  cannot  prove  a  theory  by  evidence  which  that 
theory  dismisses  as  irrelevant.  This  is  also  the  reason  that  in 
any  science  which  has  failed  to  produce  any  theory  with  a 
sufficient  scope  of  application,  progress  is  necessarily  very 
slow.  It  is  impossible  to  know  what  to  look  for,  and  how  to 
connect  the  sporadic  observations.  Philosophical  discussion 
in  the  absence  of  a  theory  has  no  criterion  of  the  validity  of 
evidence.  For  example,  Hume  assumes  that  his  doctrine  of 
association  holds  for  all  types  of  impressions  of  sensation 
and  of  ideas  of  them  indiscriminately.  This  assumption  is 
part  of  his  theory.  In  divorce  from  the  theory,  a  separate 
appeal  to  experience  is  required  for  each  type  of  impression, 
for  example,  tastes,  sounds,  sights,  etc.,  and  likewise,  not 
only  for  the  association  of  tastes  inter  se  and  of  sounds  inter 


PHILOSOPHIC  METHOD 


285 

se ,  but  for  the  association  of  tastes  with  sounds,  and  so  on 
for  every  possible  type,  and  for  every  possible  conjunction 
of  types. 

To  sum  up  this  preface,  every  method  is  a  happy  simplifica¬ 
tion.  But  only  truths  of  a  congenial  type  can  be  investigated 
by  any  one  method,  or  stated  in  the  terms  dictated  by  the 
method.  For  every  simplification  is  an  over-simplification. 
Thus  the  criticism  of  a  theory  does  not  start  from  the  question, 
True  or  false?  It  consists  in  noting  its  scope  of  useful  appli¬ 
cation  and  its  failure  beyond  that  scope.  It  is  an  unguarded 
statement  of  a  partial  truth.  Some  of  its  terms  embody  a 
general  notion  with  a  mistaken  specialization,  and  others  of 
its  terms  are  too  general  and  require  discrimination  of  their 
possibilities  of  specialization. 

Section  II.  Philosophy  is  a  difficult  subject,  from  the  days 
of  Plato  to  the  present  time  haunted  by  subtle  perplexities. 
The  existence  of  such  perplexities  arising  from  the  common 
obviousness  of  speech  is  the  reason  why  the  topic  exists. 
Thus  the  very  purpose  of  philosophy  is  to  delve  below  the 
apparent  clarity  of  common  speech.  In  this  connection,  it 
is  only  necessary  to  refer  to  Socrates.  Another  illustration  is 
to  be  found  in  the  Sophist ,  where  Plato  states  that  c  not-being 5 
is  a  form  of  ‘being’.  This  statement  is  at  once  an  extreme 
instance  of  the  breakdown  of  language,  and  the  enunciation 
of  a  profound  metaphysical  truth  which  lies  at  the  foundation 
of  this  discussion. 

Section  III.  Speculative  Philosophy  can  be  defined1  as 
the  endeavour  to  frame  a  coherent,  logical,  necessary  system 
of  general  ideas  in  terms  of  which  every  element  of  our  ex¬ 
perience  can  be  interpreted.  Here  ‘interpretation’  means  that 
each  element  shall  have  the  character  of  a  particular  instance 
of  the  general  scheme. 

1  Cf.  P.R.  Part  1,  Chapter  1  Section  I. 


236 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


Thus  speculative  philosophy  embodies  the  method  of  the 
‘working  hypothesis’.  The  purpose  of  this  working  hypo¬ 
thesis  for  philosophy  is  to  co-ordinate  the  current  expressions 
of  human  experience,  in  common  speech,  in  social  institutions, 
in  actions,  in  the  principles  of  the  various  special  sciences, 
elucidating  harmony  and  exposing  discrepancies.  No  syste¬ 
matic  thought  has  made  progress  apart  from  some  adequately 
general  working  hypothesis,  adapted  to  its  special  topic.  Such 
an  hypothesis  directs  observation,  and  decides  upon  the 
mutual  relevance  of  various  types  of  evidence.  In  short,  it 
prescribes  method.  To  venture  upon  productive  thought 
without  such  an  explicit  theory  is  to  abandon  oneself  to  the 
doctrines  derived  from  one’s  grandfather. 

In  the  preliminary  stages  of  knowledge  a  haphazard  criterion 
is  all  that  is  possible.  Progress  is  then  very  slow,  and  most  of 
the  effort  is  wasted.  Even  an  inadequate  working  hypothesis 
with  some  conformation  to  fact  is  better  than  nothing.  It 
co-ordinates  procedure. 

The  advance  of  any  reasonably  developed  science  is  two¬ 
fold.  There  is  the  advance  of  detailed  knowledge  within  the 
method  prescribed  by  the  reigning  working  hypothesis;  and 
there  is  the  rectification  of  the  working  hypothesis  dictated 
by  the  inadequacies  of  the  current  orthodoxy. 

Sometimes  it  is  necessary  for  a  science  to  entertain  con¬ 
currently  two — or  more — working  hypotheses,  each  with  its 
own  success  and  its  own  failure.  Such  hypotheses  are  con¬ 
tradictory  as  stated;  and  science  awaits  their  conciliation  by 
the  production  of  a  working  hypothesis  with  a  wider  sweep. 
When  a  new  working  hypothesis  is  proposed,  it  must  be 
criticized  from  its  own  point  of  view.  For  example,  it  is 
futile  to  object  to  the  Newtonian  dynamics  that,  on  the 
Aristotelian  system,  the  loose  things  on  the  earth’s  surface 
must  be  left  behind  by  the  earth’s  motion. 


PHILOSOPHIC  METHOD  287 

Philosophy  has  been  afflicted  by  the  dogmatic  fallacy,  which 
is  the  belief  that  the  principles  of  its  working  hypotheses  are 
clear,  obvious,  and  irreformable.  Then,  as  a  reaction  from 
this  fallacy,  it  has  swayed  to  the  other  extreme  which  is 
the  fallacy  of  discarding  method.  Philosophers  boast  that 
they  uphold  no  system.  They  are  then  a  prey  to  the  delusive 
clarities  of  detached  expressions  which  it  is  the  very  purpose 
of  their  science  to  surmount.  Another  type  of  reaction  is 
to  assume,  often  tacitly,  that  if  there  can  be  any  intellectual 
analysis  it  must  proceed  according  to  some  one  discarded 
dogmatic  method,  and  thence  to  deduce  that  intellect  is 
intrinsically  tied  to  erroneous  fictions.  This  type  is  illustrated 
by  the  anti-intellectualism  of  Nietzsche  and  Bergson,  and 
tinges  American  Pragmatism. 

Section  IV.  A  method  is  a  way  of  dealing  with  data, 
with  evidence.  What  are  the  evidences  to  which  philosophy 
appeals? 

It  is  customary  to  contrast  the  objective  approach  of  the 
ancient  Greeks  with  the  subjective  approach  of  the  moderns, 
initiated  by  Descartes,  and  further  emphasized  by  Locke  and 
Hume. 

But,  whether  we  be  ancient  or  modern,  we  can  only  deal 
with  things,  in  some  sense,  experienced.  The  Greeks  dealt 
with  things  that  they  thought  they  experienced,  and  Hume 
merely  asked,  What  do  we  experience?  This  is  exactly  the 
question  which  Plato  and  Aristotle  thought  that  they  were 
answering. 

To  speak  of  anything,  is  to  speak  of  something  which,  by 
reason  of  that  very  speech,  is  in  some  way  a  component  in 
that  act  of  experience.  In  some  sense  or  other,  it  is  thereby 
known  to  exist.  This  is  what  Plato  pointed  out  when  he 
wrote,  Not-being  is  itself  a  sort  of  being. 

Speech  consists  of  noises,  or  visible  shapes,  which  elicit 


288 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


an  experience  of  things  other  than  themselves.  In  so  far  as 
vocables  fail  to  elicit  a  stable  co-ordination  of  sound-character, 
or  shape-character,  to  meaning,  those  vocables  fail  to  function 
as  speech.  And  in  so  far  as  some  meaning  is  not  in  some  sense 
directly  experienced,  there  is  no  meaning  conveyed.  To  point 
at  nothing  is  not  to  point. 

To  speak  of  the  same  thing  twice  is  to  demonstrate  that 
the  being  of  that  thing  is  independent  of  either  singular 
act  of  speech,  unless  we  believe  that  the  two  acts  presuppose 
each  other  or  are  both  presupposed  by  the  thing  spoken  of. 
If  we  cannot  speak  of  the  same  thing  twice,  knowledge 
vanishes  taking  philosophy  with  it.  Thus,  since  speech  can 
be  repeated,  things  spoken  of  have  a  determined  being  in 
abstraction  from  the  occasion  of  experience  which  includes 
that  act  of  speech. 

The  difference  between  ancients  and  moderns  is  that  the 
ancients  asked  what  have  we  experienced,  and  the  moderns 
asked  what  can  we  experience.  But  in  both  cases,  they  asked 
about  things  transcending  the  act  of  experience  which  is  the 
occasion  of  asking. 

Section  V.  The  translation  of  Hume’s  question  from 
‘What  do  we  experience’  to  ‘What  can  we  experience’  makes 
all  the  difference,  though  in  his  ‘Treatise’  Hume  makes  the 
transition,  time  and  again,  without  explicit  comment.  For 
modern  epistemology  the  latter  form  of  the  question — with 
its  substitution  of  can  for  do — is  accompanied  by  the  implicit 
presupposition  of  a  method,  namely  that  of  placing  ourselves 
in  an  introspective  attitude  of  attention  so  as  to  determine 
the  given  components  of  experience  in  abstraction  from  our 
private  way  of  subjective  reaction,  by  reflection,  conjecture, 
emotion,  and  purpose. 

In  this  attitude  of  strained  attention,  there  can  be  no 
doubt  as  to  the  answer.  The  data  are  the  patterns  of  sensa 
provided  by  the  sense  organs.  This  is  the  sensationalist  doc- 


PHILOSOPHIC  METHOD 


289 

trine  of  Locke  and  Hume.  Later,  Kant  has  interpreted  the 
patterns  as  forms  introduced  by  the  mode  of  reception  pro¬ 
vided  by  the  recipient.  Here  Kant  introduces  the  Leibnizian 
notion  of  the  self-development  of  the  experiencing  subject. 
Thus  for  Kant  the  data  are  somewhat  narrower  than  for 
Hume:  they  are  the  sensa  devoid  of  their  patterns.  Hume’s 
general  analysis  of  the  consequences  of  this  doctrine  stands 
unshaken.  So  also  does  his  final  reflection,  that  the  philo¬ 
sophic  doctrine  fails  to  justify  the  practice  of  daily  life.  The 
justification  of  this  procedure  of  modern  epistemology  is 
twofold,  and  both  of  its  branches  are  based  upon  mistakes. 
The  mistakes  go  back  to  the  Greek  philosophers.  What  is 
modern,  is  the  exclusive  reliance  upon  them. 

Section  VI.  The  first  error  is  the  assumption  of  a  few 
definite  avenues  of  communication  with  the  external  world, 
the  five  sense-organs.  This  leads  to  the  pre-supposition  that 
the  search  for  the  data  is  to  be  narrowed  to  the  question,  What 
data  are  directly  provided  by  the  activity  of  the  sense-organs 
— preferably  the  eyes.  This  doctrine  of  sense-organs  has  a 
vague,  general  truth,  very  important  for  practical  affairs.  In 
particular  all  exact  scientific  observation  is  derived  from 
such  data.  The  scientific  categories  of  thought  are  obtained 
elsewhere. 

But  the  living  organ  of  experience  is  the  living  body  as  a 
whole.  Every  instability  of  any  part  of  it — be  it  chemical, 
physical,  or  molar — imposes  an  activity  of  readjustment 
throughout  the  whole  organism.  In  the  course  of  such 
physical  activities  human  experience  has  its  origin.  The 
plausible  interpretation  of  such  experience  is  that  it  is  one 
of  the  natural  activities  involved  in  the  functioning  of  such 
a  high-grade  organism.  The  actualities  of  nature  must  be 
so  interpreted  as  to  be  explanatory  of  this  fact.  This  is  one 
desideratum  to  be  aimed  at  in  a  philosophic  scheme. 

Such  experience  seems  to  be  more  particularly  related  to 

19 


wi 


290 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


the  activities  of  the  brain.  But  how  far  an  exact  doctrine  can 
be  based  upon  this  presumption  lies  beyond  our  powers  of 
observation.  We  cannot  determine  with  what  molecules  the 
brain  begins  and  the  rest  of  the  body  ends.  Further,  we 
cannot  tell  with  what  molecules  the  body  ends  and  the 
external  world  begins.  The  truth  is  that  the  brain  is  con¬ 
tinuous  with  the  body,  and  the  body  is  continuous  with  the 
rest  of  the  natural  world.  Human  experience  is  an  act  of 
self-origination  including  the  whole  of  nature,  limited  to 
the  perspective  of  a  focal  region,1  located  within  the  body, 
but  not  necessarily  persisting  in  any  fixed  co-ordination  with 
a  definite  part  of  the  brain. 

Section  VII.  The  second  error  is  the  presupposition  that 
the  sole  way  of  examining  experience  is  by  acts  of  conscious 
introspective  analysis.  Such  a  doctrine  of  the  exclusive 
primacy  of  introspection  is  already  discredited  in  psychology. 
Each  occasion  of  experience  has  its  own  individual  pattern. 
Each  occasion  lifts  some  components  into  primacy  and  re¬ 
treats  others  into  a  background  enriching  the  total  enjoyment. 
The  attitude  of  introspection  shares  this  characteristic  with 
all  other  experiential  occasions.  It  lifts  the  clear-cut  data 
of  sensation  into  primacy,  and  cloaks  the  vague  compulsions 
and  derivations  which  form  the  main  stuff  of  experience.  In 
particular  it  rules  out  that  intimate  sense  of  derivation  from 
the  body,  which  is  the  reason  for  our  instinctive  identification 
of  our  bodies  with  ourselves. 

In  order  to  discover  some  of  the  major  categories  under 
which  we  can  classify  the  infinitely  various  components  of 
experience,  we  must  appeal  to  evidence  relating  to  every 
variety  of  occasion.  Nothing  can  be  omitted,  experience 
drunk  and  experience  sober,  experience  sleeping  and  experi¬ 
ence  waking,  experience  drowsy  and  experience  wide-awake, 

1  Cf.  P.R.  Pt.  n,  Ch.  in,  especially  Sects.  IV-XI,  and  Pt.  iv,  Chs.  iv  and  v. 


PHILOSOPHIC  METHOD 


291 


experience  self-conscious  and  experience  self-forgetful,  ex¬ 
perience  intellectual  and  experience  physical,  experience 
religious  and  experience  sceptical,  experience  anxious  and 
experience  care-free,  experience  anticipatory  and  experience 
retrospective,  experience  happy  and  experience  grieving,  ex¬ 
perience  dominated  by  emotion  and  experience  under  self- 
restraint,  experience  in  the  light  and  experience  in  the  dark, 
experience  normal  and  experience  abnormal. 

Section  VIII.  We  have  now  reached  the  heart  of  our 
topic.  What  is  the  store-house  of  that  crude  evidence  on 
which  philosophy  should  base  its  discussion,  and  in  what 
terms  should  its  discussion  be  expressed? 

The  main  sources  of  evidence  respecting  this  width  of 
human  experience  are  language,  social  institutions,  and 
action,  including  thereby  the  fusion  of  the  three  which  is 
language  interpreting  action  and  social  institutions. 

Language  delivers  its  evidence  in  three  chapters,  one  on 
the  meanings  of  words,  another  on  the  meanings  enshrined 
in  grammatical  forms,  and  the  third  on  meanings  beyond 
individual  words  and  beyond  grammatical  forms,  meanings 
miraculously  revealed  in  great  literature. 

Language  is  incomplete  and  fragmentary,  and  merely  reg¬ 
isters  a  stage  in  the  average  advance  beyond  ape-mentality. 
But  all  men  enjoy  flashes  of  insight  beyond  meanings  already 
stabilized  in  etymology  and  grammar.  Hence  the  role  of 
literature,  the  role  of  the  special  sciences,  and  the  role  of 
philosophy — in  their  various  ways  engaged  in  finding  linguistic 
expressions  for  meanings  as  yet  unexpressed. 

As  a  special  example,  consider  the  line  and  a  half  of  poetry 
in  which  Euripides1  compresses  the  main  philosophical  pro¬ 
blems  which  have  tortured  European  thought  from  his  day 
to  the  present — “Zeus,  whether  thou  art  Compulsion  of 

1  Trojan  Women,  886-7. 


19-2 


292  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

Nature  or  Intelligence  of  Mankind,  to  thee  I  prayed”.  Con¬ 
sider  the  ideas  involved,  ‘Zeus’,  ‘necessity  [compulsion]  of 
nature’,  ‘intelligence  of  mankind’,  ‘prayer’.  These  lines  have 
survived  the  ages  with  a  modern  appeal  vivid  as  when  first 
they  thrilled  an  Athenian  audience.  The  biographer1  of  a 
modern  statesman  cites  them  to  express  the  solemnity  of  the 
spectacle  of  life  passing  into  religious  emotion. 

Yet  Hume  would  be  able  to  find  no  ‘impression  of  sen¬ 
sation’  from  which  to  derive  ‘Zeus’,  or  ‘compulsion’,  or 
‘intelligence’,  or  the  would-be  ‘persuasiveness’  which  we 
term  ‘prayer’.  John  Morley  himself  selected  the  quotation 
in  spite  of  his  own  positivistic  bias  which  should  trivialize 
these  meanings.  Also,  perhaps  even  for  their  original  author, 
the  lines  represent  a  triumph  of  dramatic  intuition  over  tem¬ 
peramental  scepticism. 

The  common  practice,  interpreted  by  the  common  lan¬ 
guage  of  mankind,  tells  the  same  tale.  A  statesman,  or  a 
president  of  a  business  corporation,  assumes  the  ‘compul¬ 
sion  of  recent  events’  [ dvayKTj  cfrvareajs]  as  laying  down 
inexorable  conditions  for  the  future.  He  frames  a  ‘policy’ 
upon  this  assumption  and  advises  that  it  be  ‘acted  on’, 
thereby  also  assuming  that  the  imposed  conditions  leave 
room  for  the  effectiveness  of  ‘choice’  and  ‘intelligence’ 
[vou?] .  He  assumes  alternatives  in  contrast  to  the  immediate 
fact.  He  conceives  an  ideal,  to  be  attained  or  to  be  missed. 
He  conceives  such  ideals  as  effective  in  proportion  as  they 
are  entertained.  He  praises  and  he  blames  by  reason  of 
this  belief. 

In  the  world,  there  are  elements  of  order  and  disorder, 
which  thereby  presuppose  an  essential  interconnectedness  of 
things.  For  disorder  shares  with  order  the  common  charac¬ 
teristic  that  they  imply  many  things  interconnected. 

1  Cf.  John  Morley ’s  Life  of  Gladstone,  Ch.  x. 


PHILOSOPHIC  METHOD 


293 


Each  experient  enjoys  a  perspective  apprehension  of  the 
world,  and  equally  is  an  element  in  the  world  by  reason  of 
this  very  prehension,  which  anchors  him  to  a  world  tran¬ 
scending  his  own  experience.  For,  it  belongs  to  the  nature 
of  this  perspective  derivation,  that  the  world  thus  disclosed 
proclaims  its  own  transcendence  of  that  disclosure.  To  every 
shield,  there  is  another  side,  hidden. 

Thus  an  appeal  to  literature,  to  common  language,  to 
common  practice,  at  once  carries  us  away  from  the  narrow 
basis  for  epistemology  provided  by  the  sense-data  disclosed 
in  direct  introspection.  The  world  within  experience  is 
identical  with  the  world  beyond  experience,  the  occasion  of 
experience  is  within  the  world  and  the  world  is  within  the 
occasion.  The  categories  have  to  elucidate  this  paradox  of  the 
connectedness  of  things — the  many  things,  the  one  world 
without  and  within. 

Section  IX.  European  philosophy  is  founded  upon  Plato’s 
dialogues,  which  in  their  methods  are  mainly  an  endeavour 
to  elicit  philosophic  categories  from  a  dialectic  discussion  of 
the  meanings  of  language  taken  in  combination  with  shrewd 
observation  of  the  actions  of  man  and  of  the  forces  of  nature. 

But  in  one  dialogue,  the  Sophist ,  Plato  explicitly  considers 
the  methods  of  philosophy.  One  of  his  conclusions  is  to 
point  out  the  limitations  of  common  speech.  Mere  dialectic, 
uncriticized,  is  a  fallacious  instrument,  the  mark  of  the 
Sophist.  For  example,  Plato  insists  that  not-being  is  itself  a 
form  of  being.  Thus  in  philosophy  linguistic  discussion  is  a 
tool,  but  should  never  be  a  master.  Language  is  imperfect 
both  in  its  words  and  in  its  forms.  Thus  we  discover  two 
main  errors  to  which  philosophic  method  is  liable;  one  is  the 
uncritical  trust  in  the  adequacy  of  language,  and  the  other 
is  the  uncritical  trust  in  the  strained  attitude  of  introspection 
as  the  basis  for  epistemology. 


294 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


But  since  the  life-time  of  Plato  nearly  two  and  a  half 
thousand  years  have  intervened,  including  the  continuous 
activity  of  European  philosophic  thought,  pagan,  Christian, 
secular.  It  is  widely  held  that  a  stable,  well-known  philo¬ 
sophic  vocabulary  has  been  elaborated,  and  that  in  philo¬ 
sophic  discussion  any  straying  beyond  its  limits  introduces 
neologisms,  unnecessary  and  therefore  to  be  regretted. 

This  alleged  fact  requires  examination.  In  the  first  place, 
if  the  allegation  be  true,  it  is  very  remarkable.  It  decisively 
places  philosophy  apart  from  the  more  special  sciences. 
Modern  mathematics,  most  secure  and  authoritative  of  sci¬ 
ences,  is  largely  written  in  verbal  and  symbolic  phrases 
which  would  have  been  unintelligible  eighty  years  ago.  In 
modern  physics  the  old  words,  where  they  are  still  used, 
convey  different  meanings,  and  the  new  words  are  abundant. 
But  it  is  futile  to  make  a  catalogue  of  the  sciences  accom¬ 
panied  by  this  refrain.  The  conclusion  is  obvious  to  the  most 
cursory  inspection. 

Section  X.  Undoubtedly,  philosophy  is  dominated  by  its 
past  literature  to  a  greater  extent  than  any  other  science. 
And  rightly  so.  But  the  claim  that  it  has  acquired  a  set  of 
technical  terms  sufficient  for  its  purposes,  and  exhaustive  of 
its  meanings,  is  entirely  unfounded.  Indeed  its  literature  is 
so  vast,  and  the  variations  of  its  schools  of  thought  so  large, 
that  there  is  abundant  evidence  of  most  excusable  ignorance 
respecting  verbal  usages. 

A  recent  instance  illustrates  the  vagueness  of  philosophical 
terminology.  Logic  is,  by  far,  that  branch  of  philosophy  best 
systematized  with  the  aid  of  a  stable  technical  language. 
Consider  the  terms  Judgment  and  Proposition.  I  am  not 
writing  a  preface  to  Logic,  so  I  will  confine  myself  to  the 
assertion  that  there  is  considerable  variation  in  the  usages  of 
these  terms  among  logicians. 


PHILOSOPHIC  METHOD 


295 


Also  we  may  well  ask  whether  there  are  not  subtle  variations 
of  meaning  stretching  far  beyond  the  competence  of  the 
two-term  vocabulary — Judgment,  Proposition.  For  example, 
Mr  Joseph1  has  been  examining  Mr  W.  E.  Johnson’s  use 
of  the  term  Proposition  in  his  well-known  Logical  Treatise. 
Mr  Joseph  finds  twenty  distinct  meanings.  It  is  to  be  re¬ 
membered  that  we  are  here  referring  to  two  of  the  most 
acute  of  modern  logicians.  Whether  Mr  Joseph  has  rightly 
interpreted  Mr  Johnson’s  phrases  is  not  to  the  point.  If 
Mr  Joseph  has  found  twenty  distinct,  though  allied,  meanings 
closely  connected  with  the  term  Proposition,  there  are  twenty 
such  meanings,  even  though  for  the  moment  their  divergencies 
may  seem  unimportant  to  Mr  Johnson  or  to  Mr  Joseph. 
Importance  depends  on  purpose  and  on  point  of  view.  So 
at  any  moment  twenty  new  terms  may  be  required  by 
some  advance  in  the  subtlety  of  logical  theory.  Again,  if 
Mr  Johnson  has  employed  twenty  distinct  meanings,  it  is 
because  they  were  relevant  to  his  argument,  even  though 
his  argument  may  require  further  completion  by  reason  of 
their  unnoted  distinction. 

It  is  safe  to  affirm  that  this  situation  can  be  repeated  over 
every  technical  term  in  philosophy. 

Section  XI.  Another  illustration,  in  which  my  use  of 
the  words2  Prehension,  Feeling,  Satisfaction,  is  partly  con¬ 
cerned,  can  be  drawn  from  the  terms  expressive  of  the 
connectedness  of  things.  For  this  topic,  the  reigning  philo¬ 
sophical  term  is  the  word  Relation.  There  are  various  con¬ 
troversies  about  relations  which  need  not  be  explicitly 
referred  to.  But  there  is  one  discussion  which  illustrates  our 
immediate  topic. 

It  is  generally  held  that  relations  are  universals,  so  that  A 

1  Cf.  Mind,  Vols.  36,  37,  New  Series. 

3  Cf.  S.M.W.,  Ch.  iv  and  passim  and  P.R.  Part  1,  Ch.  11  and  passim. 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


296 

can  have  the  same  relation  to  B  as  G  has  to  D.  For  example 
‘loving’,  ‘believing’,  ‘between’,  ‘greater  than’,  are  relations. 
There  can  be  no  objection  to  this  doctrine.  For  it  is  a  mere 
definition.  Universals  which  require  two  or  more  particulars 
for  their  illustration  need  some  term  to  indicate  them,  and 
Relation  is  the  word  chosen. 

But  with  this  meaning  to  the  term,  a  relation  cannot  signify 
the  actual  connectedness  of  the  actual  individual  things  which 
constitute  the  actual  course  of  history.  For  example,  New 
York  lies  between  Boston  and  Philadelphia.  But  the  con¬ 
nectedness  of  the  three  towns  is  a  real  particular  fact  on  the 
earth’s  surface  involving  a  particular  part  of  the  eastern  sea¬ 
board  of  the  United  States.  It  is  not  the  universal  ‘between’. 
It  is  a  complex  actual  fact  which,  among  other  things, 
exemplifies  the  abstract  universal  ‘betweenness’. 

This  consideration  is  the  basis  of  Bradley’s  objection  that 
relations  do  not  relate.  Three  towns  and  an  abstract  universal 
are  not  three  connected  towns.  A  doctrine  of  connectedness 
is  wanted.  Bradley1  writes  ‘Is  there,  in  the  end,  such  a  thing 
as  a  relation  which  is  merely  between  terms  ?  Or,  on  the  other 
hand,  does  not  a  relation  imply  an  underlying  unity  and  an 
inclusive  whole?’ 

Bradley’s  ‘inclusive  whole’  is  the  connectedness  of  which 
we  are  in  search.  Throughout  this  chapter  \loc.  cit.\  Bradley 
uses  the  term  Feeling  to  express  the  primary  activity  at  the 
basis  of  experience.  It  is  experience  itself  in  its  origin  and 
with  the  minimum  of  analysis.  The  analysis  of  Feeling  can 
never  disclose  anything  lying  beyond  the  essence  of  the 
occasion  of  experience.  Hence  Bradley  terms  it  ‘non¬ 
relational’.  There  are  of  course  grave  differences  between  my 

1  Cf.  Essays  on  Truth  and  Reality,  Ch.  vi,  On  our  Knowledge  of  Immediate  Ex¬ 
perience,  Appendix,  p.  193. 

The  page  references  are  to  the  Oxford  edition  of  1914.  Also  cf.  Appendix 
to  Ch.  vi,  passim,  and  Supplementary  Note  to  the  same. 


PHILOSOPHIC  METHOD 


297 


own  doctrine  and  that  of  Bradley.  This  was  a  reason1  for 
expounding  my  point  of  view  in  some  independence  of 
Bradley,  with  due  acknowledgment.  Surely  the  proper 
method  of  choosing  technical  terms  is  to  adopt  terms  from 
some  outstanding  exposition  of  an  analogous  doctrine.  It 
throws  an  interesting  light  on  the  belief  in  a  well-understood 
technical  phraseology  reigning  in  philosophy,  that  an  ac¬ 
complished  philosopher  censured  in  print  my  use  of  the 
word  Feeling  as  being  in  a  sense  never  before  employed  in 
philosophy. 

I  may  add  that  William  James  also  employs  the  word  in 
much  the  same  sense  in  his  Psychology.  For  example  in  the 
first  chapter  he  writes,  “Sensation  is  the  feeling  of  first 
things”.  And  in  the  second  chapter  he  writes,  “In  general, 
this  higher  consciousness  about  things  is  called  Perception, 
the  mere  inarticulate  feeling  of  their  presence  is  Sensation, 
so  far  as  we  have  it  at  all.  To  some  degree  we  seem  able  to 
lapse  into  this  inarticulate  feeling  at  moments  when  our 
attention  is  entirely  dispersed”.  It  is  interesting  to  make  a 
few  citations  from  Bradley,  illustrating  my  general  adherence 
to  his  doctrine  of  Feeling,  as  expressed  in  his  Chapter.  “In 
my  general  feeling  at  any  moment  there  is  more  than  the 
objects  before  me,  and  no  perception  of  objects  will  exhaust 
the  sense  of  a  living  emotion.”2 

In  accordance  with  this  doctrine  of  Bradley’s,  I  analyse  a 
feeling  [or  prehension]  into  the  ‘datum’,  which  is  Bradley’s 
‘object  before  me’,  into  the  ‘subjective  form’  which  is 
Bradley’s  ‘living  emotion’,  and  into  the  ‘subject’  which  is 
Bradley’s  ‘me’.  My  reason  for  using  the  term  ‘subjective 
form’  is  that  I  stretch  its  meaning  beyond  ‘emotion’.  For 
example  consciousness,  if  it  be  present,  is  an  element  in  the 
subjective  form.  This  is,  of  course,  a  grave  divergence  from 
1  Cf.  P.R.  passim.  2  Bradley,  p.  159. 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


298 

Bradley.  Subjective  form  is  the  character  assumed  by  the 
subject  by  reason  of  some  prehended  datum. 

But  on  the  whole  I  conform  to  Bradley’s  conception  of  the 
function  of  subjective  form.  For  example,  “These  puzzles  are 
insoluble  unless  that  which  I  feel,  and  which  is  not  an  object 
before  me,  is  present  and  active.  This  felt  element  is  used 
and  it  must  be  used  in  the  constitution  of  that  object  which 
satisfies  me”.1 

From  my  point  of  view  there  is  an  ambiguity  in  this 
statement,  but  I  adhere  to  either  alternative  meaning. 

The  component  of  feeling  ‘which  is  not  an  object  before 
me’  is  the  subjective  form.  If  Bradley  is  stating  that  the 
subjective  forms  of  feelings  determine  the  process  of  inte¬ 
gration,  I  entirely  agree.  The  result,  as  Bradley  states,  is  the 
‘  satisfaction 5  which  is  the  final  feeling  terminating  the  unrest 
of  the  creative  process. 

Bradley,  however,  may  mean  by  his  phrase  “that  which 
I  feel,  and  which  is  not  an  object  before  me”  what  I  term  a 
“negative  prehension”.  Such  a  prehension  is  active  via  its 
contribution  of  its  subjective  form  to  the  creative  process, 
but  it  dismisses  its  ‘object’  from  the  possibility  of  entering 
into  the  datum  of  the  final  satisfaction.  This  final  complex 
datum  will  be  what  Bradley  calls  “that  object  that  satisfies 
me”.  Again  I  agree. 

The  doctrine  of  the  ‘living  emotion’  which  necessarily 
clothes  each  concrete  exhibition  of  the  subject-object  situa¬ 
tion  is  far  older  than  Bradley.  We  find  its  germ  in  Plato, 
who  insists  that  the  whole  character  is  conformed  to  the 
adequate  knowledge.  He  implicitly  refuses  to  abstract  the 
‘living  emotion’  from  the  bare  intellectual  perception,  and 
thereby  identifies  virtue  with  knowledge.  The  advance  in 

1  P.  161. 


PHILOSOPHIC  METHOD 


299 


psychology  has  added  to  our  conscious  discrimination,  but  it 
has  not  altered  the  fact  that  inevitably  perception  is  clothed 
with  emotion. 

The  historical  importance  of  the  doctrine  is  stated  by 
George  Foot  Moore:1  “Civilization  develops  only  where 
considerable  numbers  of  men  work  together  for  common 
ends.  Such  unity  is  brought  about,  not  so  much  by  com¬ 
munity  of  bare  ideas  as  by  community  of  the  feelings  by 
which  ideas  are  ‘emotionalized’  and  become  beliefs  and 
motives”. 

The  conventionalized  abstractions  prevalent  in  epistemo¬ 
logical  theory  are  very  far  from  the  concrete  facts  of  ex¬ 
perience.  The  word  ‘feeling’  has  the  merit  of  preserving  this 
double  significance  of  subjective  form  and  of  the  appre¬ 
hension  of  an  object.  It  avoids  the  disjecta  membra  provided 
by  abstraction.2 

Section  XII.  Thus  an  occasion  of  human  experience  is 
one  illustration  of  the  required  doctrine  of  connectedness. 

Bradley’s  authority  can  be  quoted  in  support.  Fie  writes:3 
“At  every  moment  my  stage  of  experience,  whatever  else 
it  is,  is  a  whole  of  which  I  am  immediately  aware.  It  is  an 
experienced  non-relational  unity  of  many  in  one”.  Here 
Bradley  by  ‘  non-relational  ’  apparently  means  that  experience 
is  not  a  relation  of  an  experient  to  something  external  to 
it,  but  is  itself  the  ‘inclusive  whole’  which  is  the  required 
connectedness  of  ‘many  in  one’. 

In  this  I  thoroughly  agree,  holding  that  the  connectedness 

1  In  the  Prefatory  Note  to  Emotion  as  the  Basis  of  Civilization ,  by  J.  H.  Denison, 
New  York,  1928  (Scribner’s) :  a  work  of  importance. 

2  The  genetic  description  of  the  process  of  ‘  emotionalization  ’  is  considered 
in  my  ‘ Symbolism ,  Its  Meaning  and  Effect ’  and  also  in  P.R.  Pt.  n,  Ch.  vm,  and 
throughout  Pt.  in. 

3  Loc.  cit.  p.  1 75. 


300 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


of  things  is  nothing  else  than  the  togetherness  of  things  in 
occasions  of  experience.  Of  course,  such  occasions  are  only 
rarely  occasions  of  human  experience. 

Curiously  enough  Hume  also  agrees.  For  his  only  to¬ 
getherness  of  the  stream  of  impressions  of  sensation,  which 
in  his  doctrine  are  distinct  existences  at  distinct  times,  lies 
in  the  4 gentle  force5  of  association  which  must  lie  wholly 
within  an  occasion  of  experience.  This  is  also  one  aspect  of 
Kant’s  doctrine,  that  the  occasions  of  experience  provide  the 
forms  of  connectedness. 

Of  course  there  are  important  differences  between  all  these 
doctrines.  But  they  agree  in  their  general  principle — to  look 
on  occasions  of  experience  as  the  ground  of  connectedness. 

Section  XIII.  Also  Leibniz  can  find  no  other  connected¬ 
ness  between  reals  except  that  lying  wholly  within  the 
individual  experiences  of  the  monads,  including  the  Supreme 
Monad.  He  employed  the  terms  ‘perception5  and  ‘apper¬ 
ception5  for  the  lower  and  higher  ways  in  which  one  monad 
can  take  account  of  another,  namely  for  ways  of  awareness. 
But  these  terms  are  too  closely  allied  to  the  notion  of  con¬ 
sciousness  which  in  my  doctrine  is  not  a  necessary  accom¬ 
paniment.  Also  they  are  all  entangled  in  the  notion  of 
representative  perception  which  I  reject.  But  there  is  the 
term1  ‘apprehension5  with  the  meaning  of  ‘thorough  un¬ 
derstanding5.  Accordingly,  on  the  Leibnizian  model,  I  use 
the  term  ‘prehension5  for  the  general  way  in  which  the 
occasion  of  experience  can  include,  as  part  of  its  own  essence, 
any  other  entity,  whether  another  occasion  of  experience 
or  an  entity  of  another  type.  This  term  is  devoid  of  sugges¬ 
tion  either  of  consciousness  or  of  representative  perception. 

Feelings  are  the  positive  type  of  prehensions.  In  positive  pre- 

♦ 

1  This  term  is  used  by  L.  T.  Hobhouse,  Theory  of  Knowledge,  Chapters 
i  and  ii. 


PHILOSOPHIC  METHOD 


3°! 


hensions  the  ‘datum’  is  preserved  as  part  of  the  final  complex 
object  which  ‘satisfies’  the  process  of  self-formation  and 
thereby  completes  the  occasion. 

This  nomenclature  has  been  made  up  to  conform  to  the 
condition  that,  as  a  theory  develops,  its  technical  phraseology 
should  grow  out  of  the  usages  of  the  great  masters  who 
laid  its  foundations.  The  immediate  verbal  usages  at  any 
moment  prevalent  in  any  school  of  philosophy  are  but  a 
small  selection  from  the  total  vocabulary  of  the  philosophic 
tradition.  This  is  rightly  the  case  having  regard  to  the 
variations  of  doctrine. 

The  current  usage  can  express  the  doctrine  of  the  reigning 
school  of  thought  and  of  certain  accredited  variations  from 
it.  The  demand  that  an  alternative  doctrine  with  other  roots 
in  the  historic  tradition  should  confine  itself  to  this  selection 
of  terms  amounts  to  the  dogmatic  claim  that  certain  pre¬ 
liminary  assumptions  should  never  be  revised.  Only  those 
schools  of  thought  are  to  be  allowed  which  can  be  expressed 
in  the  sacred  terms.  What  can  reasonably  be  asked,  is  that 
each  doctrine  should  ground  its  vocabulary  on  its  own  proper 
tradition.  If  this  precaution  has  been  taken,  an  outcry  as  to 
neologisms  is  a  measure  of  unconscious  dogmatism. 

Section  XIV.  The  main  method  of  philosophy  in  dealing 
with  its  evidence  is  that  of  descriptive  generalization.  Social 
institutions  exemplify  a  welter  of  characteristics.  No  fact 
is  merely  such-and-such.  It  exemplifies  many  characters  at 
once,  all  rooted  in  the  specialities  of  its  epoch.  Philosophic 
generalization  seizes  on  those  characters  of  abiding  import¬ 
ance,  dismissing  the  trivial  and  the  evanescent.  There  is  an 
ascent  from  a  particular  fact,  or  from  a  species,  to  the  genus 
exemplified. 

It  is  to  be  noted  that  the  converse  procedure  is  impossible. 
There  can  be  no  descent  from  a  mere  genus  to  a  particular 


302 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


fact,  or  to  a  species.  For  facts  and  species  are  the  product 
of  the  mingling  of  genera.  No  genus  in  its  own  essence  in¬ 
dicates  the  other  genera  with  which  it  is  compatible.  For 
example,  the  notion  of  a  backbone  does  not  indicate  the 
notions  of  suckling  the  young  or  of  swimming  in  water.  Thus 
no  contemplation  of  the  genus  vertebrate,  taken  by  itself, 
can  suggest  mammals  or  fishes,  even  as  abstract  possibilities. 
Neither  the  species  nor  the  instance  are  to  be  discovered  by 
the  genus  alone,  since  both  include  forms  not  'given'  by  the 
genus.  A  species  is  a  potential  mingling  of  genera,  and  an 
individual  instance  involves,  among  other  things,  an  actual 
mingling  of  many  species.  A  syllogism  is  a  scheme  for 
demonstration  of  ways  of  mingling. 

Thus  the  business  of  Logic  is  not  the  analysis  of  generalities 
but  their  mingling.1 

Philosophy  is  the  ascent  to  the  generalities  with  the  view 
of  understanding  their  possibilities  of  combination.  The  dis¬ 
covery  of  new  generalities  thus  adds  to  the  fruitfulness  of 
those  already  known.  It  lifts  into  view  new  possibilities  of 
combination. 

Section  XV.  Even  the  dim  apprehension  of  some  great 
principle  is  apt  to  clothe  itself  with  tremendous  emotional 
force.  The  welter  of  particular  actions  arising  out  of  such 
complex  feelings  with  their  core  of  deep  intuition  are  in 
primitive  times  often  brutish  and  nasty.  Finally  civilized 
language  provides  a  whole  group  of  words,  each  embodying 
the  general  idea  under  its  own  specialization.  If  we  desire 
to  reach  the  generality  common  to  these  various  specializa¬ 
tions,  we  must  gather  together  the  whole  group  of  words 
with  the  hope  of  discerning  their  common  element.  This 
is  a  necessary  procedure  for  the  purpose  of  philosophical 
generalization.  The  premature  use  of  one  familiar  word 

1  Gf.  Plato’s  Sophist,  253. 


PHILOSOPHIC  METHOD  303 

inevitably  limits  the  required  generalization  by  importing 
the  familiar  special  connotation  of  that  word. 

For  example,1  let  the  working  hypothesis  be  that  the  ulti¬ 
mate  realities  are  the  events  in  their  process  of  origination. 
Then  each  event,  viewed  in  its  separate  individuality,  is  a 
passage  between  two  ideal  termini,  namely,  its  components 
in  their  ideal  disjunctive  diversity  passing  into  these  same 
components  in  their  concrete  togetherness.  There  are  two 
current  doctrines  as  to  this  process.  One  is  that  of  the  external 
Creator,  eliciting  this  final  togetherness  out  of  nothing.  The 
other  doctrine  is  that  it  is  a  metaphysical  principle  belonging 
to  the  nature  of  things,  that  there  is  nothing  in  the  Universe 
other  than  instances  of  this  passage  and  components  of  these 
instances.  Let  this  latter  doctrine  be  adopted.  Then  the  word 
Creativity  expresses  the  notion  that  each  event  is  a  process 
issuing  in  novelty.  Also  if  guarded  in  the  phrases  Immanent 
Creativity,  or  Self-Creativity,  it  avoids  the  implication  of  a 
transcendent  Creator.  But  the  mere  word  Creativity  suggests 
Creator,  so  that  the  whole  doctrine  acquires  an  air  of  paradox, 
or  of  pantheism.  Still  it  does  convey  the  origination  of 
novelty.  The  word  Concrescence  is  a  derivative  from  the 
familiar  Latin  verb,  meaning  ‘growing  together’.  It  also  has 
the  advantage  that  the  participle  ‘  concrete  ’  is  familiarly  used 
for  the  notion  of  complete  physical  reality.  Thus  Concrescence 
is  useful  to  convey  the  notion  of  many  things  acquiring  com¬ 
plete  complex  unity.  But  it  fails  to  suggest  the  creative  novelty 
involved.  For  example,  it  omits  the  notion  of  the  individual 
character  arising  in  the  concrescence  of  the  aboriginal  data. 
The  event  is  not  suggested  as  ‘emotionalized’,  that  is,  as  with 
its  ‘subjective  form’. 

Again  the  term  ‘  together  ’  is  one  of  the  most  misused  terms 

1  Cf.  P.R.  passim,  where  the  second  of  the  doctrines  stated  below  is  de¬ 
veloped. 


304 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


in  philosophy.  It  is  a  generic  term  illustrated  by  an  endless 
variety  of  species.  Thus  its  use  as  though  it  conveyed  one 
definite  meaning  in  diverse  illustrations  is  entirely  sophisdcal. 
Every  meaning  of ‘  together 5  is  to  be  found  in  various  stages  of 
analysis  of  occasions  of  experience.  No  things  are  ‘together5 
except  in  experience;  and  no  things  are ,  in  any  sense  of ‘are5, 
except  as  components  in  experience  or  as  immediacies  of 
process  which  are  occasions  in  self-creation. 

Section  XVI.  Thus  to  arrive  at  the  philosophic  generaliza¬ 
tion  which  is  the  notion  of  a  final  actuality  conceived  in  the 
guise  of  a  generalization  of  an  act  of  experience,  an  apparent 
redundancy  of  terms  is  required.  The  words  correct  each 
other.  We  require1  ‘together5,  ‘creativity5,  ‘concrescence5, 
‘prehension5,  ‘feeling5,  ‘subjective  form5,  ‘data5,  ‘actuality5, 
‘becoming5,  ‘process5. 

Section  XVII.  At  this  stage  of  the  generalization  a  new 
train  of  thought  arises.  Events  become  and  perish.  In  their 
becoming  they  are  immediate  and  then  vanish  into  the  past. 
They  are  gone;  they  have  perished;  they  are  no  more  and 
have  passed  into  not-being.  Plato  terms2  them  things  that 
are  ‘always  becoming  and  never  really  are5.  But  before  he 
wrote  this  phrase,  Plato  had  made  his  great  metaphysical 
generalization,  a  discovery  which  forms  the  basis  of  the  present 
discussion,  tie  wrote  in  the  Sophist ,  not-being  is  itself  a  form 
of  being.  He  only  applied  this  doctrine  to  his  eternal  forms. 
He  should  have  applied  the  same  doctrine  to  the  things  that 
perish.  He  would  then  have  illustrated  another  aspect  of  the 
method  of  philosophic  generalization.  When  a  general  idea 
has  been  obtained,  it  should  not  be  arbitrarily  limited  to  the 
topic  of  its  origination. 

In  framing  a  philosophic  scheme,  each  metaphysical 
notion  should  be  given  the  widest  extension,  of  which  it 
1  Cf.  P.R.  passim,  also  S.M.  W.  a  Gf.  Timaeus. 


PHILOSOPHIC  METHOD 


305 


seems  capable.  It  is  only  in  this  way  that  the  true  adjust¬ 
ment  of  ideas  can  be  explored.  More  important  even  than 
Occam’s  doctrine  of  parsimony — if  it  be  not  another  aspect 
of  the  same — is  this  doctrine  that  the  scope  of  a  metaphysical 
principle  should  not  be  limited  otherwise  than  by  the  necessity 
of  its  meaning. 

Thus  we  should  balance  Aristotle’s — or,  more  rightly, 
Plato’s — doctrine  of  becoming  by  a  doctrine  of  perishing. 
When  they  perish,  occasions  pass  from  the  immediacy  of 
being  into  the  not-being  of  immediacy.  But  that  does  not 
mean  that  they  are  nothing.  They  remain  ‘stubborn  fact’: 
Pereunt  et  imputantur. 

The  common  expressions  of  mankind  fashion  the  past  for 
us  in  three  aspects — Causation,  Memory,  and  our  active 
transformation  of  our  immediate  past  experience  into  the 
basis  of  our  present  modification  of  it.  Thus  4  perishing  ’  is  the 
assumption  of  a  role  in  a  transcendent  future.  The  not-being 
of  occasions  is  their  ‘objective  immortality’.  A  pure  physical 
prehension  is  how  an  occasion  in  its  immediacy  of  being 
absorbs  another  occasion  which  has  passed  into  the  objective 
immortality  of  its  not-being.  It  is  how  the  past  lives  in 
the  present.  It  is  causation.  It  is  memory.  It  is  perception  of 
derivation.  It  is  emotional  conformation  to  a  given  situation, 
an  emotional  continuity  of  past  with  present.  It  is  a  basic 
element  from  which  springs  the  self-creation  of  each  temporal 
occasion.  Thus  perishing  is  the  initiation  of  becoming.  How 
the  past  perishes  is  how  the  future  becomes. 


wi 


20 


PART  IV 


CIVILIZATION 


CHAPTER  XVI 


TRUTH 

Section  I.  Truth  and  Beauty  are  the  great  regulative  pro¬ 
perties  in  virtue  of  which  Appearance  justifies  itself  to  the 
immediate  decision  of  the  experient  subject.  The  justifica¬ 
tion  determines  its  status  in  the  immediate  occasion.  The 
subjective  form  of  the  prehension  can  include  immediate  em¬ 
phasis  or  attenuation,  and  it  can  include  purpose  of  prolonga¬ 
tion  into  the  future  or  purpose  of  exclusion.  Truth  and  Beauty 
are  the  ultimate  grounds  for  emphasis  and  for  prolongation. 
Of  course  the  present  can  be  sacrificed  to  the  future,  so  that 
Truth  or  Beauty  in  the  future  can  be  the  reason  for  the 
immediate  attenuation  of  either. 

Section  II.  Truth  is  a  qualification  which  applies  to 
Appearance  alone.  Reality  is  just  itself,  and  it  is  nonsense 
to  ask  whether  it  be  true  or  false.  Truth  is  the  conformation 
of  Appearance  to  Reality.  This  conformation  may  be  more 
or  less,  also  direct  or  indirect.  Thus  Truth  is  a  generic  quality 
with  a  variety  of  degrees  and  modes.  In  the  Law  Courts, 
the  wrong  species  of  Truth  may  amount  to  perjury.  For 
example,  a  portrait  may  be  so  faithful  as  to  deceive  the  eye. 
Its  very  truthfulness  then  amounts  to  deception.  A  reflection 
in  a  mirror  is  at  once  a  truthful  appearance  and  a  deceptive 
appearance.  The  smile  of  a  hypocrite  is  deceptive,  and  that 
©f  a  philanthropist  may  be  truthful.  But  both  of  them  were 
truly  smiling. 

Section  III.  The  notion  of  Truth  can  be  generalized,  so 


310 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


as  to  avoid  any  explicit  reference  to  Appearance.  Two  objects 
may  be  such  that  (i)  neither  may  be  a  component  of  the 
other,  and  (2)  their  composite  natures  may  include  a  com¬ 
mon  factor,  although  in  the  full  sense  of  the  term  their 
‘essences’  are  different.  The  two  objects  can  then  be  said  to 
have  a  truth-relation  to  each  other.  The  examination  of  one 
of  them  can  disclose  some  factor  belonging  to  the  essence  of 
the  other.  In  other  words,  an  abstraction  can  be  made  and 
some  elements  of  the  complete  pattern  can  be  omitted.  The 
partial  pattern  thus  obtained  will  be  said  to  be  abstracted 
from  the  original.  A  truth-relation  will  be  said  to  connect 
the  objective  contents  of  two  prehensions  when  one  and  the 
same  identical  partial  pattern  can  be  abstracted  from  both 
of  them.  They  each  exhibit  this  same  partial  pattern,  though 
their  omitted  elements  involve  the  differences  which  belong 
to  their  diverse  individualities.  Plato  uses  the  term  ‘par¬ 
ticipation5  [fied is]  to  express  the  relation  of  a  composite 
fact  to  some  partial  pattern  which  it  illustrates.  Only  he 
limits  the  notion  of  the  partial  pattern  to  some  purely  ab¬ 
stract  pattern  of  qualitative  elements,  to  the  exclusion  of  the 
notion  of  concrete  particular  realities  as  components  in  a 
composite  reality.  This  limitation  is  misleading.  Thus  we  will 
speak  of  a  pattern  as  possibly  including  concrete  particulars 
among  its  patterned  elements.  With  this  enlargement  of 
meaning,  we  can  say  that  two  objective  contents  are  united 
in  a  truth-relation  when  they  severally  participate  in  the 
same  pattern.  Either  illustrates  what  in  part  the  other 
is.  Thus  they  interpret  each  other.  But  if  we  ask  what  is 
meant  by  ‘truth5,  we  can  only  answer  that  there  is  a  truth- 
relation  when  two  composite  facts  participate  in  the  same 
pattern.  Then  knowledge  about  one  of  the  facts  involves 
knowledge  about  the  other,  so  far  as  the  truth-relation 
extends. 


TRUTH 


311 

The  truth-relation  as  realized  in  experience  always  in¬ 
volves  some  element  of  Appearance.  For  the  separate  pre¬ 
hensions  of  the  two  composite  facts  have  been  integrated  so 
that  the  two  objects  stand  in  the  unity  of  a  contrast  with 
each  other.  There  is  an  intuition  of  a  limited  identity  of 
pattern  involved  in  the  contrast  of  the  diverse  essences.  In 
virtue  of  this  identity  there  is  a  transference  of  subjective 
form  from  the  feeling  of  one  object  to  that  of  the  other. 
What  is  appropriate  to  one  is  appropriate  to  the  other.  The 
intuitive  recognition  of  That  is  so5  is  the  subjective  form  in¬ 
cluding  in  itself  justification  of  its  own  transference  from  the 
object  on  one  side  of  the  contrast  to  the  object  on  the  other 
side. 

In  this  way  one  object  as  a  real  fact  obtains  a  re-adjustment 
of  the  relative  values  of  its  factors  by  reason  of  its  analogies 
to  another  object.  In  other  words,  it  becomes  a  real  fact 
tinged  with  Appearance.  By  itself,  its  factors  would  not  be 
felt  in  those  proportions.  To  know  the  truth  partially  is  to 
distort  the  Universe.  For  example,  the  savage  who  can  only 
count  up  to  ten  enormously  exaggerates  the  importance  of 
the  small  numbers,  and  so  do  we  whose  imaginations  fail 
when  we  come  to  millions.  It  is  an  erroneous  moral  platitude, 
that  it  is  necessarily  good  to  know  the  truth.  The  minor 
truth  may  beget  the  major  evil.  And  this  major  evil  may 
take  the  form  of  the  major  error.  Henri  Poincare  points 
out  that  instruments  of  precision,  used  unseasonably,  may 
hinder  the  advance  of  science.  For  example,  if  Newton’s 
imagination  had  been  dominated  by  the  errors  in  Kepler’s 
Laws  as  disclosed  by  modern  observation,  the  world  might 
still  be  waiting  for  the  Law  of  Gravitation.  The  Truth  must 
be  seasonable. 

Section  IV.  The  two  conspicuous  examples  of  the  truth- 
relation  in  human  experience  are  afforded  by  propositions 


312 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


and  by  sense-perception.  A  proposition  is  the  abstract  possi¬ 
bility  of  some  specified  nexus  of  actualities  realizing  some 
eternal  object,  which  may  either  be  simple,  or  may  be  a 
complex  pattern  of  simpler  objects.  The  realization  may 
( i )  concern  the  complete  nexus  with  its  component  occasions 
in  assigned  functions,  or  (2)  it  may  concern  the  individual 
realization  of  the  eternal  object  by  some  or  all,  of  the  com¬ 
ponent  occasions,  or  (3)  it  may  concern  the  joint  realization 
by  some  unspecified  subordinate  nexus.  All  of  these  alter¬ 
natives  merely  concern  the  possibility  of  propositions  of  the 
various  types,  so  important  for  the  purposes  of  Formal 
Logic. 

But  for  the  present  discussion  we  need  simply  consider  the 
broad  fact  that  a  proposition  is  the  abstract  possibility  of  an 
assigned  nexus  illustrating  an  assigned  pattern. 

No  verbal  sentence  merely  enunciates  a  proposition.  It 
always  includes  some  incitement  for  the  production  of  an 
assigned  psychological  attitude  in  the  prehension  of  the  pro¬ 
position  indicated.  In  other  words,  it  endeavours  to  fix  the 
subjective  form  which  clothes  the  feeling  of  the  proposition  as 
a  datum.  There  may  be  an  incitement  to  believe,  or  to  doubt, 
or  to  enjoy,  or  to  obey.  This  incitement  is  conveyed  partly 
by  the  grammatical  mood  and  tense  of  the  verb,  partly  by 
the  whole  suggestion  of  the  sentence,  partly  by  the  whole 
content  of  the  book,  partly  by  the  material  circumstances  of 
the  book,  including  its  cover,  partly  by  the  names  of  the 
author  and  of  the  publisher.  In  the  discussion  of  the  nature 
of  a  proposition,  a  great  deal  of  confusion  has  been  intro¬ 
duced  by  confusing  this  psychological  incitement  with  the 
proposition  itself. 

A  proposition  is  a  notion  about  actualities,  a  suggestion, 
a  theory,  a  supposition  about  things.  Its  entertainment  in 
experience  subserves  many  purposes.  It  is  an  extreme  case 


TRUTH 


313 

of  Appearance.  For  actualities  which  are  the  logical  subjects 
are  conceived  in  the  guise  of  illustrating  the  predicate.  The 
unconscious  entertainment  of  propositions  is  a  stage  in  the 
transition  from  the  Reality  of  the  initial  phase  of  experience 
to  the  Appearance  of  the  final  phase.  In  the  lowest  types  of 
actualities  in  whose  processes  propositions  hardly  arise,  there 
is  practically  no  Appearance  differentiating  the  final  and 
initial  phases. 

It  is  more  important  that  a  proposition  be  interesting  than 
that  it  be  true.  This  statement  is  almost  a  tautology.  For 
the  energy  of  operation  of  a  proposition  in  an  occasion  of 
experience  is  its  interest,  and  is  its  importance.  But  of  course 
a  true  proposition  is  more  apt  to  be  interesting  than  a  false 
one.  Also  action  in  accordance  with  the  emotional  lure  of 
a  proposition  is  more  apt  to  be  successful  if  the  proposition 
be  true.  And  apart  from  action,  the  contemplation  of  truth 
has  an  interest  of  its  own.  But,  after  all  this  explanation  and 
qualification,  it  remains  true  that  the  importance  of  a  pro¬ 
position  lies  in  its  interest.  Nothing  illustrates  better  the 
danger  of  specialist  sciences  than  the  confusion  due  to  handing 
over  propositions  for  theoretical  consideration  by  logicians, 
exclusively.  The  truth  of  a  proposition  lies  in  its  truth-relation 
to  the  nexus  which  is  its  logical  subject.  A  proposition  is  true 
when  the  nexus  does  in  reality  exemplify  the  pattern  which 
is  the  predicate  of  the  proposition.  Thus  in  the  analysis  of 
the  various  component  factors  involved  the  proposition,  if 
true,  seems  to  be  identical  with  the  nexus.  For  there  are  the 
same  actual  occasions  and  the  same  eternal  objects  involved. 
But  in  all  analysis  there  is  one  supreme  factor  which  is  apt 
to  be  omitted,  namely,  the  mode  of  togetherness.  The  nexus 
includes  the  eternal  object  in  the  mode  of  realization. 
Whereas  in  the  true  proposition  the  togetherness  of  the  nexus 
and  the  eternal  object  belongs  to  the  mode  of  abstract  possi- 


314  ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 

bility.  The  eternal  object  is  then  united  to  the  nexus  as  a 
mere  ‘predicate5.  Thus  a  nexus  and  a  proposition  belong  to 
different  categories  of  being.  Their  identification  is  mere 
nonsense.  It  is  the  nonsense  of  the  same  sort  as  the  fashion¬ 
able  identification  of  physical  fact  with  formulae  of  pure 
mathematics. 

Propositions,  like  everything  else  except  experience  in  its 
own  immediacy,  only  exist  as  entertained  in  experience.  It 
is  the  peculiar  function  of  the  mental  pole  that  the  objective 
content  of  its  prehensions  only  exists  in  the  mode  of  possi¬ 
bility.  But  matter  of  fact  essentially  involves  a  mental  pole. 
Thus  in  the  analysis  of  an  actual  occasion,  we  necessarily 
find  components  belonging  to  the  mode  of  possibility.  The 
most  conspicuous  example  of  truth  and  falsehood  arises  in 
the  comparison  of  existences  in  the  mode  of  possibility  with 
existences  in  the  mode  of  actuality. 

Section  V.  For  animals  on  this  Earth,  sense-perception 
is  the  culmination  of  Appearance.  The  sensa  derived  from 
bodily  activities  in  the  past  are  precipitated  upon  the  regions 
in  the  contemporary  world.  The  note  of  hypothesis,  the  note 
of  mere  suggested  possibility  is  eliminated.  The  regions 
appear  to  the  percipient  as  in  their  own  right  associated  with 
the  sensa.  The  Appearance  now  is,  that  the  sensa  qualify  the 
regions. 

The  question  then  arises,  Do  the  sensa  in  fact  qualify  the 
regions?  The  answer  depends  on  what  is  meant  by  ‘in  fact5, 
and  what  is  meant  by  ‘qualification5.  It  is  here  that  the 
notion  of  truth  and  falsehood  applies  to  sense-perception. 
But  in  the  realm  of  truth  there  are  many  mansions;  and  we 
have  to  analyse  the  types  of  truth  and  of  falsehood  which 
sense-perception  is  capable  of. 

In  the  first  place,  the  primary  status  of  the  £ensa  as  quali¬ 
fications  of  affective  tone  must  be  kept  in  mind.  They  are 


TRUTH 


315 


primarily  inherited  as  such  qualifications  and  then  by  c  trans¬ 
mutation  5  are  objectively  perceived  as  qualifications  of  regions. 
The  immense  aesthetic  importance  of  sensa  is  due  to  this 
status  of  sensa.  For  the  sensum  as  a  factor  in  the  datum  of  a 
prehension  imposes  itself  as  a  qualification  of  the  affective 
tone  which  is  the  subjective  form  of  that  prehension.  Thus  a 
pattern  of  affective  tone  is  conformally  produced  by  a  pattern 
of  sensa  as  datum.  Now  when  a  region  appears  as  red  in 
sense-perception,  the  question  arises  whether  red  is  qualifying 
in  any  dominant  manner  the  affective  tones  of  the  actualities 
which  in  fact  make  up  the  region. 

If  so,  there  is  in  this  sense  a  truth-relation  between  the 
reality  of  the  region  and  its  appearance  for  the  contemporary 
percipient.  For  example,  if  the  light  has  undergone  reflections 
in  a  mirror,  the  appearance  of  the  region  behind  the  mirror 
affords  no  ground  for  conjecture  as  to  the  affective  tones  of 
its  component  actualities. 

This  notion  of  the  sensa  as  qualifications  of  affective  tone  is 
a  paradox  for  philosophy,  though  it  is  fairly  obvious  to  common 
sense.  A  red-irritation  is  prevalent  among  nerve-racked  people 
and  among  bulls.  The  affective  tone  of  perception  of  a  green 
woodland  in  spring  can  only  be  defined  by  the  delicate  shades 
of  the  green.  It  is  a  strong  aesthetic  emotion  with  the  quali¬ 
fication  of  green  in  spring-time.  The  intellect  fastens  on  smell 
as  a  datum:  the  animal  experiences  it  as  a  qualification  of 
his  subjective  feelings.  Our  developed  consciousness  fastens 
on  the  sensum  as  datum :  our  basic  animal  experience  enter¬ 
tains  it  as  a  type  of  subjective  feeling.  The  experience  starts 
as  that  smelly  feeling,  and  is  developed  by  mentality  into  the 
feeling  of  that  smell. 

We  can  also  observe  qualifications  of  moods  hovering  on 
the  verge  of  becoming  sensa,  in  fact  functioning  as  sensa 
for  the  infant,  and  being  dismissed  from  that  category  by 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


3j6 

the  developed  intellect  of  the  grown-up  person.  For  example, 
the  emotional  moods  of  the  mother  nursing  the  infant,  moods 
of  love,  or  gaiety,  or  depression,  or  irritation,  are  directly 
perceived  on  the  mother’s  face  by  the  infant,  and  are  responded 
to.  It  certainly  is  in  the  highest  degree  improbable  that  the 
subtle  trains  of  thought  by  which  our  epistemologists  obtain 
their  knowledge  should  have  occurred  to  speechless  infants, 
or  to  dogs  and  horses.  Direct  perceptions  of  such  moods  in 
these  cases  must  enter  on  equal  terms  with  the  other  sensa. 
But  in  respect  to  the  perception  of  such  moods,  the  animal 
body  functions  vary  differently  from  its  functionings  in  the 
conveyance  of  sensa.  Hence  for  the  educated  intellect  there 
is  a  distinction  of  type. 

But  in  any  case  the  infant  feels  its  mother’s  cheerfulness  as 
a  datum,  and  feels  it  conformally,  with  that  affective  tone. 
The  datum  is  derived  from  the  past,  the  immediate  past.  It  is 
precipitated  upon  that  present  region  occupied  by  the  nexus 
of  occasions  which  constitute  the  complex  fact  of  the  mother’s 
existence,  body  and  soul.  For  the  infant,  the  Appearance 
includes  the  qualification  of  cheerfulness.  And  in  this  respect 
it  may  have — it  often  does  have — to  the  contemporary 
real  mother  a  truth-relation  in  the  fullest  sense  of  the  term 
‘truth’. 

Section  VI.  The  relation  of  sense-perception  to  contem¬ 
porary  occasions  can  also  exemplify  another  type  of  truth- 
relation  between  Appearance  and  Reality. 

The  sense-perception  may  result  from  the  normal  func¬ 
tioning  of  the  healthy  animal  body.  The  consequent  inherit¬ 
ance  from  the  antecedent  occasions  of  the  personal  soul  may 
likewise  share  in  this  healthy  normality.  Also  the  particular 
body  and  soul  in  question  may  share  in  that  conformation 
of  their  reactions  to  those  main  external  activities  of  fluent 
energy  which  is  normally  required  for  the  preservation  of 


TRUTH 


3W 

that  species  of  animal.  Given  these  conditions  of  normality, 
the  resulting  appearance  will  be  that  proper  to  that  species 
of  animal  under  circumstances  of  that  type.  This  is  a  fact 
of  nature,  and  the  Appearance  expresses  the  issue  of  a  Law 
of  Nature,  belonging  to  that  cosmic  epoch  and  to  those  more 
special  conditions  within  that  epoch.  This  is  a  truth-relation 
between  Appearance  and  Reality  of  a  more  indirect  character 
than  the  first  sort  of  truth-relation.  It  is  wider,  vaguer,  and 
more  diffuse  in  its  reference.  We  have  perceived  what  well- 
conditioned  individuals  of  our  own  type  would  perceive  under 
those  circumstances. 

Section  VII.  Within  any  type  of  truth-relation  a  distinction 
arises.  The  Reality  functions  in  the  past,  the  Appearance  is 
perceived  in  the  present.  On  a  moonless  night,  the  faintly 
luminous  stretch  of  the  sky  which  is  the  Milky  Way  is  an 
Appearance  of  the  contemporary  world,  namely,  it  is  a  great 
region  within  the  ‘Receptacle5  of  that  world  as  it  appears. 
But  the  Reality  whose  functioning  issues  in  that  Appearance, 
is  a  flux  of  light-energy  travelling  through  the  utmost 
depths  of  space  and,  to  our  imaginations,  through  illimitable 
time. 

Beyond  that  Milky  Way  as  it  stands  in  sight,  at  a  finite 
ill-defined  distance,  a  barrier  separating  us  from  the  con¬ 
temporary  space  beyond : — Does  that  remote  activity  of  the 
transference  of  light-energy  still  persist  as  a  contemporary 
fact?  Perhaps  the  occasions  whose  interconnections  con¬ 
stitute  that  distant  region  have  changed  the  ordering  of 
their  goings-on.  Stars  flare  out  in  a  few  days,  and  in  a  few 
years  their  light  has  died.  The  Appearance  of  the  con¬ 
temporary  regions  has  its  truth-relations  to  the  past,  and 
its  truth-relations  to  contemporary  Reality.  These  latter 
truth-relations  can  only  be  estimated  by  an  imaginative  leap, 
which  has  as  its  basis  for  justification  the  truth-relations  to 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


3j8 

the  past  and  our  experience  of  the  stability  of  the  types  of 
order  involved. 

Perhaps  in  the  mutual  immanence  of  occasions,  although 
the  antecedence  and  the  consequence — the  past,  the  present 
and  the  future — still  hold  equally  for  physical  and  mental 
poles,  yet  the  relations  of  the  mental  poles  to  each  other  are 
not  subject  to  the  same  laws  of  perspective  as  are  those  of  the 
physical  poles.  Measurable  time  and  measurable  space  are 
then  irrelevant  to  their  mutual  connections.  Thus  in  respect 
to  some  types  of  Appearance  there  may  be  an  element  of 
immediacy  in  its  relations  to  the  mental  side  of  the  contem¬ 
porary  world.  Other  types  of  Appearance,  such  as  the  located 
sensa  in  sense-perception,  may  depend  on  the  time  and  space 
which  express  the  perspective  arising  in  the  mutual  immanence 
of  the  physical  poles. 

If  such  be  the  case,  some  types  of  Appearance  will  have  a 
more  direct  relation  than  others  to  contemporary  Reality. 

Section  VIII.  There  is  a  third  type  of  truth-relation  which 
is  even  vaguer  and  more  indirect  than  the  second  type  con¬ 
sidered  above.  It  may  be  termed  the  type  of 4  symbolic  truth 5 . 
This  species  of  truth  may  be  included  under  the  second  type, 
as  an  extreme  instance  of  it.  But  on  the  whole,  it  is  clearer  to 
consider  it  as  a  distinct  species. 

The  relation  of  Appearance  to  Reality,  when  there  is 
symbolic  truth,  is  that  for  certain  sets  of  percipients  the  pre¬ 
hension  of  the  Appearance  leads  to  the  prehension  of  the 
Reality,  such  that  the  subjective  forms  of  the  two  prehensions 
are  conformal.  There  is,  however,  no  direct  causal  relation 
between  the  Appearance  and  the  Reality ;  so  that  in  no  direct 
sense  is  the  Appearance  the  cause  of  the  Reality,  or  the 
Reality  the  cause  of  the  Appearance.  A  set  of  adventitious 
circumstances  has  brought  about  this  connection  between 
those  Appearances  and  those  Realities  as  prehended  in  the 


TRUTH 


3X9 


experiences  of  those  percipients.  In  their  own  natures  the 
Appearances  throw  no  light  upon  the  Realities,  nor  do  the 
Realities  upon  the  Appearances,  except  in  the  experiences  of 
a  set  of  peculiarly  conditioned  percipients.  Languages  and 
their  meanings  are  examples  of  this  third  type  of  truth.  There 
is  an  indirect  truth-relation  of  the  sounds  or  of  the  visual 
marks  on  paper  to  the  propositions  conveyed.  We  are  confining 
the  discussion  to  the  relation  of  written  or  spoken  sentences  to 
propositions.  There  is  a  right  and  a  wrong  use  of  any  particular 
language  among  the  group  of  people  who  are  properly  con¬ 
ditioned.  Also,  having  regard  to  the  aesthetics  of  literature, 
language  not  only  conveys  objective  meaning,  but  also  involves 
a  conveyance  of  subjective  form. 

Music,  ceremonial  clothing,  ceremonial  smells,  and  cere¬ 
monial  rhythmic  visual  appearances,  also  have  symbolic 
truth,  or  symbolic  falsehood.  In  these  latter  instances,  the 
conveyance  of  objective  meaning  is  at  a  minimum,  while 
the  conveyance  of  suitable  subjective  form  is  at  its  height. 
Music  provides  an  example  when  it  interprets  some  strong 
sentiment,  patriotic,  martial,  or  religious,  by  providing  the 
emotion  which  the  votaries  dumbly  feel  ought  to  be  attached 
to  the  apprehension  of  national  life,  or  of  the  clash  of  na¬ 
tions,  or  of  the  activities  of  God.  Music  elicits  some  con¬ 
fused  feeling  into  distinct  apprehension.  It  performs  this 
service,  or  dis-service,  by  introducing  an  emotional  cloth¬ 
ing  which  changes  the  dim  objective  reality  into  a  clear 
Appearance  matching  the  subjective  form  provided  for  its 
prehension. 

There  is  then  the  vague  truth-relation,  via  community 
of  subjective  form,  between  the  music  and  the  resulting 
Appearance.  There  is  also  the  truth-relation  between  the 
Appearance  and  the  Reality — the  Reality  of  National  Life, 
or  of  Strife  between  nations,  or  of  the  Essence  of  God.  This 


320 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


complex  fusion  of  truth-relations,  with  their  falsehoods  inter¬ 
mixed,  constitutes  the  indirect  interpretative  power  of  Art  to 
express  the  truth  about  the  nature  of  things.  Of  course  a 
somewhat  gross,  almost  vulgar,  instance  has  been  given,  for 
the  sake  of  easy  explanation.  But  the  delicate  inner  truth  of 
Art  is  mostly  of  this  sort. 

Section  IX.  This  discussion  suggests  an  illustrative  di¬ 
gression  on  the  origins  of  socially  diffused  habits  of  behaviour 
and  of  habits  of  interpretation,  among  human  beings.  An 
idea  arises  from  the  antecedent  establishment  of  modes  of 
human  functioning  which  are  germane  to  it.  In  the  infancy 
of  its  incarnation  in  human  history,  it  lurks  in  the  penumbra 
of  consciousness,  undiscriminated  and  unexpressed.  For  the 
historian  in  later  ages  it  discloses  itself  by  the  dim  growth 
of  the  sense  of  importance  attached  to  those  functionings 
of  the  tribe  which  dimly  elicit  its  discrimination.  But  soon 
an  inversion  takes  place.  These  modes  of  functioning  are 
interpreted  by  some  restless  intellects  of  the  tribe.  The 
behaviour  patterns  then,  in  addition  to  their  own  intrinsic 
value  for  tribal  life,  take  on  the  role  of  an  apparatus  of 
expression.  They  become  linked  to  an  intellectual  con¬ 
struction.  The  behaviour  patterns,  with  their  entwined 
emotions,  evoke  the  apprehension  of  the  construction.  Con¬ 
versely,  the  entertainment  of  the  construction  constitutes  an 
urge  towards  the  modes  of  behaviour.  In  this  way,  the 
ceremonies  with  their  output  of  emotion  become  the  mode 
of  expression  for  the  ideas;  and  the  ideas  become  an  inter¬ 
pretation  of  the  ceremonies.  This  is  the  account  of  the  primitive 
origination  of  the  linkage  of  an  idea  to  an  apparatus  of 
expression. 

The  linkage  between  an  idea  and  its  expression  has  been 
described  above  as  being  ‘interpretation’.  Some  analysis  of 
this  concept  of  ‘interpretation’  has  now  to  be  made.  Two 


TRUTH 


321 


behaviour-patterns  mutually  interpret  each  other,  only  when 
some  common  factor  of  experience  is  realized  in  the  enact¬ 
ment  of  either  pattern.  The  common  factor  constitutes  the 
reason  for  the  transition  from  one  pattern  to  the  other  pat¬ 
tern.  Each  pattern  interprets  the  other  as  expressive  of  that 
common  factor.  Here  a  behaviour-pattern  is  merely  another 
phrase  for  a  mode  of  experience.  Thus,  in  this  sense,  the 
entertainment  of  a  myth  is  one  behaviour-pattern,  and  a 
tribal  dance,  o^  a  Court  ceremonial,  is  another  behaviour- 
pattern. 

Section  X.  But  after  all,  it  is  the  blunt  truth  that  we  want. 
The  final  contentment  of  our  aims  requires  something  more 
than  vulgar  substitutes,  or  subtle  evasions,  however  delicate. 
The  indirections  of  truth  can  never  satisfy  us.  Our  purposes 
seek  their  main  justification  in  sheer  matter-of-fact.  All  the 
rest  is  addition,  however  important,  to  this  foundation.  Apart 
from  blunt  truth,  our  lives  sink  decadently  amid  the  perfume 
of  hints  and  suggestions. 

The  blunt  truth  that  we  require  is  the  conformal  corre¬ 
spondence  of  clear  and  distinct  Appearance  to  Reality.  In 
human  experience,  clear  and  distinct  Appearance  is  pri¬ 
marily  sense-perception.  The  blunt  truth  required  for  sense- 
perception  is  the  truth  of  the  first  type,  already  partially 
discussed  in  Section  V  of  this  Chapter.  In  that  section  the 
doctrine  was  developed  that  the  prehension  of  a  sensum, 
as  an  apparent  object  qualifying  a  region,  involved  for  that 
prehension  a  subjective  form  also  involving  that  sensum  as 
a  factor.  We  enjoy  the  green  foliage  of  the  spring  greenly: 
we  enjoy  the  sunset  with  an  emotional  pattern  including 
among  its  elements  the  colours  and  the  contrasts  of  the 
vision.  It  is  this  that  makes  Art  possible:  it  is  this  that  pro¬ 
cures  the  glory  of  perceived  nature.  For  if  the  subjective 
form  of  reception  be  not  conformal  to  the  objective  sensa, 


WI 


21 


322 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


then  the  values  of  the  percept  would  be  at  the  mercy  of  the 
chance  make-up  of  the  other  components  in  that  experience. 
For  example,  in  the  intuition  of  a  multiplicity  of  three  or  four 
objects,  the  mere  number  imposes  no  subjective  form.  It  is 
merely  a  condition  regulating  some  pattern  of  effective  com¬ 
ponents.  In  abstraction  from  those  components,  mere  triplicity 
can  dictate  no  subjective  form  for  its  prehension.  But  green 
can.  And  there  lies  the  difference  between  the  sensa  and  the 
abstract  mathematical  forms. 

The  steady  values  derived  from  sense-perception,  which 
are  there  even  when  disregarded  and  even  when  jarring  with 
other  emotions,  exist  because  the  sensa  themselves  enter  into 
the  subjective  forms  of  their  physical  prehensions. 

Section  XI.  The  point  to  be  decided  is  whether  the  green 
meadow  in  spring-time,  as  it  appears  to  us,  in  any  direct 
way  conforms  to  the  happenings  within  the  region  of  the 
meadow,  and  more  particularly  within  the  regions  of  the 
blades  of  grass.  Have  we  any  grounds  for  the  belief  that  in 
some  way  things  really  are  in  those  regions  as  our  senses  per¬ 
ceive  those  regions?  In  the  first  place,  such  conformation 
evidently  cannot  arise  from  the  necessities  of  nature.  The 
delusive  perceptions  prove  that.  Double  vision,  and  images 
due  to  reflexion  and  refraction  of  light,  show  that  the  ap¬ 
pearance  of  regions  may  be  quite  irrelevant  to  the  happenings 
within  regions.  Appearances  are  finally  controlled  by  the 
functionings  of  the  animal  body.  These  functionings  and 
the  happenings  within  the  contemporary  regions  are  both 
derived  from  a  common  past,  highly  relevant  to  both.  It  is 
thereby  pertinent  to  ask,  whether  the  animal  body  and  the 
external  regions  are  not  attuned  together,  so  that  under 
normal  circumstances  the  appearances  conform  to  natures 
within  the  regions. 

The  attainment  of  such  conformation  would  belong  to 


TRUTH 


323 


the  perfection  of  nature  in  respect  to  the  higher  types  of  its 
animal  life.  There  is  no  necessity  about  it.  Evidently  there 
is  failure,  interference,  and  only  partial  adjustment.  But  we 
have  to  ask  whether  nature  does  not  contain  within  itself  a 
tendency  to  be  in  tune,  an  Eros  urging  towards  perfection. 
This  question  cannot  be  discussed  without  passing  beyond  the 
narrow  grounds  of  the  truth-relation. 


21-2 


CHAPTER  XVII 


BEAUTY 

Section  I.  Beauty  is  the  mutual  adaptation  of  the  several 
factors  in  an  occasion  of  experience.  Thus  in  its  primary  sense 
Beauty  is  a  quality  which  finds  its  exemplification  in  actual 
occasions:  or  put  conversely,  it  is  a  quality  in  which  such 
occasions  can  severally  participate.  There  are  gradations  in 
Beauty  and  in  types  of  Beauty. 

‘Adaptation5  implies  an  end.  Thus  Beauty  is  only  defined 
when  the  aim  of  the  ‘adaptation5  has  been  analysed.  This 
aim  is  twofold.  It  is,  in  the  first  place,  the  absence  of  mutual 
inhibition  among  the  various  prehensions,  so  that  the  in¬ 
tensities  of  subjective  form,  which  naturally  and  properly — or 
in  one  word,  conformally — arise  from  the  objective  contents 
of  the  various  prehensions,  do  not  inhibit  each  other.  When 
this  aim  is  secured,  there  is  the  minor  form  of  beauty,  the 
absence  of  painful  clash,  the  absence  of  vulgarity.  In  the 
second  place,  there  is  the  major  form  of  Beauty.  This  form 
presupposes  the  first  form,  and  adds  to  it  the  condition  that 
the  conjunction  in  one  synthesis  of  the  various  prehensions 
introduces  new  contrasts  of  objective  content  with  objective 
content.  These  contrasts  introduce  new  conformal  in¬ 
tensities  of  feelings  natural  to  each  of  them,  and  by  so  doing 
raise  the  intensities  of  conformal  feeling  in  the  primitive 
component  feelings.  Thus  the  parts  contribute  to  the  massive 
feeling  of  the  whole,  and  the  whole  contributes  to  the  in¬ 
tensity  of  feeling  of  the  parts.  Thus  the  subjective  forms 


BEAUTY 


325 


of  these  prehensions  are  severally  and  jointly  interwoven 
in  patterned  contrasts.  In  other  words,  the  perfection  of 
Beauty  is  defined  as  being  the  perfection  of  Harmony;  and 
the  perfection  of  Harmony  is  defined  in  terms  of  the  per¬ 
fection  of  Subjective  Form  in  detail  and  in  final  synthesis. 
Also  the  perfection  of  Subjective  Form  is  defined  in  terms 
of  ‘Strength’.  In  the  sense  here  meant,  Strength  has  two 
factors,  namely,  variety  of  detail  with  effective  contrast,  which 
is  Massiveness,  and  Intensity  Proper  which  is  comparative 
magnitude  without  reference  to  qualitative  variety.  But  the 
maximum  of  intensity  proper  is  finally  dependent  upon 
massiveness. 

Section  II.  In  order  to  understand  this  definition  of 
Beauty,  it  is  necessary  to  keep  in  mind  three  doctrines  which 
belong  to  the  metaphysical  system  in  terms  of  which  the 
World  is  being  interpreted  in  these  chapters.  These  three 
doctrines  respectively  have  regard  to  the  mutual  relations 
(a)  between  the  objective  content  of  a  prehension  and  the 
subjective  form  of  that  prehension,  and  (b)  between  the 
subjective  forms  of  various  prehensions  in  the  same  occa¬ 
sion,  and  (c)  between  the  subjective  form  of  a  prehension 
and  the  spontaneity  involved  in  the  subjective  aim  of  the 
prehending  occasion.  These  doctrines  are  interconnected; 
but  each  of  them  introduces  a  principle  which  is  not  made 
explicit  by  the  other  two.  They  will  now  be  successively 
explained : 

(a)  It  is  held  that  every  qualitative  factor  in  the  Universe 
is  primarily  a  qualification  of  subjective  form,  so  that  the 
infinite  variety  of  qualities  involves  the  possibility  of  an 
infinite  variety  of  subjective  forms  exemplifying  those  quali¬ 
ties.  This  does  not  mean  that  the  subjective  forms  exempli¬ 
fying  various  qualities  are  all  equally  prominent  in  human 
consciousness.  Consciousness  is  a  variable  uncertain  element 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


326 

which  flickers  uncertainly  on  the  surface  of  experience.  But 
it  is  part  of  the  doctrine  that  the  qualitative  content  of  the 
object  prehended  enters  into  the  qualities  exemplified  in  the 
subjective  form  of  that  prehension.  This  is  the  general  prin¬ 
ciple  underlying  (1)  the  doctrine  of  conformal1  feelings, 
constituting  the  primary  phase  of  the  occasion,  and  (2)  the 
doctrine  of  the  qualitative  valuations  forming  the  activities 
of  the  mental  pole,  and  (3)  the  doctrine  of  the  valuations 
involved  in  the  Primordial  Nature  of  God,  here  also  termed 
the  Eros  of  the  Universe.  It  follows  that  the  subjective  form 
of  a  prehension  is  partly  dictated  by  the  qualitative  element 
in  the  objective  content  of  that  prehension.  There  is  in  fact 
initial  conformation.  It  has  been  repeatedly  stated  above 
that  this  is  what  makes  Art  possible.  Also  the  factor  of 
compulsive  determinism  in  the  Universe  depends  on  this 
principle. 

This  doctrine  of  conformation  only  holds  for  the  qualitative 
side  of  the  content  of  the  objective  datum.  It  follows  that 
two  exceptions  arise  to  the  more  general  statement  that 
subjective  form  conforms  to  the  objective  datum.  Both  ex¬ 
ceptions  arise  when  abstraction  has  reached  its  extreme  limit. 
The  extremity  of  abstraction  from  all  qualitative  elements 
reduces  pattern  to  bare  mathematical  form — for  example, 
triplicity  or  the  abstract  relationship  of  sets  of  numbers,  such 
as  the  squareness  of  the  number  four.  Such  forms  by  their 
very  natures  cannot  qualify  subjective  form.  For  example, 
there  is  not  a  squareness  of  emotion.  Thus,  except  in  an  in¬ 
direct  fashion — such  as  the  qualitative  feelings  of  smoothness 
of  a  sphere,  of  spikeyness  of  a  square,  of  amplitude  of  a 
volume — the  doctrine  of  conformation  does  not  apply  to 
mathematical  pattern.  Here  pure  mathematics  in  its  strictest 
modern  sense  is  in  question. 

1  Cf.  Part  in,  above,  and  Process  and  Reality ,  passim ,  as  indexed. 


BEAUTY 


327 


Again  the  notion  of  an  actual  occasion — that  is,  of  indi¬ 
vidual  actuality — can  be  entertained  in  abstraction  from  any 
qualitative  or  mathematical  components  which  in  any  sense 
are  realized  in  its  essence,  either  as  objective  data,  or  as 
subjective  forms,  or  as  relations  between  prehensions.  A  par¬ 
ticular  actuality  can  also  be  abstracted  from  the  mode  of  its 
initial  indication,  so  chat  in  a  later  phase  of  experience  it  is 
entertained1  as  a  bare  4 It' .  Only  the  qualitative  components 
of  an  actuality  in  the  datum  can  pass  into  the  subjective  form. 
The  only  actuality  implicated  in  the  subjective  form  is  the 
immediate  occasion  in  process  of  self-formation.  The  sub¬ 
jective  form  is  that  immediate  subject  in  that  state  of  subjective 
feeling.  In  the  sense  in  which  an  actuality  can  be  indicated 
as  a  bare  It  for  objective  prehension — in  that  sense  it  does  not 
enter  into  the  subjective  form  of  the  prehension. 

(b)  The  second  doctrine  expresses  the  unity  of  the  imme¬ 
diate  occasion  in  process  of  formation.  The  subjective  forms  are 
merely  contributions  to  the  one  fact  which  is  the  subjective 
feeling  of  the  one  occasion.  There  is  a  certain  distribution 
among  the  various  prehensions,  by  reason  of  the  fact  that 
each  part  of  the  total  objective  datum  dictates  its  conformal 
qualitative  reproduction  in  the  subjective  form.  In  so  far 
as  identical  qualities  occur  in  diverse  objective  data,  then  the 
efficiency  of  that  quality  in  the  subjective  form  must  be 
dictated  by  a  process  of  integration,  and  also  by  compatibility 
with  the  other  qualitative  feelings.  Thus  the  distribution 
of  subjective  form  among  the  separate  prehensions  refers 
primarily  to  the  conformal  origins  of  subjective  form  de¬ 
rived  from  the  various  components  of  the  total  objective 
datum. 

(c)  The  third  doctrine  expresses  the  final  autonomy  of 

1  Cf.  The  Concept  of  Nature,  Chapter  i,  and  Process  and  Reality ,  Part  n, 
Section  III,  Chapter  ix  ,  and  Part  in,  Chapter  iv. 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


328 

the  process.  This  process  of  the  synthesis  of  subjective  forms 
derived  conformally  is  not  settled  by  the  antecedent  fact  of 
the  data.  For  these  data  in  their  own  separate  natures  do  not 
carry  any  regulative  principle  for  their  synthesis.  The  regu¬ 
lative  principle  is  derived  from  the  novel  unity  which  is 
imposed  on  them  by  the  novel  creature  in  process  of  con¬ 
stitution.  Thus  the  immediate  occasion  from  the  spontaneity 
of  its  own  essence  must  supply  the  missing  determination 
for  the  synthesis  of  subjective  form.  Thus  the  future  of  the 
Universe,  though  conditioned  by  the  immanence  of  its  past, 
awaits  for  its  complete  determination  the  spontaneity  of  the 
novel  individual  occasions  as  in  their  season  they  come  into 
being. 

Section  III.  A  distinction  must  now  be  made  between 
two  meanings  of  the  term  Beauty.  There  is  the  primary 
meaning  which  has  been  given  in  Section  I  of  this  chapter. 
This  is  Beauty  realized  in  actual  occasions  which  are  the 
completely  real  things  in  the  Universe.  But  in  the  analysis 
of  an  occasion,  some  parts  of  its  objective  content  may  be 
termed  Beautiful  by  reason  of  their  conformal  contribution 
to  the  perfection  of  the  subjective  form  of  the  complete 
occasion.  This  secondary  sense  of  the  term  Beauty  is  more 
accurately  to  be  considered  as  a  definition  of  the  term  4  Beau¬ 
tiful5.  The  Beauty  realized  in  an  occasion  depends  both  on 
the  objective  content  from  which  that  occasion  originates 
and  also  on  the  spontaneity  of  the  occasion.  The  objective 
content  is  4  beautiful 5  by  reason  of  the  Beauty  that  would  be 
realized  in  that  occasion  by  a  fortunate  exercise  of  its  spon¬ 
taneity.  In  the  same  way  any  part  of  the  objective  content 
is  4  beautiful 5  in  a  still  more  indirect  sense,  capable  of  slight 
variations  in  meaning.  It  may  be  beautiful  by  reason  of  the 
Beauty  that  would  be  realized  by  a  fortunate  association 
with  other  data  combined  with  a  fortunate  exercise  of  spon- 


BEAUTY 


329 


taneity  by  the  occasion  prehending  it.  But  such  supreme 
fortune  is  an  ideal,  not  for  this  world.  By  the  term  ‘  beautiful 5 
we  usually  mean  the  presupposition  of  the  sort  of  objective 
environment  which  in  that  general  social  setting  may  be 
presupposed,  and  the  sort  of  spontaneity  which  may  be 
hoped  for  from  the  percipient  occasions  in  question.  We 
may  be  thinking  of  artists,  or  of  cultivated  men  of  the 
modern  world,  or  of  the  ruck  of  mankind  in  a  given  city  at 
a  given  time.  But  in  all  its  senses,  ‘beautiful5  means  the 
inherent  capability  for  the  promotion  of  Beauty  when  func¬ 
tioning  as  a  datum  in  a  percipient  occasion.  When  ‘Beauty5 
is  ascribed  to  any  component  in  a  datum,  it  is  in  this  se¬ 
condary  sense. 

Section  IV.  In  the  initial  definition  of  Beauty,  the  notion 
of  ‘perfection5  was  tacitly  introduced.  The  ‘perfection5  of 
subjective  form  means  the  absence  from  it  of  component 
feelings  which  mutually  inhibit  each  other  so  that  neither 
rises  to  the  strength  proper  to  it.  But  there  are  two  meanings 
to  ‘inhibition5  which  must  be  carefully  distinguished,  since 
only  one  of  them  involves  a  derogation  from  perfection. 
Complete  inhibition  is  an  example  of  the  finiteness  of  sub¬ 
jective  form.  It  does  not  derogate  from  ‘perfection5.  There 
is  then  ‘perfection5  in  its  kind — that  is  to  say,  in  its  type  of 
finiteness  with  such-and-such  exclusions.  But  then  the  com¬ 
pletely  inhibited  component  subjective  feeling  is  not  properly 
a  component  of  that  subjective  form.  It  is  merely  what  would 
have  been  a  component  under  other  conditions.  This  sense  of 
inhibition  will  be  termed  ‘anaesthesia5. 

The  other  meaning  of  inhibition — the  meaning  which 
derogates  from  perfection — involves  the  true  active  presence 
of  both  component  feelings.  In  this  case  there  is  a  third 
feeling  of  mutual  destructiveness,  so  that  one  or  other — or 
both — of  the  component  feelings  fails  to  attain  the  strength 


330 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


properly  belonging  to  the  prehension  of  the  datum  from  which 
it  arises.  This  is  the  feeling  of  evil  in  the  most  general  sense, 
namely  physical  pain  or  mental  evil,  such  as  sorrow,  horror, 
dislike.  This  type  of  inhibition  will  be  termed  ‘aesthetic 
destruction5.  Aesthetic  destruction  is  a  positive  component 
in  subjective  form,  and  is  inconsistent  with  perfection.  The 
subjective  experience  of  aesthetic  destruction  will  be  termed 
a  ‘discordant  feeling5.  Such  a  feeling  is  a  factor  in  the  sub¬ 
jective  form  of  the  percipient  occasion.  The  more  intense  the 
discordant  feeling,  the  further  the  retreat  from  perfection. 
A  complex  datum  is  ‘objectively  discordant5  when  among 
the  type  of  percipients  in  question  it  will  normally  produce 
discordant  feelings. 

It  follows  from  this  discussion  that  in  the  definition  of 
Beauty  a  distinction  has  been  overlooked.  The  subjective 
feelings  which  are  of  the  type  of  an  emotional  experience  of 
aesthetic  destruction  must  be  excepted — or  rather,  as  we  shall 
find,  belong  to  a  class  requiring  special  treatment.  ‘Per¬ 
fection5,  properly  so  called,  requires  the  exclusion  of  feelings 
of  this  class.  On  further  consideration  we  shall  find  that 
always  there  are  imperfect  occasions  better  than  occasions 
which  realize  some  given  type  of  perfection.  There  are  in  fact 
higher  and  lower  perfections,  and  an  imperfection  aiming 
at  a  higher  type  stands  above  lower  perfections.  The  most 
material  and  the  most  sensuous  enjoyments  are  yet  types 
of  Beauty.  Progress  is  founded  upon  the  experience  of 
discordant  feelings.  The  social  value  of  liberty  lies  in  its 
production  of  discords.  There  are  perfections  beyond  per¬ 
fections.  All  realization  is  finite,  and  there  is  no  perfection 
which  is  the  infinitude  of  all  perfections.  Perfections  of 
diverse  types  are  among  themselves  discordant.  Thus  the 
contribution  to  Beauty  which  can  be  supplied  by  Discord 
— in  itself  destructive  and  evil — is  the  positive  feeling  of  a 


BEAUTY 


331 

quick  shift  of  aim  from  the  tameness  of  outworn  perfection 
to  some  other  ideal  with  its  freshness  still  upon  it.  Thus  the 
value  of  Discord  is  a  tribute  to  the  merits  of  Imperfection. 

Section  V.  A  consideration  of  ancient  Greek  civilization 
illustrates  the  value  of  discordance.  The  race  was  awakened 
into  progress  by  a  great  ideal  of  perfection.  This  ideal  was 
an  immense  advance  upon  the  ideals  which  the  surrounding 
civilizations  had  produced.  It  was  effective  and  realized  in  a 
civilization  which  attained  its  proper  beauty  in  human  lives 
to  an  extent  not  surpassed  before  or  since.  Its  art,  its  theoretic 
sciences,  its  modes  of  life,  its  literature,  its  philosophic 
schools,  its  religious  rituals,  all  conspired  to  express  every 
aspect  of  this  wonderful  ideal.  Perfection  was  attained,  and 
with  the  attainment  inspiration  withered.  With  repetition 
in  successive  generations,  freshness  gradually  vanished. 
Learning  and  learned  taste  replaced  the  ardour  of  adventure. 
Hellenism  was  replaced  by  the  Hellenistic  epoch  in  which 
genius  was  stifled  by  repetition.  We  can  imagine  the  fate  of 
the  Mediterranean  civilization  if  it  had  been  spared  the  ir¬ 
ruptions  of  Barbarians  and  the  rise  of  two  new  religions, 
Christianity  and  Mahometanism:  For  two  thousand  years 
the  Greek  art-forms  lifelessly  repeated:  The  Greek  schools 
of  philosophy,  Stoic,  Epicurean,  Aristotelian,  Neo-Platonic, 
arguing  with  barren  formulae :  Conventional  histories : 
A  stabilized  Government  with  the  sanctity  of  ancient  cere¬ 
mony,  supported  by  habitual  pieties:  Literature  without 
depth:  Science  elaborating  details  by  deductions  from  un¬ 
questioned  premises :  Delicacies  of  feeling  without  robustness 
of  adventure. 

This  is  no  fancy  picture.  Despite  all  storms,  something  of 
this  sort  did  happen  to  the  Byzantine  Empire  for  a  thousand 
years;  and  despite  the  inroad  of  a  new  religion,  Buddhism, 
and  despite  Tartar  invasions,  something  of  this  sort  did  hap- 


332 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


pen  to  the  vast  Chinese  Empire  for  a  thousand  years.  The 
Chinese  and  the  Greeks  both  achieved  certain  perfections  of 
civilization — each  worthy  of  admiration.  But  even  perfection 
will  not  bear  the  tedium  of  indefinite  repetition.  To  sustain 
a  civilization  with  the  intensity  of  its  first  ardour  requires 
more  than  learning.  Adventure  is  essential,  namely,  the  search 
for  new  perfections. 

Section  VI.  There  is  nothing  to  be  astonished  at  in  this 
conclusion.  Spontaneity,  originality  of  decision,  belongs  to  the 
essence  of  each  actual  occasion.  It  is  the  supreme  expression 
of  individuality :  its  conformal  subjective  form  is  the  freedom 
of  enjoyment  derived  from  the  enjoyment  of  freedom.  Fresh¬ 
ness,  zest,  and  the  extra  keenness  of  intensity  arise  from  it.  In 
a  personal  succession  of  occasions  the  upward  path  towards 
an  ideal  of  perfection,  with  the  end  in  sight,  gives  a  thrill 
keener  than  any  prolonged  halt  in  a  stage  of  attainment  with 
the  major  variations  completely  tried  out.  Thus  the  wise 
advice  is,  Not  to  rest  too  completely  in  any  continued  realiza¬ 
tion  of  the  same  perfection  of  type.  Each  occasion  in  a  society 
of  occasions,  and  more  particularly  each  occasion  in  a  per¬ 
sonal  society,  seeks  this  zest  by  finding  some  contrast  between 
the  Appearance  resulting  from  the  operations  of  the  mental 
pole  and  the  inherited  Realities  of  the  physical  pole.  When 
spontaneity  is  at  its  lowest,  in  practice  negligible,  the  final 
trace  of  its  operation  is  found  in  alternations  backwards  and 
forwards  between  alternative  modes.  This  is  the  reason  for 
the  predominant  importance  of  wave-transmission  in  physical 
nature. 

But — considering  occasions  at  their  highest,  with  effective 
exercise  of  mental  originality — the  preservation  of  zest,  after 
the  attainment  of  a  stage  of  perfection,  first  requires  the 
exploration  of  all  variations  which  do  not  introduce  dis- 


BEAUTY 


333 


cordances  into  the  type  of  perfection  attained.  The  variation 
of  styles  and  of  decorative  detail  in  mediaeval  Gothic  archi¬ 
tecture  may  serve  as  an  illustration.  But  such  variations  are 
easily  exhausted.  Bolder  adventure  is  needed — the  adventure 
of  ideas,  and  the  adventure  of  practice  conforming  itself  to 
ideas.  The  best  service  that  ideas  can  render  is  gradually  to 
lift  into  the  mental  poles  the  ideal  of  another  type  of  per¬ 
fection  which  becomes  a  programme  for  reform.  An  illustra¬ 
tion  of  this  is  the  service  of  Christianity  by  its  introduction  of 
new  ideals  for  the  social  life  of  mankind.  In  other  words,  the 
ideal  of  a  new  society  derived  from  a  new  defining  charac¬ 
teristic  is  introduced. 

Section  VII.  The  doctrine  has  been  stated  that  the  ex¬ 
perience  of  destruction  is  in  itself  evil ;  in  fact  that  it  constitutes 
the  meaning  of  evil.  We  find  now  that  this  enunciation  is 
much  too  simple-minded.  Qualifications  have  to  be  intro¬ 
duced,  though  they  leave  unshaken  the  fundamental  position 
that  4  destruction  as  a  dominant  fact  in  the  experience 5  is  the 
correct  definition  of  evil. 

The  intermingling  of  Beauty  and  Evil  arises  from  the  con¬ 
joint  operation  of  three  metaphysical  principles:  (i)  That  all 
actualization  is  finite;  (2)  That  finitude  involves  the  exclusion 
of  alternative  possibility;  (3)  That  mental  functioning  intro¬ 
duces  into  realization  subjective  forms  conformal  to  relevant 
alternatives  excluded  from  the  completeness  of  physical 
realization. 

The  result  is  that  the  concerns  of  the  actual  world  are 
deflected  from  harmony  of  feeling  by  the  divergent  tonalities 
introduced  from  the  mental  poles.  The  new  occasion,  even 
apart  from  its  own  spontaneous  mentality,  is  thus  con¬ 
fronted  by  basic  disharmony  in  the  actual  world  from  which 
it  springs.  This  is  fortunate.  For  otherwise  actuality  would 


334 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


consist  in  a  cycle  of  repetition,  realizing  only  a  finite  group 
of  possibilities.  This  was  the  narrow,  stuffy  doctrine  of  some 
ancient  thinkers. 

In  an  individual  experience  there  are  three  ways  of  dealing 
with  this  disharmony  of  the  world  as  given  for  initial  pre¬ 
hension.  Two  of  these  ways  have  been  discussed  under 
the  general  term  'inhibition5.  One  way  is  termed  'Anaes¬ 
thesia5,  and  is  the  way  of  mere  negative  prehension.  The 
other  way  is  by  positive  realization  with  the  positive  feeling 
of  discordance.  In  this  case,  the  elimination  of  the  sheer 
incompatibility  is  accompanied  by  a  positive  feeling  of  acute 
disruption  of  affective  tone.  This  experience  is  the  pre¬ 
hension  of  a  qualitative  datum  which  also  imposes  itself 
conformally  on  the  subjective  form.  The  third  way  depends 
on  another  principle,  that  a  readjustment  of  the  relative 
intensities  of  incompatible  feelings  can  in  some  cases  reduce 
them  to  compatibilities.  This  possibility  arises  when  the 
clash  in  affective  tones  is  a  clash  of  intensities,  and  is  not  a 
sheer  logical  incompatibility  of  qualities.  Thus  two  systems 
of  prehensions  may  each  be  internally  harmonious;  but  the 
two  systems  in  the  unity  of  one  experience  may  be  dis¬ 
cordant,  when  the  two  intensities  of  their  subjective  forms  are 
comparable  in  magnitude.  There  may  be  a  discordance  in 
feeling  this  as  much  as  that ,  or  in  feeling  that  as  much  as  this. 
But  if  one  be  kept  at  a  lower  intensity  in  the  penumbra  of 
feeling,  it  may  act  as  a  background  to  the  other,  providing 
a  sense  of  massiveness  and  variety.  This  is  the  habitual 
state  of  human  experience,  a  vast  undiscriminated,  or  dimly 
discriminated  background,  of  low  intensity,  and  a  clear 
foreground.  This  third  way  of  eliminating  discordance  may 
be  termed  the  method  of  'reduction  to  a  background5. 
Alternatively,  it  can  equally  well  be  termed  the  method  of 
‘raising  to  a  foreground5.  For  the  avoidance  of  anaesthesia 


BEAUTY 


335 


may  come  by  the  percipient  occasion  so  functioning  as  to 
increase  the  intensity  of  subjective  tone  belonging  to  the 
prehension  of  one  of  the  two  systems. 

Yet  a  fourth  way  now  discloses  itself,  and  this  way  is  the 
explanation  of  the  second  and  third  ways  for  all  occasions  of 
experience  where  mentality  has  been  developed  into  its  higher 
activities.  The  second  and  the  third  ways,  when  they  are  not 
in  truth  this  fourth  way,  are  examples  of  the  low  type  of 
mental  functionings  termed1  ‘physical  purposes’.  This  fourth 
way  is  by  spontaneity  of  the  occasion  so  directing  its  mental 
functionings  as  to  introduce  a  third  system  of  prehensions, 
relevant  to  both  the  inharmonious  systems.  This  novel  system 
is  such  as  radically  to  alter  the  distribution  of  intensities 
throughout  the  two  given  systems,  and  to  change  the  im¬ 
portance  of  both  in  the  final  intensive  experience  of  the 
occasion.  This  way  is  in  fact  the  introduction  of  Appearance, 
and  its  use  to  preserve  the  massive  qualitative  variety  of 
Reality  from  simplification  by  negative  prehensions. 

Appearance  preserves  this  variety  by  concentrating  on 
itself  the  intensities  properly  derived  from  Reality  in  the 
background.  It  is  a  procedure  of  simplification.  For  example, 
in  Appearance  the  one  Region  supersedes  the  many  indi¬ 
vidual  occasions  which  compose  it.  Also  qualities  widely 
spread  throughout  the  occasions  in  Reality  are  in  Appear¬ 
ance  inherent  either  in  Regions  occupied  by  these  occasions, 
or  in  Regions  having  some  definite  association  with  such 
Regions.  The  Reality  is  in  the  background  as  explanatory 
of  the  procedures  by  which  its  rich  variety  has  been  saved. 
Also  the  variety  of  affective  tone  is  now  transferred  to  Ap¬ 
pearance,  with  that  amount  of  transformation  which  saves 
its  compatibility.  There  is  massive  feeling  transferred  to 
Appearance,  either  of  Harmony,  or  of  Discords,  or  of  Vul- 

1  Cf.  Process  and  Reality,  Part  in,  Chapter  v,  Sections  VII,  VIII. 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


336 

garity,  or  of  utter  Commonplaceness.  Appearance  raises  into 
a  distinctness  of  feeling,  factors  which  can  be  generalized  for 
salvation  from  the  welter  of  Fact.  In  this  way  it  emphasizes 
for  individual  experience  widespread  qualities  of  feeling. 
Massiveness  of  subjective  form  is  somewhat  at  variance  with 
the  intensity  of  individual  feelings.  The  variety  of  individual 
intensities  thwart  each  other  by  their  diversities  of  objects. 
Appearance  combines  massiveness  with  intensity  by  unifying 
the  diversities  of  objects.  It  simplifies  the  objects  and  pre¬ 
cipitates  upon  the  simplification  the  qualitative  contents  of 
the  given  world.  It  saves  intensities  and  massiveness  at  the 
cost  of  eliciting  vivid  experiences  of  affective  tones,  good  and 
bad.  It  makes  possible  the  height  of  Beauty  and  height  of 
Evil ;  because  it  saves  both  from  a  tame  elimination  or  a  tame 
scaling  down. 

Section  VIII.  We  can  now  consider  more  closely  the 
grounds  of  Harmony  and  the  grounds  for  the  positive  feeling 
of  its  destruction.  It  must  be  remembered  that  just  as 
there  is  a  positive  integral  feeling  of  Harmony  lost,  so 
there  is  a  positive  integral  feeling  of  Harmony  attained. 
There  is  not  only  the  fact  of  details  in  experience  allowing 
each  other:  beyond  that  there  is  the  positive  feeling  of  the 
whole  as  Harmonious.  Analogously  there  is  the  positive 
feeling  of  the  whole  as  discordant.  Either  feeling  as  the 
case  may  be.  The  Harmony  is  felt  as  such,  and  so  is  the 
Discord.  Now  Harmony  is  more  than  logical  compatibility, 
and  Discord  is  more  than  logical  incompatibility.  Logicians 
are  not  called  in  to  advise  artists.  The  key  to  the  explana¬ 
tion  is  the  understanding  of  the  prehension  of  individuality. 
This  is  the  feeling  of  each  objective  factor  as  an  individual 
‘ It 5  with  its  own  significance.  The  emotional  significance 
of  an  object  as  C/F,  divorced  from  its  qualitative  aspects 
at  the  moment  presented,  is  one  of  the  strongest  forces 


BEAUTY 


337 


in  human  nature.  It  is  at  the  base  of  family  affection,  and 
of  the  love  of  particular  possessions.  This  trait  is  not  a 
peculiarity  of  mankind  alone.  A  dog  smells  in  order  to  find 
out  if  the  person  in  question  is  that  It  to  which  its  affections 
cling.  The  room,  or  stable,  may  be  full  of  odours,  many  of 
them  for  a  dog  sweeter.  But  he  is  not  smelling  for  the 
pleasure  of  that  smell,  but  to  discover  that  It  who  claims  his 
whole  affection.  An  analogous  substitute  may  deceive,  but 
when  discovered  never  does  as  well.  The  analogy  may  claim 
affection.  But  the  original  It  commands  a  poignancy  of 
feeling.  This  type  of  interest  is  at  the  base  of  much  in  ar¬ 
chaeology — an  inscribed  stone,  executed  at  the  command  of 
and  under  the  very  eyes  of  Sennacherib.  A  really  admirable 
replica  by  a  modern  workman  lacks  interest,  except  for  certain 
purposes  of  scholarship.  The  worship  of  relics  touches  upon 
the  pathology  of  such  concerns. 

Undoubtedly  the  emotional  value  of  particular  individuality 
arises  from  the  generalization  of  emotions,  so  as  to  get  rid 
of  their  mere  sensory  elements.  Such  generalized  emotional 
qualities  are  love,  admiration,  the  feeling  of  exquisiteness, 
the  feeling  of  worth,  hate,  horror,  the  general  feeling  of 
association,  that  is  of  particular  objects  entwined  with  one’s 
own  existence.  The  successive  immanence  of  occasion  after 
occasion  in  the  life  of  the  soul  will  in  the  present  occasion 
of  that  life  include  the  cumulation  of  the  successive  pre¬ 
hensions  of  some  particular  object.  In  the  various  prehensions 
of  it  new  qualities  secure  prominence,  original  qualities 
are  present  with  some  difference.  There  is  thus  a  gradual 
elimination  of  the  more  special  types  of  quality,  which 
vary  and  fluctuate,  from  conformal  effectiveness  in  the 
tone  of  the  final  prehensions.  Generalized  aromas  take 
their  place — the  basic  feelings  of  lifelong  devotion,  of  life¬ 
long  repulsion,  or  of  aesthetic  excellence.  Thus  the  indica- 


wi 


22 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


338 

tion  of  that  It ,  partly  by  its  status  in  the  pattern  of  experience 
and  partly  by  its  immediate  exhibition  of  minor  qualities, 
produces  a  strong  sharp-cut  emotional  tone  of  dominating 
significance.  The  significance  is  not  merely  for  the  general 
complex  of  subjective  form  in  the  immediate  percipient.  It 
is  also  reflected  back  on  to  the  original  objective  It.  Thus  the 
It  which  is  indicated  by  minor  details  of  a  status  and  quality 
is  finally  prehended  in  Appearance  as  It  with  its  permanent 
character. 

For  epistemology  of  the  sensationalist  school,  this  final 
prehension  is  construed  as  an  interpretation  of  original  sense- 
impressions.  But  in  this  final  prehension  there  is  no  logical 
train,  inductive  or  deductive.  The  percipient  directly  inte¬ 
grates  antecedent  real  functionings  of  that  object  in  antecedent 
occasions  of  the  soul’s  life.  The  so-called  ‘interpretation’  is 
the  conflation  of  real  history,  and  is  not  a  top-dressing  of 
conjecture.  The  notion  of  purely  qualitative  sense-impressions 
as  the  origin  of  experience  has  no  warrant  in  direct  intui¬ 
tion. 

For  the  understanding  of  Harmony  and  Discord  it  is 
essential  to  remember  that  strength  of  experience,  in  mas¬ 
siveness  and  in  intensity,  depends  upon  the  substratum  of 
detail  being  composed  of  significant  individuals.  Appearance 
has  been  constituted  fortunately  when  it  has  simplified  the 
welter  of  occasions,  individually  insignificant,  into  a  few 
significant  individual  things.  It  has  ‘interpreted’  the  world 
in  terms  of  factors  received  from  the  world — so  that  each 
factor  of  interpretation  can  be  substantiated  by  direct  in¬ 
tuition — if  only  consciousness  can  analyse  so  far.  Such  is 
fortunate  experience.  It  derives  its  strength  from  the  con¬ 
currence  of  significant  individual  objects,  and  its  own  existence 
adds  to  the  significance  of  those  objects.  This  is  the  enjoy¬ 
ment  of  Harmony,  and  a  factor  in  this  enjoyment  is  the 


BEAUTY 


339 

intuition  that  the  future,  where  its  objective  immortality 
lies,  is  increasing  the  grounds  for  Harmony.  Destruction  is 
absent. 

But  there  can  be  intense  experience  without  Harmony.  In 
this  event,  there  is  Destruction  of  the  significant  characters  of 
individual  objects.  When  the  direct  feeling  of  such  Destruction 
dominates  the  whole,  there  is  the  immediate  feeling  of  evil, 
and  the  anticipation  of  destructive  or  weakened  data  for  the 
future.  Harmony  is  bound  up  with  the  preservation  of  the 
individual  significance  of  detail,  and  Discord  consists  in  its 
destruction.  In  Discord  there  is  always  a  frustration.  But 
even  Discord  may  be  preferable  to  a  feeling  of  slow  relapse 
into  general  anaesthesia,  or  into  tameness  which  is  its  prelude. 
Perfection  at  a  low  level  ranks  below  Imperfection  with  higher 
aim. 

A  mere  qualitative  Harmony  within  an  experience  com¬ 
paratively  barren  of  objects  of  high  significance  is  a  debased 
type  of  Harmony,  tame,  vague,  deficient  in  outline  and  in¬ 
tention.  It  is  one  property  of  a  beautiful  system  of  objects 
that,  as  entertained  in  a  succession  of  occasions  adapted  for 
its  enjoyment,  it  quickly  builds  up  a  system  of  apparent 
objects  with  vigorous  characters.  The  sculptures  on  the  famous 
porch  of  the  Cathedral  at  Chartres  at  once  assume  individual 
importance  with  definite  character  while  performing  their 
office  as  details  in  the  whole.  There  is  not  a  mere  pattern 
of  qualitative  beauty.  There  are  those  statues,  each  with  its 
individual  beauty,  and  all  lending  themselves  to  the  beauty 
of  the  whole.  Enduring  Individuality  in  the  details  is  the 
backbone  of  strong  experience. 

Art  at  its  highest  exemplifies  the  metaphysical  doctrine  of 
the  interweaving  of  absoluteness  upon  relativity.  In  the  work 
of  art  the  relativity  becomes  the  harmony  of  the  composition, 
and  the  absoluteness  is  the  claim  for  separate  individuality 


22-2 


340 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


advanced  by  component  factors.  We  also  understand  how 
Appearance  leads  to  the  Aristotelian  doctrine  of  a  substantial, 
enduring  It  with  essential  character.  The  point  of  view  ex¬ 
presses  important  truth.  Hence  its  obviousness.  The  aesthetic 
importance  of  this  apparent  individuality  lies  in  its  claim  to 
attention.  In  so  far  as  Appearance  has  a  truth-relation  to 
Reality  such  enduring  individuality  indicates  a  real  society 
important  for  its  control  of  the  future.  The  claim  to  aesthetic 
attention  thus  represents  the  indirect  importance  of  anticipa¬ 
tion  and  purpose  as  factors  in  the  immediate  enjoyment  of 
the  immediate  percipient.  The  danger  of  a  street-crossing  is 
for  the  pedestrian  a  regulative  factor  in  the  aesthetic  values 
of  the  apparent  scene.  The  concept  of  completely  passive 
contemplation  in  abstraction  from  action  and  purpose  is  a 
fallacious  extreme.  It  omits  the  final  regulative  factor  in  the 
aesthetic  complex.  But  of  course  there  are  large  diversities 
of  action  and  large  diversities  of  purpose.  The  final  point  is 
that  the  foundation  of  Reality  upon  which  Appearance  rests 
can  never  be  neglected  in  the  evaluation  of  Appearance. 


CHAPTER  XVIII 


TRUTH  AND  BEAUTY 

Section  I.  It  appears  from  the  discussion  in  the  two 
previous  chapters  of  this  Part  that  Beauty  is  a  wider,  and 
more  fundamental,  notion  than  Truth.  Of  course  both 
terms  have  been  used  here  in  a  very  generalized  sense.  Nar¬ 
rower  usages  are  not  marked  off  from  the  wider  meanings, 
here  employed,  by  anything  except  habitual  presupposition 
respecting  importance  and  triviality.  Beauty  is  the  internal 
conformation  of  the  various  items  of  experience  with  each 
other,  for  the  production  of  maximum  effectiveness.  Beauty 
thus  concerns  the  inter-relations  of  the  various  components 
of  Reality,  and  also  the  inter-relations  of  the  various  com¬ 
ponents  of  Appearance,  and  also  the  relations  of  Appearance 
to  Reality.  Thus  any  part  of  experience  can  be  beautiful. 
The  teleology  of  the  Universe  is  directed  to  the  production 
of  Beauty.  Thus  any  system  of  things  which  in  any  wide 
sense  is  beautiful  is  to  that  extent  justified  in  its  existence. 
It  may  however  fail  in  another  sense,  by  inhibiting  more 
Beauty  than  it  creates.  Thus  the  system,  though  in  a  sense 
beautiful,  is  on  the  whole  evil  in  that  environment.  But 
Truth  has  a  narrower  meaning  in  two  ways.  First,  Truth, 
in  any  important  sense,  merely  concerns  the  relations  of 
Appearance  to  Reality.  It  is  the  conformation  of  Appearance 
to  Reality.  But  in  the  second  place  the  notion  of  ‘con¬ 
formation’  in  the  case  of  Truth  is  narrower  than  that  in  the 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


342 

case  of  Beauty.  For  the  truth-relation  requires  that  the  two 
relata  have  some  factor  in  common. 

In  itself,  and  apart  from  other  factors,  there  seems  to  be 
no  special  importance  about  the  truth-relation.  There  is  the 
bare  fact  of  a  certain  limited  relationship  of  identity.  There 
is  nothing  in  such  a  fact  which  will  necessarily  dictate  any 
corresponding  type  of  subjective  form  within  the  percipient 
occasion.  Still  less  is  there  any  reason  why  such  influence  as 
a  truth-relation  does  have  upon  subjective  form  should  be 
in  the  direction  of  the  promotion  of  Beauty.  In  other  words, 
a  truth-relation  is  not  necessarily  beautiful.  It  may  not  even 
be  neutral.  It  may  be  evil.  Thus  Beauty  is  left  as  the  one 
aim  which  by  its  very  nature  is  self-justifying.  The  Discord 
in  the  Universe  arises  from  the  fact  that  modes  of  Beauty 
are  various,  and  not  of  necessity  compatible.  And  yet  some 
admixture  of  Discord  is  a  necessary  factor  in  the  transition 
from  mode  to  mode.  The  objective  life  of  the  past  and  the 
future  in  the  present  is  an  inevitable  element  of  disturbance. 
Discord  may  take  the  form  of  freshness  or  hope,  or  it  may 
be  horror  or  pain.  In  the  higher  types  of  mentality  the  note 
of  displacement  impresses  its  qualitative  character  upon 
subjective  form  with  peculiar  keenness:  welcome  or  an¬ 
tagonism.  Wide  purpose  is  in  its  own  nature  beautiful  by 
reason  of  its  contribution  to  the  massiveness  of  experience. 
It  increases  the  dimensions  of  the  experient  subject,  adds  to 
its  ambit.  Then  the  destruction  of  immediate  realizations 
for  the  sake  of  purpose  is,  on  the  face  of  it,  a  sacrifice  to 
Harmony. 

Section  II.  Notwithstanding  the  possible  unseasonable¬ 
ness  of  the  truth-relation,  the  general  importance  of  Truth 
for  the  promotion  of  Beauty  is  overwhelming.  After  all  has 
been  said,  yet  the  truth-relation  remains  the*  simple,  direct 
mode  of  realizing  Harmony.  Other  ways  are  indirect,  and 


TRUTH  AND  BEAUTY 


343 

indirectness  is  at  the  mercy  of  the  environment.  There  is  a 
blunt  force  about  Truth,  which  in  the  subjective  form  of  its 
prehension  is  akin  to  cleanliness — namely,  the  removal  of 
dirt,  which  is  unwanted  irrelevance.  The  sense  of  directness 
which  it  carries  with  it,  sustains  the  upstanding  individualities 
so  necessary  for  the  beauty  of  a  complex.  Falsehood  is 
corrosive. 

Truth  is  various  in  its  extent,  its  modes,  and  its  relevance. 
But  an  apparent  object,  beautiful  beyond  the  hope  of  ante¬ 
cedent  imagination,  as  it  functions  in  experience  is  realizing 
some  hidden,  penetrating  Truth  with  a  keenness  beyond 
compare.  The  type  of  Truth  required  for  the  final  stretch 
of  Beauty  is  a  discovery  and  not  a  recapitulation.  The  Truth 
that  for  such  extremity  of  Beauty  is  wanted  is  that  truth- 
relation  whereby  Appearance  summons  up  new  resources  of 
feeling  from  the  depths  of  Reality.  It  is  a  Truth  of  feeling, 
and  not  a  Truth  of  verbalization.  The  relata  in  Reality  must 
lie  below  the  stale  presuppositions  of  verbal  thought.  The 
Truth  of  supreme  Beauty  lies  beyond  the  dictionary  meanings 
of  words. 

When  Appearance  has  to  Reality,  in  some  important  direct 
sense,  a  truth-relation,  there  is  a  security  about  the  Beauty 
attained,  that  is  to  say,  a  pledge  for  the  future. 

From  these  functions  of  Truth  in  the  service  of  Beauty, 
the  realization  of  Truth  becomes  in  itself  an  element  pro¬ 
moting  Beauty  of  feeling.  Consciousness,  with  its  dim  in¬ 
tuitions,  welcomes  a  factor  so  generally  on  the  right  side,  so 
habitually  necessary.  The  element  of  anticipation  under  the 
influence  of  Truth  is  in  a  deep  sense  satisfied,  and  thus  adds 
a  factor  to  the  immediate  Harmony.  Thus  Truth,  in  itself 
and  apart  from  special  reasons  to  the  contrary,  becomes 
self-justifying.  It  is  accompanied  by  a  sense  of  rightness 
in  the  deepest  Harmony.  But  Truth  derives  this  self-justifying 


344 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


power  from  its  services  in  the  promotion  of  Beauty.  Apart 
from  Beauty,  Truth  is  neither  good,  nor  bad. 

Section  III.  Art  is  purposeful  adaptation  of  Appearance 
to  Reality.  Now  ‘purposeful  adaptation’  implies  an  end,  to 
be  obtained  with  more  or  less  success.  This  end,  which  is  the 
purpose  of  art,  is  two-fold — namely  Truth  and  Beauty.  The 
perfection  of  art  has  only  one  end,  which  is  Truthful  Beauty. 
But  some  measure  of  success  has  been  reached,  when  either 
Truth  or  Beauty  is  gained.  In  the  absence  of  Truth,  Beauty 
is  on  a  lower  level,  with  a  defect  of  massiveness.  In  the 
absence  of  Beauty,  Truth  sinks  to  triviality.  Truth  matters 
because  of  Beauty. 

The  relation  of c  appearance  ’  to  c  reality  ’  is  such  that  in  the 
final  phase  of  experience  [‘satisfaction’  or  'anticipation’]  the 
reality  of  the  primary  phase  is  prehended  with  subjective 
form  as  though  it  participated  in  the  qualitative  characters 
of  ‘  appearance  ’ .  When  in  fact  the  reality  does  so  participate, 
the  relation  is  truthful.  When  it  does  not  so  participate,  the 
relation  is  falsifying. 

Beauty,  so  far  as  concerns  its  exemplification  in  Appearance 
alone,  does  not  necessarily  involve  the  attainment  of  Truth. 
Appearance  is  beautiful  when  the  qualitative  objects  which 
compose  it  are  interwoven  in  patterned  contrasts,  so  that 
the  prehensions  of  the  whole  of  its  parts  produces  the  fullest 
harmony  of  mutual  support.  By  this  it  is  meant,  that  in  so 
far  as  the  qualitative  characters  of  the  whole  and  the  parts 
pass  into  the  subjective  forms  of  their  prehensions,  the  whole 
heightens  the  feelings  for  the  parts,  and  the  parts  heighten 
the  feelings  for  the  whole,  and  for  each  other.  This  is  harmony 
of  feeling;  and  with  harmony  of  feeling  its  objective  content 
is  beautiful. 

It  is  evident  that  when  appearance  has  obtained  truth 


TRUTH  AND  BEAUTY 


345 


in  addition  to  beauty,  harmony  in  a  wider  sense  has  been 
produced.  For  in  this  sense,  it  also  involves  the  relation  of 
appearance  to  reality.  Thus,  when  the  adaptation  of  ap¬ 
pearance  to  reality  has  obtained  Truthful  Beauty,  there  is  a 
perfection  of  art.  That  is  to  say,  if  there  be  art :  for  the  result 
may  be  the  slow  outcome  of  nature.  Such  an  outcome  may 
be  due  to  some  wide  universal  purpose.  But  it  will  not  be  due 
to  quick  purposeful  adaptation  originated  by  finite  creatures, 
the  sort  of  adaptation  usually  termed  art. 

Goodness  is  the  third  member  of  the  trinity  which  tradi¬ 
tionally  has  been  assigned  as  the  complex  aim  of  art — 
namely,  Truth,  Beauty,  and  Goodness.  With  the  point  of 
view  here  adopted,  Goodness  must  be  denied  a  place  among 
the  aims  of  art.  For  Goodness  is  a  qualification  belonging 
to  the  constitution  of  reality,  which  in  any  of  its  individual 
actualizations  is  better  or  worse.  Good  and  evil  lie  in  depths 
and  distances  below  and  beyond  appearance.  They  solely 
concern  inter-relations  within  the  real  world.  The  real 
world  is  good  when  it  is  beautiful.  Art  has  essentially  to 
do  with  perfections  attainable  by  purposeful  adaptation  of 
appearance.  With  a  larger  view  and  a  deeper  analysis,  some 
instance  of  the  perfection  of  art  may  diminish  the  good 
otherwise  inherent  in  some  specific  situation  as  it  passes  into 
its  objective  actuality  for  the  future.  Unseasonable  art  is 
analogous  to  an  unseasonable  joke,  namely,  good  in  its  place, 
but  out  of  place  a  positive  evil.  It  is  a  curious  fact  that  lovers 
of  art  who  are  most  insistent  on  the  doctrine  of  ‘  art  for  art’s 
sake’  are  apt  to  be  indignant  at  the  banning  of  art  for  the 
sake  of  other  interests.  The  charge  of  immorality  is  not 
refuted  by  pointing  to  the  perfection  of  art.  Of  course  it  is 
true  that  the  defence  of  morals  is  the  battle-cry  which  best 
rallies  stupidity  against  change.  Perhaps  countless  ages  ago 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


346 

respectable  amoebae  refused  to  migrate  from  ocean  to  dry 
land — refusing  in  defence  of  morals.  One  incidental  service 
of  art  to  society  lies  in  its  adventurousness. 

Section  IV.  It  is  a  tribute  to  the  strength  of  the  sheer 
craving  for  freshness,  that  change,  whose  justification  lies  in 
aim  at  the  distant  ideal,  should  be  promoted  by  Art  which 
is  the  adaptation  of  immediate  Appearance  for  immediate 
Beauty.  Art  neglects  the  safety  of  the  future  for  the  gain 
of  the  present.  In  so  doing  it  is  apt  to  render  its  Beauty 
thin.  But  after  all,  there  must  be  some  immediate  harvest. 
The  good  of  the  Universe  cannot  lie  in  indefinite  postpone¬ 
ment.  The  Day  of  Judgment  is  an  important  notion:  but 
that  Day  is  always  with  us.  Thus  Art  takes  care  of  the 
immediate  fruition,  here  and  now;  and  in  so  doing  is  apt  to 
lose  some  depth  by  reason  of  the  immediate  fruition  at 
which  it  is  aiming.  Its  business  is  to  render  the  Day  of 
Judgment  a  success,  now.  The  effect  of  the  present  on  the 
future  is  the  business  of  morals.  And  yet  the  separation  is 
not  so  easy.  For  the  inevitable  anticipation  adds  to  the 
present  a  qualitative  element  which  profoundly  affects  its 
whole  qualitative  harmony. 

There  is  a  paradox  concerning  morals  to  be  added  to  the 
one  concerning  art.  Morals  consists  in  the  aim  at  the  ideal, 
and  at  its  lowest  it  concerns  the  prevention  of  relapse  to 
lower  levels.  Thus  stagnation  is  the  deadly  foe  of  morality. 
Yet  in  human  society  the  champions  of  morality  are  on  the 
whole  the  fierce  opponents  of  new  ideals.  Mankind  has  been 
afflicted  with  low- toned  moralists,  objecting  to  expulsion 
from  some  Garden  of  Eden.  And  in  a  way  they  are  right.  For 
after  all  we  can  aim  at  nothing  except  from  the  standpoint  of 
a  well-assimilated  system  of  customs — that  is,  of  mores.  The 
fortunate  changes  are  made  ‘Hand  in  hand,  with  wand’ring 
steps  and  slow5. 


TRUTH  AND  BEAUTY 


347 

Section  V.  The  factor  in  experience  that  renders  Art 
possible  is  consciousness.1  Of  course  consciousness,  like 
everything  else,  is  in  a  sense  indefinable.  It  is  just  itself  and 
must  be  experienced.  But,  also  like  other  things,  it  is  the 
emergent  quality  illustrated  in  the  essence  of  a  conjunction 
of  circumstances.  It  is  a  qualitative  aspect  of  that  conjunction. 
We  can  ask  therefore  for  an  analysis  of  the  details  whose 
conjunction  in  experience  issues  in  consciousness. 

Consciousness  is  that  quality  which  emerges  into  the  ob¬ 
jective  content  as  the  result  of  the  conjunction  of  a  fact  and 
a  supposition  about  that  fact.  It  passes  conformally  from  the 
complex  object  to  the  subjective  form  of  the  prehension.  It 
is  the  quality  inherent  in  the  contrast  between  Actuality  and 
Ideality,  that  is,  between  the  products  of  the  physical  pole 
and  the  mental  pole  in  experience.  When  that  contrast  is  a 
feeble  element  in  experience,  then  consciousness  is  there  merely 
in  germ,  as  a  latent  capacity.  So  far  as  the  contrast  is  well- 
defined  and  prominent,  the  occasion  includes  a  developed 
consciousness.  That  portion  of  experience  irradiated  by  con¬ 
sciousness  is  only  a  selection.  Thus  consciousness  is  a  mode 
of  attention.  It  provides  the  extreme  of  selective  emphasis. 
The  spontaneity  of  an  occasion  finds  its  chief  outlets,  first 
in  the  direction  of  consciousness,  and  secondly  in  production 
of  ideas  to  pass  into  the  area  of  conscious  attention.  Thus 
consciousness,  spontaneity,  and  art  are  closely  interconnected. 
But  that  art  which  arises  within  clear  consciousness  is  only 
a  specialization  of  the  more  widely  distributed  art  within 
dim  consciousness  or  within  the  unconscious  activities  of 
experience. 

Consciousness  is  the  weapon  which  strengthens  the  arti¬ 
ficiality  of  an  occasion  of  experience.  It  raises  the  impor- 

1  Cf.  Process  and  Reality ,  Part  n,  Chapter  vn,  Section  II,  and  Part  in, 
Chapter  n,  Section  IV,  and  Chapters  iv  and  v. 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


348 

tance  of  the  final  Appearance  relatively  to  that  of  the  initial 
Reality.  Thus  it  is  Appearance  which  in  consciousness  is 
clear  and  distinct,  and  it  is  Reality  which  lies  dimly  in  the 
background  with  its  details  hardly  to  be  distinguished  in 
consciousness.  What  leaps  into  conscious  attention  is  a  mass 
of  presuppositions  about  Reality  rather  than  the  intuitions 
of  Reality  itself.  It  is  here  that  the  liability  to  error  arises. 
The  deliverances  of  clear  and  distinct  consciousness  require 
criticism  by  reference  to  elements  in  experience  which  are 
neither  clear  nor  distinct.  On  the  contrary,  they  are  dim, 
massive,  and  important.  These  dim  elements  provide  for  art 
that  final  background  of  tone  apart  from  which  its  effects 
fade.  The  type  of  Truth  which  human  art  seeks  lies  in  the 
eliciting  of  this  background  to  haunt  the  object  presented  for 
clear  consciousness. 

Section  VI.  The  merit  of  Art  in  its  service  to  civilization 
lies  in  its  artificiality  and  its  finiteness.  It  exhibits  for  con¬ 
sciousness  a  finite  fragment  of  human  effort  achieving  its 
own  perfection  within  its  own  limits.  Thus  the  mere  toil  for 
the  slavish  purpose  of  prolonging  life  for  more  toil  or  for 
mere  bodily  gratification,  is  transformed  into  the  conscious 
realization  of  a  self-contained  end,  timeless  within  time. 
The  work  of  Art  is  a  fragment  of  nature  with  the  mark  on 
it  of  a  finite  creative  effort,  so  that  it  stands  alone,  an  in¬ 
dividual  thing  detailed  from  the  vague  infinity  of  its  back¬ 
ground.  Thus  Art  heightens  the  sense  of  humanity.  It  gives 
an  elation  of  feeling  which  is  supernatural.  A  sunset  is 
glorious,  but  it  dwarfs  humanity  and  belongs  to  the  general 
flow  of  nature.  A  million  sunsets  will  not  spur  on  men 
towards  civilization.  It  requires  Art  to  evoke  into  conscious¬ 
ness  the  finite  perfections  which  lie  ready  for  human 
achievement. 

Consciousness  itself  is  the  product  of  art  in  its  lowliest 


TRUTH  AND  BEAUTY 


349 


form.  For  it  results  from  the  influx  of  ideality  into  its  contrast 
with  reality,  with  the  purpose  of  reshaping  the  latter  into  a 
finite,  select  appearance.  But  consciousness  having  emerged 
from  Art  at  once  produces  the  new  specialized  art  of  the 
conscious  animals — in  particular  human  art.  In  a  sense  art 
is  a  morbid  overgrowth  of  functions  which  lie  deep  in  nature. 
It  is  the  essence  of  art  to  be  artificial.  But  it  is  its  perfection 
to  return  to  nature,  remaining  art.  In  short  art  is  the  educa¬ 
tion  of  nature.  Thus,  in  its  broadest  sense,  art  is  civilization. 
For  civilization  is  nothing  other  than  the  unremitting  aim  at 
the  major  perfections  of  harmony. 

Section  VII.  The  human  body  is  an  instrument  for  the 
production  of  art  in  the  life  of  the  human  soul.  It  concen¬ 
trates  upon  those  elements  in  human  experience  selected  for 
conscious  perception  intensities  of  subjective  form  derived 
from  components  dismissed  into  shadow.  It  thereby  en¬ 
hances  the  value  of  that  appearance  which  is  the  subject- 
matter  for  art.  In  this  way  the  work  of  art  is  a  message 
from  the  Unseen.  It  unlooses  depths  of  feeling  from  behind 
the  frontier  where  precision  of  consciousness  fails.  The 
starting-point  for  the  highly  developed  human  art  is  thus  to 
be  sought  amid  the  cravings  generated  by  the  physiological 
functionings  of  the  body.  The  origin  of  art  lies  in  the  craving 
for  re-enaction.  In  some  mode  of  repetition  we  need  by 
our  personal  actions,  or  perceptions,  to  dramatize  the  past 
and  the  future,  so  as  to  re-live  the  emotional  life  of  our¬ 
selves,  and  of  our  ancestors.  There  is  a  biological  law — 
which  however  must  not  be  pressed  too  far — that  in  some 
vague  sense  the  embryo  in  the  womb  reproduces  in  its  life- 
history  features  of  ancestors  in  remote  geologic  epochs.  Thus 
art  has  its  origin  in  ceremonial 1  evolutions  from  which 
issue  play,  religious  ritual,  tribal  ceremonial,  dance,  pictures 

1  Cf.  Religion  in  the  Making ,  Chapter  i,  Section  III. 


35° 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


on  caves,  poetic  literature,  prose,  music.  In  this  list  each 
member  in  its  simpler  forms  enshrines  some  effort  to  reproduce 
a  vivid  experience  flashed  out  among  the  necessities  of  daily 
life.  But  the  secret  of  art  lies  in  its  freedom.  The  emotion  and 
some  elements  of  the  experience  itself  are  lived  again  divorced 
from  their  necessity.  The  strain  is  over,  but  the  joy  of  intense 
feeling  remains.  Originally  the  intensity  arose  from  some 
dire  necessity ;  but  in  art  it  has  outlived  the  compulsion  which 
was  its  origin.  If  Odysseus  among  the  shades  could  hear 
Homer  chanting  his  Odyssey,  he  then  re-enacted  with  free 
enjoyment  the  perils  of  his  wanderings. 

The  arts  of  civilization  now  spring  from  many  origins, 
physical  and  purely  imaginative.  But  they  are  all  sublimations, 
and  sublimations  of  sublimations,  of  the  simple  craving  to 
enjoy  freely  the  vividness  of  life  which  first  arises  in  moments 
of  necessity.  With  a  slight  shift  of  the  focus  of  our  attention, 
Art  can  be  described  as  a  psychopathic  reaction  of  the  race 
to  the  stresses  of  its  existence.  From  that  point  of  view, 
Odysseus  as  he  listened  to  Homer  was  evading  the  Furies. 
This  psychopathic  function  of  Art  is  lost  when  the  conviction 
of  Truth  is  absent.  It  is  here  that  the  concept  of  Art  as  the 
pursuit  of  Beauty  is  shallow.  Art  has  a  curative  function 
in  human  experience  when  it  reveals  as  in  a  flash  intimate, 
absolute  Truth  regarding  the  Nature  of  Things.  This  service 
of  Art  is  even  hindered  by  trivial  truths  of  detail.  Such  petty 
conformations  place  in  the  foreground  the  superficialities  of 
sense-experience.  Art  performing  this  great  service  belongs 
to  the  essence  of  civilization.  By  the  growth  of  such  Art 
the  adventure  of  mentality  gains  upon  the  physical  basis  of 
existence. 

Science  and  Art  are  the  consciously  determined  pursuit 
of  Truth  and  of  Beauty.  In  them  the  finite  conscious¬ 
ness  of  mankind  is  appropriating  as  its  own  the  infinite 


TRUTH  AND  BEAUTY 


351 


fecundity  of  nature.  In  this  movement  of  the  human  spirit 
types  of  institutions  and  types  of  professions  are  evolved. 
Churches  and  Rituals,  Monasteries  with  their  dedicated  lives, 
Universities  with  their  search  for  knowledge,  Medicine,  Law, 
methods  of  Trade — they  all  represent  that  aim  at  civilization, 
whereby  the  conscious  experience  of  mankind  preserves  for 
its  use  the  sources  of  Harmony. 


CHAPTER  XIX 


ADVENTURE 

Section  I.  The  notion  of  civilization  is  very  baffling.  We 
all  know  what  it  means.  It  suggests  a  certain  ideal  for  life 
on  this  earth,  and  this  ideal  concerns  both  the  individual 
human  being  and  also  societies  of  men.  A  man  can  be 
civilized,  and  a  whole  society  can  be  civilized;  although  the 
senses  are  somewhat  different  in  the  two  cases. 

Yet  civilization  is  one  of  those  general  notions  that  are 
very  difficult  to  define.  We  pronounce  upon  particular  in¬ 
stances.  We  can  say  this  is  civilized,  or  that  is  savage.  Yet 
somehow  the  general  notion  is  elusive.  Thus  we  proceed 
by  examples.  During  the  last  six  centuries,  the  culture  of 
Europe  has  guided  itself  by  example.  The  Greeks  and 
Romans  at  their  best  period  have  been  taken  as  the  standard 
of  civilization.  We  have  aimed  at  reproducing  the  excellencies 
of  these  societies — preferably  the  society  of  Athens  in  its 
prime. 

These  standards  have  served  the  Western  races  well.  But 
the  procedure  has  its  disadvantages.  It  is  backward  looking, 
and  it  is  limited  to  one  type  of  social  excellence.  To-day  the 
world  is  passing  into  a  new  stage  of  its  existence.  New 
knowledge,  and  new  technologies  have  altered  the  propor¬ 
tions  of  things.  The  particular  example  of  an  ancient  society 
sets  too  static  an  ideal,  and  neglects  the  whole  range  of  op¬ 
portunity.  It  is  really  not  sufficient  to  direct  attention  to  the 
best  that  has  been  said  and  done  in  the  ancient  world.  The 


ADVENTURE  353 

result  is  static,  repressive,  and  promotes  a  decadent  habit  of 
mind. 

Also  I  suggest  that  the  Greeks  themselves  were  not  back¬ 
ward  looking,  or  static.  Compared  to  their  neighbours,  they 
were  singularly  unhistorical.  They  were  speculative,  ad¬ 
venturous,  eager  for  novelty.  The  most  un-Greek  thing  that 
we  can  do  is  to  copy  the  Greeks.  For  emphatically  they  were 
not  copyists. 

Another  danger  in  forming  our  notions  of  civilization  is 
to  concentrate  exclusively  upon  passive,  critical  qualities 
concerned  chiefly  with  the  Fine  Arts.  Such  qualities  are  an 
important  element  in  a  civilized  society.  But  civilization  is 
more  than  the  appreciation  of  the  Fine  Arts.  We  must  not  tie 
it  down  to  museums  and  studios. 

I  put  forward  as  a  general  definition  of  civilization,  that 
a  civilized  society  is  exhibiting  the  five  qualities  of  Truth, 
Beauty,  Adventure,  Art,  Peace. 

Here  by  the  last  quality  of  Peace  I  am  not  referring  to 
political  relations.  I  mean  a  quality  of  mind  steady  in  its 
reliance  that  fine  action  is  treasured  in  the  nature  of  things. 

It  is  impossible  in  the  short  space  of  five  chapters  to  discuss 
all  the  various  questions  which  are  suggested  by  these  notions. 
In  this  chapter  I  will  concentrate  upon  a  few  points  in 
philosophy  and  history  which  throw  light  upon  the  various 
functions  of  these  elements  in  civilization. 

Section  II.  From  the  three  preceding  chapters  and  with 
this  short  explanation  as  to  Peace,  let  us  assume  for  the 
moment  that  Truth,  Beauty,  and  Peace  are  sufficiently  obvious 
as  to  their  meanings.  We  will  now  concentrate  upon  Ad¬ 
venture  and  Art  as  necessary  elements  in  civilization.  It  is 
in  respect  to  these  two  factors  that  prevalent  concepts  of 
civilization  are  weakest. 

The  foundation  of  all  understanding  of  sociological 

23 


wi 


354 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


theory — that  is  to  say,  of  all  understanding  of  human  life — 
is  that  no  static  maintenance  of  perfection  is  possible.  This 
axiom  is  rooted  in  the  nature  of  things.  Advance  or  De¬ 
cadence  are  the  only  choices  offered  to  mankind.  The  pure 
conservative  is  fighting  against  the  essence  of  the  Universe. 
This  doctrine  requires  justification.  It  is  implicitly  denied  in 
the  learned  tradition  derived  from  ancient  thought. 

The  doctrine  is  founded  upon  three  metaphysical  principles. 
One  principle  is  that  the  very  essence  of  real  actuality — 
that  is,  of  the  completely  real — is  process.  Thus  each  actual 
thing  is  only  to  be  understood  in  terms  of  its  becoming  and 
perishing.  There  is  no  halt  in  which  the  actuality  is  just 
its  static  self,  accidentally  played  upon  by  qualifications 
derived  from  the  shift  of  circumstances.  The  converse  is  the 
truth. 

The  static  notion,  here  rejected,  is  derived  by  two  different 
paths  from  ancient  thought.  Plato  in  the  earlier  period  of 
his  thought,  deceived  by  the  beauty  of  mathematics  intelli¬ 
gible  in  unchanging  perfection,  conceived  of  a  super-world 
of  ideas,  for  ever  perfect  and  for  ever  interwoven.  In  his 
latest  phase  he  sometimes  repudiates  the  notion,  though  he 
never  consistently  banishes  it  from  his  thought.  His  later 
Dialogues  circle  round  seven  notions,  namely — The  Ideas, 
The  Physical  Elements,  The  Psyche,  The  Eros,  The  Harmony, 
The  Mathematical  Relations,  The  Receptacle.  I  mention 
them  because  I  hold  that  all  philosophy  is  in  fact  an  en¬ 
deavour  to  obtain  a  coherent  system  out  of  some  modification 
of  these  notions.  They  largely  explain  themselves  as  to 
their  general  meanings,  apart  from  any  precise  co-ordination. 
The  Psyche  is,  of  course,  the  Soul;  the  Eros  is  the  urge 
towards  the  realization  of  ideal  perfection.  The  Receptacle 
is  expressly  stated  by  Plato  to  be  a  difficult  notion ;  so  that  we 
may  safely  put  aside  easy  explanations  of  it.  I  explain  it  to 


ADVENTURE 


355 


myself  as  the  conception  of  the  essential  unity  of  the  Universe 
conceived  as  an  actuality,  and  yet  in  abstraction  from  the 
‘life  and  motion’  in  which  all  actualities  must  partake.  If  we 
omit  the  Psyche  and  the  Eros,  we  should  obtain  a  static  world. 
The  ‘life  and  motion’,  which  are  essentials  in  Plato’s  later 
thought,  are  derived  from  the  operation  of  these  two  factors. 
But  Plato  left  no  system  of  metaphysics. 

Thus  in  the  modern  development  of  these  seven  meta¬ 
physical  notions,  we  should  start  from  the  notion  of  actuality 
as  in  its  essence  a  process.  This  process  involves  a  physical 
side  which  is  the  perishing  of  the  past  as  it  transforms  itself 
into  a  new  creation.  It  also  involves  a  mental  side  which  is 
the  Soul  entertaining  ideas. 

The  Souf  thereby  by  synthesis  creates  a  new  fact  which  is 
the  Appearance  woven  out  of  the  old  and  the  new — a  com¬ 
pound  of  reception  and  anticipation,  which  in  its  turn  passes 
into  the  future.  The  final  synthesis  of  these  three  complexes 
is  the  end  to  which  its  indwelling  Eros  urges  the  soul.  Its 
good  resides  in  the  realization  of  a  strength  of  many  feelings 
fortifying  each  other  as  they  meet  in  the  novel  unity.  Its  evil 
lies  in  the  clash  of  vivid  feelings,  denying  to  each  other  their 
proper  expansion.  Its  triviality  lies  in  the  anaesthesia  by 
which  evil  is  avoided.  In  this  way  through  sheer  omission, 
fewer,  fainter  feelings  constitute  the  final  Appearance.  Evil 
is  the  half-way  house  between  perfection  and  triviality.  It  is 
the  violence  of  strength  against  strength. 

Aristotle  introduced  the  static  fallacy  by  another  concept 
which  has  infected  all  subsequent  philosophy.  He  conceived 
of  primary  substances  as  the  static  foundations  which  re¬ 
ceived  the  impress  of  qualification.  In  the  case  of  human 
experience,  a  modern  version  of  the  same  notion  is  Locke’s 
metaphor  of  the  mind  as  an  ‘empty  cabinet’  receiving  the 
impress  of  ideas.  Thus  for  Locke  the  reality  does  not  reside 

23-2 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


356 

n 

in  the  process  but  in  the  static  recipient  of  process.  According 
to  the  versions  of  Aristotle  and  Locke,  one  primary  substance 
cannot  be  a  component  in  the  nature  of  another  primary 
substance.  Thus  the  interconnections  of  primary  substances 
must  be  devoid  of  the  substantial  reality  of  the  primary 
substances  themselves.  With  this  doctrine,  the  conjunction  of 
actualities  has,  in  various  shapes,  been  a  problem  throughout 
modern  philosophy — both  for  metaphysics  and  for  epistemo¬ 
logy.  The  taint  of  Aristotelian  Logic  has  thrown  the  whole 
emphasis  of  metaphysical  thought  upon  substantives  and 
adjectives,  to  the  neglect  of  prepositions  and  conjunctions. 
This  Aristotelian  doctrine  is  in  this  book  summarily  denied. 
The  process  is  itself  the  actuality,  and  requires  no  antecedent 
static  cabinet.  Also  the  processes  of  the  past,  in  their  perishing, 
are  themselves  energizing  as  the  complex  origin  of  each 
novel  occasion.  The  past  is  the  reality  at  the  base  of  each 
new  actuality.  The  process  is  its  absorption  into  a  new  unity 
with  ideals  and  with  anticipation,  by  the  operation  of  the 
creative  Eros. 

Section  III.  I  now  pass  to  the  second  metaphysical  prin¬ 
ciple.  It  is  the  doctrine  that  every  occasion  of  actuality  is 
in  its  own  nature  finite.  There  is  no  totality  which  is  the 
harmony  of  all  perfections.  Whatever  is  realized  in  any  one 
occasion  of  experience  necessarily  excludes  the  unbounded 
welter  of  contrary  possibilities.  There  are  always  ‘others’, 
which  might  have  been  and  are  not.  This  finiteness  is  not 
the  result  of  evil,  or  of  imperfection.  It  results  from  the  fact 
that  there  are  possibilities  of  harmony  which  either  produce 
evil  in  joint  realization,  or  are  incapable  of  such  conjunction. 
This  doctrine  is  a  commonplace  in  the  fine  arts.  It  also  is — or 
should  be — a  commonplace  of  political  philosophy.  History 
can  only  be  understood  by  seeing  it  as  the  theatre  of  diverse 
groups  of  idealists  respectively  urging  ideals  incompatible 


ADVENTURE 


357 

for  conjoint  realization.  You  cannot  form  any  historical 
judgment  of  right  or  wrong  by  considering  each  group 
separately.  The  evil  lies  in  the  attempted  conjunction. 

This  principle  of  intrinsic  incompatibility  has  an  im¬ 
portant  bearing  upon  our  conception  of  the  nature  of  God. 
The  concept  of  impossibility  such  that  God  himself  cannot 
surmount  it,  has  been  for  centuries  quite  familiar  to  theo¬ 
logians.  Indeed,  apart  from  it  there  would  be  difficulty  in 
conceiving  any  determinate  divine  nature.  But  curiously 
enough,  so  far  as  I  know,  this  notion  of  incompatibility  has 
never  been  applied  to  ideals  in  the  Divine  realization.  We 
must  conceive  the  Divine  Eros  as  the  active  entertainment 
of  all  ideals,  with  the  urge  to  their  finite  realization,  each  in 
its  due  season.  Thus  a  process  must  be  inherent  in  God’s 
nature,  whereby  his  infinity  is  acquiring  realization. 

It  is  unnecessary  to  pursue  theology  further.  But  the  point 
stands  out  that  the  conceptual  entertainment  of  incompati¬ 
bilities  is  possible,  and  so  is  their  conceptual  comparison. 
Also  there  is  the  synthesis  of  conceptual  entertainment  with 
physical  realization.  The  idea  conceptually  entertained  may 
be  identical  with  the  idea  exemplified  in  the  physical  fact; 
or  it  may  be  different,  compatible  or  incompatible.  This 
synthesis  of  the  ideal  with  the  real  is  just  what  happens  in 
each  finite  occasion. 

Thus  in  every  civilization  at  its  culmination  we  should 
find  a  large  measure  of  realization  of  a  certain  type  of 
perfection.  This  type  will  be  complex  and  will  admit  of 
variation  of  detail,  this  way  or  that.  The  culmination  can 
maintain  itself  at  its  height  so  long  as  fresh  experimentation 
within  the  type  is  possible.  But  when  these  minor  variations 
are  exhausted,  one  of  two  things  must  happen.  Perhaps  the 
society  in  question  lacks  imaginative  force.  Staleness  then 
sets  in.  Repetition  produces  a  gradual  lowering  of  vivid 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


358 

appreciation.  Convention  dominates.  A  learned  orthodoxy 
suppresses  adventure. 

The  last  flicker  of  originality  is  exhibited  by  the  survival  of 
satire.  Satire  does  not  necessarily  imply  a  decadent  society, 
though  it  flourishes  upon  the  outworn  features  in  the  social 
system.  It  was  characteristic  that  at  the  close  of  the  silver 
age  of  Roman  culture,  shortly  after  the  deaths  of  the  younger 
Pliny  and  of  Tacitus,  the  satirist  Lucian  was  born.  Again,  at 
the  close  of  the  silver  age  of  the  Renaissance  culture,  during 
the  eighteenth  century,  Voltaire  and  Edward  Gibbon  per¬ 
fected  satire  in  their  various  styles.  Satire  was  natural  to 
the  age  as  it  neared  the  American  Revolution,  the  French 
Revolution,  and  the  Industrial  Revolution.  Again  a  new 
epoch  arose,  the  first  phase  of  modern  industrialism.  It 
flourished  with  consistent  growth  for  a  hundred  and  fifty 
years.  Its  central  period  has  been  termed  the  Victorian 
Epoch.  Within  that  period,  the  European  races  created  new 
methods  of  industry;  they  peopled  North  America;  they 
developed  trade  with  the  old  civilizations  of  Asia;  they  gave 
new  directions  to  literature  and  to  art;  they  re-fashioned 
their  forms  of  government.  The  nineteenth  century  was  an 
epoch  of  civilized  advance — humanitarian,  scientific,  indus¬ 
trial,  literary,  political.  But  at  length  it  wore  itself  out.  The 
crash  of  the  Great  War  marked  its  end,  and  marked  the 
decisive  turn  of  human  life  into  some  new  direction  as  yet 
not  fully  understood.  But  the  close  of  the  epoch  has  been 
marked  by  the  rise  of  satire— Lytton  Strachey  in  England, 
Sinclair  Lewis  in  the  United  States  of  America.  Satire  is  the 
last  flicker  of  originality  in  a  passing  epoch  as  it  faces  the 
onroad  of  staleness  and  boredom.  Freshness  has  gone:  bitter¬ 
ness  remains.  The  prolongation  of  outworn  forms  of  life 
means  a  slow  decadence  in  which  there  is  repetition  without 
any  fruit  in  the  reaping  of  value.  There  may  be  high  survival 


ADVENTURE 


359 


power.  For  decadence,  undisturbed  by  originality  or  by 
external  forces,  is  a  slow  process.  But  the  values  of  life  are 
slowly  ebbing.  There  remains  the  show  of  civilization,  without 
any  of  its  realities. 

There  is  an  alternative  to  this  slow  decline.  A  race  may 
exhaust  a  form  of  civilization  without  having  exhausted  its 
own  creative  springs  of  originality.  In  that  case,  a  quick 
period  of  transition  may  set  it,  which  may  or  may  not  be 
accompanied  by  dislocations  involving  widespread  unhappi¬ 
ness.  Such  periods  are  Europe  at  the  close  of  the  Middle 
Ages,  Europe  during  the  comparatively  long  Reformation 
Period,  Europe  at  the  end  of  the  eighteenth  century.  Also 
let  us  hope  that  our  present  epoch  is  to  be  viewed  as  a  period 
of  change  to  a  new  direction  of  civilization,  involving  in  its 
dislocations  a  minimum  of  human  misery.  And  yet  surely 
the  misery  of  the  Great  War  was  sufficient  for  any  change 
of  epoch. 

These  quick  transitions  to  new  types  of  civilization  are 
only  possible  when  thought  has  run  ahead  of  realization. 
The  vigour  of  the  race  has  then  pushed  forward  into  the 
adventure  of  imagination,  so  as  to  anticipate  the  physical 
adventures  of  exploration.  The  world  dreams  of  things  to 
come,  and  then  in  due  season  arouses  itself  to  their  realiza¬ 
tion.  Indeed  all  physical  adventure  which  is  entered  upon 
of  set  purpose  involves  an  adventure  of  thought  regarding 
things  as  yet  unrealized.  Before  Columbus  set  sail  for  America, 
he  had  dreamt  of  the  Far  East,  and  of  the  round  world,  and 
of  the  trackless  ocean.  Adventure  rarely  reaches  its  pre¬ 
determined  end.  Columbus  never  reached  China.  But  he 
discovered  America. 

Sometimes  adventure  is  acting  within  limits.  It  can  then 
calculate  its  end,  and  reach  it.  Such  adventures  are  the 
ripples  of  change  within  one  type  of  civilization,  by  which 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


36° 

an  epoch  of  given  type  preserves  its  freshness.  But,  given  the 
vigour  of  adventure,  sooner  or  later  the  leap  of  imagination 
reaches  beyond  the  safe  limits  of  the  epoch,  and  beyond  the 
safe  limits  of  learned  rules  of  taste.  It  then  produces  the 
dislocations  and  confusions  marking  the  advent  of  new  ideals 
for  civilized  effort. 

A  race  preserves  its  vigour  so  long  as  it  harbours  a  real 
contrast  between  what  has  been  and  what  may  be;  and  so 
long  as  it  is  nerved  by  the  vigour  to  adventure  beyond  the 
safeties  of  the  past.  Without  adventure  civilization  is  in  full 
decay. 

It  is  for  this  reason  that  the  definition  of  culture  as  the 
knowledge  of  the  best  that  has  been  said  and  done,  is  so 
dangerous  by  reason  of  its  omission.  It  omits  the  great  fact 
that  in  their  day  the  great  achievements  of  the  past  were 
the  adventures  of  the  past.  Only  the  adventurous  can  un¬ 
derstand  the  greatness  of  the  past.  In  its  day,  the  literature 
of  the  past  was  an  adventure.  Aesychlus,  Sophocles,  Euripides 
were  adventurers  in  the  world  of  thought.  To  read  their  plays 
without  any  sense  of  new  ways  of  understanding  the  world 
and  of  savouring  its  emotions  is  to  miss  the  vividness  which 
constitutes  their  whole  value.  But  adventures  are  to  the 
adventurous.  Thus  a  passive  knowledge  of  the  past  loses  the 
whole  value  of  its  message.  A  living  civilization  requires 
learning;  but  it  lies  beyond  it. 

Section  IV.  The  third  metaphysical  principle  may  be 
termed  the  principle  of  Individuality.  It  concerns  the  doc¬ 
trine  of  Harmony;  and  its  omission  is,  I  think,  the  greatest 
gap  in  traditional  discussions  of  that  doctrine.  Indeed,  in 
recent  times,  with  the  predominance  of  the  sensationalist 
doctrine  of  perception,  modern  views  of  the  Harmony  cha¬ 
racterizing  a  great  experience  have  reached  their  lowest  point. 
This  sensationalist  doctrine  concentrates  attention  upon  a 


ADVENTURE 


361 

mere  qualitative  harmony  within  an  experience  compara¬ 
tively  barren  of  objects  of  high  significance.  The  complex 
to  which  the  term  Harmony  is  applicable  is  conceived  as  a 
mere  spatio-temporal  pattern  of  sensa.  The  Harmony  to  be 
derived  from  such  a  complex  belongs  to  a  debased  type — 
tame,  vague,  deficient  in  outline  and  intention.  At  the  best, 
it  can  only  excite  by  a  sense  of  strangeness.  At  the  worst,  it 
fades  into  insignificance.  It  lacks  any  strong,  exciting  element 
capable  of  stirring  the  depths  of  feeling.  Sense-perception, 
despite  its  prominence  in  consciousness,  belongs  to  the  super¬ 
ficialities  of  experience.  It  is  here  that  the  Aristotelian 
doctrine  of  primary  substances  has  done  some  of  its  worst 
harm.  For  according  to  this  doctrine  no  individual  primary 
substance  can  enter  into  the  complex  of  objects  observed  in 
any  occasion  of  experience.  The  qualifications  of  the  soul  are 
thus  confined  to  universals.  According  to  the  metaphysical 
system  that  I  suggest  to  you,  this  Aristotelian  doctrine  is  a 
complete  mistake.  The  individual,  real  facts  of  the  past  lie 
at  the  base  of  our  immediate  experience  in  the  present.  They 
are  the  reality  from  which  the  occasion  springs,  the  reality 
from  which  it  derives  its  source  of  emotion,  from  which  it 
inherits  its  purposes,  to  which  it  directs  its  passions.  At  the 
base  of  experience  there  is  a  welter  of  feeling,  derived  from 
individual  realities  or  directed  towards  them.  Thus  for 
strength  of  experience  we  require  to  discriminate  the  com¬ 
ponent  factors,  each  as  an  individual  ‘It'  with  its  own 
significance. 

Our  lives  are  dominated  by  enduring  things,  each  ex¬ 
perienced  as  a  unity  of  many  occasions  bound  together  by 
the  force  of  inheritance.  Each  such  individual  endurance 
collects  into  its  unity  the  shifting  qualities  of  its  many 
occasions.  Perhaps  it  is  the  thing  we  love,  or  perhaps  it  is 
the  thing  we  hate.  There  is  a  bare  ‘It' — a  real  fact  of  the  past, 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


362 

stretching  into  the  present,  which  concentrates  upon  itself 
the  wealth  of  emotion  derived  from  its  many  occasions. 
Such  enduring  individualities,  as  factors  in  experience,  con¬ 
trol  a  wealth  of  feeling,  an  amplitude  of  purpose,  and  a 
regulative  power  to  subdue  into  background  the  residue  of 
things  belonging  to  the  immensity  of  the  past.  Surely  this 
is  what  Descartes  must  have  meant  by  the  realitas  objectiva 
which,  according  to  his  doctrine,  clings  more  or  less  to  our 
perceptions. 

A  complex  experience  which  includes  conscious  attention 
to  such  enduring  individualities  at  once  unlooses  a  wealth 
of  feeling  far  beyond  anything  derived  from  patterns  of 
sensa,  merely  as  such.  The  great  Harmony  is  the  harmony 
of  enduring  individualities,  connected  in  the  unity  of  a  back- 
ground.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  the  notion  of  freedom 
haunts  the  higher  civilizations.  For  freedom,  in  any  one  of 
its  many  senses,  is  the  claim  for  vigorous  self-assertion. 

In  considering  the  process  which  constitutes  the  existence 
of  an  occasion  of  experience,  the  perception  of  the  enduring 
individuals  must  belong  to  the  final  Appearance  wherein 
the  occasion  terminates.  For  in  the  primary  phase,  the  past 
is  initiating  the  process  in  virtue  of  the  energizing  of  its 
diverse  individual  occasions.  This  is  the  Reality  from  which 
the  new  occasion  springs.  The  process  is  urged  onward  by 
operation  of  the  mental  pole  providing  conceptual  subject- 
matter  for  synthesis  with  the  Reality.  There  finally  emerges 
the  Appearance,  which  is  the  transformed  Reality  after 
synthesis  with  the  conceptual  valuations.  The  Appearance 
is  a  simplification  by  a  process  of  emphasis  and  combina¬ 
tion.  Thus  the  enduring  individuals,  with  their  wealth  of 
emotional  significance,  appear  in  the  foreground.  In  the 
background  there  lies  a  mass  of  undistinguished  occasions 
providing  the  environment  with  its  vague  emotional  tone.  In 


ADVENTURE 


363 

a  general  sense,  the  Appearance  is  a  work  of  Art,  elicited 
from  the  primary  Reality.  In  so  far  as  the  Appearance  em¬ 
phasizes  connections  and  qualities  of  connections  which  in 
fact  reside  in  the  Reality,  then  the  Appearance  is  truthful  in 
its  relation  to  Reality.  But  the  Appearance  may  have  effected 
connections,  and  have  introduced  qualities,  which  have  no 
counterpart  in  Reality.  In  that  case,  the  occasion  of  ex¬ 
perience  contains  in  itself  a  falsehood,  namely  the  discon¬ 
nection  of  its  Appearance  from  its  Reality.  In  any  case,  the 
Appearance  is  a  simplification  of  Reality,  reducing  it  to  a 
foreground  of  enduring  individuals  and  to  a  background  of 
undiscriminated  occasions.  Sense-perception  belongs  to  Ap¬ 
pearance.  It  is  interpreted  as  indicating  enduring  individuals, 
truthfully  or  otherwise. 

Thus,  the  basis  of  a  strong,  penetrating  experience  of 
Harmony  is  an  Appearance  with  a  foreground  of  enduring 
individuals  carrying  with  them  a  force  of  subjective  tone, 
and  with  a  background  providing  the  requisite  connection. 
Undoubtedly,  the  Harmony  is  finally  a  Harmony  of  qualitative 
feelings.  But  the  introduction  of  the  enduring  individuals 
evokes  from  the  Reality  a  force  of  already  harmonized 
feelings  which  no  surface  show  of  sensa  can  produce.  It  is 
not  a  question  of  intellectual  interpretation.  There  is  a  real 
conflation  of  fundamental  feeling. 

Thus,  civilization  in  its  aim  at  fineness  of  feeling  should  so 
arrange  its  social  relations,  and  the  relations  of  its  members 
to  their  natural  environment,  as  to  evoke  into  the  experiences 
of  its  members  Appearances  dominated  by  the  harmonies 
of  forceful  enduring  things.  In  other  words,  Art  should 
aim  at  the  production  of  individuality  in  the  component 
details  of  its  compositions.  It  cannot  trust  to  a  mere  com¬ 
position  of  qualities.  In  that  case,  it  becomes  tame  and  vapid. 
It  must  create,  so  that  in  the  experience  of  the  beholder 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


364 

there  appear  Individuals  as  it  were  immortal  by  their  appeal 
to  the  deep  recesses  of  feeling.  For  this  reason,  it  is  hardly 
a  paradox  to  say,  that  a  great  civilization  interfused  with  Art 
presents  the  world  to  its  members  clothed  with  the  Appearance 
of  immortality.  The  Individuals  it  presents  for  Appearance 
belong  equally  to  all  time. 

This  is  exactly  what  we  find  in  great  Art.  The  very  details 
of  its  compositions  live  supremely  in  their  own  right.  They 
make  their  own  claim  to  individuality,  and  yet  contribute  to 
the  whole.  Each  such  detail  receives  an  access  of  grandeur 
from  the  whole,  and  yet  manifests  an  individuality  claiming 
attention  in  its  own  right. 

As  an  example,  the  sculpture  and  the  tracery  in  a  Gothic 
cathedral — Chartres  for  instance — subserve  the  harmony. 
They  lead  the  eye  upward  to  the  vaulting  above,  and  they 
lead  the  eye  onward  horizontally  to  the  supreme  symbolism 
of  the  altar.  They  claim  attention  by  their  beauty  of  detail. 
Yet  they  shun  attention  by  guiding  the  eye  to  grasp  the 
significance  of  the  whole.  Yet  the  sculpture  and  the  tracery 
could  not  perform  this  service  apart  from  their  supreme  in¬ 
dividuality,  evoking  a  wealth  of  feeling  in  their  own  right. 
Each  detail  claims  a  permanent  existence  for  its  own  sake, 
and  then  surrenders  it  for  the  sake  of  the  whole  composition. 

Again,  the  value  of  discord  arises  from  this  importance  of 
the  forceful  individuality  of  the  details.  The  discord  enhances 
the  whole,  when  it  serves  to  substantiate  the  individuality 
of  the  parts.  It  brings  into  emphatic  feeling  their  claim  to 
existence  in  their  own  right.  It  rescues  the  whole  from  the 
tameness  of  a  merely  qualitative  harmony. 

Also  the  importance  of  truth  now  emerges.  Truth  of  belief 
is  important,  both  in  itself  and  in  its  consequences.  But  above 
all,  there  emerges  the  importance  of  the  truthful  relation  of 
Appearance  to  Reality.  A  grave  defect  in  truth  limits  the 


ADVENTURE 


365 

extent  to  which  any  force  of  feeling  can  be  summoned 
from  the  recesses  of  Reality.  The  falsehood  thus  lacks  the 
magic  by  which  a  beauty  beyond  the  power  of  speech  to 
express  can  be  called  into  being,  as  if  by  the  wand  of  an 
enchanter.  It  is  for  these  reasons  that  the  civilization  of  a 
society  requires  the  virtues  of  Truth,  Beauty,  Adventure  and 
Art. 


CHAPTER  XX 


PEACE 

Section  I.  Our  discussions  have  concerned  themselves 
with  specializations  in  History,  of  seven  Platonic  generalities, 
namely,  The  Ideas,  The  Physical  Elements,  The  Psyche, 
The  Eros,  The  Harmony,  The  Mathematical  Relations,  The 
Receptacle.  The  historical  references  have  been  selected  and 
grouped  with  the  purpose  of  illustrating  the  energizing  of 
specializations  of  these  seven  general  notions  among  the 
peoples  of  Western  Europe,  driving  them  towards  their 
civilization. 

Finally,  in  this  fourth  and  last  Part  of  the  book,  those 
essential  qualities,  whose  joint  realization  in  social  life  con¬ 
stitutes  civilization,  are  being  considered.  Four  such  qualities 
have,  so  far,  been  examined:  Truth,  Beauty,  Adventure, 
Art. 

Section  II.  Something  is  still  lacking.  It  is  difficult  to 
state  it  in  terms  that  are  wide  enough.  Also,  where  clearly 
distinguished  and  exposed  in  all  its  bearings,  it  assumes  an 
air  of  exaggeration.  Habitually  it  is  lurking  on  the  edge  of 
consciousness,  a  modifying  agency.  It  clings  to  our  notion  of 
the  Platonic  ‘Harmony’,  as  a  sort  of  atmosphere.  It  is  some¬ 
what  at  variance  with  the  notion  of  the  ‘Eros’.  Also  the 
Platonic  ‘  Ideas  ’  and  ‘  Mathematical  Relations  ’  seem  to  kill  it 
by  their  absence  of  ‘life  and  motion’.  Apart  from  it,  the  pur¬ 
suit  of ‘Truth,  Beauty,  Adventure,  Art’  can  be  ruthless,  hard, 
cruel;  and  thus,  as  the  history  of  the  Italian  Renaissance 


PEACE 


367 

illustrates,  lacking  in  some  essential  quality  of  civilization. 
The  notions  of  ‘tenderness5  and  of  ‘love5  are  too  narrow, 
important  though  they  be.  We  require  the  concept  of  some 
more  general  quality,  from  which  ‘tenderness5  emerges  as 
a  specialization.  We  are  in  a  way  seeking  for  the  notion  of 
a  Harmony  of  Harmonies,  which  shall  bind  together  the 
other  four  qualities,  so  as  to  exclude  from  our  notion  of 
civilization  the  restless  egotism  with  which  they  have  often 
in  fact  been  pursued.  ‘Impersonality5  is  too  dead  a  notion, 
and  ‘Tenderness5  too  narrow.  I  choose  the  term  ‘Peace5  for 
that  Harmony  of  Harmonies  which  calms  destructive  tur¬ 
bulence  and  completes  civilization.  Thus  a  society  is  to 
be  termed  civilized  whose  members  participate  in  the  five 
qualities — Truth,  Beauty,  Adventure,  Art,  Peace. 

Section  III.  The  Peace  that  is  here  meant  is  not  the  nega¬ 
tive  conception  of  anaesthesia.  It  is  a  positive  feeling  which 
crowns  the  ‘life  and  motion5  of  the  soul.  It  is  hard  to  define 
and  difficult  to  speak  of.  It  is  not  a  hope  for  the  future, 
nor  is  it  an  interest  in  present  details.  It  is  a  broadening  of 
feeling  due  to  the  emergence  of  some  deep  metaphysical  in¬ 
sight,  unverbalized  and  yet  momentous  in  its  co-ordination 
of  values.  Its  first  effect  is  the  removal  of  the  stress  of  acquisi¬ 
tive  feeling  arising  from  the  soul’s  preoccupation  with  itself. 
Thus  Peace  carries  with  it  a  surpassing  of  personality. 
There  is  an  inversion  of  relative  values.  It  is  primarily  a 
trust  in  the  efficacy  of  Beauty.  It  is  a  sense  that  fineness  of 
achievement  is  as  it  were  a  key  unlocking  treasures  that  the 
narrow  nature  of  things  would  keep  remote.  There  is  thus 
involved  a  grasp  of  infinitude,  an  appeal  beyond  boundaries. 
Its  emotional  effect  is  the  subsidence  of  turbulence  which 
inhibits.  More  accurately,  it  preserves  the  springs  of  energy, 
and  at  the  same  time  masters  them  for  the  avoidance  of 
paralysing  distractions.  The  trust  in  the  self-justification 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


368 

of  Beauty  introduces  faith,  where  reason  fails  to  reveal  the 
details. 

The  experience  of  Peace  is  largely  beyond  the  control  of 
purpose.  It  comes  as  a  gift.  The  deliberate  aim  at  Peace 
very  easily  passes  into  its  bastard  substitute,  Anaesthesia.  In 
other  words,  in  the  place  of  a  quality  of  ‘life  and  motion5, 
there  is  substituted  their  destruction.  Thus  Peace  is  the  re¬ 
moval  of  inhibition  and  not  its  introduction.  It  results  in  a 
wider  sweep  of  conscious  interest.  It  enlarges  the  field  of 
attention.  Thus  Peace  is  self-control  at  its  widest — at  the 
width  where  the  ‘self5  has  been  lost,  and  interest  has  been 
transferred  to  co-ordinations  wider  than  personality.  Here 
the  real  motive  interests  of  the  spirit  are  meant,  and  not 
the  superficial  play  of  discursive  ideas.  Peace  is  helped  by 
such  superficial  width,  and  also  promotes  it.  In  fact  it  is 
largely  for  this  reason  that  Peace  is  so  essential  for  civiliza¬ 
tion.  It  is  the  barrier  against  narrowness.  One  of  its  fruits 
is  that  passion  whose  existence  Hume  denied,  the  love  of 
mankind  as  such. 

Section  IV.  The  meaning  of  Peace  is  most  clearly  under¬ 
stood  by  considering  it  in  its  relation  to  the  tragic  issues 
which  are  essential  in  the  nature  of  things.  Peace  is  the 
understanding  of  tragedy,  and  at  the  same  time  its  pre¬ 
servation. 

We  have  seen  that  there  can  be  no  real  halt  of  civilization 
in  the  indefinite  repetition  of  a  perfected  ideal.  Staleness  sets 
in.  And  this  fatigue  is  nothing  other  than  the  creeping 
growth  of  anaesthesia,  whereby  that  social  group  is  gradually 
sinking  towards  nothingness.  The  defining  characteristics  are 
losing  their  importance.  There  may  be  no  pain  or  conscious 
loss.  There  is  merely  a  slow  paralysis  of  surprise.  And  apart 
from  surprise,  intensity  of  feeling  collapses. 

Decay,  Transition,  Loss,  Displacement  belong  to  the 


PEACE  369 

essence  of  the  Creative  Advance.  The  new  direction  of  aim 
is  initiated  by  Spontaneity,  an  element  of  confusion.  The 
enduring  Societies  with  their  rise,  culmination,  and  decay, 
are  devices  to  combine  the  necessities  of  Harmony  and  Fresh¬ 
ness.  There  is  the  deep  underlying  Harmony  of  Nature,  as  it 
were  a  fluid,  flexible  support;  and  on  its  surface  the  ripples 
of  social  efforts,  harmonizing  and  clashing  in  their  aims  at 
ways  of  satisfaction.  The  lower  types  of  physical  objects  can 
have  a  vast  endurance  of  inorganic  life.  The  higher  types, 
involving  animal  life  and  the  dominance  of  a  personality 
primarily  mental,  preserve  their  zest  by  the  quick  succession 
of  stages  from  birth,  culmination,  to  death.  As  soon  as  high 
consciousness  is  reached,  the  enjoyment  of  existence  is 
entwined  with  pain,  frustration,  loss,  tragedy.  Amid  the 
passing  of  so  much  beauty,  so  much  heroism,  so  much  daring, 
Peace  is  then  the  intuition  of  permanence.  It  keeps  vivid 
the  sensitiveness  to  the  tragedy;  and  it  sees  the  tragedy  as 
a  living  agent  persuading  the  world  to  aim  at  fineness  beyond 
the  faded  level  of  surrounding  fact.  Each  tragedy  is  the 
disclosure  of  an  ideal — What  might  have  been,  and  was  not : 
What  can  be.  The  tragedy  was  not  in  vain.  This  survival 
power  in  motive  force,  by  reason  of  appeal  to  reserves  of 
Beauty,  marks  the  difference  between  the  tragic  evil  and 
the  gross  evil.  The  inner  feeling  belonging  to  this  grasp 
of  the  service  of  tragedy  is  Peace — the  purification  of  the 
emotions. 

Section  V.  The  deepest  definition  of  Youth  is,  Life  as  yet 
untouched  by  tragedy.  And  the  finest  flower  of  youth  is  to 
know  the  lesson  in  advance  of  the  experience,  undimmed. 
The  question  here  for  discussion  is  how  the  intuition  of  Peace 
asserts  itself  apart  from  its  disclosure  in  tragedy.  Evidently 
observation  of  the  earlier  stages  of  personal  life  will  afford  the 
clearest  evidence. 


WI 


24 


370 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


Youth  is  distinguished  for  its  whole-hearted  absorption 
in  personal  enjoyments  and  personal  discomforts.  Quick 
pleasure  and  quick  pain,  quick  laughter  and  quick  tears, 
quick  absence  of  care,  and  quick  diffidence,  quick  courage 
and  quick  fear,  are  conjointly  characters  of  youth.  In  other 
words,  immediate  absorption  in  its  own  occupations.  On 
this  side,  youth  is  too  chequered  to  be  termed  a  happy 
period.  It  is  vivid  rather  than  happy.  The  memories  of 
youth  are  better  to  live  through,  than  is  youth  itself.  For 
except  in  extreme  cases,  memory  is  apt  to  count  the  sunny 
hours.  Youth  is  not  peaceful  in  any  ordinary  sense  of  that 
term.  In  youth  despair  is  overwhelming.  There  is  then  no 
to-morrow,  no  memory  of  disasters  survived. 

The  short-sightedness  of  youth  matches  the  scantiness  of 
its  experience.  The  issues  of  its  action  are  beyond  its  ken, 
perhaps  with  literature  supplying  a  delusory  sense  of  know¬ 
ledge.  Thus  generosity  and  cruelty  are  equally  natural,  by 
reason  of  the  fact  that  their  full  effects  lie  beyond  conscious 
anticipation. 

All  this  is  the  veriest  commonplace  in  the  characterization 
of  youth.  Nor  does  the  modern  wealth  of  social  literature 
in  any  fundamental  way  alter  the  case.  The  reason  for  its 
statement  here  is  to  note  that  these  features  of  character 
belong  to  all  animals  at  all  ages,  including  human  beings  at 
every  stage  of  their  lives.  The  differences  only  lie  in  relative 
proportions.  Also  the  success  of  language  in  conveying  in¬ 
formation  is  vastly  over-rated,  especially  in  learned  circles. 
Not  only  is  language  highly  elliptical,  but  also  nothing  can 
supply  the  defect  of  first-hand  experience  of  types  cognate 
to  the  things  explicitly  mentioned.  The  general  truth  of 
Hume’s  doctrine  as  to  the  necessity  of  first-hand  impressions 
is  inexorable. 

There  is  another  side.  Youth  is  peculiarly  susceptible  to 


PEACE 


371 


appeals  for  beauty  of  conduct.  It  understands  motives  which 
presuppose  the  irrelevance  of  its  own  person.  Such  motives 
are  understood  as  contributing  to  the  magnification  of  its 
own  interests.  Its  very  search  for  personal  experience  thus 
elicits  impersonality,  self-forgetfulness.  Youth  forgets  itself 
in  its  own  ardour.  Of  course,  not  always.  For  it  can  fall  in 
love.  But  the  test  of  the  better  nature,  so  happily  plenti¬ 
ful,  is  that  love  passes  from  selfishness  to  devotion.  The 
higher  forms  of  love  break  down  the  narrow  self-regarding 
motives. 

When  youth  has  once  grasped  where  Beauty  dwells — 
with  a  real  knowledge  and  not  as  a  mere  matter  of  literary 
phraseology  in  some  poetic,  scriptural,  or  psychological  ver¬ 
sion — when  youth  has  once  grasped,  its  self-surrender  is 
absolute.  The  vision  may  pass.  It  may  traverse  consciousness 
in  a  flash.  Some  natures  may  never  permit  it  to  emerge  into 
attention.  But  youth  is  peculiarly  liable  to  the  vision  of  that 
Peace,  which  is  the  harmony  of  the  soul’s  activities  with  ideal 
aims  that  lie  beyond  any  personal  satisfaction. 

Section  VI.  The  vigour  of  civilized  societies  is  preserved 
by  the  widespread  sense  that  high  aims  are  worth  while. 
Vigorous  societies  harbour  a  certain  extravagance  of  ob¬ 
jectives,  so  that  men  wander  beyond  the  safe  provision  of 
personal  gratifications.  All  strong  interests  easily  become 
impersonal,  the  love  of  a  good  job  well  done.  There  is  a  sense 
of  harmony  about  such  an  accomplishment,  the  Peace  brought 
by  something  worth  while.  Such  personal  gratification  arises 
from  aim  beyond  personality. 

The  converse  tendency  is  at  least  equally  noticeable; 
the  egotistic  desire  for  fame — ‘that  last  infirmity5 — is  an 
inversion  of  the  social  impulse,  and  yet  presupposes  it.  The 
tendency  shows  itself  in  the  trivialities  of  child-life,  as  well 
as  in  the  career  of  some  conqueror  before  whom  mankind 

24-2 


372 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


trembled.  In  the  widest  sense,  it  is  the  craving  for  sympathy. 
It  involves  the  feeling  that  each  act  of  experience  is  a  central 
reality,  claiming  all  things  as  its  own.  The  world  has  then 
no  justification  except  as  a  satisfaction  of  such  claims.  But 
the  point  is  that  the  desire  for  admiring  attention  becomes 
futile  except  in  the  presence  of  an  audience  fit  to  render  it. 
The  pathology  of  feeling,  so  often  exemplified,  consists  in  the 
destruction  of  the  audience  for  the  sake  of  the  fame.  There 
is  also,  of  course,  the  sheer  love  of  command,  finally  devoid 
of  high  purpose.  The  complexity  of  human  motive,  the 
entwinement  of  its  threads,  is  infinite.  The  point,  which  is 
here  relevant,  is  that  the  zest  of  human  adventure  presupposes 
for  its  material  a  scheme  of  things  with  a  worth  beyond 
any  single  occasion.  However  perverted,  there  is  required 
for  zest  that  craving  to  stand  conspicuous  in  this  scheme 
of  things  as  well  as  the  purely  personal  pleasure  in  the 
exercise  of  faculties.  It  is  the  final  contentment  aimed  at  by 
the  soul  in  its  retreat  to  egoism,  as  distinct  from  anaesthesia. 
In  this,  it  is  beyond  human  analysis  to  detect  exactly  where 
the  perversion  begins  to  taint  the  intuition  of  Peace.  Milton’s 
phrase  states  the  whole  conclusion — ‘That  last  infirmity  of 
noble  mind’. 

Fame  is  a  cold,  hard  notion.  Another  half-way  house 
between  the  extreme  ecstasy  of  Peace  and  the  extreme  of 
selfish  desire  is  the  love  of  particular  individual  things.  Such 
love  is  the  completion  almost  necessary  for  finite  reality,  and 
all  reality  is  in  some  way  finite.  In  the  extreme  of  love,  such 
as  mother’s  love,  all  personal  desire  is  transferred  to  the  thing 
loved,  as  a  desire  for  its  perfection.  Personal  life  has  here 
evidently  passed  beyond  itself,  but  with  explicit,  definite 
limitation  to  particular  realities.  It  is  partly  based  upon  the 
importance  of  the  individuality  of  details  for  the  aesthetic 
value  of  objective  appearance.  This  has  been  discussed 


PEACE 


373 


before.1  This  aspect  of  personal  love  is  simply  a  clinging  to 
a  condition  for  selfish  happiness.  There  is  no  transcendence 
of  personality. 

But  some  closeness  of  status,  such  as  the  relation  of  parent 
to  child  or  the  relation  of  marriage,  can  produce  the  love 
of  self-devotion  where  the  potentialities  of  the  loved  object 
are  felt  passionately  as  a  claim  that  it  find  itself  in  a  friendly 
Universe.  Such  love  is  really  an  intense  feeling  as  to  how 
the  harmony  of  the  world  should  be  realized  in  particular 
objects.  It  is  the  feeling  as  to  what  would  happen  if  right 
could  triumph  in  a  beautiful  world,  with  discord  routed. 
It  is  the  passionate  desire  for  the  beautiful  result,  in  this 
instance.  Such  love  is  distracting,  nerve-racking.  But,  unless 
darkened  by  utter  despair,  it  involves  deep  feeling  of  an  aim 
in  the  Universe,  winning  such  triumph  as  is  possible  to  it. 
It  is  the  sense  of  Eros,  hovering  between  Peace  as  the  crown 
of  Youth  and  Peace  as  the  issue  of  Tragedy. 

Section  VII.  The  general  health  of  social  life  is  taken  care 
of  by  formularized  moral  precepts,  and  formularized  reli¬ 
gious  beliefs  and  religious  institutions.  All  of  these  explicitly 
express  the  doctrine  that  the  perfection  of  life  resides  in  aims 
beyond  the  individual  person  in  question. 

It  is  a  doctrine  of  great  generality,  capable  of  a  large 
variety  of  specialization,  not  all  of  them  mutually  consistent. 
For  example,  consider  the  patriotism  of  the  Roman  farmers, 
in  the  full  vigour  of  the  Republic.  Certainly  Regulus  did  not 
return  to  Carthage,  with  the  certainty  of  torture  and  death, 
cherishing  any  mystic  notions  of  another  life — either  a 
Christian  Heaven  or  a  Buddhist  Nirvana.  He  was  a  practical 
man,  and  his  ideal  aim  was  the  Roman  Republic  flourishing 
in  this  world.  But  this  aim  transcended  his  individual  per¬ 
sonality;  for  this  aim  he  entirely  sacrificed  every  gratification 

1  Cf.  Chapter  xvn,  Section  VIII,  and  Chapter  xix,  Section  IV. 


374 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


bounded  by  such  limits.  For  him  there  was  something  in 
the  world  which  could  not  be  expressed  as  sheer  personal 
gratification — and  yet  in  thus  sacrificing  himself,  his  personal 
existence  rose  to  its  full  height.  He  may  have  been  mistaken 
in  his  estimate  of  the  worth  of  the  Roman  Republic.  The 
point  is  that  with  that  belief,  he  achieved  magnificence  by 
the  sacrifice  of  himself. 

In  this  estimate  Regulus  has  not  in  any  way  proved  him¬ 
self  to  be  exceptional.  His  conduct  showed  heroism  that  is 
unusual.  But  his  estimate  of  the  worth  of  such  conduct  has 
evoked  widest  assent.  The  Roman  farmers  agreed ;  and 
generation  after  generation,  amid  all  the  changes  of  history, 
have  agreed  by  the  instinctive  pulse  of  emotion  as  the  tale  is 
handed  down. 

Moral  codes  have  suffered  from  the  exaggerated  claims 
made  for  them.  The  dogmatic  fallacy  has  here  done  its  worst. 
Each  such  code  has  been  put  out  by  a  God  on  a  mountain 
top,  or  by  a  Saint  in  a  cave,  or  by  a  divine  Despot  on  a 
throne,  or,  at  the  lowest,  by  ancestors  with  a  wisdom  beyond 
later  question.  In  any  case,  each  code  is  incapable  of  im¬ 
provement;  and  unfortunately  in  details  they  fail  to  agree 
either  with  each  other  or  with  our  existing  moral  intuitions. 
The  result  is  that  the  world  is  shocked,  or  amused,  by  the 
sight  of  saintly  old  people  hindering  in  the  name  of  morality 
the  removal  of  obvious  brutalities  from  a  legal  system.  Some 
Acta  Sanctorum  go  ill  with  civilization. 

The  details  of  these  codes  are  relative  to  the  social  circum¬ 
stances  of  the  immediate  environment — life  at  a  certain  date 
on  ‘  the  fertile  fringe  ’  of  the  Arabian  desert,  life  on  the  lower 
slopes  of  the  Himalayan  Mountains,  life  on  the  plains  of 
China,  or  on  the  plains  of  India,  life  on  the  delta  of  some  great 
river.  Again  the  meaning  of  the  critical  terms  is  shifting 
and  ambiguous,  for  example,  the  notions  of  ownership, 


PEACE 


375 

family,  marriage,  murder,  God.  Conduct  which  in  one 
environment  and  at  one  stage  produces  its  measure  of  har¬ 
monious  satisfaction,  in  other  surroundings  at  another  stage 
is  destructively  degrading.  Each  society  has  its  own  type  of 
perfection,  and  puts  up  with  certain  blots,  at  that  stage  in¬ 
evitable.  Thus  the  notion  that  there  are  certain  regulative 
notions,  sufficiently  precise  to  prescribe  details  of  conduct, 
for  all  reasonable  beings  on  Earth,  in  every  planet,  and  in 
every  star-system,  is  at  once  to  be  put  aside.  That  is  the 
notion  of  the  one  type  of  perfection  at  which  the  Universe 
aims.  All  realization  of  the  Good  is  finite,  and  necessarily 
excludes  certain  other  types. 

But  what  these  codes  do  witness  to,  and  what  their  inter¬ 
pretation  by  seers  of  various  races  throughout  history  does 
witness  to,  is  the  aim  at  a  social  perfection.  Such  a  realized 
fact  is  conceived  as  an  abiding  perfection  in  the  nature  of 
things,  a  treasure  for  all  ages.  It  is  not  a  romance  of  thought, 
it  is  a  fact  of  Nature.  For  example,  in  one  sense  the  Roman 
Republic  declined  and  fell;  in  another  sense,  it  stands  a 
stubborn  fact  in  the  Universe.  To  perish  is  to  assume  a  new 
function  in  the  process  of  generation.  Devotion  to  the  Re¬ 
public  magnified  the  type  of  personal  satisfactions  for  those 
who  conformed  their  purposes  to  its  maintenance.  Such  con¬ 
formation  of  purpose  to  ideal  beyond  personal  limitations  is 
the  conception  of  that  Peace  with  which  the  wise  man  can 
face  his  fate,  master  of  his  soul. 

Section  VIII.  The  wide  scope  of  the  notion  of  ‘society’ 
requires  attention.  Transcendence  begins  with  the  leap  from 
the  actuality  of  the  immediate  occasion  to  the  notion  of 
personal  existence,  which  is  a  society  of  occasions.  In  terms 
of  human  life,  the  soul  is  a  society.  Care  for  the  future 
of  personal  existence,  regret  or  pride  in  its  past,  are  alike 
feelings  which  leap  beyond  the  bounds  of  the  sheer  actuality 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


376 

of  the  present.  It  is  in  the  nature  of  the  present  that  it  should 
thus  transcend  itself  by  reason  of  the  immanence  in  it  of 
the  ‘other5.  But  there  is  no  necessity  as  to  the  scale  of  em¬ 
phasis  that  this  fact  of  nature  should  receive.  It  belongs  to 
the  civilization  of  consciousness  to  magnify  the  large  sweep 
of  harmony. 

Beyond  the  soul  there  are  other  societies,  and  societies  of 
societies.  There  is  the  animal  body  ministering  to  the  soul: 
there  are  families,  groups  of  families,  nations,  species,  groups 
involving  different  species  associated  in  the  joint  enterprise 
of  keeping  alive.  These  various  societies,  each  in  its  measure, 
claim  loyalties  and  loves.  In  human  history  the  various  re¬ 
sponses  to  these  claims  disclose  the  essential  transcendence 
of  each  individual  actuality  beyond  itself.  The  stubborn 
reality  of  the  absolute  self-attainment  of  each  individual  is 
bound  up  with  a  relativity  which  it  issues  from  and  issues 
into.  The  analysis  of  the  various  strands  of  relativity  is  the 
analysis  of  the  social  structure  of  the  Universe,  as  in  this 
epoch. 

Although  particular  codes  of  morality  reflect,  more  or 
less  imperfectly,  the  special  circumstances  of  social  structure 
concerned,  it  is  natural  to  seek  for  some  highly  general  prin¬ 
ciples  underlying  all  such  codes.  Such  generalities  should 
reflect  the  very  notions  of  the  harmonizing  of  harmonies, 
and  of  particular  individual  actualities  as  the  sole  authentic 
reality.  These  are  the  principles  of  the  generality  of  harmony, 
and  of  the  importance  of  the  individual.  The  first  means 
‘order5,  and  the  second  means  ‘love5.  Between  the  two  there 
is  a  suggestion  of  opposition.  For  ‘order*  is  impersonal; 
and  ‘love5,  above  all  things,  is  personal,  The  antithesis  is 
solved  by  rating  types  of  order  in  relative  importance 
according  to  their  success  in  magnifying  the  individual 
actualities,  that  is  to  say,  in  promoting  strength  of  experience. 


PEACE 


377 


Also  in  rating  the  individual  on  the  double  basis,  partly  on 
the  intrinsic  strength  of  its  own  experience,  and  partly  on  its 
influence  in  the  promotion  of  a  high-grade  type  of  order. 
These  two  grounds  in  part  coalesce.  For  a  weak  individual 
exerts  a  weak  influence.  The  essence  of  Peace  is  that  the 
individual  whose  strength  of  experience  is  founded  upon  this 
ultimate  intuition,  thereby  is  extending  the  influence  of  the 
source  of  all  order. 

The  moral  code  is  the  behaviour-patterns  which  in  the  en¬ 
vironment  for  which  it  is  designed  will  promote  the  evolution 
of  that  environment  towards  its  proper  perfection. 

Section  IX.  The  attainment  of  Truth  belongs  to  the  essence 
of  Peace.  By  this  it  is  meant,  that  the  intuition  constituting 
the  realization  of  Peace  has  as  its  objective  that  Harmony 
whose  inter-connections  involve  Truth.  A  defect  in  Truth 
is  a  limitation  to  Harmony.  There  can  be  no  secure  efficacy 
in  the  Beauty  which  hides  within  itself  the  dislocations  of 
falsehood. 

The  truth  or  falsehood  of  propositions  is  not  directly  to 
the  point  in  this  demand  for  Truth.  Since  each  proposition 
is  yoked  to  a  contradictory  proposition,  and  since  of  these 
one  must  be  true  and  the  other  false,  there  are  necessarily 
as  many  false  as  there  are  true  propositions.  This  bare  Truth 
or  falsehood5  of  propositions  is  a  comparatively  superficial 
factor  affecting  the  discursive  interests  of  the  intellect.  The 
essential  truth  that  Peace  demands  is  the  conformation  of 
Appearance  to  Reality.  There  is  the  Reality  from  which  the 
occasion  of  experience  springs — a  Reality  of  inescapable, 
stubborn  fact;  and  there  is  the  Appearance  with  which  the 
occasion  attains  its  final  individuality — an  Appearance  in¬ 
cluding  its  adjustment  of  the  Universe  by  simplification, 
valuation,  transmutation,  anticipation.  A  feeling  of  disloca¬ 
tion  of  Appearance  from  Reality  is  the  final  destructive  force, 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


378 

robbing  life  of  its  zest  for  adventure.  It  spells  the  decadence 
of  civilization,  by  stripping  from  it  the  very  reason  for  its 
existence. 

There  can  be  no  necessity  governing  this  conformation. 
Sense-perception,  which  dominates  the  appearance  of  things, 
in  its  own  nature  re-arranges,  and  thus  in  a  way  distorts. 
Also  there  can  be  no  mere  blunt  truth  about  the  Appearance 
which  it  provides.  In  its  own  nature  Sense-perception  is  an 
interpretation,  and  this  interpretation  may  be  completely 
misleading.  If  there  were  a  necessary  conformation  of  Ap¬ 
pearance  to  Reality,  then  Morality  would  vanish.  There  is 
no  morality  about  the  multiplication  table,  whose  items  are 
necessarily  linked.  Art  would  also  be  a  meaningless  term. 
For  it  presupposes  the  efficacy  of  purpose.  Art  is  an  issue  of 
adventure. 

The  question  for  discussion  is  whether  there  exists  any 
factor  in  the  Universe  constituting  a  general  drive  towards 
the  conformation  of  Appearance  to  Reality.  This  drive 
would  then  constitute  a  factor  in  each  occasion  persuading 
an  aim  at  such  truth  as  is  proper  to  the  special  appearance 
in  question.  This  concept  of  truth,  proper  to  each  special 
appearance,  would  mean  that  the  appearance  has  not  built 
itself  up  by  the  inclusion  of  elements  that  are  foreign  to  the 
reality  from  which  it  springs.  The  appearance  will  then  be 
a  generalization  and  an  adaptation  of  emphasis;  but  not  an 
importation  of  qualities  and  relations  without  any  corre¬ 
sponding  exemplification  in  the  reality.  This  concept  of  truth 
is  in  fact  the  denial  of  the  doctrine  of  Appearance  which 
lies  on  the  surface  of  Kant’s  Critique  of  Pure  Reason.  It  is 
a  denial  of  his  answer  to  the  question— How  are  synthetic 
a  priori  judgments  possible?  It  is  at  least  the  introduction 
of  guarding  limitations,  which  Kant  explicitly  in  that  work 
does  not  introduce. 


PEACE 


379 

Section  X.  The  answer  to  this  question  must  issue  from 
a  survey  of  the  factors  in  terms  of  which  individual  ex¬ 
perience  has  been  interpreted — The  antecedent  World  from 
which  each  occasion  springs,  a  World  of  many  occasions 
presenting  for  the  new  creature  harmonies  and  discords :  the 
easy  road  of  Anaesthesia  by  which  discordant  factors  are  dis¬ 
missed  into  irrelevance:  the  activity  of  the  mental  poles  in 
building  conceptual  experience  into  patterns  of  feeling  which 
rescue  discords  from  loss :  the  spontaneity  of  the  mental  action 
and  its  persuasion  by  a  sense  of  relevance :  the  selective  nature 
of  consciousness  and  its  initial  failure  to  discriminate  the 
deeper  sources  of  feeling:  that  there  is  no  agency  in  ab¬ 
straction  from  actual  occasions,  and  that  existence  involves 
implication  in  agency :  the  sense  of  a  unity  of  many  occasions 
with  a  value  beyond  that  of  any  individual  occasion;  for 
example,  the  soul,  the  complete  animal,  the  social  group  of 
animals,  the  material  body,  the  physical  epoch:  the  aim  at 
immediate  individual  contentment. 

The  justification  for  the  suggestion  derived  from  this  group 
of  factors  must  mainly  rest  upon  their  direct  elucidation  of 
first-hand  experience.  They  are  not,  and  should  not  be, 
the  result  of  an  argument.  For  all  argument  must  rest  upon 
premises  more  fundamental  than  the  conclusions.  Discussion 
of  fundamental  notions  is  merely  for  the  purpose  of  disclosing 
their  coherence,  their  compatibility,  and  the  specializations 
which  can  be  derived  from  their  conjunction. 

The  above  set  of  metaphysical  notions  rests  itself  upon  the 
ordinary,  average  experience  of  mankind,  properly  inter¬ 
preted.  But  there  is  a  further  set  for  which  the  appeal  lies 
to  occasions  and  modes  of  experience  which  in  some  degree 
are  exceptional.  It  must  be  remembered  that  the  present 
level  of  average  waking  human  experience  was  at  one  time 
exceptional  among  the  ancestors  of  mankind.  We  are  justi- 


ADVENTURES  OF  IDEAS 


380 

fied  therefore  in  appealing  to  those  modes  of  experience 
which  in  our  direct  judgment  stand  above  the  average  level. 
The  gradual  emergence  of  such  modes,  and  their  effect  on 
human  history,  have  been  among  the  themes  of  this  book 
in  its  appeal  to  history.  We  have  found  the  growth  of  Art: 
its  gradual  sublimation  into  the  pursuit  of  Truth  and  Beauty: 
the  sublimation  of  the  egoistic  aim  by  its  inclusion  of  the 
transcendent  whole:  the  youthful  zest  in  the  transcendent 
aim:  the  sense  of  tragedy:  the  sense  of  evil:  the  persuasion 
towards  Adventure  beyond  achieved  perfection:  the  sense  of 
Peace. 

Section  XI.  The  concept  of  Civilization,  as  developed 
up  to  this  stage,  remains  inherently  incomplete.  No  logical 
argument  can  demonstrate  this  gap.  Such  arguments  are 
merely  subsidiary  helps  for  the  conscious  realization  of 
metaphysical  intuitions — Non  in  dialectica  complacuit  Deo 
salvum  facer e  populum  suum.  This  saying,  quoted  by  Cardinal 
Newman,1  should  be  the  motto  of  every  metaphysician. 
He  is  seeking,  amid  the  dim  recesses  of  his  ape-like  con¬ 
sciousness  and  beyond  the  reach  of  dictionary  language,  for 
the  premises  implicit  in  all  reasoning.  The  speculative 
methods  of  metaphysics  are  dangerous,  easily  perverted.  So 
is  all  Adventure;  but  Adventure  belongs  to  the  essence  of 
civilization. 

The  incompleteness  of  the  concept  relates  to  the  notion  of 
Transcendence,  the  feeling  essential  for  Adventure,  Zest,  and 
Peace.  This  feeling  requires  for  its  understanding  that  we 
supplement  the  notion  of  the  Eros  by  including  it  in  the 
concept  of  an  Adventure  in  the  Universe  as  One.  This 
Adventure  embraces  all  particular  occasions  but  as  an  actual 
fact  stands  beyond  any  one  of  them.  It  is,  as  it  were, 
the  complement  to  Plato’s  Receptacle,  its  exact  opposite, 

1  Grammar  of  Assent. 


PEACE 


381 

yet  equally  required  for  the  unity  of  all  things.  In  every 
way,  it  is  contrary  to  the  Receptacle.  The  Receptacle  is  bare 
of  all  forms:  the  Unity  of  Adventure  includes  the  Eros 
which  is  the  living  urge  towards  all  possibilities,  claiming 
the  goodness  of  their  realization.  The  Platonic  Receptacle 
is  void,  abstract  from  all  individual  occasions:  The  Unity 
of  Adventure  includes  among  its  components  all  individual 
realities,  each  with  the  importance  of  the  personal  or  social 
fact  to  which  it  belongs.  Such  individual  importance  in  the 
components  belongs  to  the  essence  of  Beauty.  In  this  Supreme 
Adventure,  the  Reality  which  the  Adventure  transmutes  into 
its  Unity  of  Appearance  requires  the  real  occasions  of  the 
advancing  world  each  claiming  its  due  share  of  attention. 
This  Appearance,  thus  enjoyed,  is  the  final  Beauty  with  which 
the  Universe  achieves  its  justification.  This  Beauty  has  always 
within  it  the  renewal  derived  from  the  Advance  of  the 
Temporal  World.  It  is  the  immanence  of  the  Great  Fact 
including  this  initial  Eros  and  this  final  Beauty  which  con¬ 
stitutes  the  zest  of  self-forgetful  transcendence  belonging  to 
Civilization  at  its  height. 

At  the  heart  of  the  nature  of  things,  there  are  always  the 
dream  of  youth  and  the  harvest  of  tragedy.  The  Adventure 
of  the  Universe  starts  with  the  dream  and  reaps  tragic  Beauty. 
This  is  the  secret  of  the  union  of  Zest  with  Peace — That  the 
suffering  attains  its  end  in  a  Harmony  of  Harmonies.  The 
immediate  experience  of  this  Final  Fact,  with  its  union  of 
Youth  and  Tragedy,  is  the  sense  of  Peace.  In  this  way  the 
World  receives  its  persuasion  towards  such  perfections  as  are 
possible  for  its  diverse  individual  occasions. 


INDEX  OF  PROPER  NAMES 


Adrian  the  Sixth,  138 
Aeschylus,  360 
Akhnaton,  62 

Alexander  the  Great,  14,  67,  79,  132, 
133 

Alexandria,  136 
America,  23,  28 
Aquinas,  27 
Archytas,  190 
Aristarchas,  134 

Aristotle,  70,  79,  132,  136,  149,  155, 
169-172,  180-183,  1 90-1 94,  200, 
287,  305,  355,  356 
Arius,  134 
Asquith,  43 
Athanasius,  134 
Athens,  133 
Atticus,  82,  83 
Attila,  7 

Augustine,  27,  68,  103,  134,  135,  166, 
167,  205,  21 1 
Augustus,  25,  79 

Bacon,  Francis,  36,  39,  74 
Bacon,  Roger,  195 
Bailey,  Cyril,  viii,  157 
Bentham,  45-48 
Bergson,  287 
Bradley,  F.  H.,  296-299 
Bright,  John,  42 
Burke,  Edmund,  23,  56 

Caesar,  14 

Calvin,  27,  63,  166,  167,  205,  21 1 
Campbell-Bannerman,  43 
Charles  the  Second,  76 
China,  95,  99,  100,  132 
Cicero,  14,  16,  24,  25,  67,  82 
Claudius,  69 

Clement  of  Alexandria,  7,  22,  52 


Cleon,  14 

Clerk-Maxwell,  238 
Cobden,  42 
Columbus,  359 

Comte,  Auguste,  45,  47,  48,  165 
Constantine  the  Great,  63 
Cotes,  Roger,  201 
Cranmer,  2 1 1 
Crete,  132 

Cyril  (of  Alexandria),  134 
Dante,  38 

Darwin,  Charles,  44.  45  48 
Democritus,  155,  156,  159 
Denison,  J.  H.,  299 
Descartes,  74,  145,  168,  169,  172,  225, 
244,  263,  270,  287,  362 
Dionysius,  The  Younger,  38 
Disraeli,  42 

Donham,  Dean  W.  B.,  viii 
Dutch  Republic,  63 

Edwards,  Jonathan,  2 1 1 
Egypt,  131,  132 

Epicurus,  136,  148,  155,  156,  160,  167, 
1 71,  172,  182,  200 
Erasmus,  74,  2 1 1 
Euclid,  108,  134 
Euripides,  291,  360 
Europe,  9,  10 

Fox,  George,  21 1,  212 
France,  23 
Franklin,  B.,  36 

Galba,  69 
Galen,  76 

Galileo,  74,  145,  186,  192,  244 
Galton,  Francis,  45 
Gandhi,  Mahatma,  205,  206 


INDEX  OF  PROPER  NAMES 


384 

Gerbert  (Silvester  the  Second),  195, 
199 

Gibbon,  Edward,  vii,  5,  6,  82,  358 
Gladstone,  W.  E.,  42,  43,  292 
Greece,  131,  132 
Gregory  the  Great,  34,  102 

Halevy,  Elie,  27 
Hammond,  Barbara,  42 
Hammond,  J.  L.,  42 
Hanno,  101 
Hartington,  Lord,  43 
Hervey,  74 
Hipparchus,  1 91 
Hobhouse,  L.  T.,  300 
Hooker,  Richard,  27 
Hume,  35-37,  45~48.  *59.  160,  165, 
168,  225,  232,  233,  236,  237,  240, 
244,  283-289,  300,  370 
Huss,  John,  21 1 
Huxley,  163 

Ignatius  Loyola,  21 1 
India,  95,  99,  100,  132 
Irwin,  Lord,  205 

James,  William,  240,  297 
Jefferson,  36 
Jerome,  27 
Johnson,  W.  E.,  295 
Joseph,  Mr  H.  W.  B.,  295 
Jowett,  B.,  135 
Justinian,  103 

Kant,  289,  300,  378 
Kepler,  3 1 1 

Lamarck,  45 

Leibniz,  27,  74,  167-172,  300 
Leo  the  Tenth,  138 
Leonardo  da  Vinci,  77 
Leonardo  of  Pisa,  1 95 
Lewis,  Sinclair,  358 
Locke,  John,  22,  23,  27,  36,  63,  167, 
208,  225,  244,  287,  289,  355,  356 
Lovejoy,  Professor,  244 
Lowell,  Percy,  162-164 
Lucian,  69,  358 


Lucretius,  67,  136,  1 55-1 59,  167-172, 
227 

Luther,  27,  63,  138,  182,  205,  21 1,  213 

Macaulay,  4 
Malthus,  93,  95 
Marcus  Aurelius,  1 7 
Marius,  14 
Marx,  Karl,  43 
Mendel,  45 
Mesopotamia,  132 
Mill,  J.  S.,  165  " 

Milton,  66 

Monro,  H.  A.  J.,  157 
Moore,  George  Foot,  299 
Morley,  John,  292 

Near  East,  The,  9,  10,  95,  98-108 
Nero,  69 
Nestorius,  134 
Newman,  Cardinal,  vii,  380 
Newton,  Isaac,  22,  36,  46,  108,  144, 
145,  155,  156,  167-169,  172,  186, 
192,  200,  201,  244 
Nietzsche,  287 

Occam,  305 

Paine,  T.,  37,  47 
Palestine,  13 1 
Paul,  St,  67-69 
Pearson,  Karl,  45 
Pelagius,  135,  205 
Pericles,  14,  64,  65,  70,  219 
Phoenicia,  132 
Pitt,  William  (Chatham),  56 
Plato,  6,  13-18,  24,  25,  29-31,  38-40, 
48.  50,  53.  64>  65,  69,  70,  79,  80, 
86,  103,  105,  126,  132-136,  150- 
156,  162-173,  182,  183,  189-197, 
200,  203,  205,  209,  213-216,  221, 
225,  240-244,  267,  285,  287,  293, 

294.  304.  354.  38o 
Pliny,  16,  69,  70,  358 
Poincare,  Henri,  31 1 
Poynting,  238 
Price,  H.  H.,  279 
Ptolemy,  134,  1 91 


INDEX  OF  PROPER  NAMES 


385 


Pythagoras,  182 

Roman  Empire,  16,  20,  101,  102 
Rome,  25 
Rousseau,  26 

Santayana,  279 
Sarpi,  Paul,  vii 
Shaftesbury,  Lord,  42 
Sidonius  Apollinaris,  83 
Silvester  the  Second  (Gerbert),  195, 
199 

Smith,  Adam,  35 
Socrates,  64,  68,  69 
Solomon,  108 
Sophocles,  360 
Spinoza,  134 
Stephen,  Leslie,  vii 
Strachey,  Lytton,  12,  358 
Suarez,  27 
Sulla,  14 


Tacitus,  358 
Taylor,  A.  E.,  viii,  135 
Taylor,  H.  O.,  vii,  viii,  70 
Thales,  180 

Thomson,  Sir  J.  J.,  238 
Thucydides,  64 
Trajan,  69,  70 

Varus,  102 
Vauban,  77 
Vesalius,  76 
Virgil,  25,  67 
Voltaire,  26 

Walpole,  Robert,  56,  57 
Watt,  James,  77 
Wesley,  John,  57,  21 1 
William  the  Conqueror,  33 
Woolman,  John,  29,  37,  47 
Wycliffe,  2 1 1 


wi 


25 


INDEX  OF  TERMS 


Absolute  Being,  142 
Absolute  Individuality,  80,  235 
Absolute  Reality,  227 
Absolute  Self- Attainment,  227 
Absoluteness,  54-56 
Abstraction,  187 

Actuality,  172,  230,  242,  347,  354 
Adventure,  vii,  332,  350,  352-381 
Aesthetic  Destruction,  330 
Affective  Tone,  226,  315 
Agencies,  Intellectual,  13 
Agency,  253,  254 
Agriculture,  1 39-1 41 
Alexandrian  Scholarship,  150,  155 
Alexandrian  Theologians,  166,  167 
American  Civil  War,  26,  29 
Anaesthesia,  329,  334,  355,  367,  368 
Anglican  Settlement,  205 
Animal  Body,  263,  275,  376 
Anticipation,  248,  249,  340,  343,  344 
Appeal  to  History,  207,  208,  2 1 1 
Appearance,  309-322,  332-348,  355, 
362,  363,  377-381 
Appearance  and  Reality,  268-282 
Arabs,  133 
Argument,  379 
Arian  Solution,  216 
Aristotle’s  Logic,  169-171,  356 
Art,  277,  320,  321,  344-353,  364-381 
Association,  300 
Association  of  Ideas,  234 
Atomicity,  238 
Atomism,  159,  160,  168 
Atoms,  155,  156,  159,  169,  227 
Autonomy,  327,  328 

Background,  334 
Beautiful,  328,  329 

Beauty,  12,  153,  154,  190,  309,  324- 
35  L  353,  365-381 


Body,  243 

Body,  Animal,  263,  275,  376 
Body,  Human,  242,  243,  274,  275, 
281,  349 
Brain,  290 

British  Government,  The,  23 
Brotherhood,  46 
Brotherhood  of  Man,  28,  35,  37 
Buddhism,  41 
Business  Mind,  1 23-1 25 
Byzantines,  104 

Capriciousness,  141 

Carthaginians,  30 

Catholic  Church,  34,  74,  107 

Catholic  Missionaries,  28,  37 

Catholic  Theology,  212 

Causal  Action,  153 

Causal  Independence,  251,  252,  278 

Causation,  237,  251 

Certainties  of  Science,  1 98 

Chance,  157,  158 

Chaos,  147 

Christian  Ethics,  105,  107 
Christianity,  18-20,  41,  102,  108,  133 
Christians,  69 
Cities,  1 20-1 22 

Civilization,  vii,  ix,  9,  10,  25,  95,  96, 
105-108,  127,  140,  181,  188,  212, 
218-220,  348-352,  357-363,  380, 
381 

Classification,  Aristotelian,  1 20-122, 
176,  183,  196 
Coercive  Forces,  213 
Commerce,  83,  88-125 
Common  Law,  36,  81 
Communal  Customs,  52 
Communication,  171,  172 
Compatibility,  188 
Competition,  35,  38,  39,  42 


INDEX  OF  TERMS 


388 

Complete  Fact,  203 
Composition,  197 
Compulsion,  6,  71,  87,  89,  106,  108, 
213,  218 

Conceptual  Order,  The,  1 98 
Conceptual  Prehensions,  250 
Concern,  226,  232 
Concrescence,  303,  304 
Conformal  Feeling,  235,  236,  326 
Conformal  Inheritance,  239 
Conformal  Reception,  249 
Conformation,  322 
Connectedness,  197,  293,  306 
Consciousness,  226,  232,  347 
Constraint,  255 

Contemporary  Events,  251-255 
Contemporary  Occasions,  316-318 
Contemporary  World,  281 
Contiguity,  259,  260 
Continuity  of  Nature,  235,  238,  239 
Continuity  of  Subjective  Form,  236- 
242 

Contract,  81 

Contractual  Freedom,  80 
Conventional  Interpretation,  152, 1 73- 
177 

Co-ordination,  37,  38,  43,  44 
Corporate  Action,  68,  70,  82 
Corporations,  83 
Corporeal  Substances,  255 
Cosmological  Principles,  10 
Cosmology,  14,  131 
Crafts,  73 

Creative  Advance,  369 
Creative  Urge,  248,  249 
Creativity,  230,  303,  304 
Custom,  7,  236 
Customary  Status,  80 

Data,  230 

Decadence,  358,  359 
Defining  Characteristic,  261,  265 
Definition  of  Being,  1 53 
Deism,  144,  145 
Democracy,  23,  24,  29 
Description,  152,  156,  157 
Descriptive  Generalization,  301 
Destruction,  339 


Dimensionality,  243 

Discord,  330,  334~338>  342,  384 
Disorder,  189 
Distortion,  281,  31 1 
Divine  Eros,  357 
Divine  Immanence,  206 
Division,  Platonic,  176,  183 
Dogmatic  Fallacy,  185,  287 
Dogmatic  Finality,  208 
Dualism,  244,  245 

Economic  Interpretation  of  History, 
84 

Economic  Man,  1 1 9 

Elimination,  334 

Empty  Cabinet,  355 

Empty  Continents,  96,  101 

Endurance,  262,  263 

Enduring  Individuality,  339,  361-364 

Enduring  Objects,  255,  265 

Enduring  Person,  250 

Enduring  Unity,  257 

Energy,  239 

Energy,  Flux  of,  237,  239 
Enjoyment,  249 
Epistemology,  159,  170 
Epochs,  251 

Eros,  13,  84,  188,  189,  203,  256,  323, 

354>  355>  366 
Essential  Character,  257 
Ethics,  19 
Events,  255 
Evidence,  291 
Evil,  333,  336,  345 
Exact  Science,  136 
Excessiveness,  138 
Experience,  228 

Experience,  Structure  of,  225-245 
Explanation,  143 
Explanatory  Description,  164 
Expression,  320 
External  Relations,  144,  201 

Fame,  371,  372 
Feeling,  295,  296 
Feudal  System,  37  « 

Feudalism,  33,  34,  74 
Finitude,  333,  356 


INDEX  OF  TERMS 


389 


Flatness,  278 
Fluent,  165 

Flux  of  Energy,  236,  238,  242 
Flux  of  Impressions,  36,  37 
Force,  105 
Foreground,  334 
Foresight,  1 10-125 

Freedom,  15,  29,  42.  61-65,  68,  77, 
83-S6,  251,  255,  362,  369 
Future  Occasions,  246-257 

Galilean  Peasantry,  19 
General  Description,  164 
Geometry  in  an  Epoch,  258 
Gnostics,  167 
God,  13 
Gold,  89,  90 
Golden  Mean,  138 
Goodness,  345,  346 
Grace,  205 
Grammar,  133 

Greatest  Happiness  Principle,  45, 47, 50 
Greek,  10 

Grouping  of  Occasions,  258-267 

Harmony,  39,  40,  188,  190,  194,  196, 
197,  203,  205,  325,  333-344>  349> 
354>  356,  360-367,  377 
Hebrew,  10 

Hebrew  Prophets,  62,  63 
Hellenic,  10 

Hellenic  Mentality,  104,  137 
Hellenic  Speculation,  136 
Hellenism,  70,  82,  86,  104,  134,  150, 

I5I5  331 
Hellenistic,  10 

Hellenistic  Mentality,  137 
History,  3,  4,  8,  207,  208 
History  of  Religion,  220 
Human  Body,  242,  243,  274,  275,  281, 

349 

Humanitarian  Ideal,  35-53 
Humanitarian  Principles,  38 
Humanitarian  Spirit,  105 
Hume’s  Dialogues  on  Natural  Re¬ 
ligion,  217 

Icon,  215 


Ideality,  347,  349 
Ideals,  6,  109,  215 

Ideas,  18-21,  30,  105,  127,  165,  187- 
189,  203,  215,  333,  354,  366 
Idolatry,  12 
Imitation,  215 

Immanence,  152-158,  172,  216,  217 
241,  246-257,  259 
Immanence,  Nonsymmetrical,  254 
Immanence  of  God,  166,  167 
Immanence  of  Occasions,  237 
Immanent  Law,  143,  145,  165,  166 
Immediate  Existence,  246 
Immediate  Future,  247 
Immediate  Past,  233,  234,  247 
Imposed  Law,  144,  165-167 
Imposition,  152,  154,  156 
Impression  of  Sensation,  159,  232 
Incompatibility,  188,  357 
Individual  Identity,  209 
Individual  Substance,  170 
Individual  Thing,  197 
Individualism,  42,  44,  74 
Individuality,  200,  227,  235,  331,  332, 

3395  34°»  360,  376 
Induction,  143  , 

Industrial  Slavery,  42 
Industrial  System,  41,  43 
Inheritance,  80,  243,  278 
Inhibition,  324,  329 
Instinct,  58,  60 
Intelligence,  59,  60 
Intensity,  325,  334 
Interconnection,  169,  170 
Interdependence,  142 
Internal  Relations,  144,  201 
Interpretation,  279,  320 
Introspection,  290,  293 
Irrelevance,  255 
“It,”  327,  336-3395  361 

Jesuits,  47 
Jews,  104,  133 
Judgment,  294,  295 

Knowledge,  5,  227 

Language,  153,  209,  210,  291,  293 


39° 


INDEX  OF  TERMS 


Law,  139,  1 41 
Law,  Natural,  152 
Law  as  Convention,  142 
Law  as  Description,  142,  147 
Law  as  Immanent,  142,  153 
Law  as  Imposed,  142 
Law  as  Statistical,  143 
Law  of  Gravitation,  181 
Laws  of  Nature,  51,  52,  172,  173,  175, 
i77>  257 

Learned  Professions,  136 
Learned  Tradition,  133 
Legal  Organization,  105 
Liberalism,  41-47,  79 
Liberty,  68,  71,  74 
Life,  102,  264,  266 
Life  and  Mind,  1 54 
Life  and  Motion,  188,  355,  367 
Life  of  Christ,  214 
Living  Bodies,  266,  267 
Living  Organisms,  255 
Logic,  150 

Logic,  Aristotelian,  196 
Love,  372,  373,  376 
Lowell  Observatory,  161 

Mahometans,  103,  104,  133 
Malthusian  Law,  35,  44,  91-98 
Man,  264 

Manichaean  Doctrine,  166 
Mariners’  Compass,  107 
Massiveness,  325,  336 
Mathematical  Formulae,  203 
Mathematical  Relations,  188,  191, 
194,  196,  203,  326,  354,  366 
Mathematics,  150,  161,  174,  176,  191, 
I96-I99 

Matter,  Aristotelian,  156,  192 
Memory,  237 
Mental  Role,  326,  333 
Mentality,  271,  272 
Metaphysics,  163,  164 
Method,  185,  283-305 
Mind,  263,  269 
Mind  and  Nature,  239 
Mingling  of  Genera,  302 
Mode  of  Togetherness,  313 
Modern  Scholarship,  137 


Monads,  1 71 
Monads  of  Leibniz,  1 68 
Moral  Codes,  374-377 
Moral  Order,  132 
Morals,  345,  346 

Natural  Law,  152 
Natural  Selection,  44 
Nature,  12,  131 

Necessity,  9,  88,  250,  251,  254,  258, 
259 

Negative  Prehension,  334 
Neologisms,  294 

Non-Sensuous  Perception,  231,  236 
Novelty,  10,  273 

Objective  Immortality,  248,  305 
Objects  and  Subjects,  225-245 
Observation,  136,  164 
Observational  Order,  The,  198 
Occasion  of  Experience,  230 
Order,  376 

Order,  Types  of,  251,  256,  257 
Order  of  Nature,  131,  132,  167 
Original  Contract,  71 
Originality,  359 
Other-Formation,  248 
Otherness,  231 

Participation,  310 
Passivity,  272 
Past  Occasions,  246-257 
Pattern,  3 10-31 2,  315 
Patterned  Nexus,  260 
Peace,  353,  366-381 
Perception,  229,  231 
Perceptual  Acceptance,  279 
Perfection,  329,  330,  333,  348,  354 
Perishing,  262,  304,  305,  355,  375 
Permanence,  369 
Persians,  104 

Personal  Identity,  237,  240 
Personal  Order,  242,  244 
Personal  Societies,  263-267,  271 
Personal  Unity,  240 
Personality,  239 
Persons,  255,  262,  263,  264 
Perspective,  255,  256,  280 


INDEX  OF  TERMS 


391 


Persuasion,  31,  53,  87,  88,  105,  109, 
189,  205,  206,  214,  241,  381 
Persuasive  Agency,  2 1 3-2 1 6 
Phoenician  Sailors,  100,  101 
Physical  Elements,  188,  203,  354,  366 
Physical  Entities,  202 
Plato’s  Seven  Notions,  354,  366 
Political  Economy,  90,  91 
Population,  92-94 

Positivist  Doctrine,  146-148,  158-167 

Potentiality,  230 

Power,  12,  106,  165 

Predication,  170,  314 

Pre-established  Harmony,  171 

Prehension,  227,  232,  295,  298,  300 

Present  Occasions,  346-357 

Primary  Phase,  230 

Primary  Substance,  170,  356,  361 

Primordial  Nature  of  God,  362 

Printing,  107 

Private  Actions,  70 

Private  Life,  39 

Private  Property,  80 

Probability,  158,  160 

Process,  192,  354,  355 

Process  of  Becoming,  226 

Professional  Institutions,  74,  77,  79 

Professional  Qualifications,  72,  73,  77 

Professions,  76 

Programme  for  Reform,  17, 18,52,  333 
Prophets,  183 
Proportion,  190 

Propositions,  248,  294,  295,  312 
Protestant  Christianity,  205 
Protestant  Theology,  2 1 7 
Psyche,  12,  188,  189,  203,  350,  354, 
355>  366 

Purpose,  266,  340,  342 
Quakers,  29,  63 

Qualitative  Valuation,  269,  326 
Quanta,  239 

Real  Agency,  269 

Realitas  Objectiva,  362 

Reality,  309,  3 17-321,  332,  335,  340- 

345 j  348,  349,  362-365,  377,  378 
Realization,  254 


Reasoning,  107 

Receptacle,  156,  171,  172,  188,  192, 
197,  203,  241,  242,  258,  317,  354, 
366 

Re-enaction,  248,  249,  349 
Reformation,  New,  206 
Reformation,  Protestant,  212 
Regions,  254 

Relativity,  54-56,  61,  197 
Relevance,  284,  286 
Religion,  95,  96,  207 
Religion,  Mystical,  41 
Religion  and  Science,  50 
Religion  of  Humanity,  45,  47 
Renaissance  Monarchs,  40 
Repetition,  333 
Revelation  of  St  John,  219 
Rights  of  Man,  15,  22 
Roads,  107 
Romans,  104 
Routine,  113-116,  180 

Satire,  358 

Satisfaction,  248,  295,  298,  301,  344 
Scholars,  149,  154 
Scholarship,  131,  137,  138 
Scholasticism,  134,  137 
Scholastics,  149,  155 
Science,  350 
Scientists,  149 
Self-Formation,  248,  269 
Self-Identity,  241,  262 
Sensa,  276,  277,  314,  315,  321,  322 
Sensationalist  Doctrine,  360,  361 
Sense-Organs,  289 

Sense-Perception,  228,  232,  269,  274, 
276-279,  316 
Senseless  Forces,  21 
Sensible  World,  165 
Sentences,  312 
Serial  Order,  259,  260,  263 
Seriality,  243 
Simplification,  273,  335 
Slave-Trade,  23,  33,  34 
Slavery,  14,  15,  28 
Slaves,  106 

Simple  Location,  201,  202 
Simplification,  273,  335 


INDEX  OF  TERMS 


392 

Social  Institutions,  68 
Social  Order,  261 
Societies,  255,  260-264,  375 
Sociological  Defence,  102 
Sociological  Functions,  10 
Sociological  Ideals,  32 
Soul,  18,  22,  29,  36,  64,  156,  189, 
241,  243,  263,  267,  271,  276,  337, 
354>  355 

Space-Time,  192,  241 
Speculation,  66,  67,  131,  133,  137, 
138,  153 

Speculative  Philosophy,  30,  285,  286 
Speech  of  Pericles,  2 1 9 
Spontaneity,  59,  64,  80,  266,  325, 

328,  332 

Sporadic  Occurrence,  255 
Statistics,  161 
Status,  Social,  1 1 
Stoics,  16 

Straightness,  277,  278 
Strength,  325 
Strife,  40,  41 

Structure  of  Experience,  225-245,  247 
Subjective  Aim,  269,  325 
Subjective  Form,  227,  236,  269,  277, 
297,  325 

Subjects  and  Objects,  225-245,  247, 
268 

Sublimation,  350 
Substance,  145,  172 
Substratum,  281 
Subtlety,  273 
Supreme  Craftsman,  189 
Swerve  ( Lucre tian),  157 
Symbolic  Truth,  318 
Systems,  203 

Tartars,  104 

Technology,  33,  95-97,  101,  107 
Teleological  Self-Creation,  251,  252 
Teleology,  249,  259 
Temporal  World,  381 


Theologians,  165,  166 
Thinking  Substance,  240,  263 
Time-Spans,  116-118 
Together,  169,  303,  304 
Tolerance,  63-65 
Topics  of  Physical  Science,  49 
Tragedy,  368-381 

Transcendence,  154,  166,  167,  375, 

378 

Transition,  8 

Transmutation,  274,  276,  315 
Truth,  12,  309-323, 341-35C  353> 
366-381 

Truth  and  Beauty,  341 -351 
Truth  and  Falsehood,  314 
Truth-Relation,  310-323,  340-342 
Turks,  105 
Types  of  Order,  318 

Uniform  Relations,  253 
Uniformity  of  Nature,  99,  241 
Uniformity  of  Space,  253 
Unity  of  Nature,  241 
Universities,  73,  74 
University  Professors,  133 

Vacuous  Inherence,  281 
Valuation,  269 
Vatican  Council,  21 1 
Violence,  6 

Void,  156,  168,  1 71,  172 

Wave-Theory,  200 
Wesleyan  Revival,  27 
Western  Civilization,  137 
Wisdom,  59,  60 
Women,  106 

Working  Hypothesis,  286 
World-Soul,  166 

Youth,  369,  370,  381 

Zest,  381 


PRINTED  BY  WALTER 


. 


