ADVA1TASIDDHI Vs NYAYAMRTA 


An up to date Critical Re-Appraisal 

PART-I 

by 

^astranidhi, Dvaitavedantarasajna, Madhvamunipriya 
Dr. B.N.K. SHARMA, M.A., Ph.D.,D. Litt., 

Retired Professor and Head of the Dept, of Sanskrit 
Ruparcl College, Bombay - 400 016. 

Recipient : Sahitya Akademi, 

President of India and Govt, of Maharashtra Awards. 


Published by 

Anandatirtha Pratijthana of the Akhila Bharata Madhva 
Mahamandal, Katriguppa Main Road, Bangalore - 560 028. 

1994 



THE AUTHOR 

The history of Dvaita-Adyurta Polemics 
in its massive form, in Sanskrit, elating from 
Vyasatirtha in the first quarter of the 16th 
century and ending with the :8th is 
an event exciting wonder and admiration 
and has kept the spirit of quest of philo¬ 
sophical truth alive and active to this day. 

In 1964. Or. K. Naraift of the AUahaba^ 
University reopened it in modern garb in 
English and brought it to 'the modern 
academic forum, in his Critique of Mjtlhva 
Refutation affankard Schools of Vedanta. It 
'' has since been reprinted in 19SS. 

The-main targets of his httadh are the 
■NfSydmrta ot Vyiisatirtha and its defence 
against the reply of the Adraitasiddhi of 
Madhusi/duna. in Ramacafya's Tarangipi- 
Dr. Narain has undertaken to dispel what 
he calls “the darkness let loose by Vyasa- 
tirtha” and restore Advaita Vedanta to its 
status quo ante bellum, as the culmination ot 
Indian thought. 

The philosophical world has waited 
long for the reaction to Dr. Nurain’s work 
from the Dvaita side. The mantle has tallen 
on the doyen of modern scholars of Dvaita 
thought Dr. 8. N. K. Sharma (b. 1909), 
whose credentials to speak and write with 
authority and inward knowledge of the rival 
schools have been acknowledged by Savants 
of international reputation. 








ADVAITASIDDHI Vs NYAYAMRTA 

An up to date Critical Re-Appraisal 

PART - I 

by 

S&stranidhi, DvaitavedShtamajna, Madhvamumpriva 
Dr. B.N.K. SHARMA, MA, Ph.D .D. Litt., 

Retired Professor sal Head of the Dept of Sanskrit 
Rupard College. Bombay • 400 016. 

Recipient : Sahitya Akademi, 

President of India and Govt, of Maharashtra Awards. 


Published by 

Anandatlrtha PratijlhSna of the Akhila Bharat* MSdhva 
Mahamandal, Katriguppa Main Road, Bangalore - 560 028. 


1994 



COPYRIGHT: Reserved by the Author 
First Edition : 500 Copies. 


Printed by MERCURY PRINTERS, 

82, Bazaar Road, Mylapore, 
MADRAS-600 004. ©84879 


Price: Rs.70/- 



ADVAITASIDDHI VS. NYAYAMRTA 
AN UPTO DATE RE APPRAISAL 



ABBREVIATIONS 


A-Siddhi 

Advaita - siddhi 

Ail. Up. 

Ailarcya Upanisad 

AV 

Anu • Vyakhyana (Madhva) 

Brh. Up. 

Brhadaranyaka Upanisad 

B.S. 

Brahma Sutras 

B.S.B. 

Brahmasutra Bhasva 

Chan.Up. 

Chindogya Upanisad 

DVSRF 

Dvaita Vedanta Studies and Research 
Foundation (Bangalore) 

J 

JayatTrtha 

M 

Madhva 

Mand.Up. 

MSndukya Upanisad 

Nvm 

NvSySmrta 

NS. 

Nyiva SudhS (JayatTrtha) 

PL 

PramSna Laksana (Madhva) 

PLt 

PramJnalaksana Tika (JayatTrtha) 

PM 

Philosophy of Madhvacarva 

P.M.S. 

PurvamTmamsa Sutras (Jaimini) 

RV 

Rg Veda 

S 

Sankara 

TD 

TattvapradTpa (Trivikrama Pandita) 

TDy. 

Taltvodyota (Madhva) 

TDvi. 

Tattvodyota Tika (JayatTrtha) 

Tg 

(Nyayamrta) - Tarangini (RSmScSrya) 

TT 

TarkatSndava (VySsatlrtha) 

Taitt. Up. 

TaittirTya Upanisad 

VTN 

Visnutaltvanirnaya (Madhva) 



Reverentially Dedicated to 

Sri Visvesa Tirtha SvSmlji 

of 

Sri Pejavar Mult, Udupi 
in acknowledgement of his abiding 
interest and inspiration in my literary career. 




FOREWORD 


All of us who are interested in Indian Philosophy and in Vedanta 
in particular are greatly indebted to DR.B.N.K.SHARMA. He 
has in this volume added to his magisterial History of Dvaita 
School (2nd Edition, 1981) and other writings with an exposition 
and unfolding of Vyasalirtha's Nyayamrta. Although the 
Neo-Vedantin philosophy espoused by Swami Vivekananda was 
an important riposte to the critiques of Indian religion and 
philosophy launched by many missionaries and colonial 
administrators, and so became a potent weapon in the defence 
of Indian nationalism, its great influence has indeed tended 
to ooscure the real total shape of Vedanta, taken in its various 
forms. Dr. Sharma's restoration of Madhva’s rightful place in 
the whole scheme of Hindu thought has been most welcome. 
This latest undertaking of his shows how later important figures 
in the Dvaitin tradition still produced important criticisms of 
the Non-Dualist epistemology and metaphysics. They pointed 
to certain instabilities in the Advaitin philosophy. Dr. Sharma 
incisively points to the contradiction in supposing that Got! 
is after all a deceptive magician. Both Western and traditional 
Indian scholars are in his debt for making the Nyayamrta 
available to a modern public. I congratulate him on this volume's 
appearance. 

Ninian Smart, 

J.F. Rowny Professor of Comparative Religions, 

University of California. 

Santa Barbara, 

U.S.A. 





i 

CONTENTS 

Page 

No. 

Abbreviations 


iii 

Foreword 


iv 

Autthor’s Preface 

v-xxviii 

CHAPTER I 

Introductory 

1-14 

CHAPTER 11 

Doctrine of Falsity of the World 
(Milhyatva) 

15-18 


DEFINITIONS OF FALSITY 


CHAPTER ID 

First Definition of Falsity 

19 

CHAPTER IV 

Second Definition of Falsity 

23 

CHAPTER V 

Third Definition of Falsity 

33 

CHAPTER VI 

Fourth Definition of Falsity 

36 

CHAPTER VO 

Fifth Definition of Falsity 

39 

CHAPTER VTU 

Status of Falcity - True or false 

GROUNDS OF FALSITY 

43 

CHAPTER IX 

DrSyatva (Perceptibility) 

49 

CHAPTER X 

JAdatva (Materiality) 

66 

CHAPTER XI 

Paricchinnatva (Finitude) 

79 

CHAPTER XU 

Criterion of Reality (Sattvanirukti) 

89 

CHAPTER Xm 

Primacy of Pratyaksa (Perception) 

100 

CHAPTER XJV 

No Conflict with ApacchedanySva 

111 

CHAPTER XV 

Possibility of future Stullifiability of 
Pratyaksa 

115 

CHAPTER XVI 

Competence of Pratyaksa to Grasp 
Uncontradictable reality of the 

World 

128 

CHAPTER XVII 

Relation between Consciousness and 
its Objects (DrgdfSyasambandha) 

136 



y 


CHAPTER XVm 

Theory of Perception in Advaita 
(Pratikarmavyavastha) 

150 

CHAPTER XIX 

Antinomies in the Advaita 
Interpretation of Neha niciisti Sruti 

174 

CHAPTER XX 

Doctrine of Falsity of the Universe 
•Irrational 

185 

Appendix I 

KrishnadevarSyakrti 

193 

n 

GuruparamparS of Vvisatlrtha 

195 

m 

Brief Sketch of Life, Personality, 
Career and Achievements of 
Vyisaflrtha 

197 

IV 

Select List of Author’s Writings 

209 

Index 


220 

Books Consulted 


229 

Errata 


230 






fanwrcfarTra *ft%^rFff t Twftr% i 

wro ^rrfrm r«rw«MT^W n 

<jWJWqI 

*sw t*i4m«i*-h*U*i rabiffinriNr& ti 
w gmaHftm tm wirM'wW i 

n” 1 

fm«f Fg?rt u: $wnj^n i 2 

cTFPf ^wn^cft^T gr< T »nfm<I WlftWT II 
arryirfar HTTOtsro hfth: Hswiwft t 

N €\ 

^Tf^pinflWjtVT *T*CT*fa U 

9TOrFW 1 I^^RvfmT^ » 
s^crmf wiwtw sre*ft ii 

cv • 

ni?srw gfast ftnnpg ^g*H I 
^rt: <?5TO>: II 

snft WH ^ I R m wr vfit : I 

R f«fyq qr ^ * isrfwirwf mr ffir u 

1 . Copper plate grant Kmhnadevaraya to Vyaaa- 
tirtha (Ep, Car> — Shimoga. 

2. See Kmhnadevaraya K/ti Appendix 




a r w Tirw w« TT«nffr *f Ut^ ssriffosr fa* ? 

wm w wpfa ifrr ftrw. wtemmtntftrg: 
%**ri fnr^^fw fefftrafc finrrg fwwm; u 

wrmnra faimwTftfronifawT 
M*«iiw>r»r5fT«iT srf<«fr$in«ro \ 

itm finreTfiremg 

inf*rt«ra ep»rm *ro*ra»if^ n 

SomioSth*: Vyisayogicvite 




PREFACE 

The Dvaita system of Vedanta, of which Sri Madhvscirya 
(1238-1317) was the historical Founder, has come to stay as the 
most formidable rival of the Advaita philosophy of Sankarflc&rya. 
Tho’ Ramanuja and his predecessor Yamuna had also vigorously 
opposed the claims of Sankara-Vedsnta to be the sole repre¬ 
sentative of the philosophy of the Upanisads (aupansadam Darfca- 
nam), "Visistadvaita” by its very label and certam in-built 
Monistic leanings and mental reservations, such as its (ostensible) 
acceptance of Brahman's Abbinna-nimittopadana-karanatva is 
respect of the world, the uniformity of svarupa of a plurality of 
Selves and their utmost equality (paramasdmyam) with Brahman, 
in spite of the spirit and letter of the Sutra Ja gad vy3p&ra varjam 
(B. S. iv. 17) >n the released Hate, could not live up to the 
rigid requirements of an Unadulterated Theism, pledged to tho 
supreme majesty end transcendence of Brahman (notwithstanding 
its immanence) in all respects (l) Rsminuja’s Critique of the 
presuppositions of Sankara Vedanta in the introduction to hi* 
£ribh&sya and its exposition by Sudarssana Snri and the futther 
criticisms of the doctrine* of MsysvSda by Yedsnta Deeika in 
hi* Satadusanui did not evoke any noteworthy reaction from the 
Advaita side, till very recently at the hands of Mm. Ananta- 
krishna Sastri, in his irihhasya-Khandanam. 

Not so in the case of Madhva. His frontal attacks on almost 
all the vulnerable positions of Monistic philosophy from an 
altogether fresh standpoint of his New Realism in Vedanta, 
differed from those of earlier Realisms known to the Advaitins. 
It was equipped with a new set of concepts and categories like 
the ONE‘Svatantra-tattva'. Visesas, Sek$i, Svarupabheda, disti¬ 
nction of attributes into permanent ( Yavad-dravyabhavi ) and 
impermanent! ayavaddravyabhivi) the former being Savisesibhinna 
with the substance, acceptance of identity-in difference between 
substance and its permanent attributes thro’ the agency of 
SvarQpa-Vtsejas, which permit of distinction of reference between 
Gupa and Gugl without involoving any distinction of essence 
between then. 

1. See Viivatak paramam nilyam ( Puru&asukta ) Tatstham 
tadvyatiriktam ca niyantSram namdmahe (Skinda) 



vi Advaitasiddhi V» NySyimrta : A Re-Appraiial 

This New Realism propounded by Madhva seems to have 
come upon the Advaitini of his days as a complete suprite. 
They had to deal with the double task of plugging the vulne¬ 
rable holes in their own doctrines exposed to his criticisms and 
upon which he could turn the tables against them (2) and to 
go into the merits and demerits of the alternative solutions of 
metaphysical problems offered by him on the basis of the New 

Logic of the Brahma-Tarka relied upon by him in regard to the 
concept of S»k?J as the never-erring principle of validation of 
all knowledge, the criterion of Upajivya-pramaija-prsbalya in 
resolving the apparent conflict between Pratyak$a and socalled 
Monistic texts. In addition, Madhva'i works had brought to light 
from both the extant sacred literature of the Prasthanatraya and 
from a large body of fading and forgotten source-books ho had 
salvaged from oblivion and wanton destruction of ancient 
Manuscript Libraries in the country during the disturbed 
political conditions in the wake of the invasions of a crusading 
faith. These tasks were time-consmuing. Meantime, the 
Aksobhya VidySraijya disputation on the 'Tat tvam asi’ text 
and its result as confirmed by the referee Vedanta Desika. ( 3) 

2. cf. 

wr ci«rr?atm i asfafesj w. fag* • 

(M VTN ) and Jayatirtha’s elucidation— 

Jrcftimrc (J. VTNt.) 

3. “ vforr tRqqfffqT «RqflTsr$rf?;tr i 

•rfRsqqtfrtsqgftTpssfl? n ” 

(Quoted in Muvviyiroppadi Guruparam pari Vaibhavapre 
KisikS of Brahme tantra Svatantra Jeer (See my HDSV. 
p. 281 (1981) 



Preface 


vii 


had come at a set-back to Advaita. 

•Pufijaprajnadamna' as Madhva’s philosophy now came to 
be called for the first time in MBdhava'a Sarvadar&ana-Sangraha 
had thus come out triumphant on its own credentials. The 
systematic formulation of its doctrinal details and their elabora¬ 
tion thro" patiently worked out Prakriyas (organic details) the 
definitions of concepts and the standardization of thought and 
the final presentation of the edifice of Madhva-SiddhBnta in all 
its architectonic unity and grandeur were accomplished by the 
genius of Jayatutha (1365 88). His Nyiyasudha on M‘s AV and 
commentaries on the Khspdana-traya had done splendid work in 
this direction, not to mention his excellent fiklson the Tattvo- 
dyota and the VTN. Thanks to him the system of Madhva had 
attained an indisputable place of honor, authority and equality 
of status with those of feankara and Rim&nuja as one of the three 
principal schools of Vedanta, both in respect of its adhika- 
rarjaprasthana and the Vada-Prasth&na. However, the circum¬ 
stance that most of his monumental works like the NyayasudhA. 
the Tattvaprakaiikd and other, on which be had spent his time 
and energy in giving exhaustive analysis and critical exposition 
of almost all the vital problems of logic and metaphysics not 
only of his own school but of most of the other leading schools 
of thought known and studied in his days, were mostly in the 
form of commentaries on the original works of Madhva was 
probably the reason why they were missed by or had escaped 
the attention of his contemporaries of other schools. That seems 
to be the reason why we do not come across any references or 
criticism of his writings in the works of Adraita writers who 
came after him till we come to NrsimhSsrama. His Viddvali 
however has laid the foundation for more elaborate dialectical 
works in the succeeding centuries. 


The next generation after Jayatirtba saw the advent of 
Rsiendra Tirtha and his successor Jayadhvaja. Tradition has it 
that they spearheaded the spread of Suddha-Vaispava Bh.kti 
Siddhinta of Madhva in.Bengal, which flowered into the Caita- 



viii Advaitasiddhi Vs Nylysmrta : A Re*Appraisal 

nya-Sampradlya. The Guruparampari of the Caitanya Sampra* 
dlya, as given by Baladeva and KavikarpapQra traces the 
spiritual descent of Caitanya to Madhva thro' Jayatirtba and 
VySsatirtha (See Appendix) 

Rsjendra’s pupil VijondisscSrya was the author of three 
monumental dialectical works Vadaratnavati, Vivaranavidam- 
banam and Khandana-KMpdana. The first one alone has surv- 
ved and has been printed. The others are not extant. They are 
however mentioned by name and quoted in the Vadaratnivali 
itself. The first and the last named have been quoted in 
Vyisatirtha's Nym. also. 

in 

The third quarter of the 15th century saw the birth of 
Vylsatfrtha (1460-1539), the Prince of Dialecticians of the 
Dvaita school. He was the sixth in successiuon from Jayatirtba, 
in his senior Pontifical line from Rftjendra. Ha modelled his 
Nyay&mrta on the Vddivali and Vsdratnivali of bis predecessors, 
enlarging their scope and dimensions considerably and producing 
a masterly treatise on Dvaita-Advaita philosophical polemics 
on a novel plan and pattern as the last word on the subject. He 
did similar work in regard to the philosophy of the BrahmasQtra 
on the basis of an indepth study and assessement of their differ¬ 
ent lines of thought represented by the three principal schools. 
He has also bequeathed to Indian Logic a masterly analysis and 
criticism of the logical and epistemological theories of the 
Founder of Navya, Nyaya in his Tattvacintimapi and its learned 
commentaries by Paksadhara, Vardham&na and Rucidatta, in 
his Tarkat&n&ava. 

VySsatirtha's Nym represents the highest achievement of 
Dvaita dialectics in the exhaustive and incisive analysis and 
assessment of the viability of the Monistic metaphysics of 
Sankara school, over the last eight hundred years. It is 
unparalleled both in depth of thought and range of survey. It 
has taken in its stride the entire garaut of its metaphysics and 



Preface ix 

subjected it to a dignified and objective analysis and criticism 
•without beat or passion, in strict parliamentary language, dealing 
with almost all shades of its thought, in one single work, cove¬ 
ring the other side of the picture as well, of the rival school of 
realistic metaphysics. 

In one word, VySsatirtha’s achievement was an event in the 
history of Vedanta Si Astra as a whole. It shattered the prestige of 
the Advaita school as never before. His dexterous handling of 
Vedic exegesis of MimSmss and the utilisation of the rulings of 
the Vylkarapa Sastra of Pacini and his commentators in deter¬ 
mining the import of disputed £ruiti texts and his expertise in 
both the PrScina and Navya Nyaya schools, not to speak of his 
apt citations from several standard works of other systems- 
known and studied in his days, (4) for purposes of criticism of 
Advaita doctrines and in support of those of his own school. 
This added several new dimensions to the final presenation of 
Madbva’s Realistic Theism and placed it firmly on an all-India 
pedestal from which it could not be dislodged and gave it a 
philosophical ststus and staying power which had to be reckoned 
with by all serious thinkers. 

If the Vedanta system is the culmination of Indian 
thought, Dvaita philosophy has every right to be recognised 
as the historical and ideological culmination of Vedantic thought. 
The thinkers of this school have doubtless benefited by the 
speculations of earlier schools, both cognate and rival. The 
Vedanta itself for example has dropped the concept of Sama. 
vaya and the MSdhva conception of Stk$i as the Apperceiving 
Self immune from error of judgments is a decided improvement 
on the conception of Ssk$i in Advita as the reflection of pure 
immaculate Caitanya in Avidyivftti. This deprives Epistemo¬ 
logy of any final principle of validation of knowledge within 
the framework of Svatahprimlgyavlda in Vedanta. As Prof. 
S. Bagchi has pointed out *' students of Indian thought can 

4. For List of Works cited by VySiatirtha in bis Nym. See 
my HDSVp. 301. 


x Advaitaslddhi V* Nyly Rafts : A Re-Appraisal 

always expect to learn something fresh and new from the 
writings of the thinkers of the Madhva school,” It is a real 
pity that the post-Vylsatirtha writers of the Navja-Nyflya 
school of Logic have not cared to look beyond their noses and 
take note of the searching criticises of the TaUvacmt&mani 
and its great commentaries by Pak$adhara and others in VyRsatir- 
tha’s TarkatlpQava. 

A classic of such magnificent range and depth as the 
Nyiyamrta could hardly remain neglected or ignored in a living 
system of thought like the Vedanta, for long, by the aggrieved 
party. It had administered a rude shock to the self-complacence 
‘nto which the Advaita thinkers had lapsed after their spectacu¬ 
lar victories over the earlier realistic systems like the SRnkhya* 
Ny&ya and MtmlmiR. To their dismay, they found a new 
“MahSmalla” in Madhva Siddhlnta and its triumphant entry 
into the philosophical arena, equipped with an altogether new 
metaphysical ideology in Realistic thought and a new technique 
of Vedantic exegecsis based on the criterion of Upajivyapraml- 
©aprlbalya in tackling the conflict of experience with Monistic 
texts, without depriving or down - grading either of them as 
“atattvtvedaka” 

But It was not till half a century after the exit of VySsa- 
tirtha from the philosophical scene that a determined effort was 
made in Advaita circles to take stock of the situation and set the 
house in order by closing the bieaches made and put up a stout 
resistance and a spectacular defence. It was the talented Logician 
from Bengal MadhusGdana Sarasv&ti who took the challenge 
and came out with hit Advaita-Siddhi in refutation of the Ny&yd- 
mrta. It was however promptly answered by two stalwarts from 
the Dvaita side RBmficRrya-VyRsa and Anandabhajt1 raka in 
their Nym-Tarangini and Nym-Kanfatkoddhdra respectively. Both 
these scholars come from Puntimba in the Ahmadnaga district 
of Maharashtra, where Madhva Siddhinta had taken deep roots 
since the days of Madhva and Padmanlbba Tirtha. The 
jTarangini was refuted by Biahminanda Saraavati of Bengal is his 



Preface 


xi 


Brahminandiya . It wa> in its turn refuted by Vanamala Misra a 
North Indian follower of Madhva Sampradsya from Briadavan 
(U. P.) He wat alao the author of leveral other works on Madhva 
thought (For details See my HDSV). 

IV 

There the great controversy came to a hait and a standstill, 
in the traditional style of SSstrartha-Vicira in Sanskrit, so 
admirably suited to incisive thought-dissection. 

The rapid decline of Sanskrit after the advent of foreign rule 
in India and the establishment of modern Indian Universities with 
English as the medium of higher education, paved the way for 
the emergence of ‘‘Indologists” and their entry into the field. 
Their influence on the pursuit of advanced studies and Research 
in Sanskrit was exerted mainly through the medium of the 
English language. The new generation of “Sanskrit Scholars \ 
students and Researchers who came out of the portals of the new 
Universities in the nationalist period in Indian history had come 
under the powerful Influence of the speeches and writings of 
Swami Vivekananda, who had thrown the full weight of bis 
magnetic personality, eloquence and spiritual halo, heavily on 
the Advaitavida of Sankara, which be believed to be the highest 
reach of the “Vedanta” of the Upanisads. He had however 
judiciously adminstered his own orientations to some of the key 
notes of the traditional Sankara Vedanta such as the doctrine of 
Mays and “Mithyatva” to make than more acceptable to the 
taste of Western Rationalists and Indian intellectuals. Hit 
diluted versions of Advaita and Mflylvida were made more 
popular by academic writara brought up in that milieu. Before 
long, it came to be seriously believed that “Vedanta” is synony¬ 
mous with “Advaita* * and the two are convertible terms. 

But whatever may have been the vogue in the writing* of the 
earlier authors of the Buddhist, Nyiya and MfmSmil achoolt 
prior to the adviol of the Vedanta schools of Rsmgnuja and 



Advaitaslddbi Vs Nyayampta : A Re-Appraisal 


xii 

Madhva, in regard to the use of the terms ''Vedanta*', and 
Vedantins” to denote the Sankara school, it is now no longer 
valid, justifiable or defensible, in the context of the present esta¬ 
blished position of the three principal schools of Vedanta to 
restrict it to one of them. It is high time our “modern” scholar* 
and intellectuals, who ought to know better, not only discourage 
this vicious practice but themselves learn to desist from it altoge¬ 
ther ia their own writings. It is therefore regrettable to see that 
Dr. Narain himself has not been able to rise above this tempta¬ 
tion and hat succumbed to it by monopolising the use of the term 
to denote the Sankara school exclusively. It is to be hoped he 
will not do so in his future writings. 

In the infancy of Indian philosophical stndiet by Western 
and modern scholors, much capital had been made of a few 
random quotes from the Upani$adt(uch as 'Tat tvam asi’ f 'Abam 
Brahmssmi’ torn from their legitimas context, in favor of 
•‘Advaita” and the other schools of Raminuja and Madhva were 
lebclled as “Bhakti schools” “belonging more to the religious 
history then to the philosophical development of Indian thought” 
(RSdhakrishnan). The syllabus for Post-graduate studies in 
Sanskrit and Indian Philosophy has been and still is heavily 
overweighted in favor of Advaita-Vedanta with but a meagre 
half-hearted provision for the study of the other schools of 
Vedanta in many of our Universities. It is a fit case for the 
University Grants Commission to set right this anemoly. 

Such a deplorable state of affairs in our "temples of lear¬ 
ning” has greatly impoverished the standard of philosophical 
tcholarthip and creative thinking among the alumni It has bred a 
wrong notion that nen-Moniatic systems of Vedanta are to be 
looked at askance as the outcome of inierference of religious 
prejudice with the pursuit of true philosophy and the aftermath 
of the reign of religion in contemporary philosophy. Such unme¬ 
rited denigration of and slur cast on the realistic systems of 
Vedanta of our country has at times received overt and covert 
encouragement from various publicity media including those at 



Preface 


xiu 


Government level. This state of affairs is highly detrimental to 
the free and unfettered development of the true philosophical 
spirit of which this country has been the home, the cradle and 
the exemplar, for thousands of years. 

The right way to restore balance of thought sanity and 
sobriety of judgment cn the subject is to mobilise public opinion 
among our intellectuals and the rising generation to extend com¬ 
plete parity of place and attention to all the different systems of 
Vedanta which have a living interest and following in the 
country. 

V 

Unlike some other writers on Indian philosophy who have 
blacked out Dvaita philosophy from the public gaze. Dr. JNarain 
has done a real service to the advancement of thought and 
Vedantic studies thro’ his first work (Out lines) of Madhva Philo¬ 
sophy. It has however come upon me a startling surprise that 
barely within two years of its appearance he should have come 
out with his Critique of Madhva Refutation of S ankara School of 
Vedanta (Udayana Publication, Allahabad, 1964) which has 
recently been reprinted (1988) by Munsbiram Manoharlal, 
Delhi. His first work was highly appreciative cf Madhva philo¬ 
sophy while the second is highly censorious of the performance 
of Madhva, Jayatirtha and Vyasatirtha, accusing them of grossly 
misrepresenting Advaita by wantonly or otherwise confusing 
between the Paramirihika and the VyivahSrika levels of truth 
in Sankara’s philosophy and holding it up to misplaced criticism 
throughout. 

The following quotes from Dr. Narain’s second work will 
suffice to make this clear (I) “The Madhva philosopher is satis¬ 
fied with his theory that ’’Ajnlna” is the negation of knowledge 
and its existence is quite negative 1 ’ * (P. 5). (2) “Most of the 
criticisms against Sankara and his followers are grounded in 

5. This is a totally mistaken view. Madhva philosophy 
too accepts Bhavarupa Ajncma - See my PM p. 261. (1986) 

00 




Advaitasiddhi Vs Nyayanafta : A Re-Appraisal 


xiv 

die confusion of standpoint* to which the opponents of Sankara 
have shown a persistent tendency. Here also the confusion is 
caused in the minds of the Msdhva critics that knowledge can¬ 
not be the substratum of the superimposition of the object, as 
the substratum must always be of a higher degree in the order of 
reality *' (p. 63) (3) “ But for Madhusudana’s defence in hia 
monumental work, the ‘‘Vedanta” position would have been 
completely eclipsed by Vylsatlrtha’s terrible onslaught. Wc 
would naturally find much light to dispel the darkness let loose 
by Vyasatirtha’s criticisms in Madhusiidana’s magnum opus'' 
(P. 166) (4) The MSdhva philosophers have at times misrepre¬ 
sented the ’‘Vedanta” position (p. 192) They have deliberately 
overlooked the philosophy of Vivaria that had been invented for 
avoiding the contradictions and inconsistencies that would other¬ 
wise follow in the wake of the Parigima conception of Brahman. 
Is it not a matter of pity that the Masters of the Midhva 
school have in their enthusiasm of nullifying all the achievements 
of the rival school refused to take notice of the most important 
aspect of "Vedanta philosophy ”? (P. 209) - Italics mine. 

It is a gross perversion of the truth for Dr. Narain to say 
that the Masters of the Dvaita school have deliberately overlooked 
the explanation of Vivarta invented by the Advaitins. All the 
three masters have been quite well informed about the Brahma- 
Virartavida and have refuted it in their writings. If Dr. Narain 
would look into Madhva’s AV he will find him, after refuting 
real redolent Brahmapariolmavada of Bhsskara and the ostensi¬ 
ble PariQimavlda interpretation of the Sutra Prakrtisca 
(I, 4. 24) as the ‘‘Purvabhumi ” of Vrvartavsida, as the Sankse- 
pasSriraka puts it, taking the clue from the labored explanation 

of the Bhimati {Iyam copadanaparinimadibhaya .) taking on 

the new-fangled Vivartakirapavlda ‘‘invented” by the Advaitins 
to save their Brahman: 

Yaccavikftam evaikam Brahma viivitmani mr}i 

Drsyate mandadrstyaiva sa sarga iti kathyate 




Preface i* 

Explaining the details of the Vivartavada here Jayatirtha 
gives a lucid exposition of avikrtam, ;«r si and mandadrsti 
and elucidates the Advaita position aa follows— 

"Just as the rope without undergoing any change or modifica¬ 
tion appears falsely in the form of the serpent, so too Brahmam. 
The Sutra "Prakrtisca tells that B. is the Upadanakira^a 
of the world just as now clarified. Here, "upadanutva” is not 
conceived in the sense of material transformation , but as the 
substratum of the false appearance, due to the modification of 
Avidya (NS. i. p. 205): 

I qqfa qqT I rflrtfT Sfq^?V 

STffctSa ?cmfePTT q>«TrT 1 
vrqfa-5rf;fc!?^FtTTf?Ha:: gsffareteqt 
gtsq?i t ^qisnRc^r q q qf^iftraqr, «fq srfa?nqfT- 

<*cft sfarRta sfa i 

This should make it clear who is misrepresenting whom ! The 

t hird Master Vyasatirtha too has devoted a section to the 
examination of the vivartavada in terms of its three alternative 
explanations of B’s causality in association with AvidyS, as pro¬ 
pounded by the Vjyarapaksra. Jayatirtha’s NS too has indica¬ 
ted these three alternative positions of the Vivaranakara. In 
his assessment of this threefold explanation Dr. Narain finding 
it difficult to meet the objections of VySsatirtha tries to get 
away with an irrelevant plea that "there is a lurking doubt in 
the minds of the Vivaranites on the question of the causality 
of Brahman. The SSnkarites find it expedient to associate it in 
some way or other (Italics mine) with the Anirvacaniya - Mfiyi 
and the three alternative "suggestions” (Italics mine) arc only 
different ways of explaining the relation and this does not 
mean that the explanation is to be literally accepted, (Op. cit 
p. 210). This practically give* the whole case away. 



xvi Advaitasiddbi Vs NySyimrla : A Re-Appraisal 

The conception oi ‘‘upidsna” as a transforming material 
cause is widely accepted in our Sastra usage. The derivation of 
ihe terms upad&na and up.iJeya (from upa-S-da) signifies the 
passing on of some essential characteristic of the upadana to the 
upSdeya. This is accepted by Suresvara who says that “Ajnana 
(Avidy4) is the upadSna of the Magic show of the world and 
that Brahman is said to be the cause thro' the medium of this 
'* AjnSna: 

Asya dmitendrajahisya yad updda naklranam 

Ajndnam, tad upasrtya Brahma kiranarn ucyatc 

As “Ajnana’* is thus the Upidanakaraoa of the world-appe¬ 
arance its essential character of miirvacaniyatva is passed on to 
the world. But none of the essential characters of Brahman 
such as its consciousness, blissfulness and PSram&rthikatva is 
passed on to the world which is “Jada” There lies the crux of 
the problem. 

Nor can Upidanatvs be construed in the sense of its being 
the substratum of an illusory condition (bhramadhisfhdnatvam) 
That would make the deluded perceiver of the shell-silver the 
UpadSna of the shell-silver as he is the abode (Ssraya) of the 
deluded cognition. If it is said that the substratum of the super¬ 
imposed object is the Upadsna, the shell cannot be the Upadfina 
of the illusory silver, as it it not cognised as having the shell for 
its locus. For the cognition takes the form ‘‘this is silver” and not 
as “in this ( asmin) there is silver If it is contended that the 
Upddlna is that with which the superimposed object is cognised 
as put in apposition (SStninddlnkara^ya), it will not cover the 
case of an illusory cognition like “the conch is yellow 1 ’. For the 
illusory cognition does not take the form “Yellowness is the 
conch” (by way of Siminadhikaranya), but as “the couch is 
yellow-timed* 



Preface 


xvli 


Madhusiidana Sarasvati therefore tries to circumvent these 
difficulties and the criticism of the Msdhva thinkers with an 
improvised definition of his own of UpadSnatva (material causa- 
lity) as applicable to B. as the causality founded in its own 
seif in creating the world: {Svanis iha-karya-junihetutxam). 
This may perhaps preclude overpervasion of the definition 
in respect of the efficient causality of the Pot-maker, as tho 
pot produced by him does not inhere in him but in its material 
causal stuff of clay. 

But the question is whether the Nirviiesa-Brahman can 
be called the cause of production ( kdryajar.ihetu) as it is 
Ni$kriya and Nirdharmaka. (void of activity and attributes). 
The world (Ka ryeprapanra) subsists in its own causal Stuff of 
AvidyS, according to Advaita (Cf. Avidyd sakakaryena ndsid asti 
bhavisyatij. The world is thus Avidyanisjba. and not Brahma- 
nif(ha. Neither can hetuva (causality) as such be said to subsist 
in Brahman, which is Nirvisesa. Moreover, the role of Nirvi¬ 
sesa. B. as the substratum of the superimposition of the world 
upon it ( prapancabliramadhisthdnaivam) in VivartavSda, is absolu¬ 
tely passive, sud its causality purely nominal, whereas Anirva- 
canlya. Maya (AjnSna), with itsdwin characteristics of dear ana 
(concealing) and Vibhrama (projecting an appearance) has far 
better claims than the Nirviseja-B. to be regarded as producing 
the Ksrya inhering in its causal stuff of AjnSna. 

Moreover, in Advaita it is the Sagujja-B ‘the (Upahita-B) 
which operates as the efficient cause, while the Nirvisesa remains 
the passive substratum, without consent and participation in it, This 
makes for two Brahmans performing different functions. And 
the Buddha and Upahita Brahmans are not, strictly speaking, 
identical, except in the loose sense of the bare Cit which cannot 
however be designated as the ‘cause’ (kdryajanihelu). As the 
Nirviae§a-B. is the only real and true B., it cannot play two 
different roles, or even one for that matter, as required by the 
wording of the Sutra (Prakftisca) — the conjunctive particle 
denoting the sense of equal strength (tulya bala). 



xviii Advaitasiddhi Vt Nyiyamj-ta : A Re-Appraisal 

B's Abhinna-nimittopadinatva as expressly spelt out io 
Sankara’s bhSsya on the Sutra has been modified in the Bhdmati 
in terms of Vivartavada. Sarvajoatman has tried to explain its 
presence in the Bhlsya as the '‘prelude** to the official view of 
Vivarta ( Vivartavadasya tu purvabhumih). The Masters of 
Dvaita have therefore dealt with both the theories of Parinlma 
and Vivarta as they are found in Sankara’s Sutrabh»$ya and in 
the modified version of Vivarta as developed by his Scholiasts. 
They have thus been quite fair to the Advaitins and have 
ignored or suppressed neither. Yet Dr. Narain without looking 
into their works presumes to accuse them of having deliberately 
overlooked the Vivartavada interpretation, with intent” to 
nullify the achievements of the rival school ’’ (Op. cit. p. 280) 

By opting for Vivartavada, the Advaitins have virtually 
abandoned the Brahmopldanavsda, and transferred it to Anir- 
vacaniya Ajnana. As Maya is not the same as Brahman, it makes 
no difference whether MSya is the UpadanakSraga or the 
Prakrti of the Sinkhyas, as both are Jatfa. The dismissal of 
Prakrti as ‘'A-babdam” (foreign to the Srutis) in 3snkaras 
interpretation of the Iksatyadbikarapam of the Sutras has been 
shown to be baseless in the works of Madhya and his commen¬ 
tator*. (See my BSPC Vol, I pp 28-29). 

The distinction made in Advaila between the Vy&vahSrika 
and the Psramsrthika levels of truth may no doubt be very 
vital to it* interest. But as I have stated elsewhere in my Philo¬ 
sophy of Madina (p. 470). it is not good logic to take it for granted 
and build a superstructure on it. It has become second nature to 
„pokeimen of A dvaita to parry the criticisms of the Realists by 
seeking shelter behind the two level theory and repealing the 
charge of their critics persistently overlooking that basic 
distinction or deliberately confusing between them and expec¬ 
ting to convince the casual reader by repeating this charge 
ad museum. It is time this bluff is called off. Far from 
being oblivious of the distinction drawn by the Advaitins bet¬ 
ween the two levels of truth, or ignoring it in their criticism, the 
Dvaita writers have shown themselves in their writings to be 



Preface 


xix 

fully aware of it, right from the day* of Madhya and have given 
the fullest consideration to the grounds on which it is based and 
shown them to be wanting in probative value. Hence the disa¬ 
greement on this issue is not the outcome of any ignorance or 
misunderstanding on the part of the Dvaitins or their falling a 
prey to any confusion of thought. The burden of proof regarding 
the two level theory of truth rests on the Advaitins. They have 
to admit that the VySvahSrika “ and the “ Pritibhasika ’’ are 
equally ' *mithyS ”, irrespective of the time lag between their 
exposure. 

Bhranter bahukila-anuvartitvam ca aprayvjiki (Nym) For, 
what is‘‘Mithyft" is stultifiable ( hadhya ), And BSdhya again as 
accreditedly defined in the school is as sweeping es it is unspa¬ 
ring in term* of negation for all the three periods of time as 
we shall repeatedly see. No doubt there are two views about the 
frame of reference from which it is said to b# operative one 
from the “Paramarthika level (Paramirthikaiv&karcrta nisedhah) 
and the other of absolute negation with reference to all the three 
periods of time in essence of the object {svarupena nisedha). In 
his analysis of the nature of this Nisedha (stultification) from 
these two points of view on the subject of the nature of ‘‘Mith- 
ystva" it will be seen that Vyasatirtha has laid bare the fallacy 
of mutual dependence (i mvonydiraya) which dogs the footsteps 
of BSdha from the Piramlrthika point of view and the reduction 
of the counterpositive of negation in essence (svarupena nisedha) 
with reference to all the three periods of time to utter non-exis¬ 
tence inclusive of its a sad- vailakfanya svurupa). An astute 
Logician, Madhusudana when confronted by Vyasatirtha quietly 
abandons the older view of sublation from the Piramarthik* 
standpoint on account of the mutual interdependence it involves 
and accepts boldly the only other alternative left to him of 
'* Svarupena-nisedha regardless of the consequence which Vytsa- 
tlrtha is quick to point out, as we shall See onP. 31 The two level 
theory of truth for all its apparant simplicity as an “open sesa¬ 
me” has proved to bo a. veritable labyriath for Advaita. 



*x Advaitasiddbi V* Nyaysmrta •. A Re-Appraisal 

The contention that the Srutis teach MithyAtva of the world 
it also unsustainable. There are many more which insist on the 
reality of the world such as “Visvam satyam...(R, V, ii, 24, 12) 
YatkAtathyato arthin vyadadhat.(Isa Up. ). The creation texts 
and cosmological details in the Upanisads are not a mere make- 
believe. VySsatirtka rightly points out the relegation of the 
Srutis which deal with the details of cosmic creation in a syste¬ 
matic order and the involution in the revetse order at ike time of 
world-dissolution, the references to tbe sojourn of the souls in 
Heaven and Hell and rebirth will be reduced to a 
mockery if the world is pronounced to be MithyS off hand. The 
establishment of the concept of Mi'.hyaiva itself depends on the 
establishment of the two level theory of truth and that again as 
we have seen is yet to come out of the labyrinth. 

Madhva himself has rai?ed a pertinent question if tbe doct¬ 
rine of threefold reality is to be established on tbe basis of a 
proof falling under the first order of reality calied Pirsmattbiira- 
Sat or fcy ore falling under ore or the other cf the other two 
viz. the Vyflvafcarika or ifce PranbfcAsika. Since it is beyond the 
scope and jurisdiction of the VyiSvahSrika or the illusory real to 
say anything about the nature of the pAramarthika, the 6aid 
proof of establishing ifce Psum Jrihikasatya must be the Psra- 
mSrtbika-Brsbman itself or some other equally Plramartfcika 
real. But as the Advaiia Brahman is by definition ••Nirvisesa" it 
il powerless to etablisb, prove or disprove anything To call in 
some other PS rami rtkik a to aid would disrupt tbe doctrine of 
the one real. The contention that the Srutis establish that Brah¬ 
man alone is the truly real has already teen ihcwn to be wishful 
thinking. See Chap. XIX. 

Dasgupta was the first to draw tbe attention of Modern 
scholars to some of (he philosophical problems at issue between 
the Dvaita and Advaiu schools raised by Vylsatlrtha and the 
controversy provoked between the two schools. But Dasgupta 
confined himself only to a few select topics and had given tbe 
respective views of the parties without entering into an assess¬ 
ment of them of bis own. 



Preface 


xni 

Dr. Narain has now widened the scope of the subject matter 
and given his own assessment of the argument* of the contending 
schools. But from the quotes from his work I have already givta 
here it will be seen that he has not hesitated to play 
tricks with evidence, suppress material facts from the writings of 
the Dvaita authors and accuse them of deliberately misrepresen¬ 
ting the Advaita position and generally making them out to be 
the villains of the piece. 

It has therefore become necessary for me to repair the 
damage done to the reputation of the Masters of Dvaita thought 
and set the record straight so far as the case for Dvaita U 
concerned. I have a'so taken note of the attempted defence of 
the Advaita arguments by Dr. Narain and given my 
Re-appraisal of them. Dr. Narain could very well have avoided 
all the digressions and excursions into the background materials 
relating to Epistemological, ontological and other speculations in 
the different schools of Indian philosophy and confined himself 
strictly to the problems at issue between the Advaita school and 
its rival and included in his survey topics more relevant to them 
primarily. I have therefore stuck to the order of topics raised by 
Vyfisatirtha in the main. 

The net result of the Dvaita-Advaita Polemics initiated by 
Vyfttatirtha has been to bring to the forefront the rifts and 
fissures in the body-politic of Advaita metaphysics and its 
presuppositions. (See P. vi fa 2) To give an instance, in his criticism 
of the second definition of Falsity of the world, Vyasatirtha first 
of all disposes of its first alternative that the subtation of the 
world contemplated by PratipannopSdbau traikalikanisedba- 
pratiyogitvam, is from the PBrSmSrtbika level, on the ground 
that it is vitiated by the fallacy of interdependence Bnd that it 
cannot therefore pass muster. Evidently, MadbusOdana accepts the 
force of this argument as he does not attempt to rebut it. Wheu 
Vyasattrtha confronts him with the other alternative of eublation 
in essence of the suchness of the appearance inclusive of the 
rescinding of its asadvilaksanatvakdra Madhusudana boldly and 



xxii Advaitasiddhi Vi Nylylmrta : A Re-Appraisal 

unhesitatingly opts for it. Svarupenaiva traik&Ukanifedhasya pra- 
pance S' uktirupyadau ca angikdrat. As “Svaruptna ni^edha” 
involves the wiping out of the “asadvilaksanatvdkara" of the 
appearance, its effect will be to reduce the object in question to 
a nullity. That would make the soealJed ‘'Vyavahsrika-satyatva 
ostemibly granted to external world in Advaita thought a mere 
eyewash and reduce it to the Samvrtisatya of Nihilism. Such 
is the nemesis of the traditional Advaita of Sankara expressly 
admitted, probably for the first time, by Madhusudana. Well may 
one wonder whether Advaitic circles would consider Madhusu¬ 
dana to have done a service or a disservice to their cause. Perhaps 
traditional Advaita may not be bothered in the least about the 
consequences of the A-Siddhi's confession. 

" Neo—Vedanta " 

But the conscience of modern Apologists of Sankara Advaita 
who would fain uphold its claims to be most rational in its out¬ 
look “where thought follows thought naturally until Advaitism 
Is seen to complete and crown the t6\ftct'\Radhakrishtuin 1. Phil. 
ii. p 657), bai been at pains all along to remedy the situation. 
What Dr, Radhakrishnan presents in his Philosophy of Integral 
Experience is an attempt and an example of an improvement and 
departure from the strictly unitary conception of Sankara-Advaita 
and its background of MSy4v&da and Jagan-Mithyatva. 

Earlier still, Swami Vivekaoanda bad given a twist and a 
reorientation to Sankara-Advaita and his Miyivsda by liberally 
diluting the content of Miy4 and Mitbyatva. 

Recently, Swami Tapasyananda, Head of the Sri Rama- 
krishna Mission, Madras, in the Introduction to his Bhakti 
Schools of Vedanta (1990) has elaborated the principles of wbat 
he calls ‘‘Neo-Vedanta*’, which he says emerges from the experien¬ 
ces and teachings of Ramakrishna and the speeches and writings 
of bis gifted disciple Swami Vivekananda. He says that ‘classical 
Vedanta’ by which term he excludes the Bhakti School*, will have 
an honoured place, if it comes to accept the outlook of Neo- 



Pref ace 


xxiii 

Vedanta and receive world-acceptance and that the followers of 
Vedanta should abandon the polemical method. 

This overlooks the fact that the dialectical method has con¬ 
tributed immensely to the clarification of numerous problems of 
philosophy and the richness of thought content of various systems 
in the past and is still capable of providing sound guide - lines and 
fresh insights for the development of a Pan-Indian Philosophy, 
in substance and in principle, if implemented on right lines. 

The distinctiveness of “Neo-Vedanta* ’ according to Swami 
TapasjSnanda, lies in its acceptance of both the Sagupa or Savi- 
fcesa-Brahman and the Nirvise$a (Nirgupa) Brahman as two 
sides of the same coio. They exist and have the same reality and 
validity with two different frames of reference. It rejects the two 
tier theory of truth into higher and lower knowledge the Paramsr. 
thika and the Vy&vahSrika. The latter, with its worship of God 
of the Bhakti schools, endowed with all auspicious attributes as 
the Creator of the world and the bestower of Grace and delive¬ 
rance is as real as the irvisesa-Brahman. The only difference is 
that when the one is experienced, the other is not. The other 
distinctiveness is that of the concept of sufclaticn of the world 
(Badba) when true knowledge dawns. In Nco —Vedanta 
Badha is rejected outright. And with it goes Sad-asad-anirva- 
caniya-Mayo and the Mithjatva of the world, which have been 
read into Sankara’s classical system “by his scholastics*',— 
(presumably in their over-enthusiastic smartness). 

This picture is however jar from being coned or true to 
Sankara’s own clear pronouncements in his BSB. or even logically 
consistent. Sankara’s pronouncements on the status of the 
Saguna and the Nirguna Brahmans and the factual existence of 
the world even after A, B, or C attains realisation and merging 
in the Nirvisesa gives no support to any of the articles of faith 
of “Neo-Vedanta" that the Sagupa and Nirgupa Brahmans have 
been placed on the same par as the two sides of the same coin 
having the same reality and validity. After crying down the two- 



xxiv Advaitisiddhi V* Nyayfkmrta : A Re-Appraisal 


tier theory of truth it is a surreptitious way of introducing it 
again by way of ‘‘different frames of reference”. Sankara is 
adamant that the Sagun a or Sa-visesa B. is always associated 
with Upadhis (adjuncts) and these Upadhis according to him are 
necessarily the projections of Avidya (ignorance)—“avidy&kalpita 
as he calls it. (See BSB. ii. 2. 11) The Immutable or ‘‘Kutastha- 
Brahman, (Nirvisefa) is the only truth (BSB. ii, 2, 16). The entire 
Universe is just "Mayamatram” It is liable to sublation (Badha), 
like the dream world, with this difference that while the latter is 
sublated everyday, the external world by the knowledge of 
Brahman, when it arises (BSB. iii 2,4), It is thus a question of 
shorter or longer duration of the error between them. The idea 
of the Savise$a and the Nirvisesa both having the same reality 
and validity as the two sides of the same coin or the vast liquidity 
of the Ocean and the solid icebergs in another part has been 
severely criticised by Sankara under BSB. ii, 1, 14 


irifatfWB *## *ittcT t Rrm 

TRmfW fsR*ii?Rfsf3ffa?r 

wwwamt f$ BWgroftadsfc seg- 

? h 1 hwt*?trt- 

ffterur tpurfaff faecnwR*} sffRfrROT&ffRvgTnmR 1 
utrufUtTrimi 

He argues that the Supreme Brahman can never be anekat- 
makam (double sided) like the coin with two sides (as Nco- 
Vedanta wants to have it.) He thunders— Non-duality will have 
nothing to do with accommodating difference of states of experie¬ 
nce of the Saguna and Nirguna from different frames of refer_ 
•ace at any time in its being. The reader may check up the 
references with the otiginal text of Sankara’s Bhs§ya. 



Preface 


xxv 


The theory of ' Anekatmakatva” of Brahman as dual-natu- 
red for ever on the same par (as two sides of a coin) is repugnant 
to Sankara. He explains that as Liberation is attainable accor¬ 
ding to Vedanta only tbro' right knowledge, the Anekatmakatva 
theory of Brahman at the same time (irrespective of your diffe¬ 
rent "‘frames of reference”) cannot afford to admit the existence 
of any ‘‘Mithysjnana", as the cause of Samsira and the 
VyJvahirika state, which is to be sublated by right knowledge 
(See BSB. ii. 1, 14). Brahman cannot be intrinsically double- 
natured (Na svata eva anekitmakam) as the two natures are 
diametrically opposed to each other ( virodha). It can only be¬ 
come so under the influence of Upadhis and these Upadhis are 
necessarily the projections of Avidya (S. BSB. iii, 2, 16) Lastly, 
the Upanisadic thesis of Ekavijnanena saivavijnsnam (knowing 
the many by knowing the One) will be disproved and falsified, 
if it were true that when the one is known the other is not (as 
Tapasjananda has put it). 

The foregoing references are more than sufficient to show 
that “Adi-Sankara” himself is dead against the stand taken by 
Neo-Vedanta” as outlined by its exponents. It is thus wrong 
and disingenuous to put Adi Sankara and his scholiasts against 
each other, on such fundamental issue*. “Neo-Vedanta”, what¬ 
ever its merits, credentials and plus - points, will have to 
leave Adi-Sankara alone with his scholiasts in peace and go its 
own way, without seeking in any nay to capitalise on his name. 

In the last analysis, then. "Neo-Vedanta” will have to join 
hands with Pantheistic schools of thought like those of Bhaikara 
and Ysdavaprakasa, if it wants to have it both ways. In fact, 
the AnekStmakatvavada of Brahman refuted by Sankara in bis 
Sutrabhi§ya (ii, 1,14) is that of the Vrttikara who was a pre¬ 
cursor of Bhtskara. Pantheism would pull the Deity to the 
gutter. It has it* own drawbacks and as Ramanuja puts it is 
worse than Mlylvada: BrahmijnBna vida d api pipiyin a yam 
Bhedibhedavpaksak VedSrtha-Sangraha However, that may 
be. Pantheism would confirm the reality of the 



xxvi Advaitaiiddhi Vs Nyiyamrta: A Re-Appraisal 

external world as a transformation cf Brahman and 
make it as real as Brahman. To that extent it will endorse 
the reality of the world which is one of main points of difference 
between the author of the Nym and his opponent*. If Neo- 
Vedanta would wholeheartedly accept the reality of the world it 
should find itself in agreement with the finding of Vyasatirtha 
that the ultimate difference between the supreme Brahman and 
the world consists in the unchanging eternal existence of Brah¬ 
man for all time and the changeful and limited existence of the 
Universe in space and time and not in the real existence of 
Brahman and the Mithyaiva (imagined existence or imagined 
appearance) of the Universe, 

Brahma kilatrayepi Sat. Viyudadi ca kadacid era. Iti ntfyatv- 
dniiyatvabhydm era Vaisamyam. Natu Satyat\a-Milhyiitvilbhydm 
(Nym. p. 39) 

If this book should evoke a Rejoinder in its turn as of old, 
it will be welcomed in the interest of further clarification of 
the problems of Vedanta. For too long the Monism of Sankara 
has been monopolizing the field and has been luring the intellec¬ 
tuals with common-place analogies like the drezm world and the 
Serpent and the Rope and siher in shell’ silencing the voice 
cf Realistic thought by gagging it with the authority of the sup¬ 
posed “Monistic texts". In fact there has been a standing com¬ 
plaint by many modern writers who have been brought up in the 
belief that “Vedanta is Advaita” that Indian Philosophy lias 
been emasculated by its thraldom to the Sruti*. It is Dvaita 
philosophy which has taken the lion’s stare in nailing 
down this charge as baseiesr. It has suggested a harmonious 
way of demarcating the respective and legitimate jurisdictions of 
consolidated human experience and the intimations of Scripture 
about the life in Moksa, without their encroaching on each 
others domain, on the basis of the principle of Upajivyaprama- 
Siaprabalya, according to exigencies of each case, Jf God is and 



Preface xxvii 

ought to be more and greater than the world and Man 1 the quest 
of Philosophy must end with rediscovering the eternal truth. 

S\atantram Paratantram ca dvividham tat turn isyate 

CONCLUSION 

The stupendous range of survey of the problems of Indian 
philosophy carried out by Vyasatirtha in his Nyayamrta, for the 
first time in the Post-Sankara and Post-Jayatirtha period end 
the recondite nature of the topics discussed by him with his 
amazing expertise in the writings of most of the system of 
thought known and studied in his days places severe restrictions 
on the ability and equipment of any modern scholar aspiring to 
do even remote justice to monumental classics like the 
Nyayamrta and its rival. I have ventured on this task rather 
late in life. 1 have explained what prompted me to do so. I do 
not stop to anticipate how far I may be able to go thro’with 
*t and complete it. But there is no barm in making a beginnin g 
and leaving the icst to kindred spirits to come, as the great 
Saoskrit Poet Bhavabhuti has said, long ago. 

1 am very much beholden to Prof. Ninian Smart. I.F. 
Rowny Profesior of Comparative Religions, University of Cali¬ 
fornia, Santa Barbara (U. S. A.) for his kindness and courtesy 
in introducing tbia work to the modern philosophical world. 
Indeed, it is most appropriate that the celebrated author of 
■Doctrine and Argument in Indian Philosophy’ should be interei- 
ted in the great dialectical confrontation between Realism and 
Idealism in the final stage of development of traditional Vedanta 
in India, which forms the subject matter of my book. It is my 

■). 5r«TfT frfT <*r SPutT: I 

VTC»T fqfaatqfeiT ^ 4 ? || 


(Mbb. V. 66, 7-8) 



xxviii Advaitaiiddhi Vs NySyimrta : A Re-Appraisal 

pleasant duty to express my thanks to him for his insightful 
Foreword. 

The President of the Akbila Bbar&ta Madhva Mahamandal 
and its Anandatirtba Pratistbana, Sri VisbDumurti Yerkaditaye 
and his council have been good enough to accept this book for 
publication under their auspices, with the gracious approval of 
the Founder of the Mahamandal and the Chief Trustee of the 
Anandatirtba Pratistbana, the revered Sri Visvesa Tirtha 
Swamiji of the Sri Pejavar Mutt, Udupi. 

This is the first time the Pratisthana is publishing a work in 
English on the subject of an epoch-making V$6agrantha in 
Dvaita philosophy and its sequel and making it easily accessible 
to the modern philosophical world, for comparative study. 

I take this opportunity of dedicating this book to the revered 
Swamiji in token of all I owe to his abiding interest and inspira¬ 
tion in my literary career, all along. 

I thank Prof. D. Prahladachar of the Bangalore University 
for sparing time to discuss some knotty textual points. 

4/2, Shah Building, 

BhagatRoad, Bombay - 16. 

Vijaya Da.sami 6-10-92. 



(Dr.) B. N. K. SHARMA. 



Chapter I 

INTRODUCTORY 

The Nvayamria of VySsatirtha (1460 - 1539) enjoys the 
highest reputation in the history of Dvaita—Advaita dialectics. 
It represents the pinnacle of development of the incisive 
exposition and reinforcement of the realistic metaphysics of 
Anandatirtha -its logic and world-view, including the nature ol 
bondage and liberation of Souls to be attained by Bhakti 
(devotion to the Supreme Being) and Divine Grace ( prasada ). 
Its object and purpose is not purely negative or destructive. 
Demolition precedes construction. The realistic metaphysics 
rises on the ashes of the Monistic Advaita. The reinforcement 
of purely Dvaita doctrines, on the nature of truth and reality, 
difference as foundational and in respect of God. Souls and the 
world of matter, ( paricabheda ) the nature of bondage of souls 
and the place of Sadhanas, the importance of Bhakti and 
grace in the a'.tainment of release, the complete manifestation 
of the bliss of selfhood and its gradation in Moksa — which 
concludes the treatment — are all of them equally critical, 
exhaustive and authoritative. Madhva’s Vedanta Darsana is, 
by comparison and contrast with the Advaita, shown to be the 
most satisfactory reconciliation of the place, rights and claims 
of God, Souls and the world of matter, each with its own real 
status, place of honor and importance in a coherent system of 
Theistic metaphysics, wherein God or Brahman occupies the 
pivotal position as the One and Only Independent Reality 
( Svatantra tattva ). It deals with the entire gamut of realistic 
metaphysics in its architectonic unity and is written in a crisp 
and spirited style of urbane philosophical language. 

After the seed time of the founder and the crystallization of 
Dvaita thought and its standardization at the hands of 
Jayatlrtha, Vylsatirtha’s Nym raised it from its parochial 




2 


Advaitasiddlii Vs Ny5y5mrta : A Re-Appraisal 


moorings and set it on the high seas of metaphysical cogitation, 
transcending regional limits and gave it an All-India status and 
importance in the critical and comparative study of Vedanta 
Darsana -- India's greatest contribution to world-philosophy. 

This had the intended effect of rousing the sleeping spirit 
of philosophical quest, after the Advaitavsda had scored its 
innings and settled itself to a comfortable ease. 

Vyasatirtha reopened the issues from the vantage of 
Madhva’s metaphysics which held the key to many crucial 
problems of philosophy which, the Advaita dialecticians before 
him had shelved as insoluble and therefore relevant only to 
the Vyavaharika level of thought, riddled with its own fallacies: 

artferrr ?r srq# cTcsra^T: n 

He took up the problems where the earlier Masters had left 
xhem and widened their horizon of both criticism and self- 
examination. This was no small service to the onward march 
of Vedanta philosophy and its Renaissance in the 16th century. 

Fifty years after the appearance of the Nym the 
reaction to it came from far off Bengal from the pen of 
VIadhusudana Sarasvati in his Advaitasiddhi. This led to a 
brisk exchange of thought and criticism between the champions 
of the two systems for nearly three centuries, as has already 
been stated, in the words of Mm. Anantakrishna Sastri who has 
edited and published a part of all the main works pertaining to 
this controversy with his own resume in the Calcutta Oriental 
Series, IX. “ft was Vyisatirtha who, for the first time, took 
special pains to collect together from the vast range of Advaita 
literature all the crucial points for discussion and arrange them 
on a novel yet thoroughly scientific and systematic plan. 
He also exhibited in his work more than a hundred points of 



Introductory 


3 


departure and has discussed them with a minuteness of 
observation and mastery over details rarely to be found even 
among some of the Titanic thinkers of the past” (p. 36). 
A glance at the Table of Contents of the A iym would easily bear 
out the stupendousness of the task attempted and achieved by 
VySsatirtha. (See Summary of contents of the four Paricchedas 
given hereafter). 

The main purpose of the Nym is to vindicate the cogency 
of Madhva's realistic metaphysics and give it permanent staying 
power and living interest in the philosophical field and contain 
tbc aggressive ascendancy of the Advaitavada among the 
intellectuals of the times. This is clear from what he himself 
has to say about the aims, objects and scope of his work : 

*??F^cr?sfttrqR;TTcr i 

'a n 

“My labor of love is amply rewarded by gathering the threads of 
doctrine and details of Madhva Siddhsnta, found piecemeal and 
scattered here and there in the original works and their 
commentaries and re-presenting them in a co-ordinated form 
and reinforcing them with additional arguments and corrobo¬ 
rative materials where necessary, bringing fresh facts to light 
based on my own cogitations”. 1 

1 Among such topics, not actually discussed or fully dealt 
with in all their ramifications, in the earlier works of the school 
and here fully dealt with, may be mentioned (I) the detailed 
discussion of Brahman’s Upsdanakarapatva of the world as 
set forth by the VivaranakJra in Advaita, in three different 
ways, in conjunction with AvidyS, with their concomitant details; 

(2) the exhaustive analysis and refutation of the theory of 
perception in Advaila known as Pratikarma-Vyavastha and 

(3) the equally exhaustive discussion of the place and relative 
position of Bhakti and Prapatti in the Ramanuja system and 
their bearing on TSistamya in Moksa, and Prapatti as a 



4 Advaitasiddhi Vs NySyamrta : A Re-Appraisal 


The critical exposition ( upapZLdana ) envisages a corres¬ 
ponding analysis, criticism and assessment of the rival positions, 
in the interest of the stabilisation of the SiddbSnta. 

With a quiet confidence, born of his own intellectual and 
emotional conviction of the truth of Tlieistic metaphysics of 
Madhva, he writes : 

?*Ttfra?T i \ 

A C O C 

“Diving deep into the Milky ocean of Madhva-Siddhsnta and 
churning it well with my intellect as the Mandara mountain, 
1 have extracted the nectar of Theistic Logic and metaphysics, 
for the delectation of the connoisseurs”. 


PARICCHEDA I 

As the work is cast in a dialectical mould cap a pie of the 
traditional style of Vadagranthas, it starts with the framing 

Continued from page 3) 

“Laghupaya” in Visistadvaita, Hence, the objection raised 
in some quarters against the wording “Anuktakatbanat” in the 
Nym. is not well-founded. Read also the ff. from Vijayindra 
Tirtha's Nym-Amoda in answer : ^ l 

srwm, 

fawrrwfaroT 'wfa-r 'utftfa i 

mfaim'gpRregsqsrifanT t ?T?<TTl:fq sricrw 

fwTTiTRm i i sew, 

fTlfV ffa q-TM (sr?«fff<r) 

T*TP=T <1 

*> ^ 

(Nym-Amoda. p. 8. Mantralaya Mutt Edn. 1991) 




Introductory 


5 


of the issues between the two systems ( Vipratipattipradar&ana ) 
and discusses them in all their bearings and ramifications, by 
way of clearing the ground for the presentation of the SiddhSnta 
position in due course, 

A realistic metaphysics has sooner or later to come to grips 
with its Monistic rival. Hence, VySsatirtha, at the very outset, 
takes the bull by the horns and enters into a thorough exami¬ 
nation of the thesis of Monism about the falsity of the Universe 
( Vi&vam mitkya ) in all its aspects of definition, proofs, premises 
and conclusion before turning to the constructive exposition of 
the criterion of reality in the realistic system. 

He then turns to establish the primacy of Pratyksa (sense- 
perception in all its forms) the first gateway to knowledge, with 
which all thinking beings are endowed by a kindly Providence. 
The attempt to discredit Pratyak§a on various grounds of its 
being superficial, limited to the present and the possibility of 
future contradiction, want of nexus between conciousness and 
objects of perception, their liability to disproof by inference and 
scripture, the superior validity of inference and ifrutis to mere 
surface-perception - the stock in trade of all Monistic systems, 
is met with stout resistance, after incisive analysis, criticism and 
final answers. There is much confusion of thought about the 
quality of Pratyaksa, whose primacy is the first ground of 
Realism. It is not the cheap, common sense view that is 
intended by the lerm Pratyaksa as a proof of the reality of 
world-experience. It is the ‘'tested perception ( parilcsita - 
pratyaksa ) after applying all possible tests and being assured 
of the correctness of the experience. 

It is not at all contended by Madhva and his followers that 
sense-perception never goes wrong. In fact, there is ample 
scope for erroneous perceptions of things and illusory 
perceptions of the snake in the rope and the silver in shell 
variety, which are the stock-in-trade of Advaita. The existence 



6 


Advaitasiddhi Vs NySyamrta : A Re-Appraisal 


of illusory perceptions does not upset or annul valid perceptions 
of the joys and sorrows and other poignant experiences in life. 
The first perception of silver-in-shell (idam rajatain) is corrected 
by the stultifying cognition Nedam rajatain and this subsequent 
Pratyaksa is veridical and uncontradicted and therefore 
absolutely true and valid. If the Badhakajnsna (correcting 
cognition) should, in its turn, be open to contradiction, 
it cannot be termed a correcting cognition. 

That apart, following Madhva and Jayatirtiia, Vyasatirtha 
has thoroughly discussed the question of the relative superiority 
(baliihalavkdra ) between Panksita-Pratyakfa (tested Pratyaksa) 
and Inference of falsity of experience and the verdict of 
Pratyaksa (even of the Pariksita type) being overridden by 
Advaita Sruti — which is the trump-card of Monism. Against 
this, the Madhva philosophers have formulated a sound criterion 
that Again a (Sruti) is valid in matters which fall exclusively 
within its jurisdiction — such as the transcendental nature of 
Brahman and iis attributes and the existence of supersensuous 
realities. It cannot invade or upset the jurisdiction of Pratyaksa- 
involving the intuitive experiences of souls of their poignant 
experiences of the sorrows and the intimate experience of the 
joys of life, their own Kartrtva (doership), bhoktrtva (enjoyer, 
ship) and dependence on a higher power : 

^ ftp* 

VP OCX 

S3, feqsre: 

II (AV) 

2 The term is not a qualifying adjective to 

This line is to bo carefully understood, as explained 
by J. in his NS. See my Philosophy of Madhvarhary's p. 153. 





Introductory 


7 


The enunciation of the exegetic principle of Upajivya- 
pram§na-prsbalya (be it Pratyaksa, inference or Srutis 
according to exigencies) is a forward step taken by the Madhva 
school is finding other ways of reconciling the meaning and 
purport of the identity texts with that of the Bheda 3rutis w r hich, 
as Srutis, are equally nirdosa and apanruseya. The attempt 
to belittle the Bheda S'rutis as repetitive of what is already 
established by Pratyakra is unsustainable, as the Srutis are the 
only valid source of knowledge about the existence of Souls 
and Brahman. As siuh, the Dvaita and Advaita Srutis must be 
equally Tattvavedaka and in cases of apparent conflict between 
them there is no justification to denigrate one set as being 
merely repetitive (anuvadaka) and a-tattvavedflkp (not truth- 
declaring). The AdvaitavSdins themselves are pressurised into 
seeking the help of Laksanikurtha (secondary meanings) and 
Bhaga-tyugd lakjiaria or Cinmatraikya, by way of non-relational 
judgments, in tackling the ‘upajlvya-virodha’ in opting for a 
straight open identity between Jiva and Brahman as they are 
given in experience ( visi.; taikya ). Madhva has shown how 
without violating the status of both the Advaita and Dvaita 
drutis, the former can be very reasonably and rationally 
reconciled and harmonised with the spirit of the Dvaita Srutis : 

(,1V) 

Realistic philosophy believes in the competence of Prams pas 
(means of proof ) to establish the truth or otherwise of things 
to be known or investigated. These proofs must therefore be 
credited with their own intrinsic rcaltty and validity to establish 
or dis-cstablish any tiling for certain. The Advaita cannot 
afford to concede this, as the acceptance of the reality of 
Pramapas (even of Sruti in respect of B.) would be detrimental 
to the thesis of Monism that there is only one reality. This 
obliges the Advaita to depreciate the meaning of such scriptural 



8 Advaitasiddhi Vs NyaySmrta : A Re-Appraisal 

statements as Auponisadah Purusah, Na avedavin manute tarn 
brhantam “SJastrayonilvlt” and other pronouncements. The 
difficulty is sought to be overcome by claiming Brahman to be 
Svaprakstia or self-illumined and self-established. The Madhva 
philosophers too readily agree that both the Jiva and B. are 

svoprakSsa in their essence. But while the definition of SvaprakSsa 
in Advaita forbids B. from being capable of knowing itself to 

be self-shining by its self-consciousness, and is equally averse 
to letting it to be known by any other source, it seems to be 
rushing to reduce its B. to a state of aprakaiatva. The Advaita 
Brahman is in an unenviable position of not being able to know 
itself or that it exists, for fear of offending a grammatical 
rule of kart rkarmavirodha. It is conveniently forgotten that the 
(grammatical) principle of the subject and the object having 
to be kept apart is only a vy&vahSrffa-niyama pertaining to 
Grammar, while the 3rutis themselves expressly assert in so 
many words that B. alone existed in the beginning. “It knew 
itself as “I am Brahman” (Brh. Up. 1.4.10).* Here also 
Sankara’s commentary raises the bogey of kartrkarmavirodha. 
In contrast, Msdhva thought, with its concept of Svarupavis'esas 
is able to explain B.’s (and Jiva’s) SvaprakSsalva in terms of 
the capacity to be aware and be conscious of one’s own existence 
and attributes by the power of its Svarupajnana. The Advaita 
B. being “NirvisCsa" is incapable of knowing cr being aware 
of its own existence or self-luminosity, even conceding for 
argument that as there is no second real, B cannot know any 
thing else. But should this incapacity be extended to its own 
being and awareness of its own being ? An unknown and 
unknowing B. is irrelevant to philosophy like the “Sunya” of the 
Buddhist. 


* For M’s and S’s interpretation of this text. See my 
Brhadiranyaka Up. From M's Perspective DVSR Foundation, 
Bangalore 4 (1988). 



Introductory 


9 


Another ground of Mithydiva of the objects of perception 
is the impossibility of establishing a real viable relation between 
consciousness and its so-called objects i 9%). 

Hence the relation between them must be a fictitious 
and superimposed one. This has also been discussed by 
Vy asatiTtha. 

As the Advaitavada sets a premium on the Aikya iruiis 
as overriding all Pratyak?a and Bi.eda Srutis, Vyasatirtha 
devotes considerable space to the discussion of several repre¬ 
sentative Advaita Gratis such as Ekam eva cdvitiyam Brahma, 
NehandnSsti kincatta, Vdcirambhanam vikdrah, Mjyanntiram id am 
Dvaitam, Indro muydbhih and above all Tat tv am asi. 

He then passes on to discuss various problems connected 
with the concept of Avidya or Bhavaropa Ajnana, in Advaita, 
its definition and proofs and the question of its locus, 
whether it is pure consciousness or the empirical ego and the 
vifaya (object) of this ignorance, as well as the concept of 
Anirvacaniyata itself. He then turns to the Advaitic doctrines 
about the Self, especially the one which holds that the empincai 
ego in us is not the same as the Atman (self) revealed in 
dreamless sleep (susupti) and that the acts of knowing, willing 
as well as “doing” and enjoying associated with the self are 
all due to superimposition ( adhydsa ) of the Vrttis (changing 
states) of the mind - stuff {antahkarana) on the pure self and 
the consequent mistaken identification of the self and the not- 
self (dehatma-aikyadhyasa). 

The discussion of Adhyasa leads to a comprehensive 
examination of the theories of Erroneous Knowledge ( bhrama) 
and its nature and constituent factors, in Advaita (Anirvacaniya- 
khdyti). This is followed by a constructive exposition of the 
Siddhanta theory relating to erroneous knowledge, how it 
arises and the epistemological status of the object presented to 
cognition (Abhinava-Anyathdkhydti). 


2 



10 


Advaitasiddhi Vs NyayJmrta : A Re-Appraisal 


As tlie Advaita regards the percept in the illusory cognition 
to be endowed with a Prruihhixikasatya and is therefore 
subsumed under 'Mithyf. the opportunity afforded by this 
topic is utilized by Vyasatirtha to discuss the Advaita doctine 
of threefold classification of reality (saitn-iraividhya) into 
Pirammhika, Vyava'nrika and Pratibhasika, before concluding 
theytrjr Pariccheda. 


PAR1CCHEDA II 


The first thirteen sections here are devoted to the sujbect 
matter of Brahman as depicted in the Advaita system. It 
begins with a discussion of w.iat is called ‘Akha(t iarlhavada’ or 
the theory of non-partitive or non-relational, non-synthetic 
judgments as the purport of all scriptural texts defining or 
describing B. (as Sal yam jnanam unantam) or the identity of 
Atman and B. As an illustration of this theory, the interpre¬ 
tation of the texts "satyam jn&natn .” and Tat ivam asi 

is taken up for examination. The author then passes on to 
discuss other texts believed to represent B. as Nirgupa (attri¬ 
buteless), Nirakara (formless) and suffused by M3y5. He then 
deals with the theories of B.’s causality of the universe as 
both the upadiina, nimitta and Vivaria. This is followed by the 
discussion of B.’s $vaprak5*atva - (as understood by the Advaita) 
and its mexprcssibility thro’ Sabda (avacyatvaj. 

The next twelve sections are devoted to the tenets of the 
Sidd/ulnta , such as the establishment of the pivotal doctrine of 
Difference (b/teda) as “Dharmisvarupa” (involving the concept 
of Viie^as) and the doctrine of five-fold difference (Panca- 
bheda) in respect of Jivas, Jaias and Brahman from one 
another and among Jivas and Ja ias themselves mutually. 

It is this live-fold difference that is meant by the term 
■Prapahca’ which has been shown to be eternal, by a Tarka 




Introductory 


11 


argument in the Afdptfukya Upanised. Then follows a very 
recondite discussion of the concept of Difference as criticised 
by leading Advaita Dialecticians from Mandana upto Citsukha 
and others and the vindication of the reality of Difference and 
the rationalisation of its relation to the relata with the help of 
the concept of Viiesas. The importance of the category of 
Difference to Dvaita philosophy is reflected by the author’s 
devoting two consecutive sections to the refutation of certain 
general objections to the category and more specific objections. 
This is followed by a very important section allotted to the 
doctrine of Vi$e$a in Madhva’s ontology which lies at the root 
of all concepts of identity - in - difference. Vi$e$a is the life- 
breath of Dvaita ontology, theory of judgments, and relation 
between substance and its permanent attributes. It is one of 
the most outstanding contributions of Madhva to India's philoso¬ 
phical thought and holds the key to the solution of many insur¬ 
mountable difficulties facing the theory of creation, etc. 

The next section deals with the topic of identity of Jiva 
and Brahman. Vyasattrtha argues that the Aikya grutis are 
against the grain of their own upajivya-PramSna in the form 
of Saksyanubhava 4 and Bheda gratis, backed by the six-fold 
marks of purport. After discussing the concept of non¬ 
difference from the point of view of amiatva and Pratibimbatva 
of the J/va, the author concludes the Pariccheda establishing 
the atomicity of the Jivasvarupa, according to Madhva. 

PARICCHEDA III 

The third Pariccheda deals with the scope and interrelations 
between the traditionally accepted means of realisation - SSdhanas 
like gravaga, Manana and Dhyana. It reviews the position 
of the Vivarana school regarding the primacy of £.ravana of 
which the other two are ancillanes. In Madhva’s view 

4 For refutation of the Advaita view that Sak$i is not the 
immaculate self but only its reflection in Avidy&vftti See the 
argument of Tg. in Chap. XV. f. 5. 



12 


Advaitasiddhi Vs Nyayamrta : A Re-Appraisal 


Dhyana holds the key position to which the other two are 
ancillary. The concluding section deals with the interesting 
doctrine of ‘Sabda - aparok$a’ in Advaita which claims that it 
is within the competence of Sabdaprama a - such as Tat tvam 
as:, Tad dhdsya vijaj&au. VedamavijndnasuniicitiirthJh pari- 
mucyanti, etc. on the analogy of 'Dasamas tvam asi, 
(“You are the tenth person (supposed to be missing”) to 
produce Bhahmaparoksa (direct realisation of B.). 


PAR1CCHEDA IV 

The last Pariccheda discusses the nature of final liquidation 
of Avidya in the Advaita system and its status, whether it is 
real or otherwise and its precise relationship to the Atman, 
whether it is identical with Atman or different from him or else 
indescribable (anirvucamya) and whether such a cessation of 
Avidya (which is deliverance) is stultifiable in its turn or is an 
absolutely uncontradicted reality. It also points out the logical 
difficulties in the way of the final Vedantic-Vrtti (psychosis) 
oprating as the liquidating instrument of Anadi - Avidya. This 
is followed by a discussion of how far the state of Mokja in 
Advaita is compatible with the actual experience and awareness 
(anubhavaj of svarupa-sukha (bliss of selfhood) to deserve its 
being accepted as a worthy object of human endeavour 
(purufdrtha). Tne next section brings out the untenabiiity of 
the concept of Jivan-Mukti (release while yet in the physical 
body) as conceived in the Advaita system. The Dvaita view of 
Jivan-mukti as a proximate state of coming Mok$a, till the 
Jlvatman receives the final saving grace of the Lord (mocaka- 
prasdda) is then explained. Wnile in the state of jlvanmukti 
these Aparok ? ajnanins serve as a beacon light to society 
around. 

Tne law section provides a colorful account of the state of 
Mokja as conceived in the philosophy of Madhva- where the 
released souls retain tneir intrinsic personal identity as individ- 



Introductory 


13 


uals and their respective place and position in the gradational 
scheme of Taratamya. All of them are still subject to the Lord’s 
government and enjoy the full manifestation of their irrespective 
optimum of SvarilpOnanda (bliss of selfhood) without let or hind¬ 
rance, by the grace of the Lord - each released soul enjoys his 
Svarapananda in his own way, commensurate with his fitness, 
but without any trace of jealousy or discord and other bad 
passions (in spile of their Taratamya) because they have once for 
all left behind all such bad passions, before attaining final 
release. They now enter into a complete state of harmony and 
fellowship with the community of the blessed ones there and 
rest in eternal blissful communion with the Lord - the remover 
of their erstwhile bondage and the bestower of their final libera¬ 
tion by His Grace. 1 

375rr3f fawr sTfforr m i 

*T*eTT?Tf.. 

This type of Moksa, where the released Souls are many and 
retain their individuality under the sovereignty of the Lord, has 
no interest or attraction for the Monist to whom there are no 
more any Jivas in Moksa. Bui it has a meaning and great im¬ 
portance for Theist philosophers of the world 5 and Indian 
Theistic philosophers like Ramanuja and Madhva who accept 
the survival of the souls and their individuality in its pristine 
purity and their personal consciousness in Moksa. 

Therefore, Vyasatinha devotes a special section to discuss 
the rational basis and the scriptural authorities in support of the 
thesis of SvarupOnanda - Taratamya in Mokja, a point on which 
the Ramanuja school disagrees (in spite of its acceptance of the 
survival of a plurality of souls in Mok?a) as well as its covert 
acceptance of Taratamya as between Mukta-Jivas and Nitya- 
mukta jivas (accepted by the Ramanuja school, called “Nitya- 
suris”). 

5. See Albert Schweitzer Indian Thought and Its Development 
P. 61. 




14 Advaitasiddhi Vs NySySmrta : A Rc-Appraisal 

In this connection, Vyasatlrtha has given us an illuminating 
discourse on the place of Bbakti and Praptti as separate means 
of Moksa as advocated by the Ramanuja school. He discusses 
the mutual relationship of the Bhakti and Prapatti margas in 
VliLtadvaita and their bearing on the results accruing from 
either and to what extent their divergence makes room for a 
modicum ofTaratamya in the consummation of blissful existence. 
This section shows his inward knowledge, of the Rahasya-gran- 
thas on Prapatti in the ViSijtadvaita tradition. 

With a burning zeal of mellowed devotion to the Lord of 
the realistic Universe of matter and souls and a firm faith and 
philosophical conviction in the superiority of Theism as the 
world's only sane philosophy of life, VySsatirtha dedicates his 
masterpiece as a humble “Vag * yajfia” (a Jhdna-yajhc) to the 
Supreme Master and Enjoyer of all Yajna (Gita IX. 24J 

5RcJTT5tf<iT jifft'JTT m «niT *PTfTc!T I 



6. The profound sublimity and'sincerity of such a dedication are 
missing in the dedicatory verses at the end of the Advaita Siddhi > 


CHAPTER II 


Doctrine of Falsity 
(Mithyatva) of the World 

Advaitavada is pledged to the view that there is only one 
real Being in existence, in the whole universe. It is bare con¬ 
sciousness without a specific content (ninisesa - cinmatram). It 
is called Atman or Brahman. All duality and plurality experi¬ 
enced in the world of name and form and spoken of in the 
Vedas and Upani-ads arc therefore a myth (mithy3)- a super- 
imposition on pure consciousness, caused by beginninglcss 
Ignorance {an'idi- avidyi). The life and career of souls in their 
transmigratory career, their joys and sorrows and their efforts to 
get free from their cycle of births and deaths arc equally so, in 
principle. The simple truth is ; 

Brahma satyam jagan mithya 
Jivo Brahmaiva na aparah. 

As such a position cannot be credibly maintained on the 
evidence of consolidated universal human experience based on 
sense - perception and the evidence of the Appercciving self 
known as Sak-u, with whick every living being is endowed 1 it 
has to be presumed that the unreality of experience of the world 
is made known by Inference and the testimony of the Srutis. 
The preamble to ‘Sankara’s BSB known as “Adhyasa- Bha$ya” 
contains the rudiments of this philosophical theory which were 
subsequently developed, defined and elaborated by his commen¬ 
tators and leading Dialecticians of the school, giving them the 
necessary wealth of details, definiteness of shape and meaning 
and arming them with the requisite technical paraphernalia and 
logical subtlety. The Vagueness surrounding the concept of 
Mithyatva as adumbrated by Sankara thus came to be remedied 
within a couple of centuries after him. That is why we find 


1 (Av. II. 1. ad hi 3) 



16 Advaitasiddhi Vs NyaySmrta : A Rc-Appraisal 

Theistic philosophers like Ramanuja and Madhva who came 
after Sankara's commentators concentrating more on the 
clarifications of these commentators and Dialecticians in 
their assessment of the Advaita position. They had no other 
alternative as Sankara himself had left many points vague and 
ambiguous. 2 

As a result of the vigorous and fertile cogitations of these 
celebrated Advaita Dialecticians, as many as five different ways 
of defining ‘Mithyatva’ had come to be formulated and patented, 
associated with the names of writers like Padmapada, Prakai- 
atman, Anandabodha and Citsukha. These were taken note of 
by Madhva and Jayatirtha in their critiques of Advaita doctrine 
in the Khanlanatraya, the Anuvyakhydna (of Madhva) and the 
Nyayasudha tC. on AV) and in his short polemical work 
Vadlvali by Jayatirtha. 

However, it was Vyasatirtha who came out with the most 
uptodate, exhaustive, self-complete and meticulous review, 
criticism and appraisal of all that had been said and written, for 
and against the two philosophical view-points of Advaita and 
Dvaita upto his times in a monumental melaphysicai treatise, 
written in the strictly objective norm of philosophical dignity 
and decorum of assessment, doing full justice to both sides of 
the controversy. A work of such magnitude and precision could 
not be ignored or remain unrecognised or not respected by the 
scholarly world for long. 

While Theism can stand the test and survive by its own 
inner dynamics, a Monism has to dislodge all duality, root and 
branch, to make room for itself. 

cRI, ariHfas?: 

o s 

(Advaitasiddhi, p.l, Sri Vidya Press Edn, Kumbakonam). 

2 Dr. K. Narain ‘A Critique of Madhva Refutation of 
'Sankara School of Vedanta‘ Introd. p. 7. 


The First Definition 17 

The AikcuiusidiUti has also argued that it is superfluous to 
invest the ••many” with a distinct esse. in each case, as the esse 
of the many can be explained as the transfusion of the esse of 
the one reality (Brahman) - particularised and fragmented by 
illusion. That would also make intelligible the uniformity of 
reference to the different esses by the same term, without 
positing many discrete and distinct entities, each with an esse 
of its own. t 

Madhva hansel'has anticipated this kind of argument in 
saying that the law of parsimony cannot ride roughshod over 
the rights of individuals and abolish their esse : Ida! poniigauruuid 
era Padirtlu no syur era hi. The Tcrangi:.i answers 2 the Adredtc,- 
siddhi that by the same token it may he contended that just as 
there is perception and practical reaction to “silver in shell” in 
our illusions, without the factual reality of that silver 
in space and time, even without the acma! existence of 
the one real, it should he possible to perceive and react to 
its perception. So much so there will be cent per cent 
economy, if one dispenses with the esse of Brahman itseif as the 
one real and accounts for the reference to the “existence” of B. 
on the same analogy of the "silver” in the shell. If the reality 
of B.’s esse is true because it is established by Pramana, the 
same applies to the world of plurality. It would be far-fetched 
to argue that the inference of there being no separate being or 
esse for the world, backed by the logic of gravity of assumption 

1 373 H??Srfcr i Tr3'T'Trft, 3^173 spirit 3^7^ 

»nw 7m ssitt 5 ** 

(Op. cii. P. 3) 

In M's philosophy, the uniformity of reference to different esses 
is explained on the basis of resemblance (y'dyiuy. See my 
Philosophy of Madkvsccrya, 2nd Edn. 1986. p. 107-108 

* 7*7 ternfr 3£?sY 7 tfaufTRs^HtfosrNr'T fimtfa 

s?sRft?in^-Tqgr> 3rfwgt7faf7 l f^nfr * ?rs<f rm* t 

Sf33c7m 7ST €?7fRfa 5 , *7^7 7 * 77 . 


3 





18 


Advaitusiddhi Vs Nyayimna : A Re-Appraisal 


involved in accepting many distinct esses will itself culminate in 
the abolition of the world's separate reality apart from Brah¬ 
man’s. For no retinaio ad absurdu n fiarka) can upset the esse 
of things established by Prams as. Otherwise, the inference 
that there is no reality at ail, as such, being the very simplest, 
will compel acceptance and the whole world will be steeped in 
utter darkness. Thus -Kalpanalaghava” (economy of 
assumption! is a game at which two can play. 

All Vedontins are committed to the intrinsic self-validity 
of knowledge. And the essence of Prantanya of knowledge 
consists in the non-contradietability of its objective content. 
Here the Realist is on firm ground, as the reality of the world 
and o' the selves is borne out by valid perception and Sak : i- 
anubhava. Inference, on (he other hand, has to depend on 
sound Pratyakfa for its ascertainment of Vy.ipti and other 
preconditions of its acceptability. It cannot defy the authenti¬ 
city of its own data, standing - ground (upajlvyapramtlna) 
and weave fanciful theories in thin air. What is left to be 
decided is what the Srutis have to say. That has to be settled 
on the basis of accepted canons o r scriptural interpretation 
laid down in tlie Parva Mimamsa £a$ira and the guide-lines 
of Logic - and not on subjective standards of one's own 
predilections and preferences. There is irrefragable truth in 
Madhva’s onset valion : fa*?R^rrfN>rt JSr'PfsTT, T j-T 

JreqeT Truth needs no proof; only falsity does. 

It is not without significance therefore that Advaita strains 
every nerve to denigrate Perception and seeks to damn it with 
sweet praise as -Vyavahsrika pramar.a’ and build its castle of 
Monism on the airy foundations of the Mithyatvanumana. 
We have five different definitions of Mithyatva jn the writings 
of the Advaitins, 

Vyasatirtha takes them up one by one and subjects 
them to a dose and rigorous analysis and criticises them 
all, in all their ramifications. 



CHAPTER !!. 

The First Definition 

The first definition of MithyStva is sadasaliva-unadhikc.rarai- 
i am. This may be construed in three different ways, 
(i) as a karmadhoraya compound, that the ‘false’ is that 
whose being is composite with absence of non-being 
or (ii) has the two properties of total absence of 
being and non-being; or (iii) absolute negation of non-being 
qualified by the absolute absence of non-bang. The first is accept¬ 
able to the Realist, to whom the world is real and is solely of 
the nature of ‘being,’ without being composite with non-being. 
The second is self-contradictory, as being and non-being are 
contradictories and this applies to their respective absences 
as well, which cannot co-exist in the same substratum. The 
third is equally vitiated by self-contradiction, as out of the 
two self-contradictory properties (as above) one of them 
cannot be made to qualify the other. Further, the fact that 
the attributeless Brahman which, by hypothesis, cannot be 
invested with any properly such as even of absolute absence 
of being, while at the same time, it is also nevertheless 
conceived as of the essence of being, (sculr:lpam or saisvarRpam) 
makes the inference futile, as the world too can similarly be 
recognised as Sat in essence (sadrupa) without possessing the 
property of sat tram, but having the other property of absence 
of non-being (asattva-ahlantabhava). The illusory silver (in 
Advaitaj while being the substratum of the absolute absence of 
‘being’, is not at the same time the locus of the absolute absence 
of non-being (asattvam), in so far as it is conceived in the 
Advaita as 'mithva, which, by definition, is asad-vitaksarta 
other than pure non-being. 

Here, the author of the Advaitasiddhi makes a bid to 
evade the self-ccntradicticn in the last two alternative 
definitions (of sad-asaUvUnadhikcrai civam ) on the ground that 
Advaita docs no: admit any mutual exclusiveness between being 



20 


Advaitasiddhi Vs Nyayfimrta : A Re-Appraisal 


and non-being - in (he Dvaitin's sense, of asm, in describing the 
world as mithyl. To be -miihya’ is not the same as being a total 
non-existence. The A sen is that which is utterly incapable and 
unfit to be presented to cognition, us existing in any given 
substratum, at any time or place - kvaeief apyupitibau sutivem 
pro! i ixanarhu ; rum . The Mifhva. on the other hand, while 
being absolutely other than Sat, is still presentable to cognition 
as existing in some locus. The law of the Excluded Middle 
does not apply to what is Mithya. Hcncc it can accommodate 
simultaneous negation of both Sattvam and asattvam in us 
bosom. 

Vyisaurtiui has anticipated this backdoor escape of the 
Advaita, from self-contradiction in the definition. He shows 
the baselessness of the assumption behind the improvised 
definition of f saitrum attempted by the Advaita to save its face. 

It will be seen that the source of this definition of Asattva 
is to be found in the second part of ^Snkaric Ariltipatti - 
“Asat Cat iui nratiycta”. It is obvious that pratiycta in the 
predication refers to presentation us sat (existing). If non-being 
(asar) then is already prejudged and preconceived as incapable of 
presentation u\ existing ( sat i taut), the hypothetical proposition 
whose consequent is (he sarr.e as its antecedent would be 

tautologous. -what cannot present itself as existing will 

not present itself as existing”. To avoid this tautology, ‘Asat* 
has necessarily to be difitted s.ir.piy r$ the coaiuerpositive of 
absolute negation with reference to all periods of time: 

; raikil!ikaniscJhapratiyogiteam and nothing more. 

csrmfq- srfa 

1 See (he lucid commentary of Bidaraha! i i SrintvssEearya 
on this - ‘srfrE%T’ f?afir t snfm TfefTT; I TTry, 

T 5f#r-Tcr %i, 3**7 5T 5TTt*T 



The First Definition 


21 


The question whether sush Asat can be presented as set 
.existing) has to bo decided on the evidence of our correcting 
cognition (bCuIbokajne.na) following an illusory cognition of 
silver in shell. Error consists in the ("mis apprehension of 
what is non-existent os existent and vice-versa in a given setting. 
Tne Realist therefore merely wants to alfirm that there is no 
such error in our normal perceptions and experience of the 
world. The distinction sought to be made between Asat and 
MithyS by the Advaita is thus unsustainable. It is only a face- 
saving device. 


The negation of the false (fqvat) with reference to all the 
three periods of time, as contemplated by the Advaita, if it is 
to be o real fact would spell danger to the principle of Monism 
by opening the door to a duality - vi/.. the reality of the 
negation itself besides Brahman. If this negation is to be 
regarded as pr.lt ih!r>»ika (apparent) such an apparent ’.legation 
will not affect the reality of the world. IT it is regarded as 
Vy.ivahjrika, such “vyavahiirikatva, by hypothesis, being su’olata- 
ubte, will run affect the reality and truthfulness of the negation. 
Moreover, if the negation with reference to all periods of time 
were only 'Vyavafuirika' 'and not p'ramkrtkika) the ‘Ncha 
iiaiutsti’ Sruti held to be negating the world's reality would 
amount to a negation of the world's Vyava'isi ika-reaiity and 
no; its plnmUrthika reality. Bet earlier masters of the Advaita 
school declare : 


fire'hnyw'teifcT * ferer* u 


If the world, which isj the counlcrpositive of the negation, 
is itself Vyaharika it makes no sense to resort to a Vyuvahanka 
negation of it, instead of making the negation PfiramJ.nhika. 



22 


Advaitasiddhi Vs Nyayamrta: A Re-Appraisal 


The negator and the negated connot be of the same order of 
reality. The only instance of such a negation cited by the 
Advailtn is drawn from the domain of dream which belongs 
to the PrStibhasika. That cannot be extended to the Vyavaharika 
worid. If the Vyavaharika world is at all to be negated, the 
negation must perforce be of a higher order. That is where 
the shoe pinches the Adsaita. 



CHAPTER IV 


Second Definition of Mithyatva 

Advaita will have to clarify if, in the second definition of 
Nlithyltva as Pralipannopldhau traikll/km?iedtwprat rati\ opitvan,. 
the •nisedlui' (negation) contemplated includes the very 
suchness of the subject - the counterposiiivc. as it is presented 
(svarilpenaha nisedhah).' -or without rescinding the suchness 
in which it had been appearing, in terms of being 
other than the totally non-existent {asadvilaksaravvar 
panmrdenn). 

The first alternative would he untenable because (i) the 
world of name and form, spue., and time, \vho$e creation 
dissolution etc., have been dealt with in the Srutis and Smrtis 
and which is further competent to fulfil our practical needs and 
is further admitted by the Advaita itself as a product of Avidya 
(which is its material cause) and is open to liquidation bv 
knowledge, (ii) the shell-silver which has been cited as an 
example of what is false (irdtlnehlrVa) cannot be negated 
in essence, 1 for all time including the time and place of its 
existence and in the case of the world, in its Vva vaharika state also. 

[n his reply to this point. Madhnsadana Sarasvati says 
that being open to origination etc is not necessarily tiicdeterminant 
of non-negatability because the Dvaita philosophers themselves 
violate the invariable concomitance between origination and 
destruction and the essential non-originaled character of entities 
when they themselves do not admit the origination of Akiisa. 3 

' In terms of 

2 Vide Dr. Narain's Critique of Madhya Refutation of 

Sankara School of Vedanta, p. 37. 

And also srstnffa f? *nfw»ita*iT I sfaw 5 fa fasfa, far* 
f? .(AV. 11. 3.1) 




24 


Advaiiasicfcihi Vs Nyaysmna : A Re-Appraisal 


This criticism is beside the point at issue whether origina¬ 
tion. destruction etc. can be meaningfully predicated of 
tilings which are t'.v fiypoihcsi negated and negatable in essence 
(srorii/Kvaira troikalikchtisalno). in Dvaita philosophy, there are 
two kinds (I) Bh'tr-kSsu, elemental .Jkasa and (2) Avya- 
krtr.ksa (space;.Tr.e former is non—eternal (anitya) and has 
origination (Tain ip. i. lj and destruction (din an no) in 
Prnlaya. But destruction is not the same as iraikalikanindha as 
conceived by the Advaita. Avyaknakasa which is dental 
and all-pervasive, is nevertheless subject to genesis ( uipaii ) 
in the sense of •'Paradhma-ViAs # apii”, as in the case of other 
Miia pculCtnhas such as Jivasvampa, Kala, Prakiti. etc, [For 
details see my Philosophy of Mc,d!nachc.rya (2nd can. 1986, 
Chap. XI)]. Hence, the rejoinder of Madhvtsudatsa Sarasvati : 


is obviously due to liis not being aware of the Dvaita position 
in regard to the admission of creation of Nityapadarthas also, 
in a special sense, in deference to the gratis (So) idem sen cm 
asrjata (Tain. Up. 3.6) and \ityo nitylndm . 

Any attempt to make out the said negation to be absolute 
rescinding the very essence of the thing such as it may be 
(svorupena) will be in conflict with the position of earlier 
teachers of Advaita, that in illusory experiences such as of 
silver in shell, it is the silver other than the apparent one 
(anlbhisa) - i.e. to say. the silver in the shop that is negated in 
essence, or that it is the apparent silver (iibhlsa), that is negated in 
its p.iia,ndnhitcamspca, which isthe counter-positive of the negat¬ 
ion for all time. Moreover. S. ar -peyanisedha for all time, including 
the time of its presentation would reduce the thing uegated to an 
utterly and out and out non-existence, - a position which 



The Second Definition of Mithyatva 


25 


would ill accord with the much-advertised ‘Vyavaharika- 
reality, so generously believed to be conferred on the world, 
by the Advaita. 

Nevertheless, Madhusddana Sarasvati raaintains that both 
the cosmos in cosmic illusion ( jagad-brahma) and the 
shell-silver m fuktirajcitabhrama (illusory appearance of silver) 
are negated inclusively of the suchness of their Vyavavaharikatva 
or Prdtiohasikatva, as the case may be. 

Svariipenai va traikiilikanisedhapratiyogitxasya Prapottce, 
Auktirepye ca angikur.it (p. 5- Snvidya Press Edn.) That 
makes a mockery of the so-called Vyavahsnkasatta said to be 
granted, by the Advaita to the empirical world — which some 
critics deplore has not been properly understood or appreciated 
by the Realist philosophers. Vyasatirtha hits the nail cn the 
head when he says : 

Hf ?f?T TST, 

The explanation that as the svartipa (suchness) of the world 
is equally Mithyi it can coexist with its own absolute negation 
makes matters worse. For, a negation and its counterpositive can 
not co-exist - except in a terminological fiction So it will have to 
be admitted that the suchness of the counterpositive ceases to 
be and is reduced to utter non-existence ( asatlva ). That will 
cut at the root of the adjunct of asad-vilaksanaiva (otherness 
from the asat) in the definition of Mithyatva. 9 

Moreover, in order to distinguish mithyatva from asaltva 
(non-being) Advaitavada tries to define utter non-being ( tuceha) 

* arsTTcuf^r sfa, t fir 

4 



26 


Advaltasiddhi Vs Nyayimfta : A Re- Appraisal 


such as the hare’s horn as what is inconceivable ( pratityavi$aya ) 
or what is outside the pale of denotation (pada'aktyavisaya) 
while what is mithys is conceivable and denotable. 


Vyasatirtha rejoins that even the fictitious hare’s horn is 
mentally conceivable and is denoted by the term 'nirupakhya'-vtheA. 
is inconceivable or not denotable. Moreover, if what is termed 
•nsai’ should be inconceivable, how can the Advaitin afford 
to know and recognise the inirhyu as being other than asat 
^the non-existent) or deny its presentability or designate it by 
the term \Asat’ ? 


Nor can the asat be defined as what is not presentable to 
direct cognition. For certain eternally supersensible entities 
like dharma, adharma and so on are not also open to our direct 
perception. We have a Sruti text which reports that there 
were some thinkers who in all seriousness maintained that 
“Asat alone existed in the beginning, whence Sat was bora” 
(Chan. Up. vi. 2.1-) This shows these persons could conceive 
of the Asat as existing and operating as the source of being 
tho’ it is an untenable proposition. The point is that Asat is 
not beyond the pale of being conceived as existing tho’ 
mistakenly so. The form of the predication in the Srutj 
‘Asad ,l sit' implies its possibility tho’ not its actuality. 
Adveitasiddhi tries to explain it away by saying that this 
statement of the §ruti is not to be taken as an affirmative 
proposition but as a negative one denying and negating the 
truth of the proposition Sad eve idam agra Sslt, by shifting 
the negative prefix a (nan) in ‘ A-sad' from its given place and 
connecting it after the tit.* The Tarangini rightly points out 
lhat nullification of the thought-content of the Sruti-Siw/ eva 


4 '9*7 qw 7fa<mr7, a 797 : 

(Advaitasiddhi) 



The Second Definition of Mithyatva 


27 


idani agra as it, reduces it to a non-being, 5 there is no escaping 
the possibility of ami being presentable as sat though, of 
course, wrongly. 

Nor can Asat be defined as “other than the anirvasaniya. 
The latter itself cannot be conceived without a prior knowledge 
of the former. 


aW?*Tc5IcftfcT$* ^ ? 

(M. ,dv.) 

The only way to avoid all such difficulties is to admit frankly 
that asattva (non-being) is the logical counter positive of a 
negation with reference to all periods of time, everywhere. 

There is no substance in the contention that the absolutely 
non-existent cannot be conceived, even as being the counter¬ 
positive of an absolute negation, while mithyatva can be regarded 
as the counterpositive of such a negation, in so far as the 
world itself is Mithyi. Since utter non-being {asat) such as 
the hare’s horn cannot be treated as the counterpositive of any 
negation, being itself non-existent, the Advaita is justified in 
distinguishing Mithyatva from asattva. 

VyiisaUrtha pricks this bubble with a devastating rejoinder 
that in the light of the Advaita view that even the .nithyabhuta 

5 Tne Sruti Sad eva ida n agra asit means Brahman is Sat 
for all time. The negation of its satis a would thus be an utter 
non-existence. But Brahman’s non-existence at any time or 
place is inadmissible. How then can such an interpretation 
be sustained ? 

3r?ffiftT (Tg. 23) 



28 Advaitasiddhi Vs NySyamrta: A Re-Appraisal 

is also negated in its suchness (svarupepa) 5 , it cannot be 
seriously maintained that the negation of the mithydbhuta has 
a counterpositive while that of the tuccha (hare's horn) is devoid 
of a counterpositive. Nor would it be possibe to make out 
a distinction between the two on the ground that what is mithya 
is only other than sat always and everywhere, while the tuccha 
inon-being) is negated as such. 


Na ca mitky.lbhutasy.ipi svar&penaiva nisedha Hi pakse, tada- 
bhavah sapratiyogikah, tucchdbhdvastu nispratiyogjka iti vaktrni 
yuktam. 

There is no substance in arguing against this that the 
Asat‘ being itself non-existent, cannot be the counterpositive 
of a negation. For, the probans in this reasoning that 1 asat’ 
cannot be the counterpositive of a total negation, because it is 
of the nature of asat would be a contradictory reason ( \iruddha ) 
as it is in the very nature of asattvajn to be the counter-positive 
of a total negation : 

If “Asat” can have the distinguishing properties of 
(i) being Asat (ii) being other than Sat, (iii) not being 
the counterpositive of any absolute negation (as contended by 
the Advaitm), (iv) being the object of a mediate cognition 
of it and verbal references to the effect and (v) being the 
counterpositive of otherness from Asat (asadvailakjanyaprati- 
yogitva), where is the logical impropriety in its being accepted 
as the counterpositive of negation with reference to all thie 
three periods of time ? It is well established that it is the 
(as yet) non-existent pot or such other object that has to be 
recognised as the counterpositive during the period of the 
antecedent non-existence ( pragabfmvcdasd ) of the object in 
question. As this is an accepted fact and as the property of 


9 Accepted by the author of the Advaita Siddhi as already 
pointed out. 



The Second Definition of Mithystva 


29 


counter-positivity does not necessarily presuppose the actual 
existence of the object of which it is predicated at the time, 
unlike in the case of properties like color or smell. It is 
beside the point to argue that in the case of prior non-existence, 
the coumerpositive is present subsequently. For subsequent 
presence docs not help the present predicament. 7 

It is thus inevitable that if, in the Advaita view, the world 
viewed as mithy’i is held to be negated in its suchness of essence 
( svampena ) with reference to all periods of time (including 
the period of its appearance) it cannot but be absolutely non¬ 
existent in essence - despite all the fencing and verbal juggle¬ 
ries to hide the naked truth and sustain the presentation, by 
seeming to confer an empirical reality on it for the consumption 
of the gullible. 

This incisive criticism of the Advaita position regarding 
Mithyatva as set forth above unmasks the real position of that 
school with regard to the world, in purls naturalibus. We have 
seen how the author of the Advaitasiddhi has literally asserted 
that he endorses the Svarupaenaixanisedha of the world. That 
puts the lid on it. (See the passage quoted from A - Siddhi 
earlier, on this point.) (See p. 28 ante) 

However, there are some well-meaning “ modern ” Advaitins 
influenced by the writings of Vivekananda and others - whose 
number seems to be growing - who want to revert to the earlier 
view that the negation of the world contemplated by Mithyatva 

7. Read : wsrfirct'mafar ^vnafts^envu* sfir, « <1* sfatjnf i 
^ ? fofag fraur f cqqfo ? 

qf? Kcrrbrra I fctj, seftfaRra trqg-w I 

tmaVs'itfer 

(J. TV. t) 

srfamfnc^t'T I 


(J. Tdy. l) 



30 Auvaitusiddhi Vs Nyayomrta: A Re-Appraisal 

is not a Swir.'iihmiictiha but a negation of the empirical from the 
PSram'tthika point of view — so that they could have it both 
ways of eating the cake and yet having it. 

It is often thought by Apologists of Advaita that the 
Madhva philosophers have suppressed this fact. Dr. K. Narain, 
in his concluding remarks in his Critique of Madhva Reluteiion 
of Sankara School of Vedanta (Allahabad, 1964) deplores that 
“at several places, the Madhva refutation is grounded in the 
confusion between the Paramarthika and the Vyavaharika points 
of view and gives an unfaithful account of the 5 a nk a rite- 
position. In not appreciating this difference and in equating 
the Paramarthika with the Vyavaharika, the Madhva philoso¬ 
phers have often fallen a prey to a gross misunderstanding 
about the “Vedanta position” (p. 338). - Italics mine. 

This is a very cheap criticism. As I have stated on p. 470 
of my Philosophy of Sri Madhvwdrya (2nd Edn. 1986), “the 
distinction of the two standpoints may be an important 
fundamental of Advaita philosophy; but it is not good logic 
to take it for granted and build a superstructure upon its 
foundation”. The “tri-furcation” of reality into Paramarthika, 
Vyavaharika and Praubhasika, of which the last two are 
classed as ‘Mi thy I'' is itself dependent on the establishment 
of the concept of Mirhyatva. The concept itself and its five 
definitions projected by the Advaita school is yet sub judicc. 
The Advaitin is yet to come of the woods or the labyrinth he 
has built for himself and got into. 

Vyasatfrtha makes it clear that he is not oblivious of the 
familiar contention of some Monists that the negation of the 
reality of the world predicated by them is from the ‘Paramar¬ 
thika standpoint’.— 

hi up i Pdramart hikat vakarena traikalikanisedhapratiyogilvcm 
iti aiuyah [Nym. 1.1. p. 37). He lays his finger on the 



The Second Definition of Mithyitva 


31 


vulnerable point of this argument - the Achilles’ heel, that it 
involves the patent fallacy of mutual dependence (anyonyHiraya). 
For, PSramarthikatva, as defined, consists in uneontradieledness 
( abudhyatvam). Only when one has the correct knowledge of 
Parara&rthikatva as not being liable to contradiction can one 
understand the nature of “Mithyatvam” as “badhyatvam” 
or what is open to contradiction. Unless one has a prior 
knowledge of Mithyatva as consisting in being subject to 
contnuiation or liquidation, one cannot understand that 
Paramarthikikutva consists in >tol being open to contradiction. 
The question of the Paramarthikvatva of the PdraminlukatvJ- 
klrerra niscdlwh is also bound to arise, leading to a regression.'* 
It is in order to avoid catching this Tartar that Madhus'dana 
opts for Svarjpe; a nisedha of what is Mithya. He clinches 
the issue by turning his back on the explanation of “P&ramar- 
thikatvakarega nisedhah" (negation of the Vyivaharika from 
thcnoumenal (pilraniurthika) point of view held by some of 
his own earlier schoolmen, by reiterating his earlier stand 
boldly, that the negation of the Vyavah&rika-Prapanca (world) 
is, indeed, only in terms of a Svarupcija nisedha (negation in 
essence Just sec ; - 

HTfa feeftqSroccrcTOT snStfcS- 

3TW7>m*r*NSf 1 q(T?7lf^r?- 
Tmfq 3Tct: rTTqTfq 

qre*nf«ra*c*rTT^*r faq si swart ?fer %ct — 

— *erwiTSf <?q»tfaq>fqwat, qq% gfqct- 

Adruiia Siddhi p. 3) 

sruVuT'-TmT rtfTTTiT!fartf7?7tf , T 3f77>tfTcfa*U-T'Jt2T7 ? rn 

(Nym. p. 37) 



32 Advaitasiddhi Vs Nyay3mrta : A Re-Appraisal 

The external world and its experience cannot be proved 
to be -'•merely Vyavaharika and therefore n-ithya , without a 
fore-knowledge of the noumcnal (its counter position) and 
the latter cannot bo known as abadhya or uncontradictable 
without a knowledge of the contradictablc. Neither is thus 
capable of being known and established independently of the 
other. The only way out of this stalemate is to accpt frankly 
that the nisedha is a negation of the suchness of the negated : 
Svar'tpenaiva nisedhuh. The acceptance of Svaripanisedha 
as such would reduce the world to a mullity, That would 
nc the Nemesis of Mi t hy.it va. 


If thinking men and women of the present scientific age 
would have none of such a Nemesis, the Hobson's, 
shoice left to them, says Vyasatlrtha, is to accept gracefully 
that Brahman is eternal in the sense of existing at all times, 
without change, modification, development or disintegration, 
while the world of sense-experience has an indubitable existence 
within its own time-limit, subject to change and modification 
and is therefore anitya (not eternal or unchanging). The contrast 
and contrariety between Brahman and the world is only in 
respect of their Niiyatva and Anityatva and not on the basis 
of the satyaira (reality) of the one and the mithydlva of the other: 

Evam ca Brahma Kiilatraye ’ pi Sal. Viyadddi, rftpyAdi ca 
kruLicid eva, iti nityatvdnityaivabhydm eva raisemyam. A a lu 
satyatva-mithyat vdbhyan i. 

(Nym. p. 39) 

This should satisfy all level-headed persons - be they 
laymen or "philosophers" . ‘Bhaktas’ or ‘Vcdanlins'— as 
some choose to call them ! 





CHAPTER V 


Third Definition of Falsity 

The third definition of Mithyatva is that which is open 
to be set aside only by knowledge as such (jnanatvena jndna- 
nivariyatvam). This is applied to the phenomenal world, 
which the Advaita considers to be a product of beginningless 
nescience. 


The Nyn finds this definition to be open to the flaws 
of over-pervasion, underpervasion and so on, of the probans, 
in the inference of Mithyatva. The destruction of a jar in the 
past by natural causes is not due to knowledge (jnSnanivartya). 
The misapprehension of the white conch-shell as yellow thro' 
jaundiced eye is not removed by knowledge, as such, but by 
knowledge free from visual disease. Our experience does not 
bear out that the illusory silver is actually destroyed by the 
knowledge of the shell, its substratum. It attests that there 
was a real ignorance of the shell, that we were under an error, 
which shows that both the ignorance and the illusion were as 
real, as the substratum (the shell) itself. Hence, the definition 
of Jnanatvena jndnanivartyatvam is overpervasive as it includes 
cases of destruction of real entities like ignorance of the 
presence of the shell and its misapprehension. 


The reality of the svariipa of illusory cognition as such, 
notwithstanding the sublatability of the object (v/soj a) is not 
inadmissible. For, it is conceded in the Advaita school that 
tho’ pain and the sufferings of life arc unreal, they are cognised 
by the Saksi, which is real, as it shares in the nature of Brahman 
the transcendental reality and consciousness. 



34 


Advaitasiddhi Vs Nyayimrta : A Re-Appraisal 


Even if the definition is modified so as to include under 
the general term ‘knowledge’ all forms or types pervaded by 
knowledge as such and falling within the category of 'knowledge’ 
[jndnatva-vydpyadharma ) there would still be overpervasion of 
the probans in the case of earlier impressions ( samskdras ) 
stored up in the mind (obliterated from memory and 
now recalled). Further, it is admitted in the Advaita 
school that in the state of Jivanmukti even after Ajnsna, the 
root cause of Samssra, is liquidated by knowledge of the 
truth (tattvajndna) the residual impressions of Avidya continue 
to exist, for the time being, till the body falls off finally- 
These impressions ( samskdras ) are said to be destroyed by the 
samskdras of the true knowledge and not by the true knowledge 
itself 1 . This gives rise to avydptl funderpervasion) of the 
probans. It cannot also be argued that these samskdras get 
destroyed by the destruction of the material cause of AjnSna 
itself, in as much as the superimposition of Ajnana (the cause of 
world appearance) is conceived as anddi (without a beginning) 
and as such the Ajnuna cannot have a material cause ( updddna). 

To get over these difficulties, the Advaitasiddhi explains 
the definition of Mithyatva viz. Jnana-nivartyatvam given by 
the ancients, in a different way - as Jnanaprayukrc-avasthiti- 
sdmanyavirahaprati'jOgitvam. It consists in being the counter- 
positive of a generic absence of existence ( avasthili-sdmdnya) 
of the product of Nescience, caused by true knowledge. 
Such existence is of two kinds — existence in one’s own form 
(svaripena ) as an effect and another in its causal form. 
This distinction helps it to side-step the difficulty of incon¬ 
clusiveness of the piobans raised in respect of the destruction 
of the jar by natural causes. Tho the jar as such, is destroyed 
by a blow, it subsists in its casual state till the dawn of 
Monistic consciousness which liquidates the causal 'state root 


1 

(Vijayindra Tirtha, Nym. Amoda p. 37) 




Third Deftniiion of Falsity 


35 


and branch, along with Avidya, the parent of all phenomenal 
appearances, 2 

In his discussion of the third definition of Mithyatva as 
Jnanatvena jndnanivartvajam, further modified by the author 
of the Advaitasiddhi as Jndnapraniktc-avisthidsSnidnyavirahb- 
pratiyogitvam, the author of the Tarangini adverts to the 
position taken by Madhuscdana Sarasvati, earlier, that the 
nhedha accepted by him is in terms of svarupevanisedha and 
observes that in the light of this plain speaking of the Advaita¬ 
siddhi, the negation of the Tuccha and the Pratibhasika would 
be indistinguishable from each other - so much so that it would 
be meaningless to single out one of them as jnanaprayukta for 
Jnananivartyatvam would naturally presuppose the existence 
of some svarupa of the thing to be negated. If such a 
svarupa of the thing to be negated is conceded, its negation can 
only result in nullity : 

3 Tf*rTT^T%$r (srftrara 1 
*ftW) araifiroirafort, 5 fa 

*dTTirvroftsfq 
ss sfr*Tsr$?a ifa fssrm *nwr- 

» <T5T SfraSf | 

Dr, Narain has not attempted to reply to this moot - point 
of Criticism in the Tarangini against the third definition of 
Mithyatva. 


strr, - I ^fspr4?r»jq*TJnfr i enti* 

w¥^rwfiF«rfdV’f|5fi iFRirrmwffqfa 
f^TfEwsritr TfunsuTfrii tp* &• II 

(Advaitasiddi p. 8 ) 



CHAPTER VI 


Fourth Definition of Mithyatva 

The fourth difinition of MithyStva associated with the 
name of Citsukha is - .S'vi /vantdbiuvasamanTdlukarara eva 
pratiyam'malvam. It means being counterpositive of an 
absolute negation located in its own substrate. To explain— 
the cloth which is perceived as subsisting in the woven threads is 
not real, in as much as its existence elsewhere than in the threads 
wherein it is perceived is impossible. At the same time, we 
cannot confer any reality on it, in its locus, as it is only a 
particular arrangement of the threads and nothing more 
This is the corollary from the Advaita thesis of the falsity 
of change (vikSramithyatva'n) drawn from the Vacarambhana 
3ruti. (For M’s. interpretation of the Srutiscc my PM p. 247). 

The above definition is more or less similar to the first 
one and stands refuted by its refutation. VySsatirtha observes 
therefore that if the absolute negation contemplated here is 
to be regarded as truly real (i.ltnilcc), the principle of Monism 
would be thrown to the winds. On the other hand, iritis 
regarded as purely Pratibhasika, the Realist has no objection. 
If it is Vyavaharika, and as such liable to Badha the counter* 
positive of such an absolute negation (viz. the world) which 
the Advaitin does not place in the category of the Pratiohasika, 
must necessarily be placed in the category of the Paramartbika 
(intiy real). 

Further, if the absolute negation here is understood as an 
utter negation of suehness of the thing {svarapera nhedha) - 
as Madhusfjdana Sarasvati has held - it would reduce the 
counterpositive to an utter non-existence ( atyanta-asat ), instead 



Fourth Definition of Mithyitva 


37 


of distinguishing it from the Asat and glorifying it as a tenium 
quid (rui'hyu). 


Where the threads and the cloth are in conjunction at a 
given place, it would be impossible to think of their non¬ 
existence. If such non-existence is possible, the threads could 
not be regarded as the material out of which the cloth is made. 

The Advairasiddhi rejoins that such coexistence of the 
counterpositive and its absolute negation in the same locus is 
possible in space and time on the analogy of the coexistence 
of the antecedent - non-existence (prdgabhdva) m the locus of 
the absolute negation. The Mithyatva-anumana and the Srutis 
also furnish evidence of such cocxi.tence. 

The Tarang\i rebuts the above contentions. It says that 
the coexistence in the same locus, of the counterpositive and 
its absolute negation, if it is a negation in terms of the 
suchness of the counterpositive (Svardpera nifedha) with reference 
to all the three periods of time, as contended by the author of 
the Advaitasiddhi, (as we have already seen) it would cut at 
the root of all opposition between the affirmation or existence 
and negation of existence of anything in the world, - for 
such a thesis is being put forward by the Advaitin in respect 
of everything that exists, in what he is pleased to call the 
Vyavahirika reality. For, it must be borne in mind that the 
doctrine of Mithyatva is applied and is applicable, in the 
Advaitin's view to the entire Vysvaharika world in which 
we live, move and have our being 1 

On the same analogy, the Monistic and the Dualistic 
standpoints should be equally acceptable to the Monist - in 
which case he could not maintain with any consistency of 
thought that the Monistic wisdom sublates the Dualistic one. 
The contention that the MithyatvanumSna and the Sruti 



38 


Advaitasiddhi Vs Nyayamrta : A Re-Appraisal 


endorse the coexistence in the same locus, of the counterpositive 
and its absolute negation is also untenable, as the Inference 
will stand aborted by the very conflict between the counter- 
positive and its absolute negation. The Srutis are open to 
other interpretations. The other explanation that the coexistence 
of the counterpositive with its own absolute negation in the 
same locus is valid from the point of view of different 
orders of reality (visamasottckatva ) of the two is 
obviously premature as the doctrine of different orders of 
reality yet unborn! The opposition between bhava and 
abhava, on the other hand, is well-established in experience 
and needs no elaborate proof of inference or the like. 




1 Yet. Samkara himself in his refutation of the Saptabhan- 
ginyuya of the Jainas rejects the coexistence of Sattva 
and Asattva in a given dharmi at the same time : 

Na hyekasmin dharmini yugapat sadasattvadiviru- 
ddhadharmasamavesoh sambhavati, iitosnavat. 

(S, BSB, II.2.33). See also Chap IV. 

F. N. 1 



CHAPTER VII 


The Fifth Definition 

The fifth definition of Falsity is given as : Sadviviktatvam- 
something different from reality or existence. This is further 
to be qualified by the adjunct of while being other than Asat” 
(i asadbhinrtatve salt), to avoid overpervasion in respect of the 
absolute non-being, as explained by the Advaitasiddhi. 

Analysing this concept in terms of three possible ways of 
interpretation, Vvasatirtha queries if it means that ‘Sat’ 
stands for something that participates in the genus of existence 
( satrijdiimat 1 in the accepted terminology of Indian Logic, 
which would contradistinguish it from what is mi thy a; or 
whether it means uncontradjctability (ahsdhyaivam); or 
“Brahman” as such. As objects in the empirical world also 
participate in the genus of Satta (while not being "asat") this 
definition would extend to the Mjthylprapanca also. To 
define‘Sat’as ‘-Brahman” does not carry the Advaitin any far. 
For, -Sauviviktatvam’ in that case, would only serve to 
differentiate the world (which is, admittedly, not “atyanta-asat” 
in the opinion of the Advaitin also) from ‘'Brahman”, - which 
is readily acceptable to the Realist, so long as Brahman is 
letf undefined in a manner hostile to the Dvaitin’s conception 
of it. The Reality of Brahman is not in conflict with the 
reality of the world, which depends for its subsistence and 
functioning on Brahman. Being devoid of sentience and 
blissfulness, the world is “non-Brahman”. Thus the definition 
of Sadvivikatvam as a distinction of the world from “Brahman” 
is tantamount to reaffirming what is already well-established and 
is agreeable to the Realist. 



40 


Advaitasiddhi Vs Nyayamrta : A Re-Appraisal 


The Advaitasiddhi therefore tries to overcome these objec¬ 
tions by proposing a new definition of Sattvam (orSnr). To be 
“Sat” is to be established by PramSria means of proof) 
unassociated with any defects. Thereby Mithyiitva is 
established (as in respect of dream-pnenomena) as something 
which is- other than what is established by Pramapa, 


But the phrase “Pramapasiddhatvam” is synonymous 
and concomitant with uncontradictability, To forestall over- 
pervasion of the definition of Sadvivikatvam in respect ol 
the attributeless Brahman and “Asat”, it is qualified by the 
adjunct "provided" it is presented to cognition as existing 
sattvenA pratiyamanatvam). For, neither the attributeless 
Brahman nor ,‘Asat” is ever capable of being presented in 
any substrate, in any cognition in terms of existence (Scr/vo- 
prakareva pratitivisayatveni) 1 . 


Clever and resourceful as it is, the above justification 
of the definition of Sadvivikatvam, by Madhusudana Sarasvati 
is found to be unsatisfactory by the author of the Tarangini 
on the following grounds : 

Tho' ’speaking in broad terms, the Advaita system 
recognises the experience of bliss or happiness as established 
by Pram&pa to be ‘sat', material objects established by 
perception or other Pram3r,as are ‘not’ recognised to be ‘Sat. 
This exposes the definition of ‘Sat r (as Pramanasiddhatam) 


Tiwn fcnr i nut: neuuurrcuiiretfa* 

fuuufumnuin i 



The Fiflh Definition 


41 


to AvyJpti (under-pervasion of the probans). The first definition 
of ‘Pramaoasiddhatvam’ advanced by Madhusudana Sarasvati as 
what is concomitant with uncontradiclability (pram&nasid• 
dhatvam ca abadhyatvavyapyam iti anyad eva) is not decisive, 
because the Advaita-Brahman, tho’ not amenable to Pramana— 
because it is ‘avedya’ as an object of knowledge, is yet accepted 
as ‘uncontradicted’ (abadhyam),- while at the same time the 
world of experience, tho’ established by all the three Pramaiias, 
is deemed to be open to contradi.tion (bsdhyam) Here Madhu- 
sudana’s logic does not seem to be impeccable. 

Vyasatirtha therefore concludes his critique of Falsity by 
summing up and pinpointing the vulnerable points in the five 
definitions examined by him. 

Before concluding, he clarifies that tho’ shell-silver (Sukti- 
rajata ), snake-in-the-rope ( rojjusorpa) and such others figuring 
in our illusions are indeed unreal ( mithyil ) and to that extent, 
it is obligatory on the part of the Realist also to define the 
nature of “ Mithyatvam ”, still it should not be thought that 
it is unfair for him to bombard the Advaitin alone with so 
many questions about the nature of Mithyatvam. 

There is no room for a tu quaque for the Advaitin here, 
as by “Mithya", as applied to suktirajata and other illusory 
objects, the Realist understands by the term absolute non-being 
(atyanta-asat) within the context of the illusory experiences. 3 

srqfnraT qsr s^tTcrr i (Ay.) 

This is a very important point For an exposition of 
Madhva’s Abhinaxa-Anyathakhylti see my Philosphy of Madhvi- 
cSrya Chap XXI 
6 



42 


Advaitasiddhi Vs Nyuyamrta: A Re-Appraisal 


But to avoid being misunderstood, the Realist would prefer not 
to use the term “ mithyd", which camouflages the real state 
of affairs and prefers to use the plain and unmistakable term 
*‘Asat” to designate the silver-in-shell appeasing in the illusion. 
relying on the verdict of the correcting cognition usarf eva 
rajatam prityabhit. Tire possibility of the presentation of 
what is totally non-existent us existent in our illusions has been 
diseas ed and proved to the hilt by Madhva and Jayatirtha in 
their works such as Mithyatyar.umdnakha ndana , the AV and the 
Nyayasudha and by Vyasatirtha in the Nym itself, while 
expounding the Realists theory of Error known as ‘Abhinava- 
Anyathikhyifi' or Svabhimata-Anyathakhyati, as Vyasattrtha 
refers to it (i. 64). 

The Tu rang ini winds up the discussion of Mithyitva in a 
humorous vein saying with a pun on Pancatvam which also 
means ‘death’ ■ — 

fasiTTr^StT: «T^ mfacTT: I 



CHAPTER VIII 


The Status of Falsity-True or False 

VyJsatirlha next raises the question of the onto - epistemo¬ 
logical status of this falsity, predicated of the world - whether 
it is true or false in itself, whatever may be the definition of 
Falsity. 

This is not an idle question. For, if the world’s Mithyatvam 
is true and uncontradictable, the principle of Monism would be 
at stahe. It cannot be held that though ur,contradicted there 
is no danger to the principle of Monism, as this falsity or 
negation of the w'orld itself is not something oilier than Brahman, 
but is one with it and non-different from Brahman, the only 
reality (Brabir asvai upsm or “ Brahmamatrom". 1 In that case, 
the difficulty will he that Mithyaiva, being conceivable only 
in relation to the world of name and form, time and space 
[prepaheepadhika) and as its true nature is yet to be ascertained 
during the state of world - appearance, it cannot be one with the 
Suddha - Brahman whose nature as the ever-sclfshining intelli¬ 
gence ( svaprakdiacinmatram) is always self-evident and 
un obscured. If then, MithyStva which is of the nature of 
absolute negation of the world for all time should be one with 
the ever-self-shining One Reality, there will be no possibility 
of the illusory appearance of the world, at any time or place, 
to bother the heads of Philosophers to explain ir or explain it 
away a 


1 . 

(A -Siddhi ) 

sr^rTfatffoimqTfT 5tcfTfVT*Tt*r»Tqia I 


(Tg. p. 146) 



44 


Advaitasiddhi Vs Nyayjmfta : A Re-Appraisal 


It cannot be contended that the merest shining forth 
(sphuraiiam) of the Suddha - Brahman as the substrate of the 
superimposition of the world - appearance in its bare aspect of 
“this” or “thisness”, does not include the shining forth of the 
other aspect of the absolute negation. For as the absolute 
negation is by hypothesis non-different from the Suddha 
Brahman which is an undifi'crenccd, aspectless unity all over, 
there is no internal mechanism in the constitution of Brahman 
conceived as 11 Mrvi-iesa'' ail through, to account for the shining 
forth of one aspect (of tiiisness alone) and the non-shining forth 
of the other aspect of absolute negation of the world. If there 
is any such internal dynamics cr machanism in Brahman, it will 
cease to be "Nirvhiesa” and turn out to be “Sa-Viiesa”, which 
is unpalatable to the Monist. s This disposes of the explanation 
attempted by the La^hteanJrika to get over the difficulty. * 

On the other hand, it Milhyitva is other than Brahman and 
contradictable, the Realist wins his point that the world is not 
mi thy 1, but quite true and that the belief that the Advaita Srutis 
are truth-declaring {tattvavedaka) is unfounded. 

Nor can Mithyatva. which is of the nature of absolute 
negation of any second entity in addition to Brahman ( dvitiya~ 
bhSva), be viewed as an accidental adjurct (upatoksana ) falling 
outside the nature of Suddha-Brahman, but qualifying it, for the 
nonce from outside its being, like the crow perching on the roof 
of Devadalta’s house, serving as a mark of identification and 
recognition to mark it off from other houses, to help the casual 
inquirer. 


3. fr sr^mcr 

5fa I cR Jfa, S TRfaqRRTTtfa TjtITFtRTcT I 

sTR'tr. fafa»irn"^rfasFT»ri'T i 

{Tg. p. 146) 

4. For details See Dr. K. Narain Op. cit. pp. 34-33. 



The Status of Falsity — true or false 


45 


The difficulty is that Mithyatva cannot operate as an 
upalaksana of B. The function of an upalaksana is to make 
the unknown known or the insufficiently known better known. 
But the 5uddha-Cit of B. has to be already known as the 
substrate ( adhiuham ) before any superimposition can be made 
on it. As this Cianutram is ever-shining as the substrate of all 
superimposition of Avidya, which causes the world-illusion, and 
as it is also the witness of Ajnina, there seems to be no room 
for regarding the Cimtatram as the Upaluksya and Prapanca- 
bhiva or its mithyatva as the i/palaksaua in making the Brahman 
known. 


Here, the Advaitin argues - Any property of a false entity 
must be equally false. The falsity of die illusory silver does not 
make the silver true. Where the subject in question is itself 
a myth any property predicated or denied of it and its opposite 
must be equally mythical. The absence of darkness of skin 
of the barren woman's son does not make him fairskinned. 
Tne negation of the dream elephant subsequently in the same 
dream does not make the dream elephant real! 

Vyasatirtha says ihe difficulty about Mithyatva cannot 
be so easily dismissed. For, according lo the Monist; 
Mithyatva is counterposuivity to an absolute negation for 
all time, in a given substratum. But unlike other properties 
such as color or taste, counterpositivity to an absolute negation 
does not necessarily presuppose the actual existence of the 
counlerpositivc. To be the counterpositive of an absolute 
negation is merely to be the referent in respect of such know¬ 
ledge as would enable one to form an idea of such a negation 1 . 
The non-existence of the property in the absence of the subject 


1. aTW!5rfTT i T>T!TyPr?f^r«rTiT= r t!Tr^?T | 


(J. Tdyl ) 




46 Advaitasiddhi Vs NysySmrta : A Re-Appraisal 

appliss only to cases where the subject has actual existence in time 
and space. But falsity or MithyStva as defined by the Advaitin, 
is hostile to the actual existence of the subject, as we have 
seen. If the erroneous silver seen in the illusion and its 
contradiction are both false, it would be meaningless to talk 
of the one being contradicted by the other. The analogy of 
the barren woman's son is irrelevant , as the Vandhylputra is a 
myth — (tuccho) having no svariipa of his own,—unlike th emiihy- 
abhuta which, according to the Advaitin. has the nature (svariipa) 
of being asad-vitakso tut. The absence of the dream elephant 
is net contradicted in the waking state and it (the absence) must 
therefore be true. Being perceived in a dream is not a 
suilicient ground of falsity, as lire Atman too is perceiveu in the 
dream as the percipient. 

However, the Advaitin has been pleased to bestow a higher 
grade of reality on ‘empirical' things in space and time as 
" VyavahSrika - satya". What contradicts the Vyavaharika-satya 
must, in fairness, belong to a still higher order of reality, if it 
should ha’.e the power to do so. Even though the shell-silver 
(suktirupya ) is pratibhasika, its stultification and mithyatvam l as 
been admitted to be 'tattvika' by the Advaitin. Suiely, what 
contradicts the empirical, if there is any such experience, must 
be entitled to a better deal than the barren woman’s son ! The 
world of our consolidated experience is certified to be ieal by 
.lawless perception and other Piams^as, including the ilruti and 
the Saksi. The creation and dissolution of tie world in an 
orderly way have been expounded in the Srutis themselves. If 
the mithv&tva of the Pritibhasika silver were purely VyavahSrika, 
instead of being tatlvika, it would be equally open to stultifica¬ 
tion and such stultification of hs Vyavaharikatva would make it 
“tatlvika”. For the same reason, the world and its rr.ithyatva 
cannot both of them be ‘'Vyivahftrika”. The plea that both 
the world and its MUhyatva are of the same order of reality 
(samSnasattSka) because they are subject to contradiction by 




The Status of Falsity — true or false 


47 


one and the same BrahmajnSna, put forward by the Advaita- 
siddhi 4 is like counting the chicken before they are hatched. 
For, it is yet to be established that the world is Brahmajnatia- 
bddhya (sublated by knowledge of Brahman). That depends on 
the world being shown to be mithyd ; for according to the 
Advaitin what is mithya is jhinabadhya. But the question 
whether the world is really Mithyl or Jnanabadhya is stilt being 
debated. It is still sub judice. 

For reasons already stated, it is as difficult for the Advaitin 
t o equate the world's mithydtva with Brahmssvarupa, as to treat 
it as ■ VyavahUika — i e. tossy *b5dhya‘ ! (sublatable). There 
is thus no smooth sailing for him either way : 

crerarTSEr I 

ferstn^r ufa ^iTc?TriT^*TTq^cT n 

The author of the Advuitasiddhi tries to wriggle out of this 
predicament saying in the end, that even though the Vyivahlrika- 
satyatva (empirical reality) of the world is taken away by its 
' Vyavahirika-Mithyatva* its imaginary reality (kdlpanika - 
satyalva) is left untouched {intact). 4 

A Daniel come to judgment ! At long last, we arc here 
brought face to face with the naked truth of the matter that in 


4. tptfiwqrsw ^ g’flraweq sratqqnr 

(A. Siddhi. p. 10) 

Dr. Narain has discreetly avoided discussing this problem) 


(A Siddhi. p. 10. 



48 


Advaitasiddhi Vs NySvamrta : A Re-Appraisal 


Advaita philosophy, the high-sounding phrases “Vysvahirika- 
satya” “empirical reality’ 1 applied to the world is a euphemism 
for what exists only in your imagination and nothing more. That 
being so, one is forced to agree with KumSrila Bhana's 
appraisal of the Buddhist's position and extend it to the 
Advaitin : 

flem %KfafcT: %*T *57 %ctfc*cTT ^75* ? 

*c5c* * * HTTTTJTT *5T*5T*mt: l 

e 

5=3*T***c*ra> u 



CHAPTER IX 


Grounds of Mithyata (Falsity) 

(I) DRSVATVAM (PERCEPTIBILITY) 


The Advaita school has adduced drsyctva (perceptibility), 
Jadctva (inscntience) and paricckitmatva (being limited by space, 
time and other entities) as the grounds of falsity of the world. 
These are examined by Vyasaiiriha. 

To begin with - the ground of drsyciva is a leaf borrowed 
from the Buddhist camp, which holds that all percepts are false. 

*t!*lTfi2Src^q> f<| Z(: i 

While there may be some justification for the Buddhist to 
hold such a view as knowledge to him is intrinsically invalid 
and validity is thro' external grounds, the Advaitjn, who claims 
that validity is intrinsic to knowledge and that invalidity alone 
is made out extrinsically : 

3Rmr*5r i 

(Surcsvara, Erhcdilrapyakavariika 241) 

has the least justification to make perceptibility of objects the 
ground of their falsity. 

Analysing the concept of DrSyatva according to the 
Advaitin, Vyasitirtha reviews the possible ways in which it 
7 



50 Advaitasiddtu Vs Nyavarmla : A Re-Appraisal 

can be and has been defined : viz. (I) being reachable through 
a Vrtti (rrUiryjpyatram). Vrtti is the mechanism by which 
the mind-stuff (antajkaraaam) constituted of light ( laijasc) 
emerging tiirougii the sense organs pervades the object and assumes 
its form Tne consciousness reflected in this aniahkarana vrtti 
is known as the cognising consciousness. ( pramatrcaitanya ) It 
draws aside the veil of AvidyS (nescience) which has been 
surrounding the object, which exposes the substrate-conscious¬ 
ness wdtiisihina-caituiya) underlying the object. Thereupon, 
the consciousness reflected in the Vjtti and surmounting it and 
the substrate-consciousness (of the object) execute a flash- 
like identity which results in the judgment - “1 have known the 
object”. The fusion of these two forms of consciousness is 
called phala (the net result or fruition). The bare mental vj-tti 
is by itself incapable of destroying the nescience of the object. 
Pure consciousness too, being only the bare witness of Ajnana, 
cannot remove it. But when the same consciousness penetrates 
the Vrtti and takes hold of it, it is competant to remove the veil 
of ignorance in which the object has been shrouded so far. 
Such is the outline of the Advaita theory of Perception. 

Now, d/iyatva may be defined as ( 1 ) Vpttivyapyatva, 
(ii) Phalavyapyatva or (iii) as partaking of some common 
element of both, which enables the object to be spoken of as 
coming to be “known”, sometimes, and somehow, — negatively, 
as in the case of dharma and ad hernia and other super-sensi- 
bles 1 or as in the case of a pot, positively, or (iv) being 
dependent for any reference to be made to the object as being 
immediately known on a consciousness which is other than and 
different from the object itself and failing outside its being, 
or else (v)as being devoid of self-luminosity (a-svaprakafa). 

DRSYATVA AS V^TTIVY APYATVA 

None of these alternatives is sustaintable. For the Atman 
or B. too is knowable thro’ Vrtti (psychosis engendered by 


1. Servant vastu jiiiitalayS ajnatatayd vl Saksivisayah 



Grounds of Mithyatva (Falsity) 


51 


study and reflection upon the Vedantie texts relating to 
B. enjoined in the Jlruti. Otherwise, these texts and their 
injunctions to study them for the attainment of B a . would be 
futile. Teachers and pupils engaged in the arduous investigation 
of B. with the aid of these texts would otherwise have to 
lapse into silence and ignorance respectively. 

Further, Vedantic injunctions like Brar majijnasa ( kariavya ), 
the use of the objective genitive form of the compound “Brahma- 
jijnasa and texts like - “the seeker shall know Him and gain 
understanding”. “It is perceived by seasoned intellect, by the 
subtle-minded” and the gcrundiai suffix (fnrjvi) in “Atman 
should be seen (drcstcyyui,). will ail of them lose their force, 
otherwise. 

•DrSyatva’, grammatically speaking, is 'drgvifayatva'. If 
Atmic or Brahmic consciousneis (drk) as Caitanya is, in 
essence, unknowable, the premise of dfiyatva itself as drgv - 
ifaya in regard to the Mithyatva of the world cannot be 
sustained. For, without knowledge of the qualifying adjunct 
(<f?Ar—Cit) itself drsyatva (perceptibility) cannot be defined as 
dygvisayctva objectivity to drk). For, there cannot be any 
knowledge of the qualified entiiy (visit sejnarta) without a know¬ 
ledge of the qualifying clement which, in this case, happens 
to be cit or drk. Veteran Advaitins like Ma^dana Migra have 
clearly held that it is the B. which is actually known in and 
thro’ ail percepts : 

Sarvaprctyaya vedye ca Brah/ncrupe vycrasthiie 

(Brahmasiddhi) 

It cannot be pleaded that it is only the qualified B. ( Visisla) 
and not the 5>uddha-B or the Absolute that is revealed in all 


2. Tctlvamasyadiviik) arthasamyagdhijtnmcrr.airatah. 
A vidyasramayo moksas sA Samsara udahrick. 



52 Advaitasiddhi Vs NyftySmrta: A Re-Appraisal 

acts and forms of perception (in Advaita). For the second half 
of M and ana’s verse 

Prapjiicasya pravilayah iabdena praiipddyate 

speaks of this B. as the ground of liquidation (pravUaya) a 
the universe, when Tatlvajnana is attained thro’ the Srutis. 
This leaves no room for doubt that it is one and the same 
Absolute B. which is the subject of the first and the second 
halves of the verse, in keeping with continuity of thought. 
That apart, in Advaita thought there is no dissolving of the 
world ( pravUaya) in the Saguna-B, but only in the Suddlia-B. 

It is no use pleading also that the said dpiyatva is only 
Vyavaharika in respect of the objectivity of the world and 
that such a kind of drsyatva is not admissible in respect of the 
Suddha-B., which is a Paramanhika - real. The Advaitin has 
yet to establish the distinction between the Vyavaharika and the 
Paramfirthika reals and cannot take it for granted, as he is 
wont to do. with his sleight of hands. 

Nor can it be submitted that the £uddha-B. isno/drSya’ 
and only the qualified-B. can be so and that all such texts 
as have been cited by the Realist have reference only to the 
qualified, as otherwise there will be a clash between them and 
others like yaf tad adreiyam ( Mund. Up. i.6) which speak 
of B. 's unperceivability. 

Unless the £uddha-B. is knowable and perceivable with 
the aid of the Sastras its vejy existence cannot be predicated. 
The contention that it is established by self-evidence is going 
to be refuted It is also inherently illogical. If self-established- 
ness is known by its own self-competence, it will conflict with the 
Advaitic dictum of kartrkarmavirodha that the subject cannot 
be the object of its own act of knowing. 3 As no attribute 
or property can be posited or negated of an unknown or 
un-knowable something, it would be absolutely necessary 


3. See page 53 for foot Note 3 



Grounds of MithyStva (Falsity) 


53 


that the Suddha-B. should be open to knowledge thro 1 some 
Pramdna, even in order to rule out that it is perceivable. 

It cannot be that as the Suddha is self-established on the 
authority of its own self-luminosity, its knowability thro* 
iabdavrtti is negated in such texts as Yat tad adreiyam 
( Mund - Up, i.6). There can be no self-luminosity of B. 
unless it is admitted that its Suddhatva is manifested 
in the Vftti produced by the Sabda-Pramaria to 
the effect that the Suddha-B. is Svaprakasa (self-luminous). 
In the absence of any such knowledge its being merely open 
to a general awareness (sphuranam ), irrespective of whether 
such awareness is by itself or thro' some other source, it may 
as well be the determinant of its falsity, instead of its factual 
existence, as in the case of the shell-silver. Such texts as 
proclaim B.’s existence - sad eva idamagra Ssit, sat yam Brahma 
could all be explained away, otherwise, as predicating that it 
is just other than non-being, just as the Advaitin would explain 
the texts which proclaim the real existence of the world of experi¬ 
ence as conveying that it is merely ‘Asadvilaksana’ (other than 
total non-being) without at the same time having a real being of 
its own - a sort of tertiurn quid between Sat and Asat. 

This should make it clear that texts like Yat tad adreiyam 
which speak of B. as “ adresyam " ( unperceivable) have to be 
understood in the sense that it cannot be perceived or known 
in ail the fulness and vastness of Its being, powers and majesty.* 

3. See S.’s BhSsya on Brh. Up. 1.4.9-10. 

■4: Read - Acintydh khatu ye bhiva na tdmstarkena yojayet. 

Prakrttbhyah Poram yScca tad acintyasaya vaibhavam (Mbh) 

Pasyantopi na pasyanti Afero rtipam \ipaicitah (Sksnda) 

Also ; Passage from Ralph Cudworth quoted in Chamber's 
Encyclopaedia of English Literature Vol. 1. (1894), p. 373 
cited in my Philosophy of MadhvScSrya p. 342. 




54 


Advaitasiddhi Vs Nysyamfta : A Re-Appraisal 


If nothing of B. is at all knowable, perceivable (thro’ 
proper means) it cannot be referred to by the relative pronoun 
‘that 1 (vat tat) in the Sruti {Yot tad adresyam) for the pronoun 
has to fall back upon its own actual antecedent referent. 

o'uddha-Brahman Open to Perception in Carmavftti 

Advaita system speaks of a final psychosis of Brahman 
known as CARAMA Saksatkara thro' Caramavptti produced 
by intensive study and meditation on the import of the 
Mahavakyas. It would thus be necessary to accept that 
Siuddha-Brahman is the direct object of perception thro’ 
Caramavrtti, As Suddha-Brahman is an undisputed reality, 
the probans of perceptibility (drs)atva) would be incompetent to 
establish Mithyatva. 

To get over the difficulty. A - Siddhi has taken great 
pains to contend that it is not the Buddha Brahman or the 
pure Atman which is the object of the Caramavj-tii but only 
the Suddha-Brahman or the pure Atman conditioned by the Cora - 
mavrtti, which is the object of the Vrtti. As the condtiorxd 
Brahman or Atman is a composite entity (Visit/aJ, it is “Mithya” 
in status. Hence, there is no fear of overpervasion of the profcans 
of drsyatva in the Suddha-Brahman. Vyasatlrtha rightly points out 
that as the probans of drdyatva and its profcandum of Mithyatva 
are governed by a clear relation of Anvaya and Vyatireka frem 
the Advaita angle, it would be incumbent on his part to 
admit the knowability of the Suddha-Brahman in order to 
mark off the nature of the unconditioned Brahman or Atman 
from the conditioned. 

Moreover, with regard to Caramavrtti itself, it has to he 
clarified if in its operation it reveals itself to knowledge along 
with the Brahman or Atman as its qualifying adjunct (visesana). 
I fit does, it will have to be treated as SvaprakaSa (self-shining) 
which the Advaitin cannot concede on account of Kartrkar- 
inavirodha, in the same act of knowledge. 



Grounds of Mithylva (Falsity) 55 

Secondly, as the composite knowledge (Viii$tajnuna) of the 
conditioned self or Brahman would itself be “Mithya” (as what 
is conditioned is Mithya (in Advaita), the knowledge produced 
by the Caramavrtti wotild be an invalid one {apramn) 

If the Caramavrtti excludes itself from presentation as a 
qualifying adjunct of Brahman or Atman, the result would be 
that the pure unconditioned Atman or B. would have to be 
recognized as the sole object of the Caramavj-tti. As the 
unconditioned Brahman or Atman is real and nat Mithya, it 
would falsify the logical concomitance between drsyatva and 
Mithystva on which the whole Mithyatvanumana of the universe 
rests in Advaita thought. 

If the object of Vedanta texts in the last analysis of 
Caramavftti is only the VUista-Brahman which is only projected 
by Avidya and hence “Kalpita”, they would all become 
*‘A-tattv5vedaka” (not truth declaring). But Srutis like Tarati 
3okam atmavid” tell us that it is only the true knowledge of 
the £>uddha-B. that is the means of attaining release. 


Moreover, if there is no possibility of ever knowing the 
3uddha-B. as such, there will be no prospect of the liquidation 
of original Ignorance ( mula-avidya ), which can only be brought 
about by the knowledge of the Absolute. For. knowledge 
can sublate ignorance only when both of them pertain to the 
same object, If then Brahmajnana has no identifiable object 
(Ki'#<iyu) obscured by Ignorance for its removal, it can hardly 
deserve the title of “Jnana”. 

Here, the Advaitin interposes — It is not the fact of a 
thing’s objectivity to knowledge that determines its power to 
liquidate ignorance about its true nature, but that of the 
knowledge being of or conforming to the same contours of the 
object (tadakaratra) . £>rutis which enjoin on the aspirant the 
acquisition of knowledge of B. (Atwu drastavyah) mean the 



56 Advaitasiddhi Vs Nyayimrta : A Re-Appraisal 


same thing and not B.’s actually becoming the object of any 
knowledge as such (Tadvisayatra). 

Vyasatlrtha following Madhva and Jayatlrtha 5 brings 
up three different alternatives in which the phrase Tadskiratvam 
can possibly be understood as : (i) having A tman itself as 

its form ; or (ii) being of identical form with Atman’s 
(tadakera eva iikarah yasya) or (iii) having a form resembling 
that of the Atman. 

None of these alternatives can help the Advaitin. “Form’* 
abides in what possess it The form of Atman cannot possibly 
abide in the Vrtti. The second alternative would place the 
Advaitin in the company of the Buddhist’s Sakara-vSda. 
Further, the Vrtti which is insentient, void of blissfulness and 
finite in form cannot be of the form of pure intelligence, 
bliss and unlimitedness which constitute the essential form 
of B. If identity of form is to be in virtue of both possessing 
the same esse ( salts) it would lead to a travesty. The possi¬ 
bility of a single esse running thro’ several entities is not 
acceptable to the Realist. We have therefore to accept that 
correspondence of form of knowledge and its object can not 
mean anything more than having the given object for its 
content - Tadviyayatam eva tadakaratvam, in all cases, uniformly. 
Otherwise, there will be two different criteria of correspondence 
between knowledge and its object, as between a jar and its 
cognition and knowledge of Ataman and its function in remov¬ 
ing the ignorance shrouding it. 

Drsyatva As FhalavySpyatva 

Nor can drsyatva be explained as phalavy&pyaiva or being 
pervaded by the consciousness reflected in the Vftti and that 
consciousness again manifesting the substrate-consciousness, 
leading to the uncovering of the object, That would not cover 


5. See M.’s Tdy Nahi jnattajheyayor ekiikaraia and its 
C. by Jayatlrtha. 



Grounds of Mithyfitva (Falsity) 


57 


the case of knowledge of the past and future entities with which 
there is no possibility of Vrtti, followed by the reflection of 
consciousness therein etc., so much so that this cumbersome theory 
is inadequate to cover all cases of perception of present and past 
things. If it is said that the perception of the present and 
future entities too are amenable to V.tti as and when they 
actually exist, the underpervasion of this theory would still 
be there in respect of knowledge of eternally super- 
sensuous entities. They cannot be brought under Yogi-pratyak$a 
as Citsukha himself has ruled out the possibility. 7 


Moreover, the theory of Phalavyapyatvam is of no use in 
explaining perception of happiness, the perception of Avidya, 
antahkarana and its properties and the shell-silver in the 
illustration of the miihyd. These are all internal reals and the 
shell-silver too according to Advaita is a product at the time 
of the illusion and is therefore not “out there” to be reached 
by the Vftti, as in the case of the jar. 

The third alternative of djiyatva in its general aspect must 
necessarily be present in B. which is open to Vfttivyapyatva in 
its specific aspect - as the generic is included in the specific. 

It is not also of much avail to the Advaitin to argue that 
even tho’ it may be contended that Avidya, happiness 
and so forth may be held to be intuitively known by the 
Saksi-Cit, either in terms of being known or not known, pure 
consiousness cannot be perceived in any of the other ways and 
must therefore he looked upon as not drgnsaya at any time and 
that therefore the probans of driyatva in the MithyStvanumSna. 


7. Citsukhena Na ca Yogipratyaksagamyatayd aparok$atvam 
Dharmadinam Codonaikapramanayogyatvat (Citsukhi, 
p. 10. N. S. Press. Edn.) (quoted in Nym) 

The A-Siddhi does not meet this point. 

— 8 



58 


Advaitasiddhi Vs NyiySmrta : A Re-Appraisal 


is inapplicable to B. For, in respect of eternally supersensible 
t hings, it is possible to speak of them as being known 
thro* Saksipratyaksa, tho* not in the normal way of sense- 
perception. In the same way, the guddha-B. hitherto unknown 
does certainly admit of being described and now known and 
expressed thro’ the Vedanta vakyas. In this sense, then, 
the probans of dyrsatva is bound to be ©verpervasive 
of B. 


If B. is ttewr to become the object of our knowledge 
(cidvisaya) the fontal ignorance about it which is the source of 
transmigration from time immemorial would remain interminable 
for ever 3 and the statement of 3rutis like Tarati 3 ok am Atmavid 
will have to remain a dead letter for all time. 

The fifth alternative of perceivability as Svavyavahire 
svdtiriktasamvidapeks&vifayatvam is also inadmissible. For, 
there is dependence on knowledge of something other than one’s 
own being in describing and knowing B. as self-luminous, one 
without a second, which presuppose prior knowledge of an 
“other” element. Without knowing about the non-existence of 
a second real or what self-luminosity is, how is it possible to 
know B. as it is in truth ? 

The answet that Atman or B. needs such media only in 
respect of qualified judgments (visistavvavahara) about it and 
that there is no such dependence in referring to its pure 
Being ( svarUpasatta ) is not conclusive, as the same thing can 
be said of the reference to the bare existence of a jar as well. 
It may be contended that there is no room for a reference to the 
bare being of a jar, without involving its association with 
space and time ; while on the contrary there is such a reference 
to the bare being of the self in itself in deep sleep Susupti. 


(Tg.p.41) 



Grounds of Mithy&tva (Falsity) 


59 


This is wishful thinking, for even in deep sleep, the 
existence of the self is presented only in relation to the happy 
repose of sleep during the period, in terms of ‘I have slept 
happily so long. “It cannot be rejoined against this, that tho’ 
in a qualified judgment about the self there is dependence 
on some other fact of knowledge, there is no such depen. 
dence in respect of the substantive element of the self as such 
(VtSesramatram) because of its self-luminosity whereas, the jar, 
even in respect of the substantive aspect [VUeyamsa) is 
dependent on something else. In that case, the adjunct of 
"invariable” ( niyati ) qualifying the dependence on some 
other fact of knowledge, in the definition of the fifth alter¬ 
native would be superfluous. 

If the Advaitin agrees to drop the adjunct from the 
definition, there will be overpervasion in the bare essence of 
the 5>uddha-B. For, as the Suddha-B. lies shrouded 
by Nescience from the very beginning of Samsara, the true 
knowledge of its bare existence has necessarily to depend on a 
Vrtti produced by meditation on the Vedanta texts, for 
revealing the till then unknown element of its pure unqualified 
essence, capable of shattering the veil of bcginnmgless Ajnana. 

We have already made it clear that there is no knowledge 
of B. other than thro’ the Vtili and such a vrtti is a sine qua 
non of Atman or B. in the Ccramarrtti 9 . There is no case 
for accepting a ‘samvid’ (cognition) other than the Vrtti obtained 
thro* VedSntic texts. The Caitanya reflected in the Vrtti and 
the Caitanya of the substrate being manifested by it are all 
far-fetched and gratuitous assumptions. 


The A-Siddhi has tried its best to establish that the 
Caratnavrtti produced by the Vedanta texts does not have the 
£uddba-B. for its objective cement, but cnly B. suffused by 




6Q Advaitasiddhi Vs NySyimrta: A Ro-Appratul 

the Vrtti, This is diametrically opposed to the declared position 
of earlier authorities like the author of the Sanksepaimraka 
who roundly asserts that the Nirvi$e$a (Buddha) Cit, is indeed 
both the content and the locus of Mnla-Ajnana. 

SahksepaiSriraka 

The A-$iddhi has also argued that the proposition “the 
5uddha-B. is self-luminous” lias to be interpreted thro’ Lak$atya 
(secondary signification) as predicating that what is nan-self- 
luminous is pervaded by non-Suddhotva. Thus, by elimination 
of non-iuddhatva, ihe Suddha comes to be self-luminous 
just as the negation of difference leads to the acceptance of 
oneness. 10 It argues further that it cannot be objected that 
it would be futile to formulate that Suddha-B. is Svaprakala 
(self-luminous) in so many words, if the Suddha as such is 
not conveyed to knowledge cither expressly or by lak$an5 
fin the Caramavrtti). It explains that the proposition 
“Suddha-B. is Svaprakaga” can be taken to be meaningful 
if we go by the ultimate sense. Likewise, the other propositions 
“Suddha-B. is not perceivable” (Suddham na drsyam ) “Suddham 
is not MithyS" convey nothing more. However, in the final 
analysis it comes to this that the Suddha-B stands divested 
of all drsyatva and mithycitva 11 . 


10 gsreffr ?ftr 

^ipnfT i <r<rre, 

11 h ^ 3T ^prsrsrcr 

?r fmwrr’ ^ttwtfit, 

{A-Siddhi p.13) 



Grounds of MithyBtva (Falsity) 


61 


This sort of touching the nose in Pr&gayama by taking 
t he right hand around the head anti-clockwise is often charac¬ 
teristic of Advaita. see the A-Siddhi's explanation of the Sruti 
“Asad era idam agra 3sU" cited earlier, (p. 26) 

But it serves no useful purpose. The Nym-Tarangini 
rightly points out in reply that the self-luminosity of £uddha-B. 
cannot be establised by merely establishing a pervaded-pervader 
relation ( vyapyavydpakabhdva ) between non-svaprakasalva andnon- 
Suddhatva. It can only be established by knowing that Aiuddhatva 
which is pervaded by A-svaprakdiatva stands banished from the 
fuddha-B. Tn order then to realise that there is the contrary 
of the pervader in the Suddha-B. it has got to be known as 
such. The VyapyavySpakabhBva between what is non- 
svaprakaia and what is noiMuddha can be known for certain 
only after one realises that there is complete concomitance 
between £uddhatva and Svaprakagatva (in the Suddha-B). 
Thus , the attempt to by-pass the categorical sense of the 
proposition that Buddha B is Svaprakada is an exercise in 
futitity — like the cartman driving his bullock-cart by devious 
routes all night to avoid the toll-naka (octroi) - only to find 
himself at day-break just in front of the tollgate ! 

The Siddhi also takes the help of Citsukha's definition 
of SvaprakaSatva as Avedyatve sati aparok sayvavaharaygog- 
vatvam in embellishing its definition of D^yatva. 

Avedyatve sati Aparokgavyavaharayogyatabhava- 
dr§yatvam api h*tuh. (A-Siddhi) 

The objection to such a definition that such Aparoksavyava- 
hirayagyatvam as is qualified by the absence of Phalavyapyatva 
is also present in Avidya, antahkarana and shell-silver with the 
result that the pro bans will be open to question is sought 
to be met by contending that the phrase -Apdrokfavyavahdra- 



62 Advaitasiddhi Vs Nyayamrta : A Re-Appraisal 

yogyatva is intended to convey such fitness (yogyatva) as is 
embodied in the Vj-tti which is competent to liquidate AjnSna. 
As such competence is not found in the Vftti pertaining to 
Avidya, amakkcrar.a and shell-silver, they are taken to be 
intuited by the Saksi, by way of Aparoksavyavahara. 

Refuting these arguments of the A-Siddhi, the Tarangini 
raises a very pertinent question whether the said ‘Aparoksatva’' 
in the definition of Svapraks^atva is something different from 
Brahman or is the same as Brahmasvariipa, which is the sole 
i'Aparoska” (Bfh. Up iii, 4,1) according to Sankara's inter¬ 
pretation 12 . 

If Aparok^atva is different from B. it could hardly be said 
to be not dependent on any other source for its immediacy, as 
according to Advaita, whatever is different from B. is the 
outcome of Avidya and is dependent on it for its origination- 
If, on the other hand, Aparoksatva itself is Brahman, the final 
form of the probans of Asvapraka^atva will be what partakes 
of the nature of a difference whose counterpositiveness 
( pratiyogitva ) is limited ( avacchirma ) by Brahman (Brah- 
mdvacchinnapratiyogitdkabhedasYcriipam). It is obvious that 
the counterpositive of such a difference is B. the Svapraksfa 
(or the *Aparok§a”) Yat ssksad aparoksad Brahma ... That 
being so, the Aparoksatva which is now being considered as 
Brahman itself cannot be the delimiting adjunct of the 
counterpositiveness constituting the probans ( hetu .) because the 
counterpositive of the difference and its differentiating adjunct 
of counterpositiveness cannot be one and the same. The 
Pratiyogi and the Pratiyogitavacchedaka cannot be the same. 
There would thus be no possibility of any such difference in 
objects like a jar. The probans of Driyatva defined as 
“A-svaprakaSatvam” as embellished by the A-Siddhi will thus 
be open to the defect of Asiddhi (inconclusiveness). 

12. For Madhva’s interpretation of the text “Yat Ssksad 

Aparokvam Brahma” (Brh. Up) See my Brhadaranyaka Up. 

From Madhya's Perspective (DVSR Foundation, Bangalore, 

1988). 



Ground* of Mithytva (Falsity) 


63 


If, in order to overcome this difficulty, “Aparoksatvam*’ 
is not regarded as the delimiting adjunct of the counter - posi¬ 
tiveness in question and only difference from “Aparok$atva” 
is regarded as the probans, it would still entail a “Vyabhicara” 
(discrepancy) of the probans in Brahman on account of its 
being “empirically different’* and having “vyavaharikabheda” 
from the Jlvatman, who is also “Aparoktasvarupa.” 

If, in order to get over this difficulty, an imagined 
difference ( kalpltabheda ) is assumed to exist between Brahman 
and its Aparoksatva to enable the latter to be treated as the 
delimiting adjunct of the counterpositiveness of the difference 
in question, there would still be “Vyabhicara” of the hetu, 
in respect of “Avidyanivrtti” (the liquidation of Fontaj 
Ignorance (Xfafividyd) For, Avidyanivftti has been held 
by eminent Doctors of Advaita-Vedanta like Vimuktatman 
to belong to a fifth order of predication (pafleamaprakdra ) 13 aa 
being neither Sat, Asat, Sadasat, nor Anirvacaniya (Sadasad- 
vilakgapa) : 

StOTtat^ll 

(Anandabodha) 

Thus, being “Jadasadvilaksapa-Vilakjapa”, Avidyanivftti 
cannot be “Mithya” (as the Mithya)” is the same as Sadasad- 
vilaksapa,) As the first order of predication as “Sat” is alone. 
Brahma-svarupa, “Avidyanivrtti which belongs to the fifth order 
is necessarily A-Svaprakl^a. But it is nevertheless not “Mithya” 

13 ff srsrrat^fa arsTH?* Prafa: 

f fa: 

(Istasiddhi, i,4, pp. 85 - 86) 

14 srftr*TTf*ra#: rRT aijfawr^rcoiH ^ 

srsfR^TW^ffnaf i 

{A-Siddhi p. 13) 



64 


Advaitasiddhi Vs Nyaysmjta ; A Re-Appraisal 


as it is not '•Sodascdvilcksana (as the “Mithya" is, by definition 
“Sadasadvilak?aija''. Thus ‘the' Vylpti that whatever ia 
“A-Svapraksfa”) is “Mjthya" (like the jar) breaks down here 
and exposes the probans of the Mithyatvinurnsna to a patent 
fallacy of “asiddhi". 


The A-Siddhi makes a last bid to plug the loophole by 
proposing to qualify the probans of “asvaprakafatva” with 
the adjunct of “subject to its being present at the time of the 
pendency of “Ajfiana” (Ajnanakalavrttitve sati) - explaining 
that as Avidyanivrtti does not and cannot co-exist when Ajnina 
is still enduring and hente the Vyabhlcsra of the hetu is averted. 


The Tarartgini rejoins that the difficulty cannot be so easily 
solved by introducing the adjunct of Ajninakalavrttit\e sati". For, 
Advaita philosophy accepts a state of “Ji van-mukti” for some 
souls after the termination of their Ajfirna. It also admits 
that these Jivanmuktas retain their physical bodies and sense 
organs and react suitably to their stimuli in the daily commerce 
of their lives (sarirayStra) . This means that in the state of 
Jlvanmukti which is subsequent to Avidyanivttti, there is 
“Asvaprakafatva" side by side with the absence of “Mithyatva" 
(the predicate in the Mithyitvanumfina) This opens the door 
again to the fallacy of Vyabbicera of the probans. 


The difficulty cannot be aterted by the Advaitin’s accepting 
the theory of individual Salvation (Pratyekamukti) of different 
jfianins at different times, who in the state of their Jivanmukti 
continue to react to the needs of their daily routine and carry 
on their spiritual responsibilities of teaching, meditation and 
spiritual advice,, after their Avidyanivrtti. For, as “Avidys’* 
is by hypothesis “nir” amia" (aspcctless) and nir-avayaya 
(parties, there is no question of a small residual “part" of it 
lingering in the lives of the Jivanmuktas. 



Grounds of Mitbyatva (Falsity) 


65 


On the other hand, if the Advaitin should accept the theory 
of simultaneous release of all souls at the 3ams time (yugapat- 
sarvamukti) it would clash with the view of other eminent 
traditional Doctors of Advaita philosophy that the doctrine 
of Yugapat-Sarvamukti at the same time is not authentic 
(pr&manika) as the gratis, speak only of the release of Jijanins 
like Vsmadeva. Either way, the stalemate continues, so far as 
Avidyanivrtti is concerned with the Jramn's state of Jivanmukti. 

Dr. Narain has refrained from entering into the intricacies 
of the problem raised by the Taraflgjni s rebuttal of the 
Advaitasiddhi-s rejoinder in regard to the Vyabhiclra of the 
probans of “asvaprakMatva’'. 



CHAPTER X 


JADATVAHETU - BHANGAH 


The second reason of falsity is Ja.latva, insentiency or 
materiality. The world of experience is the laksya and it is 
material and wanting in senticncy. 

But what is -being insentient’? It cannot be either not 
being a knower or knowledge or non-self-luminous or being 
non-Atman or what is acceptable to the Realist as insentient. 

1) Jadatva cannot be equated with not being a knower, 
because in the Advaita system knowership (jhatr(va) belongs 
to the ego ( ahamartha ) which is not the true unsullied Atman. 
So then, according to the Mayivadin, the true self is not a 
knower and as such it will have to forfeit‘ Atmatva’. There 
is no use pleading that the pure self has knowership attributed 
to it thro’ Avidya and hence can be considered to be a knower. 
Overpervasion of a probans cannot be warded off by appealing 
to the presence of an imagined {kalpiia) reason (of JrUtrtva) 
in the pure self. We often say ‘I the fair-skinned know this’- 
attributing knowership to the body, where the apposition 
between the body and the ego stands for their identity. If the 
probans of now knowership is to be qualified by the adjunct of 
not being of the same order of reality of Param5rthikatva as that 
of the pure self, such a condition is not present in the mind-stuff 
{antahkarana) which tho’ accepted as Jriatf (knower) in Advaita, 
is still of a lower order of reality - being but VySvaharika 
(phenomenal). Moreover, knowership of the same order of 
reality cannot be predicated of pure consciousness also. 

2) Nor can Jalatva be equated with being other than 
knowledge (a-jn.inatvam). The Vj'ttijnana of Advaita tho* 
material in essence is still styled as‘Jnina'. If it is contended 



Grounds of Mithystva (Jadatva) 


67 


that the term Jnanaused in respect of VfUijfiana is only in its 
instrumental sense, while the Jnanatva intended in the premise 
is knowledge in its substantive and radical sense ( Bhdvartha ), 1 
then as a mediate Vftti like memory cannot remove the 
ignorance of the object seen long back and permit its being 
referred to as ‘known’ - which establishes that such mediate 
cognitions arising from past impressions are only the outcome 
of knowledge in its radical sense. This suffices to establish that 
there can be no outcome of “knowledge” without knowing in 
its radical sense. Otherwise, judgments-regarding the experience 
of knowledge of supersensible things like Dharma and Adharma 
cannot be explained. 

Here Dr. K. Narain refers to the view of Kashmiraka 
Sadananda in his Advaita-Brahma-Siddhi about two kinds of 
obstructing veils and concludes that ‘‘it is therefore clear that 
neither the operation of the Vfttis nor the reflection of the Cit 
in these v[ttis is an essential condition for cognition, whether 
mediate or immediate and that Vyasatirtha has committed 
an error when he criticised that the idea of materiality as 
A-jnanatva would jeopardise the concept that Vrtti is knowledge. 
As a matter of fact by “knowledge" is meant in “Vedanta" 
that which illumines the object and this definition does not 
stand in the way of comprehending the character of A-jnana(tva) 
so as to be a satisfactory interpretation of materiality" 
(Op. cit. p. 263 Italics mine). 

This excursion of Dr. Narain into the Advaita Braiima Siddhi 
of Sadananda is not at all called for, as it was not in existence 
in VySsatirtha's time and he could not be expected to take note 
of his views, or be accused of having committed an error" 
in not taking note of its theory. This is borne out by 
SadSnanda'S references to the views of Nrsimhaj'rama and 

5?p<Tf9T WTff” 5% 

ersw **fa<H* sr * 3 : sret sf<5r- 

(Nym. 1.4. p. 69). 



68 Advaitasiddhi Vs Nyayamrta : A Re-Appraisal 

Ragimnatha iJiromaai, in his Adtaila Brahma Siddhi. There 
arc passages in Nrsimha^rama's Tattvavireka * cited from the 
Nym and Raghunitha Siromani (1175-1550) the veteran Navya- 
Naiysyika; is decidedly later tian Vyasatirtha (1460-1539). 
Hence, whatever may be the superior merits of Sadananda's 
theory of A vara ias and the dispensability of the Vrtti and 
Piialavyapyatva in perception, mediate or immediate, there is 
no point in blaming Vyasatirtha for not having considered 
them. Madhus-jdana himself makes no reference to Sadananda's 
theory and says that of the various definitions of Jalatva 
referred to by Vyasatirtha all the rest but Phalavyapytva are 
sustainable. The passage extracted from the Nym in the footnote 
ante is ample evidence that Vyasatirtha is aware of the Advaita 
position that Vrtti is not "knowledge” strictly speaking and 
has also given a suitable answer to it. In the circumstances, 
the accusation against Vyasatirtha that he has committed an 
error, is itself an error of judgment born of cofusion of 
chronology. 

Moreover, the probacs of ‘A-jnanatya' would turn 9o 
to be overpervasivc of the Atman. For, if Atman is to be 
conceived as the essence of knowledge, it will have to be 
clarified if it has an objective content or has no such content. 
In the former case, it has to be specified whether this content 
is its own self or being, as such, or an “other”. The former is 
not acceptable to the Monist for fear of Svavrttivirodha (existing 
in and operating on oneself as subject and object in the same act) 
as pointed out earlier. As the Monist does not admit the 
eJtisten.ce of any other real, there will be no knowledge worth 
speaking of, in the state of freedom. 


It cannot be argued, on the lines of Citsukha that tho' 
Atman has no knowledge of its own being as the objective 
content of such a knowledge, it is open to knowledge in the 


2. Written in 1558 AD. Sec my HDSV. p. 513. 



Grounds of Mithyatva : fJapaiva) 


69 


sense of such knowledge as has the fitness to lead to a reference 
( vyavahara) being made about its pure existence by way of 
direct awareness (sphuranani ). Such awareness which is part 
of its own nature and essence is capable of facilitating a bare 
reference to be made about its existence and in that sense only 
it is spoken of as the content of such awareness (avedyatve sati 
aparoksavyavahdrayogyatvam). 


This is not conclusive. The knowledge of a jar is also 
precisely of the same nature of being the objective content of 
the knowledge which gives rise to some reference being made 
about its existence. (svavyavahdrajanakatayd). It cannot be 
said that in respect of the knowledge of the jar, it is transform¬ 
ation of the mind-stuff in the form of the object and/or the 
reflection of consciousness ( citpraiiphalana) that constitutes 
knowledge in respect of the jar. The spontaneous awareness 
of personal happiness as and when it is there (jiiataikasat) and 
the cognition of the shell-silver in illusions could not, in that 
case, be regarded as the objective content of their knowledge 
as there is no room for the mind-stuff assuming the form of 
happiness or of the shell-silver, as a result of the sense organ 
going “out" to them. For, happiness and shell-silver being 
internal (reals) are not external objects to admit of sensory 
contact leading to the internal modification of the antahkarana. 
But such an objective content in regard to knowledge cannot 
be barred in the case of the Atman implicated in the soTcalled 
Carama-vrttj of the Advaita. After all, it is the consciousness 
having the jar as its substrate manifested by the Vjttithatis 
termed knowledge. Such a knowledge serves no other purpose 
than that of facilitating the reference to the jar as "now made 
known". So much so, there is practically no difference between 
the form of the knowledge in any of these cases. The only 
difference is that objects like the jar are the content of a 
knowledge which is other than the knowledge, while conscious 
ness has its own being as its objective content (in self.awareness). 



7o Advaltasiddhi Vs Nyayamfta : A Re-Appraisal 

If Xtmic knowledge conceived as the very essence of Atman 
is contentless, it cannot be designated as “knowledge”. For, 
to be devoid of a content must be defined as having no reference 
to ait objective content and not merely the non-existence of the 
object under reference at the lime and place of reference, or 
as its absolute non-existence. It is thus the inseparable 
character of knowledge to have a content, past, present or 
future. Otherwise, in Mok$a which is accepted as the Summum 
bonum of life, there will be no shining forth of the pure bliss 
of Atman, in Aimic knowledge. 

If knowledge docs not possess the power of illuminating 
its object, even the insentient jar can be said to have knowledge 
(of itself). Unless Jfiana is credited with an inherent capacity 
to illumine its object it cannot be distinguished from the 
insentient (jada). A Jada needs a Cai-anya to illumine it. 
If Caitanya needs the help of another Caitanya to illumine Us 
own being to itself, it will be no better than a Jada. How can 
we call it a 'cetana' or 'Caitanya', if it cannot illumine its own 
presence, if not of another Cetana or Jada, even supposing with 
the Advaitin they do not exist! 

Similarly, there can be no Jnana without reference to a 
"knower” - just as there can be no eating without some one 
who eats and there is something to eat. ;It cannot be held that 
because Atman as the essence of knowledge is un originated it 
can be said to be without an objective content for its 
svariipajnana. If so, a beginnir.gless entity like antecedent 
non-existence (pr5gabhava) ] the eternal class-essences (jati) 
the beginningless distinction between Jivas and I^vara, the 
existence of anddi-\ed&& and Jnsna itself — should all be concei¬ 
vable without a counterpositive, the existence of particulars, 
relation to the dhartvi and praiiyogi of the said distinction, an 
original speaker of the words of the Vedas and their expressed 
sense and a base ( diraya ) and a content (vifaya), respectively. 
Otherwise, the proposition “Brahman exists” can not be 
formulated, on the basis of the verbal termination of (tip} 
kartcri lak&rah). 



Grounds of Mithyatva : (Jaiatva) 


71 


Moreover, knowledge of past entities and God’s knowledge 
need not look up to an object in order to come into being or 
be spoken of as “knowledge”. 

That apart, if Atman is pure knowledge without a specific 
objective content (whether it embraces the whole of finite 
reality or some particular entity which, forms part of it) it can 
never be spoken of as “knowledge” as they arc made known 
or conceived ( nir&pya ) thro' the medium of some objective 
content. It must therefore be axiomatically accepted that the 
intrinsic and inalienable character of knowledge is to be 
inconceivable without reference to some ‘‘knower” and a 
• known” which can be its own self so far as the self-luminous 
Atman is concerned- 

That apart, again, if Atman is pure knowledge without a 
specific objective content, the question will arise if it is to be 
classed as a valid one or purely illusory. If it is valid know¬ 
ledge, Avid} a, Antahkarara, etc., which are intuited by it would 
turn out to be stem realities. It cannot be treated as illusory, 
as Almajnana is not generated by flaws (dosajanya) as illusions 
are. The question cannot be parried by merely saying that 
knowledge reflected in the Vitti of the mind-stuff is valid while 
that reflected in Avidyavrtti is illusory. This is no answer to the 
straight question as to the intrinsic character of knowledge 
as such. If “knowledge” can be without cither of these chara, 
cteristics it cannot be counted as knowledge at all . 

‘Jadalvam' as non-self-luminosity has already been refuted. 
In the same way, it cannot be equated with ‘Anatmatva' or 
non-Atmatva or what does not come under the genus of Atmatva. 
For Atman according to Advaita is only one and we 
cannot speak of the genus of Atmatva so as to distin¬ 
guish Jadatva as not pertaining to the genus of Atmatva. Tho- 
the conditioned Atman may be different and many in Advaita 
theory, they fall under the category of the illusory and cannot 
be taken into account. 



72 Advaitasiddhj Vs Nyayamrta: A Re-Appraisal 

I 

Nor can Atmatva be defined as ‘-blissfulness" as contrasted 
with Jadatva. If worldly pleasures are also treated as identical 
with Atmic bliss, as in Advaita* and ‘Jadatva' as absence of 
such bliss, the position would be untenable, as sensory pleasures 
have origination and as such are un-Atmic. If they are still 
identical, with Atma-svarupa, they cannot admit of degrees and 
gradation as has been set forth in the Anandavalli of the 
Taiti. Up. as interpreted by Sankara. 


That apart, being devoid of blissfulness is not necessarily 
the determinant of falsity. 


Nor can Atmatva be equated with egohood, and ‘Jadatva' 
with its absence. For, the AhamkSratattva which is equally 
Jada partakes of the nature of egohood (in Advaita). Atmatva 
as distinguished from egohood is also without the ahamtva and 
as such the definition of Jadatva as non-egohood will overlap 
the Atman. 


Nor can Jadatva be defined as what is contradicted, as that 
■would be indistinguishable from the probandvm of MithyStva, 
as what is "Mithya" is the same as being contradicted (badhya). 
Nor can Jadatva be defined as what is accepted as "Jada" by the 
Realist. For according to the Realist, Atmatva is synonymous 
with Jnatftva (knowership) and ‘Jadatva' is synonymous with 
“not being a knower". 


This disposes of the stand taken by the author of the 
Tattvasuddhi that Jadatva is acetanatva or absence of sentiency. 
As Acetanatva is rendered as absence of Cetanatva and if 
Cetanatva i s to be viewed as a genus there will be a plurality of 
Cetanas which is anathema to the Advaita. 


3. Sarrapratyayavedye ca Brahnarupe vyavast hit e 




Grounds of Mitliyatva : (Jalatva) 


73 


Advaitasiddhi rejoins here that knowledge is not necessarily 
organically connected with a knowable or a knower. That 
is not its natural characteristic ( srabhdvika ), just as the 
genus ( jdti ) tho’ made out with the help of -particulars’ can 
exist without them sometimes, by virtue of its possessing a 
higher degree of reality than the adjuncts which determine 
their relationship. Being organically connected with a knower 
and a knowable cannot be defined either in terms of being 
generated by the knowable or concomitant with it, either 
temporally or spatially. The first condition cannot be asserted 
of mediate knowledge or God’s knowledge. Temporal 
concomitance cannot be affirmed of Ja las and Vyaktis. Their 
spatial concomitance is all the more unthinkable, as a rule. 
Nor can it be insisted that there is such concomitance in our 
direct sense-perceptions. We do not deny it. But Atmic 
knowledge is not produced by the senses. It cannot be objected 
to this that if such Vyapti is not conceded in respect of immediate 
knowledge, the perception of the Anirvacahiya-silvet in 
perceptual illusion cannot be explained, as the illusory silver 
is held to be generated then and there. The cognition of the 
illusory silver has been identified by us as “Anirvacaniya" for 
this very reason that its immediacy cannot be traced to any 
other source. 

If being organically related to a knower and a knowable 
is understood as being due to its being produced by the knower, 
it will not be true of God’s knowledge. We shall soon be 
establishing the transcedental character of knowledge. If it is 
viewed as concomitance with the knower that is not a necessary 
condition for just as it can exist without being produced by 
the knower, it can also exist without inhering in a knower. 
As jfiana is not a quality or an activity, it cannot be inferred 
to be abiding in a substance. In the proposition “Brahman 
exists" (asti brahma) the verbal termination (ti ) of the predicate 
does not signify agency in respect of existence as its existence 
is eternal. The termination ti in as-it is merely intended to make 
it conform to the grammatical requirement (sddhutvanha). 

10 



74 


Advaitasiddhi Vs Nyayamrta: A Re-Appraisal 


la reply to the Advaitasiddhi. here, the Tarangini points out 
that tho' the genus as such may endure in Pralaya without 
the particulars also existing side by side, it still remains oriented 
(uparakta ) with the idea of its consituent particulars in the mind 
of God, So there is no problem here. It is not the Realist’s 
contention that knowledge being inconceivable without an 
objective content is also necessarily either spatially or tempprally 
concomitant with its object. According to him, it merely 
consists in the cognition being oriented by the idea of the 
object of a direct knowledge or inconceivable without being so 
oriented. It is in this sense knowledge of a negation 
(i abhdva ) or resemblance (sSdrsya) presupposes the know¬ 
ledge of their correlatives The same holds good in respect of 
the Advaitin’s thesis of Jiva-Brahma-Aikya which is inconcei¬ 
vable without reference to the correlates. But_ for that reason 
it does not mean that Aikya is either generated by the Jiva 
or is temporally concomitant with Jivahood - which will not 
be true of the state of Mok$a. Spatial concomitance of Aikya 
and Jivatva ts hardly true here and now. If Jiva and B. are 
not the necessary correlates of their oneness, all the trouble 
taken to establish it would be love’s loborlost. 

Pacdnih&s defined -karta' (the agent) in his Karakapra- 
karaija as Svatantrah karta - one possessing independence of 
agency in respect of the action initiated by him to achieve 
something or keep and develop something. It stands to reason 
that the Supreme Being as the One Independent Reality is 
competent and capable of realising all that it chooses to do 
fruitfully - as the author of creation, maintenance and 
dissolution of the world of matter and souls.* When it is 
therefore possible for us to understand the verbal termination in 
the Sruti's pronouncement; istiErchma (Godexists), semantically 


4. ( Paramdrthatah bastradfstyi tu sarvatra Isvardpeksatvatn 

apadyaminam na pardmidyate (£■ B. S. B. ii, 2, 3). 



Grounds of MithyStva (Jadatva) 


75 


also in a deep phiiorohical sense, 5 it is hardly proper to treat 
the termination (ti in asti) as merely intended to abide by the 
formal rule of grammar that neither a grammatical base (prokrti) 
nor a termination fpratyoya) should be used without the other. 

The author of A-Siddhi has further contended that Brahmic 
or Atmic knowledge is knowledge pure and simple falling 
outside the scope of both valid and invalid knowledge like 
God's knowledge in the Nydya school. 

He has argued that according to the Nyaya system God’s 
knowledge cannot be brought under valid knowledge (pramd). 
As being eternal (nityc.) it cannot be produced by 
specific factors of validity called gitnas. Nor can 
it be classed as invalid knowledge ( bhrama ) as it is not produced 
by flaws (dosa). Similarly, what is known as Nirvikalpakajnana 
or indeterminate knowledge, arising at the first blush of cogni¬ 
tion in Nyaya philosophy,s falls outside the scope of both 
valid and invalid knowledge, as it does not conform to the 
definition of Prams or error as accepted by the Naiyayikas. 
For pramd according to the Nyaya school is what cognises truly 
the given thing as possessed of modes by which it is qualified. 
(tadmtitatprakarakatva). And Nirvikalpajnana as its very name 
shows is nis-prakdraka not taking the inodes into account). 
Erroneous knowledge is defined as the reverse of valid know¬ 
ledge as Tadabh&vati tatprekdrakatxcm. This also involves the 


5. Cf. Madhva’s rendering of as-nti as Asti sarvadd asti iti 
meyam and Meyatve pakdraprcdarlandya * asti* sahdah. 
bringing out this truth in his gloss on M's Brh Up. Bhajya 
((1, 4, 10) by Raghavendra. For further details see my 
Brh. Up. from Madhva’s Perspective DVSR Foundation, 
Bangalore 1988). 

C. Madhva philosophy dees not accept the existence of any 
Nirvikalpakajnna - at all. In litis it differs vitally from 
Njdya Realism. 



76 


Advaitasiddhi Vs NySyamjta : A Re-Appraisal 


comprehension of modes, tlio’ wrongly, Hence, NirvikalpajSana 
is outside the scope of both Prami and bhrarna. 

Madhusddana continues — wc are however prepared to 
admit that all determinate knowledge produced by the senses 
and their contact with their objects falls under the category of 
one or the other of the two types of knowledge, the valid and 
the erroneous, depending on their contributory factors of guna 
or dosa. But Atmic knowledge, by its very nature is different 
from both, it is pure “ knowledge" all the same. 


fn its reply to the above, the Tcrangini points out that 
Madhusudana’s assessment of the nature of I^varajnana in 
Nyaya philosophy, as falling outside the scope of both Prcma 
and Bhrama is wrong . The Tarkika position is this. Pramatva " 
as such is not delimited by being produced by any Gugas smTtTT# 
ffryiflt as thc autll0r Tattvacintaamni (Ganges'a Upad- 
hy&ya) has categorically put it. This means that it is only each 
seperate distinctive specimen of valid knowledge generated by 
appropriate means that is produced by relevant gunas. But 
there is no single Guna (common to all Promts ) running thro’ 
all of them and producing their validity embracing all the 
different types of valid knowledge such as Pratyksa, anumiti and 
$abda prami.’ 1 

Therefore God’s knowlege, in spite of its not being produced 
at all or not produced by Guijas, is entitled to be accepted as 
PramS in the sense of not being produced by any flaws (dofa- 
ajanyetvena). It cannot therefore be placed outside the pale 
of both valid and invalid knowledge, as Madhusudana Sarasvati 
would have it. It is for this reason that the veteran Naiy3yika 
Udayanacarya has hailed that livarajnSna is Pratyaksa-pram- 
,b:am, by reason of God being the abode (iiraya) of valid 


7. 


STRPTl# ffTfipft 


(Ma?i) 



Grounds of Mithyatva : (Jadatva) 


77 


knowledge, which is of the nature of eternal immediacy. s 
And it is for this very reason that the Mani has held that the 
property of Prameyatva (ofeverything being knowablc ( prameya ) 
is a univeral affirmative - (kevalanrayf) like abhidheyatvam 
(namability ) because all that is Prameya is open to God’s 
immediate perception. 

In regard to Nirvikalpakajaina the Logicians have held 
that the definition of Prama (as Tadvati tatprakarakatvum) though 
not applicable to KirvikalpakajSna is only a working definition 
conducive to forih-right unhesitating responsive activity for alj 
pragmatic purposes, as Nirvikalpakajnana is insufficient for 
such activity tho’ it is valid enough in its own sense. The 
validity of Mirvikalpajnana as Prams therefore consists in being 
a valid experience Y athSrtlm-anuhhavah in the primary sense of 
the term. 

It is therefore the A-Siddhi's contention that I.svarajnsna and 
Mirvikalpajnana are both outside the pale of Prama (and 
brahma) that is opposed to Pramagas and is a piece of “logical 
arrogance” 3 . 

The A-Siddhi has also contended that the relation between 
knowledge and its objects can only be a superimposed one and 
not intrinsic to it. Refuting this the Tarangini points out that 
were it so, the Caramavrtti (final psychosis) in Advaita cannot 
have the Suddhacaitanya as the content of its revelation. It 
cannot be said that the relation of the knowledge in the form 
of the Caramavrtti with the pure consciousness reflected in it is 


are 3rp5f3r^ sRtfsrjprpir 

(Tg.) 

P. To put it in the words of Dr. Narain used elsewhere on 
p. 127 of his book. 



78 Advaitasiddhi Vs Nyayamrta: A Re-Appraisal 

also superimposed and not a real one. For, the reflection oi 
pure cit in the Caiamavrtti will be absolutely necessary to 
terminate the Nescience about the $uddhacit (screening it). 
It is not within the coinpcter.ee of the mere Vrtti to remove such 
original nescience. Otherwise, one can dispense with the 
reflection of the Cit in the antahkara^a vrtti (pkclavyapyctva) in 
the revelation of ajar or the like to perception and let the 
antahkaraija-vitti itself account for the perception. If it is 
objected that any acceptance of the reflection of the Cit in the 
Caramav/ tii would make it mithya, there is no other alternative 
for the Advaitin than to drop plwlavydpyatxa as one of the 
grounds of Mithyatva. To make the relation between know¬ 
ledge and its object of content merely superimposed (without 
being real) would fail to account for the knowledge of super¬ 
sensible objects through mediate cognition, as the supersensible 
reals (being supersensible ) cannot make themselves objects o| 
any such superimpositiens. 



CHAPTER XI 


Paricchinnatva (Finitude) 


The third reason by which the world’s falsity is inferred by 
the Advaita school is its finitude. Vvasatlrtha naturally asks 
whether the finitude is in terms of time, space and by the 
existence of other entities, besides. Circumscription by time 
and space (as will be shown presently) cannot be made out in 
respect of Time and Space. The Advaitin’s Nescience which ii 
considered to be the material cause of all pervasive Space 
and Time cannot be limited by space and time. Ajnana as 
the veil (avarata) enveloping the all-pervasive Brahman as its 
object of obscuration must indeed be equally unlimited, which 
leaves us with more than one unlimited entity, so that the 
Advaita-Brahman is not the one and only unlimited. The shell- 
silver negated in its own substrate for all time by the Apper- 
ceiving Self (Sakai) cannot be limited by time and space, lest 
it should come back to life. The untraccable Sruti Akiisarat 
sarvagatajea Nityah ■ ) cited by Sankara in his BSB. 

II. 3.4, describing B. as all-pervasive and eternal like ‘AksnZa' 1 
confirms the eternal, all-pervasive character of Akd&a" Texts 
like "Then the mortal become immortal” ( Katha 2.3.15) “Sat 
alone existed in the beginning (Chan. up. V 1.2. 11) “Release is 
attained only after realising B.“ There in the Beyond, if every¬ 
thing were to be Atman * ( Brah. Up. ii.4.14) attest the 
unbounded character of Time and Space and their existence 
in the released state of the souls. 


TAMs'ema Brahma sarvagatatva-nityatvibhy&m upamimand. 
.ikafasyapi tau dharmau sucayati (S. BSB-ii. 3,4). 




80 


Advaitasiddhi Vs NyaySmj-ta : A Re-Appraisal 


The SnitL “From that Atman, Akaia was born*’ Tail/. Up. 
ii. 1) has reference to the genesis of elemental AkSia ( bhat.lkaia ) 
and not to empty space {Avyakrtak&ia) *. The existence of 
two kinds of Akasa (aksiadvaitam) has been authentically 
established by the Slitrakara in the Viyadadhi. (B.S. ii.3. 1-7) 3 . 


Space and Time must ex hypothesi be unbounded by them¬ 
selves. If we deny this, there will be great logical difficulty in 
conceiving of a boundary to finite space and time. We shall 
have to recognise more time and further space beyond 
them - which will lead to a regression. 

The very predication, “Here is no space” Now there is no 
time” will be self-contradictory. The limit sought to be 
imposed on Space and Time by circumscribing them within 
certain bounds of space and Time would lead to the conclusion 


2. Tne distinction made by M. between Bhutakasa and 
Avyakrtakaia is a remarkable advancement of thought in 
Vedanta philosophy , if we consider George Thibaut’s com¬ 
ment in the Introduction to his Tr. of S.'s BSB that 
“Vedantins do not clearly distinguish between empty space 
and an exceedingly fine matter filling all space which, 
however attenuated, is yet one of the material element* 
and as such belonds to the same category as air, fire and 
water”. ( SBE Serier, 38, Vol. II, p. 3, fn. I). See my 
BSPC, Vol III. pp. 125 - 140) 

3. Nym-Tg points out that creation of Avyakita-Akaia 
(empty space) is mentally inconceivable. Texts like 
Akasas Sambhittah (Taitt. Up.) have therefore to be 
understood in a restricted sense of referring to Bhatakdsa. 
The clear statement of the Sruti likening the eternal and all 
pervasiveness of B. to that of Akaia enables us to restrict 
the text of the Taitt. Up. to the genesis of elemental 
Akaia, 



Grounds of Mithy&tva (Finitude) 


81 


that B. exists at some place and time where and when there is 
no space or time, which would be unthinkable. 

Time and Space cannot be negated in their own observed 
loci , by themselves as that would be self-contradictory. If 
to overcome this difficulty, some more time and space is to be 
assumed as the loci of such negation (nisedhopadhi) it would 
only lead to the assumption of yet more time and space beyond 
them. If those too are similarly supposed to be limited some¬ 
where and at some time, there will be an endless regression. 
Hence Space and Time must be recognised as Aparicchinna 
(unbounded) with the obvious consequence that the probans of 
finitude in favor of Mithyatva would be asiddha (not established). 

Universal experience that space is everywhere, Time is there 
always and of “prior time" and so on proves that Space and 
Time are by nature, self-abiding and self-differentiating 
(sranirviihaka ), like knowability ( prameyatva) which is a 
universal affirmative and knowable in its turn, as established by 
Dharmigrahakaprama na. 

If absolute negation of what is “Mithya" in its perceived 
base is not unbounded by time and space, it would lead to the 
resurgence of the counter-positive. 

Limitation by Space and Time, qualifying for Mithyatva 
cannot be the same as existence at one time and place, as that is 
not sufficient reason to argue that such things are open to nega¬ 
tion for all time, as required by the concept of Mithyatva (in 
terms of Svanipe^a traikslikani?edhapratiyogitvam). A thing 
may exist at a given place and time, without being there at 
all times and places. Such inability of that thing is not a proof 
of its ‘unreality’ where and when it does actually exist. 

Existence at a particular time and place ( ekakslikatvamdlram ) 
cannot be construed as merely appearing to be presented to 
11 



82 Advaitasiddhi Vs Nyay&mfta : A Re-Appraisal 

cognition, as so existing. Such a presentation is common to the 
shell-silver also, which will not make it a “real” - like things 
actually in existence for a time and at a given place. If the 
qualifying adjunct “only” ( mdtram ) in ekakalidimatrasattvam 
should signify only its cognitive impression to that effect, 
without involving the thing’s actual existence at the given time 
and place, such a position is not acceptable to the Realist — and 
a probans should be acceptable to both the parties. If being 
merely open to cognitive impression as existing at a given time 
and place is to be credited with ‘Vyavaharikasatya’ it would 
not be true of the PrStibhasika shell-silver, which, in spite of 
such amenability to figure in a cognitive impression as so existing, 
is not admitted to be Vysvaharika. If the existence of given 
things in particular time and place is to be made the sole 
ground of their non-existence at other times or places, it will 
be highly preposterous and opposed to Pramanas. On the 
contrary, the existence of things at a given time and place may 
understandably justify presumption of their existence subsequen. 
tly also at another time and place-normally speaking. Otherwise, 
being void of all characteristics ( nirdharmaka ), Brahman too 
cannot be said to exist in a Paramarthika sense or aspect. 

The contention of Vacaspati Mis'ra that what is existent 
{Sat) must necessarily be existent everywhere and at all time 
and conversely what is sometimes and somewhere non-existent 
must necessarily be non-existent everywhere and at all times can 
only be treated as a slavish repetition of a ‘Buddhist’ stunt. 

Some Advaita thinkers have defined limitation by space a9 
being in contact with all tangible entities (sarvamurtadravya 
samyogitvam) or not being the substrate of Par amamahatpari. ndna- 
The Advaitic Brahman which is “Asanga” unattached would 
easily come under this definition. Limitation by other entities 
{vastUtah pariccheda) is the same as being different from another 
As ho real difference is admitted in Advaita, there can be no 
limitedness so far as the world itself is concerned. It will be 



Grounds of Mithy&tva (Finitude) 


83 


established in its proper context that the insulation of B. from 
all that is anrta, jada, antavat must be admitted to be real, in 
which case B. too will come under the category of the 
Faricchinna. 

Mandana Miira has formulated a syllogism to prove that 
objects like jas are all superimposed on the Sat or existentia 1 
aspect of Brahman, because they are all presented to knowledge 
as shot thro’ with the aspect of ‘being’ (sat) -e.g. the jar exists , 
the cow exists - San ghatah san patah) like the reflected images 
of the moon in the waves of a pond. The analogy is inappro¬ 
priate. We make predications like ‘the maimed cow* the 
hornless cow* (Khando gauh Mur.do gcwh). But the limbs put in 
apposition are not superimposed on cowness. Particulars may 
be shot thro'with the idea of the genus, according to some 
thinkers. But the particulars (vyakti) in themselves are not 
superimposed on it. 

It is impossible to agree with the Advaitin-s farfetched 
theory that a formless Brahman, lying obscured and covered 
by beginningless nescience and is further held to be knowable 
only thro’ Sastra is brought within the range of every-body's 
visual perception (aparoksa) in the day to day perceptions of 
ghatah san, patah san. 

As a matter of fact, that ‘Sat’ revealed in San ghatah etc., 
is not Brahman but the existence pertaining to the particulars 
themselves connected with those judgments - just as in other 
judgments such as the jar is impermanent, the cloth is imper¬ 
manent [anitya) the predications are adjudged to. refer to the 
particulars themselves and not to Bi 

It cannot be argued that though intrinsically not open to 
perception, it is conceivable that B. is perceived in judgments 
like San ghatah, San pafah just as the planet Rahu is perceived 
as delimited by the Moon. By the same token, SkUa too as 



84 


Advaitasiddhi Vs Nyayanqta : A Re-Appraisal 


delimited by the attribute of sound should be open to perception 
by the ear. The bluish hue of Rahu, unperceivable due to vast 
distance from the earth comes to be lit up by its vicinity to the 
Moon’s bright whiteness of light. There is no case for any 
Adhyisa in any of these experiences. 

Answering the objection raised by Vyasatirtha that 
particulars are not superimposed on the universals and that 
therefore such judgments as the jar exists, the cloth exists 
cannot be construed as establishing that ft is the isness of B., 
the substrate of super-imposition of the jar, or the cloth that 
is exposed to perception there, in terms of the distinct!, particula¬ 
rised, the author of the Advaitasiddhi goes to the extent of 
saying that he is not prepared to recognise the existence of any 
class-essence (J.iti) of cowness horseness etc., abiding in th e 
particulars of the class per sc (satsdmSnya). He explains 
further that even if such class-essences are admitted, there is no 
need to invest then with such general characteristic of mani¬ 
festing the particulars. The pure isness ( satsimdnya ) of B. a* 
qualified by the particulars can manifest the said class-essence, 
even as the particulars themselves can do so without particip¬ 
ating in a common class-essence, on the basis of possessing 
similar adjuncts of cows possessing a dewlap etc. 


Dismissing this explanation, the author of the Tarangini 
points out that there is no justification to reject the existence of 
class-essences {Jati) running thro* various particulars of a class, 
to account for referring to them as particulars belonging to a 
given category. There is no need to replace it by the bare 
isness ( satsamJnya ) of B. The Satsamlnya of B. as qualified 
by the particulars cannot operate as the basis of reference to 
particular cows or others as participating in a class-essence, 
unless these particulars are themselves related to different 
species and act as qualifying adjuncts of the SatsirnSnya (which 
is B.). There will be no point in saying that the acceptance 
©f the class-essence is unnecessary. If the sitsamZnya is unrelated 



Grounds of Mithyllva (Finitude) 


85 


to the class-essences according to the exigencies of reference, 
anything at random can be said to be manifested by the 
satsamSnya. 

Rejecting the contention of Vyisatirtna that Ajnana too 
in its turn will have to be invested with unlimited pervasion 
in space and time in order to be able to veil the all-pervading 
B. from the dawn of creation till the end of its disappearance 
tasams&ram), Madhusudana Sarasvati argues that it is not 
B. in its essential aspect of pure being ( sad-dtmaka ) which 
is enveloped by beginningless AjnSna ( Mula-ajnana) but 
only by the power of that ignorance which is delimited by the 
particular object such as a pot or a pan (st£l3Ptf«'3vTSHch5TR). 
so that there is no impediment to Brahman's shining forth after 
the removal ' of such particularised nescience thro’ such 
perceptions, as san ghaiah, san patah. 

The A-Siddhi has also argued that there is no difficulty 
whatever in B.’s isness becoming perceivable thro' the visual 
organ in spite of B.’s being formless (rapddihimm). For, only 
objects open to perception by particular sense organs have to 
depend on their help. But the Advaita Brahman is grasped 
and is graspable by all the sense organs. 

Rejecting these explanations, the Tarangini points out 
that as B. has been proclaimed to be by nature unmanifested,* 
in various Srutis and Smftis, it cannot possibly be known thro' 
any of our material senses, — let alone the eye. As a matter 
of fact, even Satta or esse of a given thing is known by 


2. See: Parastasmattu bhavo’nyo Avyakto vyaktat- 
sanatanah) (Giti viii, 20) 

3. Narayanan Paro'ryaktat (S. GB. Introd) 

Na caksusdpadyati kaScanainam (Katha Up.iii.z.9.) 
Na sandrse tifthati rupam asya (ii.3,9) 



86 


Advaitaaiddhi Vs Nyiysmita ; A Re-Appraisal 


particular sense organs endowed with the requisite capacity 
to grasp it. Otherwise, if B.’s sattS can be perceived by 
the indriyas, there will be no need to make so much ado 
about Paravidya by which alone B. is said to be knowable. 
( Mund. Up. i. 1. 4). 

By making such a claim that B. is graspable by all our 
indriyas (sarvendriyagrShjcm tu scdrtiplm krchrr.c) the author 
of A-Siddhi has practically knocked off the bottom of 
the pritnise of per ceiv ability or perceptibility (dr^atva) as 
drg vi§ayatva in favor of the world’s ' Mithyatva*. 
The counter-example of Time being perceived in spite of its 
being formless is also inappropriate as Time is perceived 
only by the Apperceiving self (Salc?i). v 

Adverting to the other argument of the A-Siddhi that it 
is not the Mula-Ajnana that veils the B. from becoming 
manifest, but the separate AjnSnas whose power is delimited 
by particular entities ( ghajadyavacchinnasaktyajndnam ) which 
is lifted after the operation of the Vrtti so that the underlying 
Caitanya is revealed to visual perception in terms of Ghath san i 
pa tas fan, the Taranglni shows its inadcqacy. For it is 
admitted in Advaita that the existential aspect ( scdatmakatvu) 
of B. is one, absolutely indivisible, indistinguishable essence 
with B. (akhaptfaikarasa) with its blissful aspect. Conse¬ 
quently, when the veil of nescience over the existential aspect 
of B. is rent asunder, by the Vj-tti, both the existential 
aspect, and the blissful aspect should shine forth in full blaze 
after the Ghatadyavcchinnaiak tyajnana has been lifted. 
But suck is not the case, 

This confirms the point raised by Vyasatirtfca that it is the 
Mola-ajnSna that is obscuring the true nature of B. inwall its 
aspects and that in order to be able to do so it must also be 
deemed to be equally coextensive ( apcricchinrta ) with B. in time 
and space and that there is no escaping this conclusion - which 



Grounds of Mithy&tva (Finitude) 


87 


if accepted, would lead to the asiddhi (non-establishcdness) of 
the probans of Paricchinnatva, in respect of AjnSna itself.* 

Another argument of the A-Siddhi is that our sense organs 
are needed only in the perception of substances. B, is not a 
substance. The Tarangini rejects this by pointing out that the 
^rutis which speak of B . as not gross or subtle, only signify 
that B has no material dimensions like objects of the world 
but is not on that account void of its own transempirical 
measures. This is evident from Srutis like— 

Mahantam libhwn atinanam (Katha If. 1. 4) 

Esa mohdn aja alma (Brh. Up. IV. 4. 22) 

Esa atmd antarhrdaye jyayan 

Sarvam samapnosi talo asi sarvah (Gita XI. 40) 

Akadaval sarvagataica nityah (q. S. BSB) 

It cannot be objected that if B. is a substance it cannot be 
of the essence of knowledge and bliss. There is no impediment 


3. Madhusudana is bound to accept that Avidydnivmi in loio 
leading to liberation cannot be secured by the partial or 
spasmodic lifting of the veil of ignorance and the manifestation 
of the pot-limited Caitanya or cloth -delimited Caitanya, but by 
the final and out and out removal of Miila-Avidya. That is the 
point Vyssatlrtha is driving at, when he uses the words 
dsamsaram ajnan&vrtam. Hence, it is necessary to go beyond 
fractional AjnSnas. And this Mula-AjnSna has necessarily to 
be conceived as unlimited in time and space like B. It is not 
proper on the part of the A-Siddhi to side-track the issue, for¬ 
getting the fact accepted by veterans of its own school such as 
Surefvara - Avidylstamayo moksalj (Sureivara) 



88 Advaitasiddbi V# Ny&ysmjta: A Re-Appraisal 

to it if we consider Jnana and finarda too of B. to be the sub¬ 
stance of its being. 

The A. Siddhi has also contended that even conceding that 
B. is a substance the visual organ can be said to depend on the 
object in question having a form (rupani) where its characteristic 
of dravyatva is of the same order of reality as the substance 
{ dharmi ) But B.‘s dravyatva, even if admitted, is of a lower 
order of reality than the substantive. Hence, the visual perception 
ofB. in sa/i ghatah etc.is not barred by its being devoid of 
form. 

In reply to this the Tarangipi points out that the dravyatva 
of B. cannot be treated as of a less order of reality than B. (the 
dharmi) before it is fully established that the world and its cate¬ 
gories of thought, such as dravyatva are kalpita (imaginary). 
But the Advaitin has yet to establish the imagined character of 
the world. So no argument based on higher and lower orders 
of reality is of any probative value until the thesis of Mithyatva 
of the world is conclusively established. 

Is it not a pity that while claiming to be the Aupanisadam 
Darsanam, Advai'a should have been pressurised into rejecting 
the competence of its Caramavrtti to reveal the Suddha-Brahman 
which amounts to an open rebuff of Ysjftavalkya's pronounce¬ 
ment in the Brh.Up Alma va are dra§ javyah srotavyo mantavyo 
nididhydsitavyah (IV.5.6) proclaiming that intensive introspec¬ 
tion is the highest means of direct perception of Atman. There 
are a good many other texts in the Upani$ads which confirm the 
possibility of a direct perception of the highest Brahman (albeit 
with its grace). 

Cf, Bhidyate hrdayagranthih chidyante sarvasam- 
iaydh tasnrin drsteparavare (Mundaka II.2.8) 

Driyate tvagrayd buddhya suk§mayd Suksmadar- 
tibhih (Kathai. 3. 12) 

Jnatum dr a stum ca tattvena prove? turn ca (Gits xi. 54) 



CHAPTER XII 


SATTVANIRUKTI : 

Criterion of Reality 


After the complete refutation of the thesis of Falstiy of the 
world (Jagan mithyitva) in all its bearings, Vy8sattrtha turns 
to the exposition of the SiddhSnta position in regard to its 
reality and the relevant issues connected with it. These include : 
(i) the primacy of Perception {Pratyaksa) culminating in the 
concept of Sak^i-pratyaksa as the basis and final standing 
ground (upajivya-pram dpa) and the final arbiter of the 
validity of all knowledge and means of proof including 
Scriptural deliverances, when and where they appear to be in 
conflict with tested Pratyaksa and personal anubhara of the 
Saksi, the Apperceiver of all (ii) the question of the future 
stultifiability ( bhilvibsdha ) of consolidated human exprience of 
the vivid joys and sorrows of life (in) questions relating to the 
contradictability of sound Pratyaksa by Inference and by the 
supposed identity texts (A bheda $ rut is) of scripture and 
(v) the most interesting and vital question of the competence 
of Perception (including Ssk$i) to grasp the uncontradictable 
reality [pSrcmiartbika satyatva) of the world and its values and 
many side-issues connected with the problem. 


Criterion of Reality 

It must be borne is mind that as the Advaita philosophy- 
does not believe in the factual reality of the world, but only 
in the sole reality of a single subject-objcctless universal undiffe¬ 
renced (akhanda) consciousness, it has quietly consigned the 
world of experience to the domain of the “false 1 '. However, as 
12 



90 Advaitasiddhi Vs NySylmrla : A Re-Appraisal 

a concession to weak minds and practical life, it has formulated 
a theory of three orders or icvels of reality known as * 'SattS- 
traividhya*', consisting of the Piramarthika (the highest truth as 
such', the VySvahSrika (truth from the practical angle and 
sommon-sense point of view) and Pratibhasika or the seeming 
truth of illusory objects of dreams and illusions of the snake 
in the rope type - the last two falling under the wider classifica¬ 
tion of Mithyatva, as earlier discussed, in the last analysis. 

This doctrine of SattJtraividhya has been discussed and 
refuted by VySsatirtha in the proper context {Myin. i. 6"?.) as 
baseless and unsustainable. The refutation of the world’s 
Mitliyatva in the preceding part will be seen to take away the 
pith of the socallcd Vyavahlrika-real. The Prltibfiasika-feal 
has no practical interest. As the Realist philosophy slarts with 
the foundational concept of ‘‘Prams na” as consisting in what is 
“Yathlrtham” (true to its content) and as it believes in the 
existence of both eternal and non-eternal entities, principles and 
substances and properties in the economy of the world-structure 
its conception of “reality” has necessarily to be consistent with 
these data and what is due to both of them. It should thus be 
clear that as neither the eternal nor the non-eternal in existence 
can be “false" and unreal epistemologically or ontologically, its 
criterion of reality has necessarily to be consistent with those 
data and what is due to them - irrespective of their eternality or 
impermanence, sentiency or inaentiency, if Philosophy and 
philosophising should be fair, impartial and true to facts. 
Srutis, Smrtis and Sutras like Nityo nityanam (Katha up. II 2-13) 
A kiiJdvat sarvagataS ca nit.yah (Q. by S), Ata evaca nityatvam 
(B.S. 1-3-29) Sargcpi nopajiyante, Praia ye na vyathanti ca 
(Gita XIV. 2). Nacaiva na bhavisydmah sarve vayam atah pararn 
(Glt5 ii 12), underline this truth. 

A just and comprehensive criterion of ‘reality’ must take 
note of both these aspects seriously and not play hide and seek 
with its respon«ibity. 



Sattvanirukti : Criierioa of Reality 


91 


This has been done by the founder of the Dvaita school of 
Vedanta in terms of aniropitam (pramittvi$ayah) tattvam — 
that the "real’' and true is what is adjudged to be not superim¬ 
posed and presented to valid knowledge as existing in time and 
space in situ. It is easy enough to see that what is established 
by valid knowledge as actually existing in space and time cannot 
be said to be liable to "contradiction” and be annulled at any 
other time or place as not having been in actual existence at the 
time and place in which it had been experienced as so existing — 
Yivadiveditasya sattvam or the actual existence of such aspects 
as are actually perceived by a person according to the extent of 
his capacity and understanding and other conditions governing 
the rapproachement to the object — Yad yaddeiakSalyoh yatha- 
pratitam tasya taddesa-kalayoh tathutvam, or the actual existence 
of an entity with reference to a spatio-temporal setting in the 
manner perceived with reference to that setting. It is a different 
matter if some of them or some of the aspects of an entity 
do not exist for ever. Ceasing to exist at a future date or place 
hh not to be confounded with "contradiction’'. The term 
"contradiction" has suffered much abuse and unwarranted 
manipulation, philosophically, for wrong ends, at the hands of 
the Advaita school to suit its own objective of pushing the 
world of experience and its values into the limbo of the unreal, 
with a flattering label and sugar-coating c*f Vyavabarikasatya, 
But the naked truth is that what is Vyivahsrika is in principle 
and in substance, liable to ‘‘sublation” or negation of existence 
with reference not only to the future, but to the past and the 
present as well~as the sublation ( bSdha ) extends to and includes 
the period of Vyavah&ra also in all conscience. This crucial 
point has been fully elicited and brought out by Vyesatirtha 
from the lips of the author of the Advaitesiddhi him-self—in 
answer to his searching question (as we have already seen).: 

snfa asfa fa Ri*ff 

sfvmrfff ? 3cT. ? 

(Nym.) 



92 Advaitasiddhi Vs Nyiyamrta : A Re-Appraisal 

v- 

wHr srr% *?qi « 

*T*fct: cT?flRTq^^T rrf?WSrTWjJ- 

'ptriw i 

(A. Siddiii, p. 26) 

Whether the stultification which occurs later rescinds the 
existence of the object even with reference to the time (andplace) 
at which it was apprehended', or only with reference to a subsequ¬ 
ent period? In the first case, how could it be credited with any 
validity at all ? In the latter case, the thing presented to 
cognition could only be deemed to be impermanent, which is 
not the same as being false or unreal f mithyd) ! 


Madhusudana’e reply to this straight question is 
astounding!}' breath-taking. ‘‘We Advaitins do not accept any 
validity in the sense of uncontradictability or uncontradictedness 
for knowledge of the external world produced by Perception. 
We do admit that the negation (or sublation) —( nisedha), when 
it arises, applies to the entity with reference to the very time 
also at which it was apprehended. (Op. Cit. p. 26). This 
should make it clear, to the meanest intelligence, thatj the 
socalled Vysvahirika pramagya bestowed by thcjAdvaitimon 
the world is a mere euphemism. 

The same point has been emphasised by Kumarila Bhatta 
also in connection with his denunciation of the docirino of 
two-fold reality adumbrated by the Buddhist philosopher 
Nagirjuna - in his Madhyamaka Kdriki. 

r 

£ *rg«nf«r?q f sfTRi t 



Saltvaairukti •. Criterion of Reality 


93 


when he says: 

?T?in ^*?*T ? 

^ STHT?l? yrmurraat: 
rTt?TTar^T^Tf?^T l 

This does not mean that the Dvaita philosopher 
has no impeccable criterion of reality applicable to 
the world and to the supreme Being alike. Since the 
Advaita has designated the world of experience as 
Mithyi and reserved the title of‘Teal” to B. alone i the atm of 
Dvaita philosophy his been to establish for the world a criterion 
of reality which would be on a par with that of B. as their L C.M. 
so far as (their) non-mithyStva is concerned. It is not the c'aint 
or contention of Dvaita that because the world of matter and 
souls is ‘‘real” and that there is no mistake or error about it, it 
is also of the same or equal sunns with B. in all respects of its 
sovereign attributes of infinite magnitude. It has been uncom¬ 
promising in standing up for the sovereign independence of B. 
(more than even the Ramanuja school) as the one and only 
Independent Reality or principle which is res completei - complete 
in itself, determined entirely by itself and capable of being 
explained entirely by itself - in the Spinozislic sense of tho term. 
All the rest, be it matter or souls, has been placed in the 
category of the "dependent reality” ( parutantra-prameya )— 
dependence, however, not being equivalent to unreality. It it one 
thing to designate the world of name and form as Paratantra 
and quite another to stigmatise it as ‘‘Mithya" in the sense of 
what has no real existence, at any time or place in the past, 
present and future (traikalikanisedhapratlyogi) in its Iocuj. 

I. cf. Madhva also. 

srroi«iw ^ *rqfar vunfr »5rt^T wfcr 

VTWiRfis'URM Hrsrai 5?r/ ? 




94 


Advaitasiddhi Vi Nyayamrta: A Re-Appraisal 


In his prefatory remarks in the section on the criterion of 
reality (saumnirukti} Vyisatirtba emphasises this crucial 
point— 

Tava itmani yar sat yam tad eveha mama and quotes Visnudii- 
sdcarya's words— 

ZTlcfJT I 

(Viidaratnavalt) 

“To us the reality of the world is of the same kind as 
Brahman’s. 

The Advaitasiddhi resorts to a grave misrepresentation of 
the meaning and intention of this statement of the Nym when it 
comes out with a piece of misplaced raillery 3 that this would put 
the Realist in the same unenviable position of the suitor to the 
hand of a fair maiden, answering the question put to him by 
her father as to what his gotra is when he says "it is the same 
as yours. Sir”. For, there can be no valid marriage (in the old 
Hindu law) if the bride and her groom are of the same Gotra !! 

Apart from his bad joke, Madhusudana also argues that if 
the world ihould have the same reality as B. it would cease to be 
real. 


The Tarangini pulls up the author of the A. Siddhi for his 
misunderstanding of the Dvaita Hand (bhava-anavabodhat). He 
explains-''When we say the world has the same kind of reality 
(yadrsam) as B. (not the same reality - mark it) - as in Dvaita 

2. fPt 4TftnfqgT fabler >r>er 

flit* »rnfq sfo I nrft 

5S»r?- ftTTff I 

( Op. cit. p. 21 j 



Sattvanirukti: Criterion of Reality 


95 


philosophy no two reals can have the same identical property* 
but only similar ones) we mean only this that the kind of reality 
which is opposed to Mithyetva, conveyed by the designation of 
Brahman 2 S “Satyam” in the Gratis and is accepted without 
demur by the Advaitin, is accepted by us, in respect of the 
world—in terms of ' not being \li thy a' on the evidence of our 
perception of objects as son ghatah, sart pcita/i* (the jar is real, the 
cloth is real). This should put the record straight. 

At this stage, the A. Suidiu rejoins that according to Advaita. 
Brahman’s reality consists in being of the nature of pure con¬ 
sciousness. It is self-luminous and one without a second. If 
such should be the nature of the world's reality, then just as the 
(supposed) reality of the shell-silver is falsified by the reality 
of the shell, the (apparent) reality of the insentient (jdda) world 
would be falsified by the self-luminous and secondless reality of 
Brahman - with the result that there will be no world left to be 
designated ns real'. 

Rsmacarya shows in his Tg that this argument too is of no 
avail, with a penetrating analysis. Self-luminosity and second- 
lessnesi are not in any way antagonistic to Mithystva. For, the 
knowledge that everything is “knowable” (sarvatn prameyamj 
tho'self-luminous {syaprakaia) is still regarded as "mi thy a" in 
Advaita. It also holds that the void of Buddhist philosophy, in 
spite of its self-luminosity, in the sense of being unknowable and 
one without a second ( [advaya ), is Mithys in so far as it is other 
than Sat ( sadvilaksana ). Hence, there is no antithesis between 


3. Read: fvr^srrrf?^ <T5T«rf ftflsRr »F«r i (AY) 

No " anitgaiasatia ’ is admitted in Dvaita. 

4 . “rRTeRfa ifeSe* T; 9^1 9 

*f?T *TT$: I F*^J, 

?5JF°T ftr-^T!?^IRK€5lfa , TfrT: I 9F5$Fr * 99 ' *f?T TcttW- 



96 Advaitasiddbi Vs NyfiySmrta : A Re-Appraisal 

SvaprakSsatva, Advitiyatva and Mithyltva. Moreover, all that 
the Advaitin is expected to establish by way of Mithyltva of the 
world as against the Realist is the absence in the world of what 
determines the application of the term “Satya” to B. in the 
scriptural statements. That being so, if self-luminosity and 
secondless existence were to be the determinants in referring to 
B. as “Satyam”, all that the inference of falsity of the 
world ( mithy&tvanum&na ) would succeed in establishing would 
be that the world of matter ( jadajagat ) is not self-luminous, and 
not without a second. That would be tantamount to establishing 
what is already w'ellknown and well-established and nothing 
unpalatable to the Realist. The Herculean efforts of the Advaita 
in building up the Mithystvsnumlna with so much trumpeting 
would all be love’s labor lost.* 

So, without surrendering the basic criterion of truth for¬ 
mulated by Madhva as Yath&rtham pram&nam and of reality as 
objectivity to valid knowledge, which carries with it the implicit 
corollary of its subsequent non-contradiction as part of the 
content of validity — Nahi vipaya-abddham anantarbhivya 
primSpyam nima. 

Vyasatirlha has also propounded a more technically worded 
criterion to plug possible loopholes in the other pragmatic 
definition* of reality such as Artha-kriyakSritvam, Asadvailak- 
$apyam etc. 

His own criterion of Salta is Trik&lasarva - de&iyanisedha - 
crpratixogild ( Adhyastatucche tu tam prati pratiyogini) which 

5. Hf? i 3 ? sJpj 

OTffrawrft fmamwier 1 fsrsrm- 

srq% Rf Rfer fn«TTc*T- 
^istnrrqofV, ftJ3STH!T?TT < p?- 
ftftr 1 ?nFTT?r, gw—eraicirfr n 



Sattvanirukti : Criterion of Reality 


97 


highlights the criterion of uncontradictability of truth in the 
Dvaita system also thereby showing that it is by no means the 
monopoly of the Advaita. 6 7 

This means “Our criterion of reality consists in not being 
the counterpositive of an absolute Negation with reference to all 
time and space. The fictitious and the Mithya are counterposi¬ 
tives of such a negation ” 

This focuses attention more prominently on the vital 
element of ‘‘non-centradiction”, in respect of the ‘real’. 
Incidentally, it takes the wind out of the sails of the Monist who 
regards the criterion of ‘‘non-contradiction” as his own exclusive 
contribution to the defin'tion of ‘reality’ and as his monopoly. 

Against this the siddhi has argued that such a reality is 
beyond the competence of human perception to grasp, as percep¬ 
tion is confined to the present and the counterpositive of such 
a negation as contemplated by Vyasatirtha is beyond the power 
of anybody’s perception and the absence of such a counterposi¬ 
tive of such a negation would be still more so . T 

6. Dr. Narain is therefore mistaken iu thinking that this 
definition has been formulated by VySsattrtha as a correc¬ 
tion to the original definition of the real as * 'objectivity to 
experience” (as formulated by Madhva) “which is exten¬ 
sive to include the facts of illusions, which are, none the 
less objects of experience” (Op. Cir. p. 15), and that “the 
M3dhva criterion of reality, originally contemplated as 
objectivity to experience has been slightly modified by Vyasa¬ 
tirtha” (Op. Cit. p. 15). Dr. Narain should know that 
Madhva’s criterion of reality is not mere “objectivity to 
experience” but objectivity to valid experience. (See my 
PM pp 52-57) 

7. cram- 

craJTtara 1 


13 



98 Advaitniddhi Vs NySyamj-ta : A Re-Appraisal 

Answering Madhusudana the Tarangini points out that 
tho' the counterpositivc of an absolute negation at all times 
and places is not within the competence of sense-per-ception, 
the absence of the counterpositive of such a negation is the 
essence of the real’ and such absence is within the competence 
of PratyaV?a to know.* As an example, it refers to the percep¬ 
tion of the absence of dkaiatva in the jar, in a perception like 
Chafe akiixlvabhawfi- If akasalva’ were really present in ti e 
jar, it would have to be present in many other particulars (jars) 
also, which would make it a ‘Jiti’ (genus). In that case, it would 
be open to perception like the genus of ‘ghatatva’ itself, inhering 
in several particulars. 


That apart, “Sattvam” or ‘reality’ can also be defined as 
‘‘being other than or different from the counterpositivc of such 
a negation. For, ‘ difference" in Dvaiui thought is the same 
as 'reciprocal negation’ (a.iyonyjbbuvit) The perception of 
reciprocal negation is not itlway: dependent on the perception 
of its coanterposlive. In eases where the counterpositivc is not 
amenable !o perception, its absence in the given locus 3 can be 
perceived through elimination by hypothetical assumption of its 
presence ( yogyiimtpaUibdhi) in terms of "Tarkita-pratiyogisattva- 
pi-aiimjita-itpa'ubdiiipmtiyogika-tibhCtvc.h. 

The author of lire Tattvacimamum has cited the example 
Stambah Pbisco na (the pest is not the ghost) to show that the 
perception of the absence of X without the perception of its 
counterpositive by the perception of the locus ( adhikaramt) itself: 
Siatnbhe PisUcStiyonyUbba van prat yaks aft. Adhikarancmyaprat yck- 
sutval. ” (Nfaiji) 

8. fxrfcT 9 a faAifir? w ?nnr- 

treft«i!rr (Tg p. 61) 

9. vjr, ?rr?3TnTTsr5rfciTrf»rcar nfr. 

i (Tg p. 62) 




Sattvanirukti : Criterion of Reality 


99 


The same principle applies to the present case that if the 
jar perceived here were the eounterpositivc of a negation of its 
presence in all the three periods of time and in all places, it should 
be so perceived, because the cognition in question pertains to an 
object otherwise open to perception. 

The Tarangiiji also cites other examples involving super¬ 
sensible reals such as Manas and the atoms of water, in such 
perceptions as the absence of ‘"Manastva” in thejarandthe 
absence of ‘‘carthiress” ( parthixatva) in the atoms of water, 
where “Manastva” and atoms of water are alike not open to 
perception. 

Such examples are admissible in Sastric discussions. 
They cannot be brushed aside ss “far-fetched’* from the point of 
view of modern laymen. Dr. Narain also dismisses the analogy 
of “Pragabhfiva (antecedent non-existence) cited by the 
Tarangim Piagabhava’’ is cognized by Pratyaksa tho' its counter- 
positive, the jar is not in existence at the time as it is yet to be 
produced. There is nothing farfetched in these analogies. 
Or. Narain speaks of PrSgabhava” as a relation and that as 
such it must be cognised only thro’ the cognition of its relata. 
He misses the point that “abhava” in Indian Logic is 
a ‘‘Padariha” and not a relation, “ssmbandha”. 



CHAPTER XIII 


The Primacy of Pratyaksa 

Judgments like San ghatah (the jar is) obtained thro’ 
perception in broad daylight are sufficient evidence of the 
fact that actual existence (isness) belongs to the objects perceived 
and is not merely due to their being shot thro’ and thro’ or 
penetrated by the isness of Brahman ( BrahniasaltSnuvedha) 
appearing to belong to them on account of superimpoiilion, 
as in the illusory cognition idam rajatani (this is silver) - where, 
according to the Advaita, the thisness (idamtV) of the substrate 
(shell) is passed on to the silver. There is thus no reason to 
distrust the evidence of Pratyaksa obtained under normal, 
healthy conditions. It has already been pointed out that as 
B, is formless, its isness cannot bo perceived by the visual 
organ, in the perception that “the jar is." Otherwise, 
other judgments such as the jar is blue, the shell-silver is false, 
hares have no horns, will have to be treated on the same basis 
of adhisthindnuvedha of B. ft is futile to argue that blueness 
and other attributes belong to the jar etc. while isness does not 
belong to them. Such a distinction would presuppose the 
Piior establishment of the adhyWsa of the jar on B., which is 
still a matter of dispute. By the same token, nothing prevents 
one from arguing that 'Sad' Brahma is also a case of adhi$- 
thindtinuvedha. To say that B. alone has svcrripasatw 
(intrinsic existence) and others have only a superimposed isness 
is begging the question. 

Checkmated in this argument, the Advaita now tries to 
question the bona tides of our faith in the indubitable, uncon- 
tradictability of the evidence of Perception about the real 
existence of the world presented to us. It is argued that 
Perception is limited to the present. So why not take it that 
like the shell-silver it is uncontradicted only for the duration 
of the perception or the present and is liable to sublation later. 



The Primacy of Pratyak$a 


101 


This brings us to the moot point of the problem of the 
basic strength and superiority of sound Perception, free from 
defects, 1 among Pramanas, as a rule,-against its falsification by 
Inference or Verbal testimony - which depend for the correct¬ 
ness of their data on Perception. 

Vyasatirtha therefore raises some pertinent questions 
in this connection. Is perception, then, inherently invalid; or, 
if though valid in itself, is incompetent to establish its 
uncontradictability in all the three periods of time ? The 
second would not deprive it of the validity naturally devolving 
on it, in the sense of making known its content as it is, so long 
as it lasts. Its subsequent non-existence by efflux of time or 
other natural causes cannot undo or falsity its factual existence, 
within the limits of the present. 

If that much is accepted in all good faith, philosophical 
honesty and sincerity by the Advaita it cannot in the same 
breath talk of the objects of perception being M'ttbya in the 
sense of being the counterpositives of an absolute negation 
with reference to all the three periods of time (traikSlikaniscdtia - 
pratiyogi) like the snake in the rope, That will be overshooting 
the mark. Existence of an object, limited to a given time and 
place would only signify its impermanence • like the ancient 
city of Pompei - but not its falsity for all time, as the Advaita 
would like to have it, in the interest of its definition of 
Mithyatva as traikalikanisedhajratiyogitxam. Where then, is the 
need for it to coin a new term and name ** mi thy a ”, unless it has 
no faith in the actual existence of objects perceived by flawless 
perception in broad day light, even for the time being, If not 
forever ? 

1. Some of the defects incidental to sound perception being 
obtained have been listed by Isvara Krishna in his 
Sunkhya-Kiirina : 

Atidiirat samipyat samdnabhighfitSt memo’ navadhiinat 
Sauksmy&t tadamtpalabdhih. 



102 


Advaitasiddhj Vs Nyay5m;ta: A Re-Appraisal 


We have already seen that the Advaiiasiddhi has unequi¬ 
vocally opted for the position that the negation of existence for 
all time is one of SvarUpenaniycdha (negation in essence) 
inclusive of the being of the object at the time in which it has 
been “appearing to exist". That would reduce objects of 
valid perception to an mter non-existence ( atyama-asattva) - a 
conclusion some of our “modern” Advaitins find it difficult 
to swallow, for fear of landing themselves in the camp of 
Nihilism. If Advaita is not prepared to go to such length, it is 
high time that it abandons the talk of Traikalikaniscdha and 
consequent Mithyatva of the world and accept that it is only 
a-nitya (not eternal). Let it not play hide and seek with 
“Mithyatva” and sail under false colors. To avoid a show¬ 
down some Advaitins have held that the negation contemplated 
is not SvarUpenanisedha, or rescinding even the apparent 
existence ns such of objects but a negation from the Paramcfthika 
aspect (puramurthikatvdkdrena rtisedhak). This has already been 
shown to be untenable, as the concept of the Paramarthika 
presupposes the other one of Bsdhyatva or “Vyavaharikatva” 
and vice versa *, in a philosophy which swears by a three-tier 
reality. And we have already seen that Madhusiidana himself 
swears by 'Svarfipeua ni^edhaffi 

Perceptual evidence of the reality of objects known cannot 
be rejected as inherently invalid, without sufficient reason. ]f 
the reason is that it is subiatable by inference or verbal testi¬ 
mony, or the possibility of future stultifiability ( bhavibsdhc - 
kaianka ), the matter cannot be so settles, offhand. Pratyaksa 
can be regarded as invalidated only when the superiority of 
inference or verbal testimony over it is first conclusively 
established. 


2. Read : nift 

%<r: i - qiwfSraeror 

5r?<ft?5Tr5ntKT (Nym. 1.1.) 

Also : g*5u%«rr, *5 (Madhva) 



The Primacy of Pratyaksa 


103 


Tnere are good reasons to hold that Pratyaksa is on 
stronger ground than Inference or Verbal testimony because 
the latter are dependent for their Jam on Pratyakra, as their 
“Upajivya* foundation. Pratyaksa does net have to depend 
for its validity on the absence of conflict with inference or 
testimony . The lion as the king of the jungles has no need to 
walk thro* his domain, only when there are no hares running 
about ! 


The inherent strength of Pratyaksa over inference and 
testimony stems from its ability to grasp minute charac¬ 
teristics of things which cannot be grasped by inference. 
Confusion of quarters (lUi.aioha) which cannot be corrected by 
what others may say can only be set right by seeing the Sun 
rise in a particular quarter. The rule that scripture is entitled 
to the highest place of honor among the three Prumanas 1 is 
mainly with reference to matters which fall within its special 
and exclusive jurisdiction such as the existence of supersensible 
values ot'Dharma and Adharma, God and H;s nut.;re-and attribu¬ 
tes, the existence of heaven and hell.and so on. It cannot intrude 
on the province of Perception and discredit its evidence regarding 
the real existence of objects and falsity it in essence (m/bi- 
pcfa nisedkd) or in its PSramarthika aspect, for reasons already 
gone thro’, 

Tne principle of deference to the voice of the majority 
won id also requirs us to stand by Pratyakra and find suitable 
ways of interpreting such Srutis 3S at first sight appear to do 
away with all duality and plurality of life. The operation of 
inference and verbal testimony can be seen to depend and rest 
upon the data supplied by Pratyaksa as their Upajirya (found¬ 
ational basis). Inference, as its very name "mw-rmPru” implies, 
cannot operate in a vacuum or fly in the face of observed facts 
duly tested and found correct - or what Madnva calls 


3. Prahalyam igamasyaiva jiiya tesu trisu smftcm 

(Src.hma-T urkd) 



104 


Advaitasiddhi Vs Nyayamrta : A Rc-Appraisal 


drtfhadrslam (vividly experienced) or verified Pratyaksa 
(pariksitapratyaksa) as against superficial perception. The 
inference of fire being cold has no chance of survival against the 
indubitable evidence of toctile perception that it is hot. 


Adverting to the topic of the inherent strength of Perception 
Dr. Narain acknowledges that ''from the Madhva standpoint 
Perception is never false. Whenever it is felse , it is not 
Perception* but only wrong knowledge” produced by the 
association of defects in the normal conditions (sdmagri) of 
Perception (Op. Cit. p. 125). He continues, "For ascertain¬ 
ment of the presence of defects one has to resort to critical 
examination and thereby depend on reasoning” (p. 128). 


However, the correct Madhva position is that the purpose 
of Parik$5 or what Dr. Narain calls critical examination is not 
(to ascertain the presence of defects or) for the positive task of 
establishing the validity of knowledge but to climiuate 
chances of contradiction and clearing of doubts where 
necesary. Moreover, the Parik$a itself may consist in taking a 
second or a closer look at the data (as in the case of perceptual 
illusions of the snake in the rope or the silver in shell). In 
cases where on account of vast distance of the object or such 
other impediments a mere second or third look decs not help, 
other tests may be instituted based on more technical or scientific 
aids. But in all such cases, the resort to PiriktS is to eliminate 
risks and doubts by way of abundant caution. It is not to 
determine validity which according to the doctrine of Svatahpra- 
manna of Pram5?as, which is accepted by all schools of 
Vedanta including Advaitie rests on the intrinsic capacity of 


4. This is terminologically self-contradictory. Madhva 
himself calls it ” apatu-pratyaksa" (Cf. Candraprideia- 
tvsdikam tu durasthatvad apatu Tdy.) 



The Primacy of Pratyaksa 


105 


knowledge to be assured of Us own validity. Vyasatfrtka puts 
tins very clearly as follows 

*T^c3TcT, 5rmT<Kro$«TW 3?V 
- ?3Rf¥r«ffaf3' (T. t. j. p. 12 ) 

in the context of Svatahpramanya or self-validity of know¬ 
ledge, it is the Sak$i or Apperceiver of all knowledge that 
grasps the fact of knowledge and its validity. It is immediate 
in respect of matters which fall directly within the field of Saksi 
and mediately thro’ the mind in regard to knowledge obtained 
thro, sensory channels. That point has been lucidly explained 
by JiiyaUrtha - ‘-This power of the Sak$i may be retarded some¬ 
times by doubts caused by mental pulls and vacillation. When 
these are set at rest by Parlksa , the Saksi grasps the validity by 
his own innate power just as an elephant whose foot has been 
pierced by a thorn is unable to walk freely till it is pulled out. 5 

Such tested Pratyaksa or Pariksitapratyaksa, as Msdhva 
calls it, is recognised and referred to as Pratyaksa in Msdhva 
Epistemology and not merely any sense-perception at random, 
under imperfect or inadequate conditions. The definition of 
Pratyaksa as given by Madhva in his Prannlnolaksar.a as Nirdosa- 
arthendriyasanttikarsah should make this clear. The adjunct 


h smnjjfvrefitfer Pm? suffer; f%§ 

sr? i sisrsnsf t Tftmssfer i TtVemr ^ 
frawRir? ggrcm?r»fcr i * ^ 

i qr?r: srmwr- 

i 'r’Istpu: fiteur 

^ srfasur irfm 5nm»sr*mmrfa i (N'S. p. 218) 

14 



106 Advaitasiddhi Vs NySySmfta : A Re-Appraisal 

nirdo^a (flawless; is applicable equally to the objects and the 
senses 6 and their contacts. 

In the light of this, it is difficult to see the point in Dr. Narain’s 
finding that “the Advaitin disparages the philosophy of the 
supremacy of Pratyakja by arguing that the theory that every 
perception is absolutely valid is contradicted both by reason and 
experience. Illusions are the most glaring examples of such 
cases. If Perceptions are always valid, what about illusions 
and their explanations in a Text Book of Philosophy, ? {Op. Cit. 
p. 126). We have already made it clear that Madhva does not 
subscribe to the view of Ramsnuja that all cognitions are 
veridical {Yat hart ham sarvavijnSnam). Madhva realism is wide 
enough to accommodate both valid knowledge and erroneous 
ones in life. This cheap jibe of Dr. Narain is a case of 
Abaddham pathitva kucodyam karoti. 

If as Dr. Narain says “What Madhusudana Sarasvati 
argues is not that inference can disprove any Perception, but that 
wrong perceptions can be set aside by inference or verbal 
testimony” {Op. Cit. p. 127) there is nothing to disagree 
about it. Only, Madhva would point out that in such case s 
the priority rests with Pratyaksa. Where the superficial 
perceptions are ascertained to be vitiated by flaws of distance 
and other defects which are corrected by more accurate obser. 
vation with better aids, as in the case of the size of the Moon- 
Tne superficial perception 'the sky is blue’ is ascertained to be 
an error which is corrected already by perceiving the sky 
(iklid) at much shorter range, without indenting on the 
Sruti. Tnis is confirmed by what Dr. Narain himself has 
to say that ‘ the Madhva doctrine of the superior 
validity of Perception is at best searching in this that 
the final removal of doubts about a particular cognition 


6. Nirdosalvam arthendrtyayor viiesanam O- PM)- 



The Primacy of Pratyaksa 


107 


rests with experience (Op. Cit. p. 128). But he goes off at a 
tangent when he opines that ‘’the Madhvas have, in their zealous 
advocacy of Perception, overemphasised the capacity of Perceptual 
cognition when not associated with any defect. For ascertaining 
the presence of defects, one has to resort to critical examination 
and thereby depend on reasoning. It is here that the Miidhva 
contention exhibits its weakness”. (Op. Cit. p. 128). 

We have already shown that the resort to Pcriktid according 
to Madhva is neither necessary in all cases nor is it resorted to 
grasp validity as such. Its function is purely to 
clear the way in the case of impediments for the primacy of 
Pratyaksa and its self-validity to shine forth unimpeded and 
undimmed. As Vyasatirtha rightly points out in his Tarka- 
tdndava , if the removal of flaws, which restrain the operation of 
the general principle (irtsargo) is also to he counted as the 
cause of the genesis of validity, there will be no fixity about 
which is the rule and which is the exception. 

(IT. 1. 15) 

In any case Dr. Narain's concluding remark that “the 
Sruti which imparts knowledge of unity (aikya) is nothing but 
a transcendent and immediate experience’* (p. 128) is but a 
restatement of the familiar Advaita position that the negation 
of perceptual evidence of reality of the world by the gruti is 
only in its P&ramarthika aspect without affecting its Vysvaharika 
reality. 7 


7 - qn.*nF*mjcr ^far: 



108 


AJvaitasiddhi Vs Nyayamrta: A Re-Appraisal 


Tnis plea has been shown to be untenable on the ground 
of the interdependence in argument by which it is vitiated. 
(Seep. 31 ante). T.iat apart, Madhusudana’s categorical assertion 
that the sublation of the world is a svarupenanisedha puts the 
lid of asattva (utter non-existence) on Mlithyatva - as already 
demonstrated by Vyasatirtlia : 

3 fa <tst 

5 \ 

Does Dr. Narnia agree with 
Madusmydana or want to la him down ? 

If, ra spite of all that has been said, Dr. Narain should still 
rind that the ‘S.inkaritc contention that the inference of the 
falsity of the world is more veilid than the perceplual experience 
has such solid foundation that it can stand the vehemence of 
the onslaught of the Madhva criticism” {Op. Cit. p. 128) we 
can only leave him to hug his illusion, in the words of 
Jayatirtha: Cakstisl nhntfya tat taihai vndatah kah pratimullah"! 

Inference by its very name of “Anu-mana” speaks 
volumes of its dependence (upajivakatva) on sound observation 
of vydpii, paksadharmaii. etc. The entire bulk of the 
the Karmakiipda of truths, the cosmological disquisitions of 
the Srutis on the evolution and involution of the world and 
the peregrinations of the Jivas in various worlds in the course 
of transmigration cannot be brushed aside as ‘Mithya* by any 
serious thinker. The import of the Scutis also has to depend 
on the fullilment of the conditions of textual exegesis in terms 
of proper ukanksi (syntactic expcntancy) contiguity (sannidhi) 
and fitness (yogyata) to be determined by Pratyaksa. The data 
of Pratyakja are the updjivya - the foundational basis of 
inference and verbal testimony. The latter are the itpajivaka, 
resting on its foundation. Whatever superstructure is built on 
their foundation needs must be in keeping with its position. 



The Primacy of Pratyaksa 


109 


This is axiomatic. The Midhva interpretation of the so 
called ‘'Advaita 3ruti$" is in accord with this principle in terms of 

SvaUntrye cavUtstatve sthdnamatyaikyaxor api 
Sadriye caikyavak samvatk savakasa yathsstatah 

(AV) 

and rests upon the principles of logical exegesis. 


In this connection, Yacaspati MiSra has tried to question 
the rationale of the superiority of the upajivya to the upajlvaka 
as between Pratyak ? s and 5>ruti by raising a feeble objection 
that if the Upajivya (Pratyaksa) is to be regarded as stronger on 
account of its priority to the Advaita Srutis, the subsequent 
perception to the effect that this is not silver (nedam rajutiun) 
will have to be rejected in favor of the first illusory perception 
“This is silver’*. Vyisatirtha shows that this is all due to a 
confusion of thought arising from an imperfect understanding 
of what constitutes the pith of an upajivyapramfina, as against 
its upajlvaka. If is not its mere temporal priority. That datum, 
wiiose validity depends on the validity of another, either for the 
ascertainment of its true nature and attributes or for elimination 
of chances of exception, that latter is the upajivya of the former 
In the case of nedam rajatam vs idam rajatam, there is no 
prospect of the validity of the subsequent negating cognition in 
the absence of the invalidity of the earlier one to be negated by 
it. Or, the upajivya ia respect of its upajlvaka may be defined as 
that without which something else cannot be posited or negated. 
Here, even though the cognition id am rajatam is the basis 
(upajivya) of the subsequent one, it is so only in a restricted 
sense of supplying that part of the datum which is to be 
rejected (prati^edhyllrpakalayA). This does not however upset 
the principle of the superiority of the upajivya. For, it is not 
mere upajivyatva in the broad sense of the surface level that 
makes for the superiority (prjhalya) of the upajivya but 
upajivyatva as duly tested (pariksitatvaviiista) . This must be 
conceded by the Monist also. Otherwise, how can he prevent 



110 


Advaitasiddhi Vs Nyiyamrta : A Re-Appraisal 


an illusory knowledge following a correct one, or the Buddhist 
Agamas disputing the Vedicones, from usurping the position 
of the upajivya ? 


Anyway, even in regard to idam rajatam it is only the 
aspect of “thisness" and not “thisness” qualified by the 
adjunct of silverness ( rajataivam) which 'strictly speaking" 
constitutes the upajivya element as regards the negation. 0 . 
And there is no negation of the aspect of “thisness” in 
tiedam rajatam but only of silverness (rajataivam) * . 

The Advaitin cannot afford to argue cn the same lines 
that in respect of the identity of Brahman and Jiva it is the 
bare essence of Caitanya (pure consciousness) of B. that is 
the subject (dharmi) shorn of ail its properties of omniscience, 
all-powerfulness etc. and that therefore there is no upajivya - 
virodha in positing the identity of the two. It will be made 
clear in our discussion of the subject of Identity (Nym. II. 27) 
how it is impossible for the Advaitin to drop the essential 
attributes of Jiva and Brahman in order to predicate their 
identity or make Cinmatraikya the predicate, as it would be 
tautologous to do so. 

facH fat fa# 

5 qfaxnf^t il 

8. STCiJ 5T ' 55 1 fafa tfhfq f 

v=efia¥: i ^ a|T5f>3!f ^ aiBnn i i 

n=sa sneat rsmmfwq a i 

(Nym. XI. 27> 

9. qxlfecTfa ■a ff afcTOsarqlr 

i qa 5f qfqsftea a$r ?isjf sstfsrcsntriffTg i aitq 
ff a|15ft«HT I (Nym) 



CHAPTER XIV 


NO CONFLICT WITH APACCHEDA-NYAYA 
IN ACCEPTING SUPERIORITY OF 

PRATYAKSA 

• 

la connection with the topic of the Prubaiya of Pratyaksa 
as upajivya in interpreting the seemingly monistic texts of 
ibrati consistent with Pratyaksa, Vyasatirtha deals with the 
objection raised by VScaspati Mi<ra that it violates the 
Apacchedanyaya of the Purva Mimamss, which in substance 
establishes the superiority of the posterior to the prior 
CPurvdt ParahalTyastvam). The first experience of reality of 
the world thro' Pratyaksa is over-ruled by the Advaita Srutis 
which present themselves to the mature minds. 

Purvasya Praiyuksasra Parana 
Igamena apacchcdany&yena badhah 1 


This contention of the Bhfrnaii is based on the PMS 
VI.b.54 Paurva parya Parvadaurbalyam Prakrtvat. The matter 
relates to the Jyotistoma sacrifice. As part of the ceremonial 
the Rtviks headed by the Adhvaryu make their exit from the 


1. This is an arthanuvada of the following passage of the 
B ham at i : 

3rs*rr^!§:, q i 

5yfsf;r?rpPT «rr?r strict 1 ^ fnrf^sremsTmtrpftfw- 

r»?ar 1 cmr ^ qhifaq sr?fetws i 

(PMS 6.5.54) 

See Kalpataru on this (Bhamati 1.1.1.) 
p. 10- 11, NS Press Edn. 1917). 



it: 


Advaitasiddhi Vs Ny5y&mrta : A Re-Appraisal 


Yajnaiala in single file holding one another by the kaccha in 
the order of Prastota, Pratiharta, UdgSta, Brahma followed 
by the sacrificer himself for the chanting of the Bahi., 
pavamSna stuti. 

Different kinds of atonements are prescribed, including 
heavy fees to be paid by the sacrificer. - in the case of any 
one of the second, third or fourth Rtviks getting himself 
detached from the one in front of him. Where the Udgata and 
the Pratiharta (who precedes him) get detached one after the 
other, it being impossible to combine the two opposed forms of 
atonement prescribed in respect of the detachment by the 
Pratiharta and the Udgata, severally, the doubt arises as to 
which of the two atonements, the prior (involving Sarvasvadak- 
siijS) or the posterior by way of performing the sacrifice again 
but without fresh daksipa) is to be adopted. The decision 
given is that as at the time of the earlier detachment by the 
Udgata the other one by the Pratiharta is not yet in being and 
as it cannot therefore set aside the posterior, the posterior form 
of Prayascitta associated with the detachment by the Udgata 
prevails. This is extended by the Advaitins to the tug of war 
between Prutyak$a and socalied Advaita Srutis on the basis of 
which the evidence of Pratyak$a about the reality of the world 
is seL aside in favor of Aikya and the Mithyatva of the 
world. 

Vyasatirtha makes a very pertinent observation about 
the inapplicability of the Apaccheda-nySya to the issue of 
Pratyak$a vs. Advaita Srutis, on the ground that the 
Dvaitvadin's claim of the superior strength of Pratyaksa 
as against the Advaita Srutis which are iUvakaia (open 
to otaer interpretations) is based not merely on the ground 
of its being prior to the £ruti but on the ground of its 
being the Upajivya with reference to the data of the 
Abheda Srutis. But in the Apaccfcedanyaya, the prior 



No Conflict with Apacc'ned anyaya. 


113 


prescription is not the Upajivya of the posterior 2 This moot 
point has not been met by the Advaitasiddhi . Moreover, 
there is no rigid invariability in the order of priority 
or posteriority of the Apacchedas of the different Rtviks nor 
any total B§dha. The ApacchedanySya is not therefore appli¬ 
cable to the conflict between Bhedapratyaksa {or Bhe - 
dosrutis ) and the identity texts. 


2. snWftorfT I 

eiR i •? ^5<T5fi3utr i 

The Kalpataru also while introducing the question of 
Apaccheda writes : 

:r<ira?4 

fqtmlfcT— ^$£5^ ift I (BS. 1.1.1.). 

This shows that the question of Upajivyatva is not part of 
the ApacchedanySya. The Srutaprakaia on the £ribha?ya has 
also held that the ApacchedanySya is applicable only wher e 
there is no rigid invariability in the order of priority and 
posteriority of the Apacchedas. It also points out that the 
Nyaya is concerned with the conflict regarding Prayogas 

(performance of rites) while the conflict of the Sagupa and 
Nirguoa texts (or of I3hedpfatyk$a and Abheda 3rutis) is 
concerned with the factual nature of Brahman (or the truth of 
the matter-whether Bhedapratyaksa is badbya or not : 

ft hr! ffrffer i 

■sfTRvnift fft ^r, m fttrmsft 1 

Rqftreftrefarra: I sg^ftnrisifsrftxttrar ^* 3 - 

1 (Srutaprakaia) 

15 



114 


Advaltasiddhi Vs Nyayamfta : A Re-Appraisal 


fomTsnftcT qvronm&Rqt 


(A -ym i. 14) 

The Tarangini rejects the explanation of the A-Sutdhi that 
(as in the case of alternative prescriptions in Apaccheda) 
flhedapratyak§a can be accommodated in a Vyavaharika sense, 
without involving its total Badha For, it would be premature 
to indent upon VySvaharika-Bheda and the two level theory 
of truth even before the thesis of Mithy&tva of which it is a 
corollary, is conclusively established. 



CHAPTER XV 


Question of future StuItifiability 

of Pratyaksa 

Another ground of distrust of Perception urged by the 
Advaita is the possibility of (doubt regarding) its future 
stuhifiability by Agama (Sruti) - bhavibudhakasanki). This 
topic in the Nym, has been bypasse by Dr. Narain in his 
Criteque. 

Since neither inference nor Sruti can set aside the 
evidence of Parikrita-pratyaksa, as already clarified, if there 
should still be any future stultification of it, it can only be 
thro’ another (act of) perception (among the three recognised 
Pramanaa). 1 But as the Advaita has already cut the ground 
from under its feet by branding Pratyaksa as such as invalid, 
the contradicting Prayaksa too (if any) will be subject to the 
same distrust and cannot claim aDy special status or privilege 
of future unstulifiability for itself. 

It cannot be said that all the same, wc can think of some 
kind of general reasoning to the effect that Pryaatk^a 
which grasps the reality of objects may still be open 
to contradiction like the dream-elephant in the waking state. 
The difficulty here is that as the Advaita has condemned Pratyaksa 
per se as unreliable (as vitiated by doses), the analogy with 
the falsification of the dream-elephaent by waking perception 
stands barred. Where none of the three specific Pramsijsa 
can operate, no generic one could be thought of : 


1 Prabalyam Agamasyaiva jatya tesu trisu smrtam 



116 


Advaitasiddhi Vs Nyayamrta : A Re-Appraisal 


Sarvavitesabhave samdnyasyapi abhavena 
bhavibadhakaiankaya anudayat. (Nym) 


Any stultifying cognition has necessarily to be a deter, 
minate one. But Brahmic cognition in Advaita, being 
indeterminate, would not in any manner be hostile to a 
determinate one. A stultifying cognition is only a correcting 
one. It is not seen to deny the existence of the illusory 
cognition, or the defects which caused it or the perceivcr of the 
illusion. Further, only such cognitions as are liable to be 
vitiated by flaws can be open to stultification (bidha). Saksi- 
pratyakoa or the judgment of the Apperceiving self is never open 
to flaws. It is knowledge partaking of the essence of the self (Cait- 
any'tniakan) and is not generated. So there is no question of its 
being generated by dosas. A stultifying cognition cannot also be 
stultified in its turn by another, lest it should lead to a regress. 
It is in the nature of a stulfifying cognition to establish as 
its content an element of “difference” from the content of the 
stultified one.. It cannot be regarded as a Badhakajn&na if it 
should grasp its content of difference from the stultified 
cognition as one with that difference or is indifferent to it. 
The stultifying cognition Nedam rajatam would cease to be a 
stultifying one if it should grasp it content of shell as non- 
different from the earlier. Caramavrtti which is supposed to 
liquidate all difference must also grasp its content viz. Brahman 
or “Advaita’' as “different" from all the difference and 
duality which is to be negated by it. The thesis of future 
stuhifiability of the world is thus unsustainable. The poss¬ 
ibility of future stultifiability can also be raised against 
such future stuhifiability itself leading to a self-contradiction. 
There is therefore a limit beyond which the possibility' 
of future stultification cannot be pressed. The principle of 
upajivya-prSbalya over the upajivaka between two given 
Pramigas, verified by applying all possible tests has to be 
admitted as the final arbiter and it cannot be discredited on 
the frivolous ground of the possibility of future stultification. 



Question of Future Stultification of Pratyak;a 


117 


Too much scepticism at every step would recoil on one's own 
stand - as rightly pointed out by Kumsrila : 

3, ?sq;stsfa »T fa^rfc* X 

The position of the Dvaita philosophers is also the same. 1 

(TTRftfsr^f II 2 (AV) 

If future stultifiability is posited of immediate perceptions 
alone as of the external world, the 'Advaitasakatkara brought 
about by the Caramavrtti will also be open to it. If it is 
restricted to direct cognitions not bought about by verbal 
testimony (iabdlgamya) the immediate awareness of the 
bliss of selfhood in Moksa which being eternal in its nature 
and pertaining to the essance of the Self and as such not 
produced or engendered by any other cause may have to come 
under the scope of the possibility of future stultification. 
As pointed out earlier, the Advaitasakjitkara generated 
by the Caramavrtti would also be engulfed by a similar doubt 
that the Slkgi has somehow fallen into an error of 
Judgment. For. in Advaita, Sak?ijfS5na is susccprtible to 
both error and correct knowledge Saksinah bhrama-pra- 
masadharanyena - pramanabadhakatvat - A-Siddhi. 
So it may err in believing what is not true realisation to be a true 
one. For, it admits that tho'Caitanya or pure consciousness 
as such is not tainted by flaws, the Avidyavrtti which delimits 


2. tnmraffT sfcftafit qfttmi sent 1 %, 

wrefarofwim: wra i sTsfarrstflftra, 7<r*«r%sr ais^T Tta; 1 





(NS. 111-595) 



118 


Advaitasiddhi Vs Nyayamrta : A Re-Appraisal 


it is tainted by flaws ( ana dido§a ) and that it is the pure 
Caitanya reflected in Avidyavrtti which is termed the 
Saksi : 


srfsrat^: *rifer- 

C ■» 

(A-Siddhi p. 44 - 50) 


Such a prospect would bring all Vedantic studies and 
instruction to a halt as not worth the trouble, in view of the 
uncertainty of the truth of identity to be produced by it. 
It cannot be objected to this that in that case, the gruti which 
postulates the liquidation of the world by such a S5ks2tkara 
would be reduced to a mere appearance ( pratibhUsika ). In 
such - ccmtimgcmcy, it will not be liquidated by Brahmajri&na. 


Our answer to this would be that here also as in the other 
cases of universal doubt, it may be that the auditory sense has 
mis-heard the gruti which really says that the world is not 
sublated by knowledge of Brahman. Such possibilities cannot 
be ruled out if the distrust of Pariksita-Pratyak$a is carried to 
extremes in respect of the reality of the world established by 
Pratyak$a. 

It is a high-handed liberty to condemn normal healthy 
perceptions on the dubious plea of possibility of future 
stultification ( bhavibadhakaianka ) on the analogy of untested 
superficial perceptions or the snake-in the rope variety. 


In properly tested and varified perceptions, the specific 
flaes of too much distance or too much nearness of the object 
etc., stand eliminated. If in spite of all this, some unspecified 
defect (dosa) is to be alleged, similar flaws can be alleged 
in the case of the gruti texts also. 



Question of Future Stultification of Pratyak ; a 119 

Advaita writers have also tried to belittle the value of 
verification relied upon by Realists in establishing the 
validity of perceptual evidence of the reality of the world 
by citing the examples of eating, drinking, bathing etc., in our 
dreams. 

The position that Pratyak^a comprehends what is 
intrinsically invalid to be valid, will deprive Advaitavida of 
any valid Sruti text which establishes the Mithyatva of the 
world. For the same ubiquitous doubt would envelop the 
supposed Mithyatva-Sruti and the sixfold Tatparyalingas in it, 
grasped by the auditory and visual senses. 


The hypothesis of unmitigated doubt of future possibility 
of stultification of all Pratyaksa, without any reservation or 
exception would let loose a reign of chaos and disorder all 
round. For, like superficial perceptions there are also cases 
of deceptive inferences and deceptive verbal testimony. 
There is no justification to single out Perception (alone) for 
condemnation on the such a ground. The dividing line between 
what is valid (pramana) and what is invalid (a-pramana) 
has got to be respected and ought not to be dismissed with 
seant courtesy by any sane philosopher. 

Moreover, according to the Realist, the world's reality 
is endorsed by the Saksf the Appcrcciving Self of 
all knowledge and validity, in the the last analysis. 
The judgment of the Sak$l is always veridical and indubitable- 
being the expression of its eternal sc If-experience and, in this 
it is unlike even the Sruti in not being open to any 
misconception of purport. 


If Sak|ipratyak;a is not to be recognised as “Pramana” 
because it is not generated by the operation of the Vfittis 



1 20 Advaitasiddbi Vs Nysmjta: A Re-Apptaisal 

in the Advaitic sense of the term, the Srutis too will have to 
forfeit their validity. For, being authorless they cannot be 
treated as valid ( pramiv.a ) in the sense of their validity not 
being brought about by the special property (gutia) of being 
the words of a reliable person (aptaktatva), in the Nyiya sense. 

So, not much store can be set on the supposed eternality 
of the Srutis frow the Advaita angle. The Sruti is no doubt 
really an instrument of valid knowledge. But just as from the 
Advaita point of view the Dvaitin’s belief, that its purport is the 
intrinsic difference of Jives and Brahman and the reality of the 
world, is the outcome of a gross mis-conception of its real 
purport or just as the positions taken by the Purvapak$a in 
each adhikarapa of the Brahma Mtmlmsa Ssstra are due 
to a gross misconception of its true Siddhanta, it is equally 
possible to argue that the Advaita belief in the oneness 
of all existence and the unreality of the world is similarly due 
to a gross misconception of the purport of the Srutis. Similar 
doubts of the possibility of future stultification can be raised 
against the perception of the unanimity of the Tatparya-Jingas, 
in terms of “Advaita”. 

The Advaitin cannot get away with the explanation that 
the Sruti being eternal is flawless and cannot be stultified like 
the deliverance of Pratyak^a. For, in the estimation of Advaita 
philiosophy, the eternatity of the £ruti means ‘nothing more’ 
than that they exist upto ore Brahmakalpa (or a hundred years 
of life of Hiranyagarbfca) and are subject to genesis again 
like BhfltaklJa and other tattvas. 

As regards external perception thro’ the material sense 
organs, there is no reason to assume the possibility of future 
stultification in all cases, because such misgivings, when 
they arise, can be removed by instituting proper verification: 
(parik&) earried to the point of certainty vouched for byj 
the intuitive experience of the Apperceiving Self 



Possibility of Future Stultification of Pratyakja 


12 L 


in terms of its inner satisfaction of self-certification. The 
ratifying experience of the Saks I is the acid test of all validity 
ascertained after sufficient verification, in cases of reasonable 
doubt. There is no room for any more Parikta after the 
Saks 1 level. Once the Saksi sets its seal of approval, it is 
final. * 

The best proof of the unerring certainty and infallibility 
of Sik$i is furnished by the most intimate and poignant 
experiences in life of pleasure, pain, compassion fright, 
terror, etc. of which none of us has any occasion to entertain 
the least shadow of doubt at any time : 

5 tpt g*i f:sr wmfufqwr: 11 

mftrfeT * era i 

(AV HI."4,41) 

* * * 

*5m<;<5i*rsnic«i ^ trtsfig'K4t*r»Tg u 
'bTCcTT 35* fcT:? 

^ mfwnT 11 

H %cT STSfft ? 

areft i 

g^: WW{? 11 

(AV) 


(AV) 






122 Advaitasiddhi Vs Nyayarntta: A Re-Appraisal 

OTTmiwf *TWT TT^Tc^ gfcfaaff 

(AV II.3.28) 


Tae whole of rational existence in the world would be 
made impossible if the verdict of the Sak$i as the ultimate 
reference, foundation and criterion of all knowledge and its 
validation is impugned, questioned or proved to be in the wrong 
even in one single instance at any time. The entire basis 
and superstructure of all religion, science and philosophy 
would be blown up to pieces, as by an atom bomb the moment 
one dares to question or doubt the verdict of the Saksi : 

HTfsroft ssfasnTshr, 

^ « ara: 3T$T?T*T*r*ir 

sura, 

(Madhya ; Pram.i'talakxana) 

The case for Saksipramanya cannot he put more tellingly 

In Advaita, as already pointed out, the Saksi is not the 
immaculate Caitanya or its flawless SvarQpendrjya, which is 
ever veridical ( niyataydthSrthva ), as it is in Dvaita thought. 
It is only the reflection of Caitanya in Avidyavftti and 
therefore shares its taint. Avidyavrtti acts as the conditioning 
factor (u pad hi ) in reflecting pure Caitanya and this reflection 
is the Ssksi : 


?tarsr?gc%sfq arfaarT- 

SfrT: Sta^cSHcT, ^STfcTfifacT^W* 

r 

(A-Siddhi p. 44 - 451 


Against this the Tarangini has argued that if the Sakjf 
is only the reflection of Caitanya in AvidySvrtti, the same 



Possibility of Future Stultification of Pratyaksa 


123 


AvidySvrtli which plays the role of a reflecting medium in 
giving rise to the Ssksi will have to be placed within the 
bounds of the subject which knows (ri$ayikoti) as participating 
jn the configuration of the Saks: ( (Snksisanrapravista). In 
ihc circumstances, the Advaita r os iti° n *l 1 at {the same) 
Avidyavftti is witnessed by the (same) S3ksl (SdktibhdsyS) 
would be untenable, involving a seif-dependence (dimdsraya)■ 
Jf another Avjdyavrtti is assumed as its Vijaya (object) 
that would need yet another Avidyavptti in which the Caitanya 
is to be reflected, so as to function as the witness of 
Avidyavrtti (for its Vi$aya). This process will have to 
be repeated endlessly, to make both ends meet - which is out 
of the question. 


The only way out of the muddle is to directly recognize 
Caitanya itself as Saksi. As Caitanya is admittedly ever-free 
from flaws (nirdosa), its judgment about the reality of the 
external world and its values and of our experience of the joys 
and sorrows of life would be indubitably veridical. 


sorted — 

c 

tnfsrfa- 

cl^TT 

wum faqsrcsng'rm: 

?q*qi: l cT^T 3?fq 3?q*qT 

qTcT \ fMWN' II 

•V N 


The above relpy of the Taranginl to the position taken 
by the A-Siddhi in regard to the nature of the Saksi as a mere 
reflection of Caitanya in Avidyavrtti and as such not immaculate 
or always veridical in its judgment and hence open to flaws is 
notable for its originality and penetration. It is significant 



124 


Advaitasiddhi Vs Nyayamrta : A Rc-Appraisal 


that Dr. Narain has not attempted to answer this criticism 
of the Taraitgini. 

As already pointed out, the conviction of Dvaita thought in 
the uncontradicted reality of our vivid experiences of the 
joys and sorrows of life and the reality of the external world 
Tests on the solid foundations of Saksipramaija 5 which is 
(as already made clear) never-erring in its judgments. 
Constructive logical and philosophical thinking must recognise 
the wisdom and sanity of equipping human beings with an 
absolutely reliable ‘Mariner’s Compass’ on its voyage on the 
ocean of Samsira, to reach their destination. 

(srsr) ^rncwfa ( Ay ) 

Advaita writers have also tried to belittle the value of 
verification {parlksd) relied upon by the Realists in establishing 
the validity of Perceptual evidence of the world by citing 
counter-examples of such responsiveness and amenability to 
verification of a sort, experienced in our dreams of drinking, 
bathing, eating, etc. 

Such an argument can be easily turned against the 
validity of the Advaita Srutis also. It cannot be contended 
here that the monistic texts draw their support from the 
Vedas which are Apauruseya and are backed by the sixfold 
marks of purport and culminate in the attainment of Brahman- 
hood in Mok,a. It is equally possible to dream of the 
existence of Vedic texts which declare that o'unya*Advaita is 
the truth or that Sad-dvaita (dualism) is the truth and entertain 
a doubt in the dream state itself that the auditory sense 

5. *r?4=n4r €iq*q?er 

SffiPT (NS p. 30) MchTiq-ff 5R-? SWTTiT: (NS p, 210; 



Possibility of Future Stultification of Pratyaksa 


125 


somehow, misapprehends their Paramartbika character to be of a 
Vyavaharika nature or their Vyavahirika character to be one of 
pratibhssika nature-with the result that sunya-Advaita and Dual¬ 
ism ( Saddvaita ) would turnout to be the real truth of the Srutis. 
It cannot be contended that such a doubt cannot arise in the 
face of the existence of “Atma-Advaita Srwri". Forwc arc confro¬ 
nting the Advaitin with his own contention of the possibility of 
their future stultification by extending it to the supposed existe¬ 
nce of the Atma-Advaita Sruti. Tae point is this - The validity 
of Atma-Advaita Sruti can be conclusively established only 
by the removal of the possibility of the misapprehension of 
its purport as either VyavahSrika or PrStibhlsika and that 
cannot be done unless the possibility of doubt about the 
future stultifiability of the Atma-Advaita Sruti is first 
removed thus involving an interdependence. 

If the possibility of such a misconception about the 
Atma-Advaita firuti is rejected on the ground that there is 
considerable difference between the experiences in a dream 
and in the waking world, the difference is not less pronoun¬ 
ced between the perceptions of the experiences of eating, 
drinking and bathing in a dream and the same acts performed 
in the waking state - so that the analogy of the supposed 
fulfilment of appetites in a dream with what happens in the 
waking state falls to the ground. If the wide difference between 
the dreaming and the wakeful states is not admitted, there is 
no justification for the Advaitin to regard the dream experience 
as Pratibhasika and the wakeful stale as Vyavaharika. It is 
thus baseless to presume to discredit the evidence of Pratyaksa, 
especially of the verified type, on the analogy of dreams. 

The distrust of verified Pratyaksa on the ground of 
possible future stultifiability is as farfetched as the supposition 
of an effect being produced without a cause and the presumption 
itself is open to a regression without end. As Udayan3c5rya 
has aptly pointed out, only such suppositions can be permitted 



126 Advaitasiddhi Vs Nyamfta : A Re-Appraisal 

as would not land us in a self-contradiction. KumSrilabhatia 
too has driven home this point with his pungent humor against 
the Sunyavidin ; 

I ha janmanl kes&m cit na tu rad upalabhyate 

Yogyavasthdtn gatdnim tu mi vidmali kirn bhavisyc.ti .* 

Lastly, it is admitted by Dvaitins and Advaitins alike 
that validity is intrinsic to knowledge in respect of both its 
genesis and its cognizance. In the case of 1} verified 

Perception free from defects , which can deprive it of its 
self-validity in genesis and 2) the absence of contradiction 
which makes it trust-worthy, it has got to be admitted as 
binding. Vague and idle doubts about its future stultifiability 
cannot b; taken seriously. The Advaitic bogie of Bhivibddho - 
kaiankd is an exercise in futility. 

To put the matter more graphically, it is absolutely 
necessary that the contradicting knowledge nedam rajauan 
{this is not silver ) experienced after the illusory perception 
idam rajatam (this is silver), in regard to a piece of shell, 
has got to be accepted as valid - as otherwise the latter cannot 
be rejected as invalid. If then, the Advaitin should condemn 
all Pratyakja including the verified ones, on the ground of 
a chimerical doubt of possibility of future stultification, he 
would be reduced to the unenviable position of one who 
lets go the principal to get the interest ! He must also admit 
that there is direct experience of the bliss of selfhood in 
Su$upti(dreamless sleep). As all the sense organs including the 
mind are at rest then, it is the Sak$i which must be 
admitted to experience it directly. If this Saksipratyaksa is to be 
discredited as essentially invalid, the experience of the essential 
character of Atman as blissfulness cannot be regarded as real and 
true. As lor the Sruti which proclaims that the self is of the 
essence of blissfulness, it can be discounted as being nothing 
more than a restatement of the bliss which the self had 



Possibility of Future Stultification of Pratyaksa 127 

experienced in the Vyavahsrika state and nothing more We 
have also texts in the Sruis and Smrtis referring to Smfti. 
Pratyaksa, Anumlna and various Agamas as “PrornSna ". It 
does not stand to reason that the same word ''PramSna” is 
used in two different senses of VySvahSrika and Paramarthika 
in the same context. Some of the early Advaitic writer* like 
Sureivara have also admitted that the feruti is “valid’’ like 
•'Pratyaksa” by reason of its competence to produce 
knowledge and being devoid of vitiating causes, and in not 
being open to contradiction. 


Ato avsbodhalcatvuna dustakdranavarjanat 
Abadhdcca praminitvam VastimyaksSdivat Srutieh 

(Suresvara) 


The same is the position of Madhva : 

Pratyaksaiacca, Prctmdnyam svata eva dgamasya hi (AV) 



CHAPTER XVI 


COMPETENCE OF PRATYAKSA TO GRASP 
THE UNCONTRADICTABLE REALITY OF 
THE WORLD AS NOT "MITHYA" 

PRAT YAK£> ASY A PS R AM ARTHIKASATTVAGR SHITVAM 

Having disposed of the main ground on which the 
validity of Pratyak?a as a Pram2pa has been impugned by the 
Advaitin, Vyasatirtha now takes up the other contention 
that, though valid in a limited sense, Pratyak$a is not 
competent to be assured of the uncontradictable nature of 
its data, in an absolute sense - Kiilatraya-abadhyatvarupasattva- 
grahana-akfamam. 

The phrase: “reality consists in not being open to 
contradiction in all the three periods of time” kdlatrayar 
abldhyatvarQpam snttvam has some over-tones which are 
not applicable to the Dvaita perspective. It has been 
overworked and exploited to its own advantage by Monism, 
by reading too much into it, of having a uniform and unchanging 
nature and existence throughout eternity - which is true of the 
Supreme Being alone, and not of the world. The other 
term ‘ Bdtiha ” is also not free from ambiguity which has been 
pressed to its advantage by Advaita. 

Vyasatirtha therefore shows how these overtones are 
unjustified, by reiterating the Dvaita position regarding the 
true nature of the world’s reality formulating a criterion of 
reality which is applicable both to the world and to Brahman in 
terms of TrikMasarvadci iyanisedha-apra tiyogita fSatti) as we 
have already seen. The only difference is that such a reality 



Question of Future Stultification of Pratyaksa 


129 


is established in respect of the world by the Saksi pratayk$a 
while that of Brahman is established by the Sruli. 

If “not being contradicted or coutradictable” in all the 
three periods of time means continuous and unchanging existence 
for all time, Dvaita philosophy too does not claim such a 
reality for non-eternal entities in the world. The only sense 
in which the description of “traikalikanbedha - aprntiyogitvanv' 
can be taken to apply both to the eternals and the 
non-eternals is that of being the conntcrpositivc of 
the absence of a non-existemcc which endures thro’ all the 
periods of time. And such an absence is grasped when the 
actual existence of a given thing is grasped as such at a 
particular time and place : 

iT^Tcr ?f?r sfcroitaTaft ae«rcnff»ir 
TOfafe: {Nym L lS) 

When such an existence is grasped by Perception, it would 
simultaneously be competent to establish that the entity in 
question is not MithyZ , within the meaning of being the 
counterpositive of an absence of a non-existence which endures 
thro’ all time. For, the immediate perception (saksZik&ra) 


1. For further clarification of the meaning of the phrase 
TttTgqsfa in the Nym see the explanation in the 

v g. a, 

srsq: u 


17 



130 


Advaitasiddhi Vs Nyayamfta: A Re-Appraisal 


of an entity at the time of its existence at a given place and 
line (svakala ) is bound to restrain its negation with reference 
all the three periods of time, as such, and be assured of its 
not being liable to be so contradicated (for all time) .■ 

^iffcTcfT TT'JjFT HTSTTcSiTT: fesFTSRR 

Moreover, in the case of the Sruti also, it is validity 
of the knowledge produced by it that determines non- 
contradictedness of the subject matter and not its position or 
status as Verbal testimony; or its grasping the existence of its 
data without reference to any particular period of time ; or 
its existence in relation to alt periods of time. If such 
an excessively wide margin is given to it, it would be 
overstepping the function of a Pramaija. Since validity of 
knowledge lies in conveying the truth of tho matter as it is 
nothing more than the actual existence of the data at the 
time of knowledge, irrespective of its having been in existence 
before or continuing to be, later. Since then validity of 
knowledge is nothing but the non-denial of the factual 
existence of its objective content , 1 such validity has got to be 
conceded to Pratyak$a, as to the Sruti. 

And this validity is grasped by the Sakji in respect of 
internal experiences of pleasure, pain, satisfaction, etc. 
directly and,nediately, thro’ the validity of the sense-perception, 
in respect of external reals. This is in keeping with the 
acceptance of the SvatafyprSmai?ya of knowledge in Vedanta^ 
which means that the validity of knowledge is grasped by the 
same agency as grasps the knowledge itself and only a conscious 
principle such as the Appercciving Self can be such an agency 


1 . Nahi visaya-ab&dham anantarbhivya pramAnyagrahanam 

C Njm) 


ndma 



Question of Future Stultification of Pratyak^a 


131 


as Vfttijnana is not self-luminous - unlike the Safest. Madhva 
is therefore within his rights in demanding of the Advaitin - 

tlfe RnfSHTefT ? ft ? 

How could one refuse to accept the reality of the world, 
consistent with the acceptance of self-validity of knowledge ? 

Another important point to be noted in this connection 
is that validity cannot be circumscribed by time factor It 
is a question of fact and not of duration of the object. What 
is (.truly) valid now cannot be invalidated the next moment 
or later. 

tT qqfsiT qfHvicit stJIfim 

JfTTWFc^StWR FHrH JcT: ? (AV) 

This is an irrefutable truth. 

The only difference, as between Sruti and Pratyakasa 
is that whereas B.’s existence is grasped on the authority of 
the Sruti as not circumscribed by past, present and future 
periods of time, the existence of sensible objects like a jar 
is grasped by perception as circumscribed by a time limit - 
"as now present”. But the fact remains that the validity of 
that means of proof by which the uncontradictedness of 
that entity whose existence has been grasped by it is common 
to both the validity of the Sruti and of Pratyaksa. * 

It is not the contention of Dvaita philosophy that Pratyak^a 
grasps or is competent to grasp the eternal existence of things 
(which are not eternal at all)! Its competence to grasp its 


IR 3^1 *T^YrTT, 33?- 



132 Advaitasiddhi Vs Nyiyamrta: A Re-Appraisal 

given data in their given locus in terms of an uncontradicted 
and uncontradictable reality in the sense of their not being 
the counterpositives of any negation jn regard to all the three 
periods of time, is what is meant by saying that it is 
“not-mithya” : 

Iti pra-niuyena praiyaksena nityatvasiddhavapi svopiidhau 
traikalika-nisedhiipratiyogitvarupam atyantika-abadhyatva/n 

siddhyatveva (Nym) 

Moreover, the crucial question is whether the 
“contradiction” which is supposed by the Advaitin to annul 
the existence of the given object perceived by Pratyaksa 
does so only with reference to a future date and time or, 
negates its existence with reference to the very time also at 
which it was grasped by Fratyak$a to be existing at a certain 
time and place. 

In the first alternative, the earlier knowledge which 
grasped the objective content as existing, cannot be deemed to 
be invalid at all by any serious person. It can only be 
Created as impermanent ( anitya) which is not the same as 
“ Mithyi In the second alternative, the object will have 
to come to be reduced to a nullity ( atyanta-asat), which the 
Advaitin is not prepared to admit openly. 

If all that the Advaitin wants to convey is that the world 
is “anitya” (not eternal;, why should he rack his wits to coin a 
New and misleading designation for it as '■ Mithyi". ? This 
recklessness of traditional Advaiia has in recent times given 
rise to an earnest call from within the Advaitic fold itself 
for a “ Neo-Vedanta ” in which the doctrine of “MithyStya" 
of the world and its “Jnina-badhyatva" stand banished. (See 
PREFACE for the views expressed by Svami Tapasy&nanda 
in his latest book Bhakci Schools of Vedanta, Madras, 1991.) 



Question of Future Stultification of Pratyaksa 


133 


Moreover, the Apperceiving Self (^aksi) which grasps 
the existence of future time, must be adjudged to be competent 
to grasp the all-pervasiveness of Space and other realities 
which fall directly under its purview, as well as the reality 
of the external world and the things therein like jars and 
other things. Tho’ not lying directly under its intuitive 
grasp (as in the case of pleasure and pain) it must be admitted 
to be able to grasp their (uncontradicted)jabsence of subsequent 
•‘contradiction" (in the sense defined above) thro' grasping 
their reality on the basis of the evidence supplied by llawless 
perception itself. For, it must be noted that there is no 
grasping of validity without including the uncontradictedness 
of its data - 

Nahi vifoya-ab.idham anantarbhAvya pramanyagrahanam nansa 

(Nym) 

The Advaitin has perforce to give up his obstinate position 
that Pratyakja is competent only to grasp what is present, 
in principle. Otherwise, he cannot, in reason, establish tne 
“mithyutva ” of shell.silver, the snakc-in-the rope etc., to be 
counterpositives of a negation in regard to all the three periods 
of time. which includes the past and the future. 
(n&sti, ndsit, na bhavisyati). Such contradicting cognition 
(badhakajntna ) is not an inference but a Pratyaksa. How is 
this possible, if Pratyaksa were incompetent to grasp the 
future ? - it matters little whether it is of existence or non¬ 
existence. If future non-existence can be grasped by Pratyaksa 
why can future existence not be ? The terms of the 
Badhakajnana itself give the whole case of the Advaitin 
away. 

The PSramsrthika reality - not subject to contradiction 
in all the three period* of time, of objects of valid perception 
follows from the same criterion by which the distinction of 
‘he Vysvaharika from the Pratibhasika is established by the 



134 Advaitasiddhi Vs NyKyXmfta : A Re-Appraisal 


Advaita, For, it must be admitted by the Advaita that there 
is some distinction in the cognition which comprehends 
objects like a jar to be “Vyavaharika” from the knowledge 
which cognises the silver (in shell). That distinction itself is 
sufficient to bear out the indisputable reality of the former. 


If the existence of the world borne out by Pratyaksa 
is not truly real ( tdttvika ) how can the mithydtva of the shell, 
silver established by Pratyaksa be tithika (true) as distin¬ 
guished from the other ? Surely, there is practically not the 
slightest difference between the judgments the jar is real,'the 
shell-silver is false. The falsity of the latter must be as true 
as the reality of the former. If the falsity of the shell-silver 
should be stultified at a subsequent time, the shell-silver 
would turn out to be a reality. 


If Piramarthika-satya (in the sense of not being the 
counterpositive of a negation (for all the three periods of time) 
is nor open to perception, the gratis which negate it would 
be negating something which is outlandish and Inot “given 
in evidence". The dilemma is that if Pratyak?a is not 
representing what is not real ( atattva ) as tatlva (real) how can 
the Advaita condemn Pratyaksa as not truth-declaring 
(i a-tattvavedaka ). How can a Pramaija which grasps what is 
vySvahSrika in truth to be "•Vyivaharika" (instead of as 
ParamSrthika) be treated a “a-tattvavedaka'' ? It is only 
when Perception (mis) - presents the world which to the 
Advaitin is “Vyavaharika*’ to be “Piramirthika” that it can 
be stigmatized as a-tattvavedaka. The Advaitin is thus forced 
by his own logic to back out from his position and concede 
that Pratyaksa, after all, grasps the external world as 
“P&ramarthika" regardless of what the Advaitin feels about it. 
It is a different question altogether whether Pratyaksa is 
ustified in doing so. But there is no disputing the fact that it does 
cognise the world as “Paramarthika*’ and is competent to do 



Question of Future Stultification of Pratyaksa 


ns 


so. 1 The universal experience and judgment of humanity 
is also in full accord with it. Hence Pratyaksa must be 
accepted to be in a position to grasp the absence of Milhy&iva in 
terms of the object of perception not being the counterpositive 
of a negation in all the three periods of time in its own locus. 
The probans of perceivability etc. as grounds of MithySttva 
stand set aside by sound Pratyaksa. 


1. Cf. PramS ri&ni hi svagocare pravartantanani tat want idam 
ityeva pravartane 

Afa punah sSmvyavahdrikam nah pr&m&nyam Hi (Bhamati) 



CHAPTER XVII 


THE RELATION BETWEEN CONSCIOUSNESS 
AND ITS OBJECT IS REAL AND IS NOT 

SUPERIMPOSED 


(Drgdr$yasambandh3nupapattibhangah) 

Having made perceivability of objects the ground of 
their falsity, Advaitic dialecticians have naturally sought 
to find support for it in an indirect mode of reasoning 
(aiuikslatarka) which is intended to undermine the foundation 
of Realism, They contend that it is impossible to find a 
real viable relation between consciousness (drk) and its 
object (drsya), or define it satisfactorily. Accordingly, they 
have concluded that there is no real relation between the two and 
that the truth is that objects are only superimposed on one 
indivisible, undivided universal Atmic consciousness which is 
transcendental and its relation to objects as we know them is 
only a super-imposed one. As the relation of conciousness to its 
objectis thus unreal, the relatum (object) must naturally be 
deemed to be unreal, in its turn. 

This alleged impossibility of conceiving of a suitable 
relation between them and the difficulty of defining it in a 
logically satisfactory manner expressed by the phrase 
"DrgdrSyasambandha.anupapatti" is posed as a reductio cd 

absurdum. 

Dr. Narain regards this as the unique character of 
3inkarite methodology which seeks to prove the conclusion 
of the falsity of objects by resorting to the method of 
reductio ad absurdum by eliminating all possibilities of a 



Advaitasiddhi Vs NyiySmrta : A Re-Appraiial 


137 


satisfactory explanation of objectivity and its relation to 
consciousness” (Op. Cit. p. 60). This is not after a!! so 
original or ‘unique' an argument or a methodology. As 
Vyasatirtha points out, at the very outset of his criticism of it, 
it is not only reminiscent of but is actually a rehash of the 
well-known Grdhyalak$ar.dbhava-tarka, advanced long before 
the Sankarites by the Vijnanavada Buddhist* : 

•rctrrat sfcrafiFft: u 1 

For it stands to reason that if what is perceived is a 
reality, the consciousness of it cannot possibly illumine it 
without coming into contact with it. Nor can it do so by 
contacting it. For, consciousness being an attribute of the self 
cannot enter into any relation ( sambandha ) of Samyoga 
(conjunction) or of inherence with it and there is no other 
relation than these two. 

For a similar reason, we cannot think of their relation 
as one of Vi$aya-Visayibh5va (subject object relation). For 
a relation is something different from the relata and abides 
in them. This is not the case with the subject*object 
nexus. 


1. ‘‘If what is blue is different from its consciousness.it 
cannot shine forth in it. If it does in spite of its 
being other than consciousness, why do other colors like 
redness or greenness not do so in it, in the same way ? We 
are therefore unable to find any determinant of objectivity 
justifying a real relation between consciousness and the 
objects passing through and across it. Hence the relation 
must be regarded as a superimposed one”. (Tr.) 

18 



138 The Relation Between Consciousness and its Object 

That apart, it is difficult to precisely define the nature 
of Vi^ayavi^ayibhdvaor -■Visayatva"' (objectivity to knowledge) 
as such. Most of the definitions offered by Realists suffer 
from one defect or another. For example, the definition 
of Visayatva as Jninu-janya-vyavahirayogyatvam (fitness to 
objective reference produced by the knowledge) is open to 
self-dcpcndence and is underpervasive, as such a “fitness” 
which is also part of its objectivity cannot he known without 
indenting upon another fitness” about its objectivity. 

No viable eoneeption of perccivability in terms of 
yifaratva and Vi >' ayavtsayihhava between consciousness and 
its object can be found from the point of view of the acceptance 
of the reality of objects as such. We have therefore to take 
it that their relation is not a real one but is merely super¬ 
imposed ( adhydxika) on consciousness. 

In answer to those objections, Vyasatirtha points out 
chat there is no necessity or compulsion to do away with the 
reality of objects presented to consciousness on the ground 
of there being no suitable relation between them, if the 
objects too should be accepted as real. 1 For Advaita episte¬ 
mology has itself adopted the highly sophisticated theory of 
Vrtti (mental psychosis) in which (he modification oj the 
mind-stuff taking the shape of the object , after flowing 
out to the external objectjthro’ the sense organ and giving rise 
to the knowledge of the object after passing thro* some further 
process of intellection among the threefold distinctions of 
Caitanya into Pramatr, Prameya and Pram&na ( Caitanyas ). 

It is obviously essential that the object be “given” and be 
“out there’* before it can be flooded by the light of the 
aniahkaranavrtti, in the Slnkarite theory of Perception. This 

2. Sankara himself in his BSB says / (1.1.4) : 

Vastutantram eva tat (jnanam) 



Advaitasiddhi Vs Nyayamrta : A Re-Appraisal 


139 


necessitates the prior existence of the object "out there** for 
the Vrtti to act on it. As this Vrtti itself provides sufficient 
nexus (sambendha) between the already existing object 
and its subsequent awareness there is hardly any justification 
to assume the relation between consciousness and its object 
to be a superimposed one (with the implication that the 
object itself is unreal). 


In this context, Vyasatirtha refers to the contention 
oi some Advaitins that the purpose of the Vrtti is not to serve 
as a medium \dvard) in regulating the perception of objects 
superimposed on one evershining transcendental consciousness 
of Brahman, by different persons at different times as determined 
by their different Vrttis, but to establish a direct contact between 
different units of consciousness which are the substrate of the 
superimposed object when such consciousness is made 
manifest by the respective Vittis. 


Against this view, Vyasatirtha points out that Advaita 
philosophy cannot hold a position akin to that of the 
VijnanavSda idealism of the Buddhists that the various objects 
perceived are superimposed on different fleeting moments 
of a steam of consciousness. As the one pure consciousness 
which is transcendental is essentially undifferenccd, it cannot 
split itself into the many. It it is to be differentiated thro* 
the conditioning factors ( upfidhi ) of particular objects as its 
adjuncts,, such a conditioned consciousness would also be 
Mithyn and cannot as such serve as the substrate of a super¬ 
imposed relation. For the cdkisthii a (substrate) is, in principle, 
required to be of a higher degree or order of reality than the 
iropya (superimposed)*. Even if the conditioning factor 
differentiating the all-pervasive consciousness into many is 


3. Upadhmii^layahbhede 'pi Gkaiadivcn in it kyat vena t ad ad hi s- 
t handy ogSt (Nym) 



140 The Relation Between Consciousness and its Object 

regarded as a mere external mark ot' identification and passing 
reference ( upalaksana) and may admit of the particularised 
consciousness being regarded as a substratum {adhi^ih'no) fo r 
the superimposition of the relation (the object 1 ), still, it cannot 
be treated as a distinct unit of consciousness, as it would cut 
at the root of undifferenced oneness of the transcendental 
consciousness, as taught by the Jjruti (ekam eva advitiyam). 

The only sustainable position lor the Advaita to take is 
thus to accept the undifferentiable transcendental consciousness 
as the substratum of superimposition of objects. Since that 
involves the difficulty of regulating the nature of perception of 
different objects superimposed on it at different times by 
different persons, differently, the doctrine of each percipient's 
Vftti has necessarily to be accepted as the regulating medium 
or link in the process of individual perceptions. There is no 
avoiding or by-passing the Vrtti. 

The operation of the Vrtti presupposes the prior existence 
of the objects. There is thus no difficulty in establishing a 
viablo relation between consciousness and its object by means 
of Vrtti itself. That eliminates the need to put up a super¬ 
imposed relation between consciousness and the object. 

The very fact, that there is no illumination of the object 
in spite of the existence of a supposed superimposed relation 
subsisting between them, even before they are brought into 
mutual relation thro' the Vrtti, is enough to show that the 
superimposed relation is not the determining factor in the 
perception of the object, * 


4. Vrtlidv&rakasambandhit prig adhjastatvarilpe 
Sambandhe satyapi Driya-apratiteh (Nym) 




Advaitasiddbi Vs Nyayamrta: A Re-Appraisal 


141 


In this connection Dr. K. Narain has accused Vyasatirtha 
of having ‘incorrectly understood the Advaita position which, 
in reality, seeks to establish the superimposed character of 
ihe relation between knowledge and its object only with 
reference to knowledge which is pure and indeterminate and 
where there is no Vrtti to accord a linkage*’ (Op. Cit. p. 64) 
“We find this confusion in this criticism that knowledge 
cannot be the substratum of superimposition of the object 
as the substratum must be always of a higher degree in the 
order of reality" (Op. Cit. p. 63-64). 


The objection raised by Vyisatirtha is with reference 
to the role of the (ghatadhisthftna). — Caitanya (delimited 
by the object of perception involved in the Vrtti). His 
criticism that the supposed supenmposition of objects in 
many adbisthana-Cuitanyas would violate the principle that 
the adhisihina should be of a higher order of reality than the 
aroypa is strictly with reference to such a view and i* not 
directed against the other position of objects being superimposed 
on the one undiffercnccd transcendental consciousness. The 
misunderstanding is only on Dr. INarain's part. For 
Vyasatirtha has himself made it abundantly clear that in 
Advaita it is the anuvrta-akhapda caitanya which is the 
substratum of the Adhyasa of all phenomenal reality, s 

If, as Dr. hsarain says, Vyasatirtha had “incorrectly 
understood" and represented the Advaita position, in this 
regard, his relentless critic, Madhusudana Sarasvati, would 
have lost no time in taking him to task for his lapse. But 
no such adverse comment on this point has been made by the 
Advaita~siddhi. So the boot is on the other leg. 

5. ffjfarrf'T , 

WjSSffTSJ ll (Nym. 1.23). 



142 The Relation Between Consciousness and its Object 

It is not fair to say there is no other viable relation 
between consciousness and its object. Just as it is possible to 
think of the relation of Samavaya between a substance and its 
attributes even when the relation of Samyoga is not possible, 
it is equally possible to think of a viable relation between 
consciousness and its object in the absence of both Samyoga 
and Samavaya. There are instances of a relation of qualifier 
and qualified (vi$esanavise$yabhava) in such cognitions as 
(i) “this part of the ground has no jar on it” (ii) “the jar 
that is known”, where we cannot think of any relation of 
Samyoga or Samavaya, between them. In such cases of 

qualified cognitions viiislajn&na the relation has to be admitted 
to be one of qualifier and qualified embodied by them. On the 
same analogy, the relation between knowledge and its object 
can be regarded as one of subject-object embodied by them - 
without being subsumable under Samyoga or Samavaya. 

There is no dearth of relations other than Samyoga and 

Samaviya in the repertoir of thought and language. The 
genitive case has been recognised to stand for a hundred 

and one relations ( ekasatam safthyarthik) 6 in the Mahabhasya 
of Patanjali. Among these are Visayatva, Visayitva, 
Prakaralva, Pratiyogitva, Niripitatva, Vyttitva, Adheyatva 
Prayuktva, etc. referred to by commentators. Where then 
is the difficulty in recognising Visayari$ayibhava as a viable 
relation ? The formulation of the norms of logical thought 
should not fly in the face of observed facts established by the 
evidence of experience. Facts cannot be rejected as fiction 
or forced into the straight jackets of preconceived patterns. 
The question of opting for an un-named superimposed 
relation between knowledge and its object cannot arise until 


6. The Sas thi-dandaka is a work on Sankrit grammar, now 
lost to us as stated by Kaiyata in his c. on the Mahabdasya. 
The A-Siddhi does not answer the point made by 
Vyisatinha, on the basis of the Saffidandaka, in support 
of the admissibility of the Visayavifayibhiva relation. 



Advaitasiddhi Vs Nyamrta: A Re-Appraisal 


143 


all the possibilities of finding a real viable relation other 
than Samyoga and Samavaya have been explored and exhausted. 

Nor can their relation be repudiated on the ground that 
knowledge as an attribute of the self is internal while the 
object is external. As in respect of Samavaya (inherence) 
the proof of the existence of an intrinsic relation between 
knowledge and its object has to be accepted as capable of 
accommodating all the necessary requirements of the relation, 
ship by virtue of its own provenness ( dharmigr&hakapramapa )- 
Otherwise, as a relation is normally predicated of only such 
things as are experienced to be existing separately or together, 
the fact of a cloth and its threads not so experienced 7 
may have to be considered to be a bar to the acceptance of 
Samavlya as a relation - as. by hypothesis, the relata of a 
SamavSya relation are Aprthaksiddha (never found dissociated 
from each other). 

If an intrinsic relation between knowledge and its object 
is to be rejected because of the inapplicability of the other 
relations of Samyoga and Samavaya, the present destruction 
of a pot cannot be related to its counter-positive (which is 
no longer in existence) and in the absence of any such relation 
it would be impossible to know to which object the destruction 
is to be related. In the same way, the absolute negation 
( atyar.tabhava ) which forms part of the definition of 'Mithyatva' 
cannot be related to its counterpositive - in which case, it 
would forfeit its Mithyitvam. The desire for Mok$a cannot 
be related to deliverance which is yet to come, in which 
case. Moksa could hardly be considered a Puru$artha. These 
cases cannot be explained on the basis of a superimposed 
relation, as there can be no superimposition of the Pratiyogi 


7. Cf, Tantubhyo anyah patas sdk^il kasya dpstipatham 
gatah ? (Brahmatarkd) 




144 The Relation Between Consciousness and its Object 

(counterpositive) on the absolute negation and similarly, 
in the other cases. 

Even conceding for a while that Viqayatva (objectivity) 
is false like the relation of Samyoga, between consciousness 
and its object, it would not necessarily follow that the 
drsyatva (of the world) is also false. For, the falsity of the 
relation has not deprived consciousness of its reality tho’ it is 
one of the relata What is the barm if, by the same token, 
the object of that consciousness too is real , notwithstanding 
the falsity of the relation in question ? The logic of the 
falsity of the relata if the relation is false must apply equally 
to both. The same yardstick must be applied to both. The 
same yardstick must be applied to both. The explanation or 
the plea that objects arc open to superimposition, while 
consciousness is not is not entirely true ! ^ahkara himself 
speaks, lustily, in his AdhyasabhSsya of the mutual super¬ 
imposition ( itaretarc-adhyasa) of Prctyagatman and anatman* 

What exactly is the term “superimposed relation" 
(i Sdhyctsikasambandha ) intended to convey ? Does it mean 
some unspecified relation has been superimposed or that the 
very superimposition is the relation '? 

In the first case the Mithyatva of the perceptible 
will not follow as a corollary, for the relata can be 
real in spite of the falsity of the relation. - just as the jar 
tho’ superimposed need not be mithyS . 9 . The seco 
alternative is also untenable. For as according to the Advaita, 


8. ci sramicttH stsmfa 

(S. Adhyasabhasya) 

9. Read h*Tl faffStrgtfttlfjqrT 

Ttfqm^r i (Com. 20) 



The Relation between Consciousness and its Object 145 


like the knowable, its knowledge is also superimposed, there 
can be no super-imposition of the one on the other. Knowledge 
cannot be superimposed on the knowable which is mithyd and 
cannot serve as the adhisfhina for its superimposition. The 
knowable too being mithyii (vydvahdrika.) cannot serve as 
the adhisihdna of the superimposition of jndna , for the same 
reason - as the cdhisthina is required to be of higher order of 
reality - even as the Pratibhssika silver cannot be superimposed 
on Pratibhdsika shell but only on Vyivahdrika shell. Just as 
the Supreme Brahman which is known thro’ JJabdavrtti is not 
superimposed on it, even so the object of knowledge is not 
superimposed on it, Similary the Visaya too is not super¬ 
imposed on the Visayi (subject) - just as Brahman which is the 
object (visaya) of Avidya 10 is not superimposed on Avidyfi. 
There is thus no case for treating the relation of consciousness 
to its objects as superimposed. It has therefore to be admitted 
to be very real. 

The question of which then is the relation is nor so vital to 
our discussion. The anomaly involved in Cosmic Adhyasa in 
regulating individual perceptions in Advaita epistemology are 
once for all eliminated in the Realistic theory of perception by 
making out a strong case for a real world and real objects 
therein with real individual selves taking part in its affairs, in 
which a viable relation other than Samyoga or Samaveya has 
been established between knowledge and its objects thro’ 
contact of the senses with their appropriate objects. There is 
no purpose to he served by affixing a name or a label with 
a siDgle word upon the relation to describe it. 11 


10. I 

(Sanksepa ^Sriraka) 

11. Cf. Asamkirravyavahrter yogincm paramdnusu \ 
Vise^akalpane fair a tHesecchd Vrthd Tava |f 

Uadayana: Kiranivali 



146 Advaitasiddhi Vs Nyayimpta : A Re-Appraisal 

The establishment of anything for certain has to be done 
on the basis of definitions and proofs. The proofs of the 
existence of a true relation have been given in the form of 
syllogisms (in the Nym). If the definitions could be 
accommodated within the framework of Samyoga or Samavaya, 
they may hold good. If not, the definition could be in terms of 
Visaya-Vi$ayl-bhava (subject-object relation). It is not 
necessary that the relation or its definition should be capable 
of being couched and expressed in a single term like Samyoga or 
Samavaya. 

Even the absence of knowledge (JnSn&bhava) must have 
an object other than of ‘being removed by the knowledge of 
the thing in question. Otherwise, it could not be removed by 
it, in so far as it can be removed only by the knowledge of 
the object of absence of the knowledge till then. Though, 
like darkness, “A-jnana may cover its abode, it cannot be 
conceived without reference to an object. This has been 
admitted by the author of the Sankfepas&riraka when he speaks 
of the NirvL<esa-Brahman as the abode and the object 
of original ignorance. If in the case of absence of a 
thing caused by its destruction, its relation to its counterpositive 
(which was in actual existence before its destruction) some 
sort of a Svarupasambandha (intrinsic relation) capable of 
sustaining a judgment of qualifier and qualified or a 
counterpositiveness not partaking of the nature of a recognised 
relation of Samyoga or Samaviya, is admitted to account 
for fulfilling the function of a proper relation, there 
is no harm in claiming the same right to “Visaya Visayi- 
bhava”. It would be premature to say at this stage that this 
relation too between bhava and abhSva, or between dhvamsa 
(destruction) and its counterpositive ( pratiyogi) is also a 
superimposed one. Until the thesis of the Mithyatva of 
the universe is proved to the hilt , no superimposed 
relation can be requisitioned as it would involve an 
interdependence in argument. 



The Relation between Consciousness and its Object 147 

The criticisms that if the relation between knowledge and 
its objects should be different from the relate it will lead to a 
regress and if not different it could not be termed aa “relation" 
have been shown to be self-contradictory. It is perfectly 
logical to invest the relation itself with the necessary self-linking 
capacity with reference to itself and the relata, just as 
DrJyatva is open to perception without indenting 
upon another Df&yatva to facilitate it. 

As regards the question of the definition of "Vijayatva" 
in regard to Jnsna, it may be pointed out it is not so very 
relevant. However, it is not difficult to sustain the alternative 
definitions put forward earlier, with necessary adjuncts and 
qualifications to plug loopholes. For example, the definition 
of Visaya at — 

“the object (Visaya) of a knowledge is that which is the cause 
of putting it to practical use" is not disqualified by defects in 
th e auxiliaries of the cause, when the defects are removed. 
We do not admit that sort of an indeterminate knowledge 
which is never capable of any practical response in any sense. 
The other definition of Visayatva as Jnanajanyavyavahdrayo- 
gyatvam or the fitness to evoke suitable vyavahera, the 
yogyats or fitness is to be defined as the certainty of production 
of the Vyavahara in the absence of auxiliary deficiencies. 
The fitness itself is self-linking like Dj^yatva admitting of its 
own Djiyatva or the superimposed relation which does not need 
another superimposition to facilitate it* application. The 
self-dependence here is not a defect as it does not arrest the 
manifestation of its self-manifestation again, if need be. 

In any case, Visaya can maintain its identity and reality 
in spite of its not being defined to the core. Its criticism by 
the Advaita school is self-contradictory, as Advaita dialecticians 
have themselves recognised its bona fides in formulating their 



148 


Advaitasiddhi Ti NySysm^ta: A Re-Appraisal 


syllogism to prove the existence of Avidya in terms of 

Vivadadhyasitam pramariajndnam svavisayavarana . 

and have also introduced it in the form of Drfyatva which is 
the same as Drgvisayalva in the probans of the famous 
Mithyatvanumana: fasiTT eP PT t TP T. 

C X 

It cannot be contended that the “Visayatva" referred 
to in the Vivarana-anumSna is also a superimposed one on 
Pramanajnana, in the form of the Vftti. Moreover, it is 
incumbent on the Advaitins too to define Vijayatva in the 
interest of Vy5vahirikasattva as distinct from the Pratibhasika. 
Hence, there is no point in blaming the Realist for not producing 
a fool-proof definition of “Visayatva" 

One wonders how the Advaitins feel bound to define Mith- 
yatva in five different ways, while they do not seem to realise 
their responsibility to define the probans of DrSyatva. which is 
the same as objectivity to knowledge, (drgvifayatva), in the 
last analysis. 

The mere formulation of a definition docs not guarantee 
the existence of the defined or the failure to do so annul 
its existence. For, according to 5rihar$a the definition of 
Brahman in the 3 rutis as the “Cause” of the world is riddled 
with difficulties. But that does not make Brahman unreal. 
Advaitins themselves have proclaimed that the Pratyagatman 
defies definition this way or that: 

cTT3*Ttef»Tfcr \ 

c \ \ « e \ 

5naf*Trire«rTTqr u ( ) 

The long and short of it is that what is given by unim¬ 
peachable evidence has a right to be accepted as viable, 
despite our inability to define it beyond a certain limit. The 
physiognomy of hundreds of human faces encountered every 
day in our lives defies our powers of exact verbal definition. 




The Relation between Consciousness and it* Object 149 


The presence of knowledge, reality, bliss and self-luminosity 
in Brahman does not become false because they are indefinable, 
in the light of the criticisms of the Khaedanaksra. 

It must therefore be admitted that whatever the 
difficulties in the way of its definition, the reality of 
the world and the countless objects therein cannot be discarded* 
like the differences in the sweetness of honey, sugarcane and 
milk, or the nature of Brahman. The limitations of our unders¬ 
tanding and powers of verbalisation have to be recognised - as 
pointed by Udayana : 

vftei sncuNra arc 

era i 

{Bauddhadhikkara ) 

Just because a congenitally blind man is unable to see and 
describe what is “bluo” it does not become unknowable or 
undefinable. It merely shows his inability to comprehend it. 




CHAPTER XVIII 


CRITIQUE OF PRATIKARMAVYAVASTHA 
OR THE DOCTRINE OF PERCEPTION 

IN ADVAITA 


‘Pratikarma-Vyavasths’ is the name given in Advaita 
philosophy to the epistemological theory of perception involving 
the mechanism and modality by which, in spite of the fact that 
external objects of ov.r consciousness {drdya) are, by hypothesis, 
all of them superimposed on one universal, undivided, indivisible 
consciousness, the only reality that exists they come to be percei¬ 
ved and revealed to the consciousness of particular percipients 
only, at particular times, without overlapping. 

It is explained that as the water from an irrigation tank 
flows out of the sluices and spreads itself over each 
demarcated piece of land and assumes its distinctive form 
and shape, even so subsequent to the contact of the sense- 
organs with their given objects the mind-stuff ( antahkarara ) 
which has its own parts and which is constituted of the 

element of tejets and endowed with great velocity, flows out 

thro* the senses and assumes, by transformation, the form 
and shape of the objects. This transformation is called 
“ Vrtti". However, the Vrtti not being self-luminous 

(as the anlahkarava , its material cause, is insentient), con¬ 
sciousness (Caitanya) has to step in to illuminate the 

objective content of the Vptti, after the Vftti has lifted 
the veil of nescience and dispelled it. It is now left to the 
Caitanya to illumine the object which has been superimposed 
on it from time immemorial. 



Advaitasiddhl V# Nyiyamita : A Re-Appraisal 151 


There are however two divergent views regarding the 
nature and identity of the Caitanya which “lights up” the 
object. One is that the Jiva-Caitanya itself, which is coper- 
vasive with beginningless nescience {Avidya), the source of 
cosmic illusion, lights up the objeets cf the Vj-tti which has been 
superimposed on consciousness, till then. The other view is that 
the Jiva-Caitanya, being limited by the mind-stuff, becomes 
circumscribed (paricchinr.a). In the first position, irrespective 
0 f .he Jiva Caitanya being covered by Avidya or not, it is 
able to illumine the object of the Vrtti - the Vrtti being 
utilised in this case, only to establish the necessary rapport of 
Caitanya with the object and not to illumine it, which is 
done by the Caitanya. In the second view, the Jiva-Caitanya 
being delimited by the nvind-stuff and circumscribed by Avidya, 
it is brahma-Caitanya which is called in to illumine the object, 
through yet another special process, which will be explained 
later. 


It is to be noted that in the former view the Jiva-Caitanya, 
though all—pervasive, being unattached (csahga) requires the 
help of the Vrtti to establish the necessary rapport {Samstesa) 
with the object. In the alternative of its pervasiveness, the 
Jiva-Cailanya being obscured by Avidya, the purpose of the 
Vrtti is only to dispel the veil of obscuration by nescience 
and the Caitanya coming into its own, directly illumines it. 

On the other view, where the j tva-Caitanya gets ‘•limited” 
by the mind-stuff, the Vrtti uncovers the veil of Avidya around 
the Caitanya (the substrate) and enables it to be reflected 
in the Vrtti, which enables it to manifest its own essential 
identity with the all-pervasive Brahmacaitanya which happens 
to be the substrate of (world-illusion and of) the particular 
superimposed object (Visayadhisthana-Caiianya). The consum¬ 
mation of this flash-revelation of the identity of the two 
Caitanyas (the one reflected in the Vptti and the other which is 
the substrate of the superimposed objects - and the “lighting up” 
of the object at a consequence it termed objective consciousness 



152 


Doctrine of Pratikarmn Vyavaithi 


(Vi?aya-aparokf a) —Cf. 

Tasmad adh 15 ih&r.aca U any am Svidhyastam bhisayati iti. 

(A-Siddhi, p. 94). 

The doctrine of "V{tti" has been introduced to explain 
the fragmentation of individual perceptions of different percep¬ 
tions of different objects by different persons at different 
times, instead of by all, of all and everywhere. 

The contact of the sense-organs with their respective 
objects is the first step. Following it, the Taijasa mind-stuff 
flows out thro’ the sockets of the senses and assumes the form 
and shape of the object. This is Vftti which, as we have 
seen, either establishes rapport of the Caitanya with the object 
or subjugates the ivarara (obscuration by Avidya) and paves 
the way for the reflection of the consciousness delimited by 
the antahkarara, in the Vrtti. 

The second hurdle is that the Vftti cannot occur without 
the initial contact of the sense-organ with the given object. 
Unless the object is “out there” prior to the Vrtti, the antah - 
karana cannot, go out thro’ the senses and envelop the object 
and take its form and shape. There is the rub. The prior 
existence of the object makes nonsense of the presumption of 
the superimposition of all objects on consciousness. A super¬ 
imposed object has no prior existence, apart from its appear¬ 
ance in an illusory cognition. It has no before or after. How 
then is the contact of the senses with the object prior to the 
Vrtti to be explained ? 

If such a contact is conceded there is no need to dub the 
objects perceived as superimposed on consciousness. The 
acceptance of superimposition of objects on consciousness 
(even before Vrtti) and its reversal is a farcical way of 
trying to explain the problem of perception, by disowning it, 
instead of solving it in a rational way. 

For, following the sensory contact with the given object 
“out there", individual consciousness can directly cognise it, 
doing away with the Vrtti going out and taking the form of 



Critique of Pratikarma Vyavastlii 


153 


the object and the Caitanya reflected in the Vftti executing a 
flash-like identity with the substrate-consciousness! 

In defence oi the m dispensability of the contact of the 
sense-organs with the object, in the interest of Vrtti, Advaita 
philosophers explain that ‘empirical objects’ like a jar differ 
from the illusory ones like the snake-in-tke rope ( pratibhSsika), 
in not being merely imagined to exist and having no esse of 
their own, other than the appearance of having one ( prailti - 
matre^ariraka). “Empirical objects”, they say, have an “empi¬ 
rical existence”, which being subject to sublation by A unit 
knowledge, theirs is a special type of imagined existence ( Kalpi- 
fatviit y ckai'd viiesa!;). 

This distinction is itself caseless. For, by the same token 
of their experience not being a rnaitcr of mere appearance 
(prctitintiiraiaririUvablidvenu), it can logically be established 
that they arc not sublet able by Jnana, for what is negated 
by knowledge is concomitant with being Pratitimatrasariraka, 
or whose esse is a matter of appearance only. 

3TTqt3R!?T?t 

% 

Here, the Adraita-Siddhi makes a feeble attempt to explain 
that the world of external reality *tho’ established to b e 
Kclpita (imagined) on grounds of incompatibility of viable 
relation between consciousness and its objects ( dfdriyasamban- 
dhanupapatti) and Inference of Falsity ( mithyatva-anumana ), 
still, its stability (sthr.yitva) and durability are attested 
by the evidence of Pratyabhijna (recollection). Tbo* such a 
seeming recollection of stability and durability is possible in 
illusory experiences also, as in a dream, the objects of external 
world pass the test of verification ( pariksitcuva ) while the illusory 
appearances do not and cannot stand the test of Pariksa. 

frrf, 


20 



154 Advaitasiddhi Vs NyJylmrta : A Re-Appraisal 

qftftrrT- 

(4. Siddhi ., p-87) 

It may be recalled that it is precisely on the ground of 
Parik§ita-pratyak$a certified by the Ssk$i on which the realistic 
philosophy of Madhva takes its stand on the u.uuperimposed 
actual existence and reality of the external objects of the world. 8 
And yet Madhusudana would have none of it, tho' it does not 
prevent him from taking a leaf from Msdhva epistemology in 
calling in pariksitapratyakja to sustain empirical reality, when 
it suits him here. 

When the Upanisad says that Brahman after creating 
the finite world, also enters into it to sustain it ( Taitt. Up. II.6.) 
to educe name and form from primordial matter, thro’ 
Trivrtkaraoa {Chin. Up. VI. 4.3) the author of the A-Siddhi- 
would have us accept that such activities of Brahman are 
like those of a Magician ( Aindrj&Iika) who creates nothing 
real or protects or sustains anything, but merely induces an 
illusion to that effect on the onlookers.* Such remarks make 
the absorbing attention given to Cosmology in the Vedic and 
Upanisadic texts, the details of creation and retraction at 
the time of Pralaya, the post-mortem peregrinations of Souls 
thro’ different worlds before being reborn here, a supreme 
exercise in futility. Such is the respect for Apaureyaya Srutis 
available in Advaita ! 


2. Even when a Pankyita-pratyakja is put to a further 
test, if necessary, it can only be done by another determinate 
knowledge. But the Advaitin’s hopes of dissolving all empi¬ 
rical reality in the nebulous indeterminate Nijprakaraka 
Akha^tUrtha psychosis is self-defeating. (Nym. 1.17) 

3. WToPT 


(A. Siddhi. p. 110) 



Critique of Pratikarma-Vyavasthl 


155 


The contention of Advaita that external objects of per¬ 
ception in “empirical experience” have to be assigned a 
higher order of reality of existence as “VylvahSrika”, subject 
to sublation only by BrahmajnSna, rests on a quibble of 
terminology. Since both the Pratibhlsika and the Vyavahk- 
rika objects are equally superimposed and subject to sublation* 
there is no distinction in their fundamental essence-except 
perhaps in the longevity of the world-illusion ( dirghabhranti ) 
and the short-lived nature of the snake-in-the rope. The 
terms of the Mithyatvanumina of the empirical world also 
rest squarely on the common ground between the PrSLibhasika 
and the VyavahSrika-viz. drkyatxa. jadatva and paricchinnaiva, 
which betrays the fallacy lurking in the desperate attempts 
made to uphold the artificial and unscientific distinction 
between them in order to make the best of a bad bargain. 

Experience ( anubhava) is immediately related to its object- 
as desire is to the desired and brooks no intermediation over 
and above the barest minimum of sensory contact. It is 
therefore, against all experience to make so many suppositions, 
such as that there is some unknown bogey of a positive 
nescience sitting tight over objects till they are made known 
thro’ Vrtti dispelling that nescience or that in spite of the very 
existence of such a Nescience being exposed to our knowledge 
(in deep sleep) by the witness-consciousness, the latter is 
somehow not antagonistic to its continuation and yet has the 
power to dispel it. 

Some Advaitins have tried to find scriptural support to 
PratikarmavyavasthS in the Mupdaka text (11.2.10): Tam 
eva bhdntam anubhati sarvam Tasya bhisd sarvam idam vibhati— 
“ All these (luminaries) shine forth after Him. They shine by 
the power of His effulgence The context here shows that 
the intended sense is that everything in finite reality draws 
its power to exist, shine and act from the central source of 
power and illumination of the Lord. This text has nothing 



156 


Advaitasiddhi Vs NyAysmrta : A Re-Appraisal 


to do with the theory that objects of perception coming to 
be known or illumined to knowledge is nothing but the 
illumination of the Brahma-Caitanya as their substrate of 
superimposition or that a unitary consciousness other than the 
intellection produced by the Vptti has got to be accepted to 
explain the day to day, hour to hour occurrence of our 
perceptual knowledge of things. 

The word sawn iJim (all this) in the .Vlundaka text is 
contextually restricted to the heavenly bodies like the Sun, 
Moon and stars mentioned there and has no reference to the 
process of our “ knowledge Indeed, Samkara himself in his 
Bhasya on BS., (1.3,22) which is based on this text refers to 
the GUI text XV. 12, as emphasising the fact that the Sun and 
the Moon and others owe their powers of effulgence to the 
Supreme Being. The Upanisad speaks of Brahman as the 
glowing one ( Bhantatn) which is inapplicable to the Advaitic-B. 
which is mere “glow” without being a "’’lowing one" in the 
active sense of the term. As B. itself is not “glowing” in the 
active sense of the verb and as it is the only one that exists 
there is no room for others to shine •'after it” (anu-bhati). 
As in the usage “the calf follows in the footsteps of the 
mother cow,” the calf too has to walk behind, on its own 
legs. The prefix anu {bhiiti) cannot be justified in the absence 
of a difference between the activity of the two, the movement 
of the latter being guided by that of the former. 

Moreover, unlike mediate Vftti {paroksajnina ) immediate 
experience {aparoksavftti] can light up its object by its very 
immediacy, after the Vritti has taken the form of the object, 
instead of going in again for a coalescence with the Caitanya 
grounded in the Vritti. The objection that as the antafykarana 
of which the Vrtti is a modification is insentient ( Jada ) 
lacking in the quality of illumination (prakSsa), the Vrtti by 
itself cannot have such a power and has to court the help 
of Caitanya to do so, is not tenable. For, we find that 



Critique of Pratikarma-Vyavasthl 


157 


even tho’ the mind-stuff is the material cause (upJjJna) from 
which desire knowledge, etc. originate*, the properties of 
desireness , knowietlgeness, etc., are to be found only in ihem 
and not in the antahkarant as such. Likewise, Vrtti as a 
modification of the mind-stuff can afford to have the power 
of intellection and illumination of the object, tho' its up'i dani 
or material cause has no such power or property. 

The objection that a direct knowledge of an object must 
necessarily be different from its Vrtti, as the former is of 
the nature of "caitanya-jnana" and is expressed intransitively 
as “the jar shines" (ghatj) pmkhiate) unlike the Vritijn Inn 
of the same which is expressed only transitively as “ l know 
the jar" (ghatd^n aham j.lniitti) is not a very pertinent one. 
The transitive and intransitive forms of predication of the 
same experience or activity is a matter of grammatical rule 
governing the nature of the verb employed in describing the 
same action, as in calati (moves) and gacehati (goes) in the 
Sanskrit language. Otherwise, as the Vrtti itself is a modifi¬ 
cation of rhe mind-stuff and the verb ‘ pari-rjam ’ (to get 
modified) is intransitive, the statement of the Vrttijnana of a 
jar as ‘I know the jar’ ( ghat am ahaen j'mhmi ) intransitive 
terms would be unsustainable. Moreover, antahkara^a vrtti 
can have both the properties of intellection ( jnUna ) and 
illumination (prakaaa) just as heat {'ejas) has the power to 
burn and to illumine its surroundings. 

No need for Vrtti to go out of the body 

There is no need to make the Vrtti go out of the body 
in order to distinguish immediate from mediate cognitions. 
For, in the former, it is the rapport of Caitanya which 
accounts for immediacy, which is its hall mark. Thus the 


4. Kimas sankalpo vieikitsa. sraddha asraddha dhrtir 
adhrtir dhir bhir ityetat sarvam mana eva (Brh. Up. 1, 5, 3) 



158 Advaitasiddhi Vs NySyJmrta : A Re-Appraisal 

rapport of Caitanya with the object can be taken to be 
established by virtue of the object being in contact with the 
Vrtti through the sensory contact preceding Vrtti and. there 
is no further need to insist that the rapport of Caitanya 
must be with the object itself <ts delimited by the Vrtti. 

If Caitanyajnana alone has the property of illumination 
and not the Vrtti, we cannot account for the expcrience-ihe 
past is illumined (atitam prakanUe), as there is no scope for 
Caitanya to operate thro' Vrtti with objects of the past, in 
the absence of sense-contact with them. This shows that 
Vrtti too has the power to light up its object to knowledge. 
As V rtti taking the form of the object is common to both 
aparoksa and parokya V.mis, in the latter thro’ conceptuali¬ 
sation, without the Vrtti going out of the body, it would 
appear that such Tadikiratva with the rapport of Caitanya 
which is situate in the antohkarana itself would be more 
than adequate to light up the object. 

No doubt, a stream of light removes the darkness 
surrounding an object by spreading itself over it (samale^o). 
But knowledge has a different way of conceptualising the 
object. That is what happens in mediate knowledge where 
there is no direct contact with the object. The additional 
factor in immediate knowledge is the rapport of Caitanya 
That makes Tadikaratva or Vrtti taking the form of the 
object sufficient to uncover the object and Caitanya which 
is present in Aparokja-Vrtti will light it up, without Vrtti 
having to go out of the body, at all. That is much simpler 
than insisting on both Tadskaratva and samilesa or physical 
contact of Vrtti with the object as such. 

The example of tactile perception offers a parallel. The 
sense of touch being all pervasive in the body has no special 
socket of exit iike the other senses, to go out. Nor can it go 
out thro’ the sockets of any other sense organ, as there 
is no evidence of one sense going out thro’ the socket of 
any other. 



Critique of Pratikarma-Viyavasthi 159 

The Role and Identity of the Caitanya 
as the Illuminating Principle 


The role of Caitanya in the Advaita theory as illuminating 
the object has its own difficulties. There are two views on 
the subject, one given in the Vpadcitisihtisri (attributed to 
Sankara) and the other propounded by Su res vara and 
Blmnuitirtha. The former holds dial the Caitanya refected 
in the Vrtti which has transformed itself into the form and 
shape of the object finally lights it up. while the eognisedness 
of the object (jnJtnU) is brought about by Srahmacaitanya 
as the witness-self, S'.Scsi; <ika\aik!tra dhixshti ciJ .g/fa/a- 
meva prakaSayet; Gho tasya jnltaii Brahmacailanw.na prakxiyal* 

The first view is untenable because the cognition repre¬ 
sented by the Caitanya reflected in the Vrtti which has assumed 
the shape of the object is a composite one iyiiix\ajninn) and 
is as such MilhyS. It cannot, therefore, serve as the substrate 
of the superimposilion, as the substrate of a supenmposiiiort 
has to be of a higher order of reality than the superimposed. 
The acceptance of any supeiimpcsition on a Vitfi jja-caitanya 
would annul the fundamental hypothesis behind Pratikarmavya- 
vasthi that all Unite reality is from the beginning superimposed 
on one transcendental consciousness, through beginningless 
Mescience and this veil of nescience is lifted to some extent 
by the V.ftti as and when it occurs in different persons. 

The second view is that it is the substratc-Caitanya ( adhis - 
thina-caitanya ) which illumines the object as the nescience 
surrounding the object is removed by the Vrtti coalescing 
with the object (samile$a). The same Caitanya reflected in 
the Vrtti can as well illumine the objeci, once it is rid of 
the nescience surrounding it. ft is, therefore, quite unnecessary 
to go in for a further manifestation of the su’ostrale-Caitanya 
by seeking the identification of the Vrtti-reflected Caitanya 
and the substrate-Caitanya to be made manifest by such an 
identification. The power of Caitanya must be the same 



160 


Advaitasiddhi Vs Nyiylmfta : A Re-Appraisal 


irrespective of its situation. If Jiva-Caitanya as qualified by 
the object is to be the substrate, its conditioned nature would 
make it mithyS and make it impossible for it to be the 
substrate of the superimposition, for reasons already given. 

Nor can SJuddha-Caitanya (Brahman) the unconditioned, 
be the substrate, as it is much mare Asafiga (relation-less) than 
either the conditioned-Brahman or the Jiva-Caitanya. If 
Suddha-B. needs the help of Vrtti to illumine the objects 
which have been superimposed on it from time immemorial 
(as the Advaita theory has it), it cannot be intrinsically 
omniscient and all-illuminating, as it has to take the help of 
Vrtti to do so. For, Suddha-B. is by hypothesis, enveloped 
by Nesiencc all thro' the duration of the world cycle. Hence, 
there can be no chance of anything glimmering or coming to 
light anywhere in the cosmos until this primal Veil of Nescience 
is removed from the face of the Nirviseja - Brahman — the 
substrate of universal illusion. There would thus be a complete 
black-out of all cosmic life. 

Advaita Siddhi intervenes here to say that even though 
without the eradication of MQla-Avidy3 or fontal nescience, 
there is no dispelling of universal nescience, still there is no 
fear of black-out of cosmic life on that account. For, there 
will still be the illumination produced by the removal of 
the veil over the Caitanya delimited by the jar or other 
objects (in everyday life) through the Vrtti pertaining to 
them.* 

5. ^aTtreijnfsmrvTi^sfq-, Tam- 


(A -Siddhi- 90) 



Critique of Pratikarma-Vyavasthl 


161 


1 his explanation fails to satisfy. For, Brahma Caitanya 
delimited by an empirical object such as a jar, being Mithya 
on account of its being qualified, thereby (visista) cannot 
afford to be the substrate of the superimposition, without 
offending the principle that the substrate must be of a higher 
order of reality than the superimposed. 

That would be equivalent to saying that suddha-Brahman 
which is delimited by an object when it is freed by the Vrttj 
from the veil of such nescience (to that extent) is the illuminer 
of the object. Bui the difficulty would be such a Brahman 
delimited by that object cannot be the substrate of its own 
superimposition - for reasons already given. Otherwise, it 
would lead to a self-dependence if Brahman-Caitanya delimited 
by the object is also regarded as the substrate of the super¬ 
imposed object. It would also render the hypothesis of 
Adhy3sika sambandha subsisting without a beginning between 
consciousness and its objects, superfluous. 

Here, the A • Siddhi explains that only ^uddha-B -is the 
substrate of superimposition. The delimiting factors such as 
AjnSna or the object do not constitute the body-politic of the 
substrate, so their being of an inferior order of reality does not 
pose any problem. This explanation overlooks the fact that 
Suddha-Brahman, im pur is naturalibas can never be conceived 
as the substrate of a superimposition as it is absolutely devoid 
of all generic and specific properties alike of any kind--which an 
adhisthina (substrate) needs must have. If to avoid this difficulty, 
it is argued that Suddha-Nirvisesa B. is the substrate of super¬ 
imposition in its aiv/a-state, there will be complete black out of 
all cosmic life rill the world-cycle continues to be unliquidated. 

The explanation, that Suddha-B. being the up&dina 
^material cause) of all phenomena will be non-different from all 
of them and as such it will be in a position to illumine all else 
as being identical with its own being, — even as it illumines its 
ow n being, is not well-founded. For a transforming B. cannot 
be ‘Suddha’ but only conditioned and the “conditioned” 


21 



162 Advaitasiddhi Vs NylySmrta : A Re-Appraisal 

would be Mithya and cannot again be the substrate of any 
superimposition for reasons already stated. 

If to avoid this difficulty, upaddnatva is interpreted as being 
the substrate of a super-imposition, without self-transformation 
in the form of phenomena, then not being of identical essence 
with phenomena, it cannot illumine them as its own self. 
Hence, it will have to forgo its Sarvajfiatva. The doctors of 
Advaita Vedanta too have agreed that B.’s sarvajr.atva 
presupposes that it is Avidyl-oriented and is not opposed to its 
influence.® 

Advaitasiddhi here rejoins that there is no redundancy of 
Caramavrtti, if there is Caitanyaprakasa in the wake of every 
Vrtti of external objects. Brahman revealed by the final 
psychosis called Caramavrtti is the one unfettered by any kind 
of adjuncts, unlike in other cases of its illumination thro’ 
object — delimited Caitanya thro’ appropriate Vrtti, The 
Sruti — Ekadhaiva anudr-as[avyam (Brh. up IV . 4.20) also 
$ ays the highest form of Brahman — realisation thro’ Carama- 
vrtti generated by the rumination of Vedantic texts is in terms 
of an akhanda impartitive experience, unitary and differenceless. 
Inina and AjnJna must have reference to the same subject 
matter. Since Brahman is an undifferenced being, the Carama- 
vrilti realisation cannot include within its content any mode or 
adjunct, positive or negative, either attributively or as an 
accidental mark ( upaiakfapa ). The content of Caramavrtti is, 
therefore, a bare undifferenced Caitanya while the Caitanya 
implicated in the normal Vrttis connected with objects of 
perception is delimited by them as up&dhis. The Caramavrtti is, 

• SarvajHatvam api Avidyavatvam aksipatyeva natu pratiksipati 

(inandabodha) 



Critique of Pratikarma-Viyavasthl 


163 


therefore, in no way rendered superfluous by the illumination 
of Cit in the other Vrttis of objective experience.’ 

The Tarangini points out in reply that the Caramavftti 
e iigendered by the intensive study and reflection over the import 
of the Vedanta texts in terms of an Akhagdartha has to 
depend on getting rid of all doubts and misconceptions regard¬ 
ing the nature of B. That can only be achieved by dispelling 
all such doubts and misconceptions by the correct knowledge 
of the nature of B. based on a specific and distinctive 
knowledge of its characteristics (ju- prakdraka-jnsno) which 
alone can put an end to doubts and misconceptions and not 
a vague nebulous knowledge of bare being ( nis-prakarakajrlana, 
that Akhandirtha will be. The Sruti Ekadhaiva anudrastavyam 
only means that the essential properties of B. such as its 
omniscience and blissfullness are all of a uniform nature 
without any trace of their opposites of nescience or imper¬ 
fection (Cf. Nirini 9 toniravadyah). The modal suffix dha (in 
eka-dhi) suggests this. The principle that knowledge of a 
given thing and the absence of it, must have reference to the 
same subject matter ( Visaya ) relating to it does not 
rule out the presence of several other characteristics of uniform 
nature in the given entity.* 


7. Ettnr: amsiff 

sremf'tfriw 5 am: trqom • 

5 fa ’Stfa^TTcT, StRI^T 

N ^ ' ° 

(A , Siddhi. p. 90) 

b. <r^jfa»wp esnm* sfatrtfc- 

fatltmt 1 fa afsqipRfa T 5 cffarTTr- 

faqirsfsrpr 1 (Tg. 157) 



164 Advaitasiddhi Vs NySySmrla : A Re-Appraisal 

Impossibility of reflection of Caitanya 

Even supposing that Vj-tti is necessary to bring about 
rapport of Caitanya with the object to illumine it, it is 
difficult to see how conciousness can ever get itself reflected 
in Vrtti, since Caitanya is not amenable to perception. The 
Antabkarana too has no visible form (udbhularupa ) to be able 
to reflect anything. Nor can reflection be taken in the sense 
of modification into the form and shape of antabkarana, like 
molten gold in a crucible, as Caitanya is unmodifiable. Nor 
can it be in the sense of “ abiding in”, as Caitanya being 
all-pervasive cannot “abide in” anything else, save in its 
own self. 

A.Siddhl explains that it is not grossness or visibility of 
the reflecting medium, but its transparency which makes reflec¬ 
tion of an object in the medium. Tarongln I points out that 
transparency of the medium is also an expression of its 
visibility. 

Answering the criticism of the Nym that 1 TadakSratva ’ 
of the Vrtti taking the form of the object cannot be construed 
by the Advaita as objectivity to knowledge ( tad-vi$ayatvam ) 
as the concept of vifayatva has been rejected by it as un- 
definable on account of Drgd^iyasambandha-anupapatti, the 
A. Siddhi has propounded an improvised definition of 
‘TadSkSratva’ as : 

Asti ityadi tadvi^ayakavyavahSraprotibandhaka- 

ajninaniva rlanayogya tvam 

This means : TadikSratvam of the Vrtti consists in the 
fitness to dispel the necience which has been preventing the 
object superimposed, from being spoken of as existing 
In plain words this could only mean that the mode of speech 
(vyavah&ra) about the existence of the object is dependent on 
the removal of the nescience which stands in the way of the 



Critique of Pratikarma-Vyavasthl 


165 


object being so spoken of in Vyavah&ra or common parlance,— 
without necessitating the acceptance of its real urtsuperimposed 
existence, in its own right. The clear stand taken by the 
author of the A. Siddhi. on the scope of the sublating 
knowledge of both empirical objects and objects of illusion 
that sublation in both the cases is inclusive of the apparent 
existence of them, in essence (svarupebinisedhah) inclusive of 
the time and place of their apparent existence* leaves no room 
for doubt that the difference between the Vylvah&rika and 
the Pritibhasika is more terminological than substantial, due 
to the length of duration or the shortness of the continuation 
of the misconception about the actual existence of the object. 


The Tarangiili points out that there can be no relation 
of what is determined and what determines (praytjyuprayoja- 
kabh&va) between the removal of Nescience of empirical 
objects and the fitness to do so as the terms embodying the 
definition of this “fitness” ( yogyatvam) includes within its 
terms and meaning the dissolution of the nescience as a 
fait accompli 10 


The rapport of Caitanya with the object cannot be one 
of conjunction or other relations except one of superimposition 
in Advaita as Caitanya is Asaiiga. As there is already a 


9. Svarupeqaiva trailcilikanisedhaprati yogitvasya 

Prapaqce Sukiirupye ca anglkarat (A. Siddhi p.5) 


10. arssnjrPTfajrtHqVq?*' t 


a*rr ^ afsrsrftr- 

(A. Siddhi) 


i arsrqt^cqpT i 

5 T^nt^fe-Tcirfefa ttpc: i 

(Tg. p. 156) 



166 


Advaitasiddhi Vs Nylyimrta : A Re-Appraisal 


beginningless superimposed relation between drk and dr&ya to 
justify Pratikarmavyavasths previous to the Vrtti, one of the 
two would be superfluous. Other relations are not the 
determinants of Drsyatva (perceivability) of objects which is 
%e ground of their falsity ( mithyatva ) in the interest of 
Pratikanna vyavasthi. 

Nescience one or many ? 

The indispensability of Vrtti to remove the veil of 
nescience which is standing in the way of the illumination 
of the object to perception, is open to question. If this 
nescience acts as a film obscuring the vision of the perceiver 
and resides in him, its removal would enable him to get 
over his disability and see the object. If this veil should j 
however, be around the object itself its removal would enable 
everyone within reach to see it. On this analogy, one man’s 
Vrtti should usher in universal illumination of all phenomena,— 
which is not the case. 

Here, Advaita thinkers have propounded two different 
views about the nature of Ajnana. According to the Vivara- 
naklra there is only one universal positive Nescience, which 
has its locus in the self but its vifayo is all that is not-self* 
There is no evidence to hold that there is a distinct and 
different positive Ajflana enshrouding each and every object- 
Vimuktltman author of ls\aslddhi has, however, opted for 
as many Nesciences as there are cases of true knowledge- 
Both the positions have their own difficulties. 


Eka - Ajnana Vada 

On the first view, there will be the contingency of 
instantaneous, Mok$a by the eradication of the one AjnSna 
by any single Vrtti. If the right knowledge of shell arising 



Critique of Pratikarma Vyavastha 


167 


after the stultifying cognition ( badha ) does not liquidate 
AvidyS root and branch, there can be no talk of Badha, 
at defirud by the Vivarana, as the termination byJnina, of 
AjnSna along with its offsprings, whether still lingering or 
which have merged in their source. 11 

It cannot be contended that in cases like this the termina¬ 
tion of AjnSna and its non-termination are both sustainable. 
In the case of the illusion of silver in shell, the former is merged 
in its casual stuff of nescience, but the casual stuff as such is 
not liquidated. That is brought about only by knowledge of 
Brahman engendered by Carama-vrtti. In other words, in such 
cases only the power of veiling exercised by nescience is 
removed, but nescience by itself is not liquidated in its entirety 
of essence. 

But it does not stand to reason that knowledge of shell 
destroys only the product of Ajnina (silver) without destroying 
its cause viz. Ajnana. It is an established principle that Jnana 
as the liquidator of Ajnina destroys through it, its products also. 
This makes it clear that Jnana is antagonistic to the products 
of Ajnina quite as much as it is to Ajnina as such. It would 
be illogical to say that Jnina destroys the effects of Ajnina 
without destroying their parent. The Realist’s objection that it 
would be meaningless to talk of stultification (\,badha) of 
‘J-iuktirajata’ without the liquidation of Ajnina as such,stays. 

If the purpose of Vrtti is only to remove the veil of 
nescience covering the object, there [will be no prospect of the 
illumination of the shell (in an erroneous cognition) even after 
the stultifying cognition has set in, in the absence of manifesta¬ 
tion ( abhivyakti ) of Caitanya. It cannot be that there is 
possibility of a partial manifestation of Caitanya after a 
particular removal of Ajnina thro’ the Vrtti in a given case — 


//. Ajn&nasya vartamanena pravilinena vi svakilryena 
saha nivrttir b£dha% ( Vivarana ) 



168 


Advaitasiddhi Vs Ny&y5m.ria: A Re-Appraisal 


just as there is a removal of darkness, to ever so slight an extent, 
even in utter darkness, when a small glow-worm glimmers. The 
analogy is irrelevant — for Caitanya and Ajnsna are both 
beginningless substances and are partless. So, Caitanya either 
manifests itself in toto or not at all. AjnSna stays in its entirety; 
or is dispelled outright. There is no halfway house between 
the two. 

If the successful removal of the veil of nescience around 
the substrate-Caitanya (the Vi4e?ya-Caitanya) is accomplished 
by the Vrtti pertaining to the shell, the riddance of the veil of 
nescience should be able to usher in Moksa, here and now , which 
does not happen. 

AvidyS cannot have the insentient (Jada) object for its 
abode (Siraya), as the latter is itself imagined to exist, by 
Avidya. The insentient being cognitally devoid of any illumi¬ 
nation ( asvaprakdsa) will have nothing to gain or lose by the 
removal of the veil. Avidyi cannot, therefore, have any power 
to veil an insentient entity, as it serves no purpose. Nor have 
Advaitins claimed any such possibility. 13 

It comes to this then that neither the Jada object nor the 
Caitanya as such can be the Vi?aya of the veiling. The veiling 
of the composite entity (the Caitanya qualified by the object) 
cannot also be mooted as a solution — in conformity with the 
principle of interpretation of significant negation or predication 
— Savi.iefane vidhinisedhau Vise$anam up asankr&m a tali sali 
vises ye badhe — that a qualified injunction or negation when 
found to be incompatible with the substantive element in a 
proposition is to be restricted in its application to the adjunct- 
element alone. This principle would apply with equal force to 
its counterpart where a qualified injunction or prohibition is 

12. *rr ^ srfgq t ufa’qsqifq, 

I {Vivaraaa) 


{Istasiddhil .124) 



Critique if Pratikarma Vyavastha 


169 


found inapplicable to the qualifying adjunct — in which case 
the restriction would be to the substantive element. That would 
lead to the undesirable contingency here that the removal of the 
veil of nescience over the shell and its subsequent illumination 
would at once lead to the illumination of the Suddha-Brahman 
as the substantive element with reference to the shell-delimited 
Caitanya. For it would be utterly impossible for the veiling 
power of Avidya, which does not admittedly veil the qualifying 
Jada element of shell but only the self qualified by the shell — 
that is to say the “ Visista" or the composite whole, to remove 
the veil surrounding the composite entity without removing it 
from the substantive "Kisesya” entity. 


Nana-Ajnanavada 

The difficulty is no less in the other view that there are as 
many Nesciences as there are correct cognitions (inana). Here’ 
the many “Ajninas” are regarded as the expression of different 
“States” of the original Mula-AjnSna, acting as the material 
cause of particular superimposed objects and these “states” 
alone are dispelled, severally, along with their Vrttis and the 
superimposed objects projected by them. 

Of course, this would bar the immediate dawn of Moksa, 
as only the nescience pertaining to the shell has been dissolved. 

But then, if these “states” are different form of Ajnina 
there would still be many Ajninas and such a position has 
its own difficulties, as we shall see, 

If they are not different forms of Ajnina, taey cannot be 
liquidated by Jntna, as Jniina alone can liquidate Ajnina. As 
being “other than Ajnina” (that is, different from it) and still 
bring the material cause of respective illusory knowledge 
caused by superimposition, they will invite the fallacy of 



170 Advaitasiddhi Vs NyaySmrta : A Re-Appraisal 

overpervasion of the difinition of AjnSna as the source of 
all Bhrama (error). 

The acceptance of many Ajnsnas will have to face other 
difficulties also. The question would naturally arise if a 
particular Vriti pertaining to the shell, would destroy all 
cases of its rtesder.ee elsewhere also or only one specific one 
of its kind, when it arises. In the former case, there will b e 
no possibility of any shell-silver illusion, afterwards, any¬ 
where else. In the latter, there would be no illumination 
of the shell, even after the particular shell-nescience has been 
dispelled, as there are bound to be numerous other layers 
of Nescience of the same object, obscuring it at other times 
This contingency would also arise in the other view that 
different nesciences are ■'states’* of the same Nescience. 

Moreover, it is difficult to see how objects like the shell 
which have a beginning in time and Caitanya which only 
afterwards comes to be delimited by such objects can at all 
be considered to be the Vi?aya (objective content) of a 
" beginningless Nescience". How could there be a beginning, 
less veiling in the absence, as yet, of something un-born ? 

It cannot be explained away that tho’ there is, in reality, 
only one amorphous beginningless Nescience and its veil 
which has the beginningless Caitanya for its Fi^aya, this veil 
remains without becoming delimited by particular objects till 
they actually come into being and that the same Nescience 
is spoken of as the veil obscuring the Caitanya delimted by 
the object in question. This will open the door to immediat e 
Mok$a by the correct cognition of a shell after its illusory 
experience as silver. For, here, the Nescience which, by 
hypothesis, is veiling the un-delimited (anivjta) suddha- 
Caitanya from time immemorial is the same Caitanya as ha s 
become delimited by the shell. That being so, when, after 
the direct perception of the shell as such by right cognition, 
the nescience veiling the C aitanya delimited by that shell is 



Critique of Pratikarma Vyavastha 


171 


removed, the removal of that veil surrounding the $uddha- 
Caitanya must follow as a matter of course and that would 
be the realisation of Mok$a. 

Answering this point, the A- Siddhi argues 1 ’ that a Vrtti 
is competent only to remove the veil of nescience of the 
Caitanya delimited by its particular adjunct at the time. 
It cannot, therefore, be expected to remove the veil enveloping 
the ^uddha-Caitanya when it remains undelimted ( anavacchinna ) 
This argument sets great store on the ground of delimitation 
(avaceheda ). The Tarangini therefore, turns to the familar 
analogy of the preposition Vfkfai} kapisamyogi (the tree is 
in conjunction with the monkey), where the monkey is 
seated on one particular branch and not on any other or 
on the entire tree. The ‘Kapisamyoga’ is no doubt not 
extensive with the tree. But as the supporting base (adhara) 
of the animal’s physical contact, even with a limited part 
of the tree, the Tree as such is indeed one and the same. 
Even so, Caitanya whose veiling as delimited by a particular 
object is the same <$uddha-Caitanya and not different. Hence 
the contingency of immediate Moksa by the illumination 
of Suddha-Caitanya even as delimited by the shell, is 
inivitable. 14 

Parallel of Jnanapraga-bnavahaSa refuled 

The Vedlnta-kaumudi has tried to overthrow the criticism 
against the non-termination of all other states of nescienc e 

srttn: i 

(A. Siddhi p. 94) 

14. i rtgiirr^Tgrriir 

v r N 

* ' Tg. 162) 



172 Advaitasiddhi Vs Nyayamrta: A Re-Appraisal 

by the liquidation of any one particular nescience from the 
standpoint of the theory one Unitary Nescience, by bringing 
up a counter argument based on the non-termination of 
all but one JnanaprSgabhiva (antecedent non-cxistence of 
Jnana by the genesis of its counter positive (pratiyogi) 
and its illumination to knowledge. To explain-It is accepted 
by all that the termination of the prior non-existence of a 
jar brings its counterpositive into being. But Pragabhavas 
are anddi and countless with reference to each counterpositive- 
If all such Prigabh&vas of the knowledge of a jar are 
terminated by the knowledge of one particular counterpositive 
jar, there will be no non-illumination of other jars thereafter. 
On the other hand, even if the knowledge of one object 
terminates only the PrSgabhava of that knowledge, there will 
still be no Praki^a or illumination of it, as the numerous 
other Pragabhavas would remain unterminated-in which case, 
the object will have no chance of emerging into being and 
be illumined to knowledge. 

The analogy of PrJgabhava is irrelevant. For, unlike 
Ajnlna, Prigabhava is not conceived as an avarana' (veil) 
covering the object or an object-limited Caitanya. Its role 
is that of a cause in the production of the effect, like the 
staff of the pot-maker in whirling the potter’s wheel. It is 
the physical presence of the cause which determines the 
genesis of the effect and not at all the termination of the 
entire family of its kindred antecedent non-existences, past, 
present and future, which is absolutely impossible of realisation. 

Technical legerdemain, verbal juggleries and hair-splittings 
apart, sound logic and universal experience tells us that the 
knowledge of the substrate of an illusory experience puts 
an end to the existence and continued experience of the 
jllaaory object superimposed on that subtrate till then, 

Tae Aivaita theory of Pratikanna VyavasthS, on the 
other hand, asks us to believe that the substrate-Caitanya when 



Critique of Pratikarma Vyavastha 


173 


it comes into its own from its veiling by nescience, lights up 
(prakasfyati) the object superimposed on itself, along with 
its own shining forth :— 

Tasmid adhii thlnacaitanyam sviidhyastam bhisayati 

iti siddham (A. Siddhi p. 94) 

This is not only mystifying but topsy turvy. Madhva 
raises this point in his criticism of the Advaita interpretation 
of Ekavijnhnena Sarvg.vijnanam that the true knowledge of 
the substrate of a super-imposition terminates the knowledge 
of the super-imposed object till then prevailing and does no* 
'‘illumine" it. 

Nahi iuktijni rajatajha ityucyate. Virodhat tayor 
jtlanayoh (Madhva, VTN) 

The elaborate attempt to establish and defend the theory 
of Pratikarma-Vyavastha in Advaita epistemology is thus an 
exercise in futility. 



CHAPTER XIX 


ANTINOMIES INVOLVED IN THE 
ADVAITA INTERPRETATION OF 
NEHA NANASTI - SRUTI 


As a last resort, Advaita has to pin its faith on the 
Neha nanasti 3ruti to establish the absolute negation of all 
empirical reality in the interest of its thesis that there is only 
one real in existence and no second or “other”, positive or 
negative. This is not possible. For, the body of texts called 
Sruti is also other than Brahman. The authoritativenes^ 
of the Sruti as a flawless means of proof and its fitness to 
establish its meaning is also an in-built property of the Sruti, 
which cannot be taken away from it. If what that feruti says 
is Paramarthikasat, the Sruti text as its vehicle must be equally 
Paramarthika. By denying the existence and reality of any 
second, whatsoever, the Sruti will be denying its own existence 
and right to speak anything worth believing, and falsify its own 
verdict. The case of a verbal testimony, its self-validity and 
fitne-s to convey its meaning are all its in-built characteristics 
which cannot be whilted down. Even the prophetic words 
of a Devata appearing in our dreams and forecasting 
something good or bad have been credited with validity as 
intimations of what is going to happen or as marks of import 
by way of correspondence, tho* not as “sabda-Pramana" as 
such, whose claim to absolute validity rests on Apti in the end 



NehaninSstri 3ruti 


175 


It cannot be that the Neha-nanasti text stands for the 
absolute falsity of all else but Brahman. Some restriction 
has to be made in terms the normal requirement that a valid 
utterance should have the same status, order of reality and 
fitness to establish its truth, as the enunciation itself. In the 
Vidhivakya ‘Svargakamo yajeta\ the right to offer a sacrifice is 
restricted to the members of the three Varnas only, as having 
the qualifying right of tending the sacred tire and Vedic 
study, which is the Upajivya pramana or pre-requisite in re$pec t 
of the person to offer the sacrifice. This applies to a Vidhi or 
a Nisedha alike. 

If a restriction is to be made in the import of the 
Nehananasti text it can only be in regard to an imaginary 
world, which, according to Advaita philosophy, is the subject 
of the creation texts ( Srstisrutis ) 1 and not the real one in 
which we live, move and have our being. Otherwise, the 
absolute negation of the empirical world and the affirmation 
of the sole reality of Brahman, in the same breath 
would be open to an interdependence. For, it is only after 
it is firmly established that there is no impediment to setting 
aside the logical requirement that the status of a verbal 
testimony, its meaning, validity and fitness to convey its 
truth shall be of the same status and order of reality as that 
of the enunciation of the absolute negation of all else but 
Brahman, that the Nehanlnisti Sruti can pass muster. And 
it is only after that is conclusively established that the question 
of restricting the scope of the NehanSnSsti text so as to 
exclude itself from the sweep of the proposed negation 
can arise. It comes to this that if the Nehananasti text should 
also negate the esse of a second as part of its meaning, it 
would stultify itself, as the Sruti itself is other than Brahman- 
the one reality and must share in the falsification of all else 
but Brahman. If the Sruti is to be exempted from the scope 


1 See SBSB II. 1.33. 




176 Advaitasiddhi Vs Nyayimrita - A Re-Appraisal 

of the negation, the thesis of the falsity' of all but Brahman 
would be buried alive. 

Apart from that, if the negation of all else but Brahman 
contemplated by the Sruti is a negation of all empirical reality 
*Vj essence ( svarupena) in all the three periods of time, it will 
contradict the claim that what is Nithya as defined by the 
Advaila is quite different from “ Asat" or total non-being, 
(Asadvilaksanam). 

If the negation contemplated is of the Pancamaprakara 
or fifth order of predication, such a negation would be 
equally applicable to Brahman which is, by hypothesis, 
Nirdharmaka or devoid of all attributes, including the 
property of being Paramarthika. 

Nor can the negation be from the Vyavaharika angle. 
For, the Advaita is never tired of claiming that what it and 
the Srutis deny is the Paramarthika reality of the empirical 
world and not its Vyivahirika reality. It would therefore 
make no sense to deny that the empirical world has no 
Vyavaharika reality. 

Moreover in regard to the Tat tvam asi text, Advaita has 
opted for a liberally diluted identity based on the secondary 
sense ( laksana ) of Tat and Tvam (Brahma and Jiva) in terms 
of a pure consciousness (Cinmatraikya) to steer clear of 
conflict with perceptual and other evidences. For the same 
reason, it would be incumbent upon it to explain the falsity 
of the world (said to be) contemplated by the Nehananasti 
text as directed towards an imaginary world such as what, 
according to Advaita, Brahman is supposed to create * and 
not the actual one in which we ail live, move and have our 
being and strive to have our aspirations fulfilled. Otherwise, it 
w-ould lead to the undesirable conclusion that the distinction 
of the present world in which we live from what is utterly 
non-existent ( asad-vailaksanya) is a myth. 



Antinomies of Nehananasti in Advaita 


177 


VyAsairtha argues that the acceptance of the total negation 
of all but Brahman in the Nehananasti text as an indubitable 
fact and truth, side by side with the affirmation of the sole 
reality of Brahman would lead to a collapse of the principle 
of Monism, in addition to the risk of the negatory text 
involving itself in a self contradiction in the process (as being 
other than Brahman). 

In reply, the Advaita Siddhi contends that there is no 
danger to the principle of Monism or fear of self-immolation 
of the Sruti. The reason is that in Advaita philosophy, the 
entire domain of the non-existence of all duality (( dvaitibhava } 
is included in the very being of Brahman , which is its locus 
^adhikarana). And such a Brahman has been spoken of in the 
Sruti as reality, consciousness and infinitude, and further as 
Tat Satyam (that alone 1 is real). That being so, the Neha¬ 
nanasti text cannot be restricted in its application to some 
imaginary world of duality and must be taken at its full face 
value as referring to the world of duality established by 
Pratyaksa. 

The Taringipi repulses this argument as follows. The 
panoramic wonder and variety displayed by the world as we 
see and experience it attest the unspeakable richness and 
variety of its causal poteney and the greatness of its creator.* 

Moreover in regard to the Tat tvam asi text Advaita has 
opted for a diluted identity between Jiva and Brahman in 
terms of the Secondary meaning (lak?apa) of the words “Tat” 
and “Tvam” denoting consciousness pure and simple (Cinrai- 
raikyam) to avoid conflict with Pratyaksa and other evidences* 


*. See fn. 1 ante. 

*. Note that Madhusudana Sarasvati here twists Tat 
satyam to mean Tadtva satyam. 

*. See S. on B.S. 1.12. 


23 



178 Advaitasiddhi Vs Nyayamrta : A Re-Appraisal 

in the event of Viiistaikya (identity between two composite 
entities). The principle of Upajivyaprabalya is true equally 
of affirmative and negative propositions. For the same 
reason, then, he should be prepared to agree that the falsity 
of the world believed to be taught by the Nehananasti text 
has reference to an imaginary world, which according to him 
is the subject of the creation texts in the Upanisads. 1 Other¬ 
wise, he will have to face the inevitable conclusion that if the 
universe of our experience is denied absolutely, in deference 
to the Nehananasti text, it cannot be held to be distinct from 
utter non-existence (asadvailaksanya) as he would like to 
have it but only as Sadvilaksanalva. 

Here, the author of the A. Siddhi contends that there is no 
need to concede that the fitness of words is a proposition 
to convey a consistent meaning such as in Nehananasti must 
necessarily be a real and true fitness, though the case is 
different in respect of the text ‘Svargakamo yajeta'. In the 
present case, it is necessary to insist on the condition that 
the fitness in question must be a real one. For, competence 
to convey the true meaning is determined by fitness as such-not 
fitness qualified by the condition of its being real (fitness)- 
{t&ttvikayogyata). 

The Tarangini points out that the two texts Nehananasti 
and Svargakamo yajeta, as verbal testimony are on the same 
par. They are sacred texts, highly authoritative and must 
make proper sense. We are not dealing with mere gossip 
of the streets here. In dealing with serious problems raised 
by the Sruti texts the fitness of the words to convey a viable 
sense capable of ensuring the validity of their statements must 
be equally true and real and not a make believe. 


5 . Na ceyam pa ram trtha vi$ayi Sfftisrutih. Avidyikalpita 
namarupavyavah&ragocaratvlt Brahmatmabhdvapratipadana 
paratvacca ityetadapi naiva vismartavyam. (S.BSB.ii i.33) 



Antinomies of NehanSnasti in Advaita 179 

Take the Sruti Par '- asya iaktir vividhatva a ruyate svdbhaviki 
piinabalakriyu ca (Sxat. Up. VI. 8). It refers to Brahman's 
creative powers as vast and intrinsic to its nature (SY&bhdvik‘ 
iaktih and not the projections of Maya. That belies the conten¬ 
tion that the negation of the reality of all duality is the real 
purport of the Nehananasti text. 6 

The argument of the A.Siddhi that the negation of 
duality is conceived as identical in essence with the Brahman 
as its locus is also untenable. The negation of duality is 
Sop&dhika (conditioned) and Brahman is Nirupadhika. The 
former cannot be part of the essence of the latter. Nor can 
it be admitted on the ground that the negation of duality 
has been taught by (that part of the Sruti which is truth- 
declaring : taitvavedaka). Such an argument is open to an 
interdependence in thought and reality. The text which negates 
the reality of all duality can be claimed to be truth-declaring 
only after it is first of all established that it is truth-declaring 
by virtue of the negation of duality being identical in essence 
with Brahmasvarupa. It is only after that is established 
that it would follow from it that the negation of duality 
taught by the Neha nanasti text is of identical essence with 
Brahmasvarupa. 

Moreover the vital difference between the two contentions 
}s that the question whether the Nehananasti text really 
means to establish the utter negation of all else but Brahman 
as a viable feet and truth is still under discussion and debate 


*. According to Dvaita philosophy the Neha nanasti text 
denies that there is any internal distinction between 
Brahman and its mataphysical attributes of Jnana. 
ananda, etc. 

See my E. T. of Jayatirtha’s NyiyasudhI Bangalore 
1993 p. 48-50. 




180 Advaitasiddhi Vs Nyiyimfta : A Re-Appraisal 

whereas the fact that the creative powers of Brahman are 
intrinsic to its nature and that the world is, therefore, 
the outcome of the exercise of that power stands already 
well attested and accepted in so many words by the 
Svetasvatara Upanisad. (VI 8). That should make a decisive 
difference in favour of accepting the Dvaita position 
that the Neha nSnlsti text cannot be forced to convey 
something which would be suicidal to its own credibility 
as a Pramana. 

As it is impossible to shut one’s eyes to the reality 
of the absence of a second to Brahman ( dvltiya-abhava - 
sattva) which is embodied in the very terms of the negative 
proposition (jVinfc nasti) the Advaita is hard put to it to 
somehow circumvent it. It tries to do so with the following 
explanation. Though it follows as a corollary form the 
negation of any “other” besides Brahman that the absence 
of such as “other” is a philosophical fact and truth (which 
will affect the principle of Monism), still there is no fear 
of any such adverse result. For, not withstanding the 
negative form of the enunciation of the proposition : 
Iha nani nasti - its purport is only affirmation of the sole 
reality of one (Brahman) and nothing else besides. This 
has the support of the Mimamsa principle of interpretation 
“Na vidhau paras sabdarthah ’* that the meaning of the words 
of a proposition is the purport intended to be conveyed 
by them and not their echoes or what is got by reading 
between their lines. 

In reply the Tarangini points out that a Vidhi 
(injunction) or a Nisedha (negation or prohibition) cannot 
have its purport elsewhere than in the expressed sense of 
t he words except on three grounds : (1) that the expressed 
sense of the proposition is already well - known or is 
made known to us by another Pramana; or (ii) its being 
opposed to a stronger Pramana; or (iii) if it leads to a 
splitting of a single proposition into two on account of 



Antinomies of NehanSnisti in Advaita 


181 


t he said predication or negation being applicable to the 
qualifying adjunct of the subject of the proposition 
(uddesya vlsesana) as in the well-known Vidhi Graham sammarsii. 
Here, the singular number (in Graham) happens to be the 
qualifying element of the sacrificial vessel ( graha ) which 
according to the Vidhi is to be cleaned with a piece of cloth, 
before it is filled with Soma juice to be offered in the Jyotiftoma 
Ylga. There are many such vessels ( GrahSh) to be cleaned 
and filled and offered. If then, the oneness ( ekatva ) of the 
Graha is also taken to be vidhivi$aya- (subject of the injunction) 
it will lead to the splitting of the Vakya into two by necessi¬ 
tating the injunction to clean ( sammarjana) to be applied 
severally to the Graha and its oneness (singular number) - the 
later being impossible, Nor can the Vidhi be understood as a 
Visistavidhi or a composite injunction applicable to the Graha 
qualified by its oneness. For, in that case, by the operation 
of the rule that what applies to a visisia (composite whole) 
would be equally applicable to its qualifying adjunct Visistasya 
yat bhavati tat visesanasyapi bhavati, the injunction to clean the 
ekatva of the Graha (and the Graha as such) will be opposed 
to the other injunction that the Rtviks shall clean all the 
Grahas with a piece of cloth. T Hence, it has been declared 
in the Siddhanta of the Sammargadhikarana of the Purva 
Mimamsa that the uddesya-visesana in a Vidhi is to be treated 
as not intended to be included for purport of the Vidhi. 

The present Nehananlsti text does not fall under any 
of the three categories listed above, As a Monistic text, it is not 
looked upon as repetitive of something already known by any 
other Pramana. (Such as the reality of an other thro’ 
Pratyaksa). Only Bheda-Srutis are accepted in Advaita as 
anuvidaka of the differences known thro’ (Vyivahlrika) 
Pratyaksa ; while Advaita Srutis are credited with Apurvata 
(novelty). As the ultimate purport of the Advaita 3rutis is an 
akhan^irtha of pure Caitanya. the existence of the absence 

T Sodhaniyl Grahis sarve Visafckhandena Cartviji. 



182 Advaitasiddhi Vs Nyayimrta : A Re-Appraisal 

of an ‘‘other” as a reality and a truth cannot in any way be 
opposed to it. An akhandartha - judgment is by its nature 
indeterminate, (nisprakaraka). Only a determinate proposition 
(saprakaraka) can be in conflict with another saprakaraka one,. 
A Nisprakaraka-judgment will be innocuous. 

An ingenious argument has been introduced to get out 
of this difficulty created by the express negation of an "other" 
in Nehanlnasti and the tacit admission it carries of the reality 
and truth of the absence of such an “other” on the ground 
of a self-contradiction, to which the NehanSnisti text will be 
exposed, if it concedes the reality of the absence of an “other” 
while negating the very existence of an “other”. The truth 
of the absence of the negation of an “ other” does not contra¬ 
dict the negation of the “other” but only confirms it. 

But negation and its negation cannot be placed on the 
same order of reality. If this is not accepted, there will be 
no need for Advaita to assign Avidyanlvrtti (annihilation of 
Avidya) to a fifth order or predication, while Avidya itself is 
classed under the fourth order of predication (sadeuadvHaksana). 

To avoid self-contradiction in making the Nehanan&sti. 
Sruti deny the absence of an other, postulated by itself, th e 
Advaita thinker now turns to some other texts like Eko drasta 
advo ito bhavati ( Brh. Up, IV. 3.3.) that there exists only one 
perceiver without, a “second”, to sustain his position, of the 
absence of any other second - be it a second or absence of 
a second. But as all Advaita Srutis are, by hypothesis, 
committed to a bare consciousness ( cinmatram ) in terms of an 
indeterminate psychosis [nisprokarakajnana) the existence of 
an “other” or its non-existence as a fact and a truth will in no 
way be opposed to pure consciousness as there can be an opposi¬ 
tion only between two determinate cognitions of opposing 
content. The self contradiction of its own words by the 
Nehananasti text in denying the reality of the absence of an 
“other”, postulated by itself, by saying that it is not the 



Antinomies of NehanSnisti in Advaita 


183 


import of the ^ruti is also open to mutual interdependence. 
It cannot be avoided by maintaining that there is no seif 
contradiction because there is no import (in respect of the 
absence of an other - dvitiyabhava ) and that because of there 
being no such import there is no self-contradiction. 

The argument that the ‘-other'’ (dvitiya) is itself mithya 
and that, therefore, there will be no self-contradiction on the 
part of the NehanSnisti text if it denies both the existence of an 
“other” and the absence of its existence in the same breath 
is not acceptable, For a negation and its counter-correlative 
cannot be placed on the same par or order of reality. 
If this is not accepted, there will be no justification for the 
Advaita to place the liquidation of Avidyi ( Avidyanivrtti ) in 
a fifth order of predication { pancamaprakarStd) while the 
liquidated Avidya is placed in the fourth order of predication 
as ‘Sadasadvilaksana’ or Anirvaconiyi. 

Moreover, it is incumbent on the seeker of truth in 
Advaita to acquire true knowledge of Brahman as the one 
without a second, transcending hunger and thirst 
(aianiyadyatito) and as Satyam, jndnam, etc, which is 
knowledge of a very determinate kind ( saprakaraka). As already 
pointed out, the modal suffix dhi in Ekadhaiva am drftavyam 
in the Nehanandsti text lays stress on the mode of the 
knowledge of Brahman to be acquired. Hence, it would 
be against the spirit and letter of the text to rule out the 
knowledge of the absence, of an “other” as out of bounds 
of the import of the Nehananasti sruti. Otherwise, even 
the Vyslvaharika reality of all others than Brahman would 
have to be taken away. 

It cannot be said that a subsidiary import (avantara 
titparya) of the Nehananisti text can be admitted in terms 
of the absence of an “other”, without prejudice to its 
Mahatatparya, to avoid the difficulty. For (from the Advaita 



184 Advaitasiddhi V* NySylmjta : A Re-Appraisal 

point of view) the absence of an “other” looms large 
both at the commencement and at the conclusion of the 
Chandogya text, in the context of the promissory statement 
of Ekavijnanena sarvavijninan (at the beginning) and in the 
concluding words ‘Aitadatmyam idam sarvam tat sat yam' * 
leaving no room for doubt that there lies the Mahatatparya 
of the discourse. Moreover according to Advaita philosophy 
the state of Nijprapancatl (worldlessness) of which there 
is a foretaste in our dreamless sleep (Susupti) is deemed 
to be a Purusartha or lummtim bonum of life. Hence th e 
knowledge of the absence of an “other” ( dvitiy&bharojnana ) 
cannot be denigrated as a subsidiary truth or import of 
the Jlruti {and not as primary one). 

There can be no justification for holding that the 
Nehananasti text sublates the Vyivahirika reality of the 
world established by Pratyaksa, if the existence of an 
“other” has only a subsidiary import. For unless the absence 
of an “other” (besides Brahman) is a fact and a truth, the 
existence of an “other” cannot be dismissed as untrue and 
as falling outside the import of the Sruti. As the Advaita 
seeks to dismiss both the “other” (dvitiya) and its absence 
( dvitiyibhiva ) as equally untrue, and belonging to the 
same order (of unreality) there will be no possibility of 
any relation of what is negated and what negates it 
(nistdhyanisedhakabh&va) between Pratyaksa and Sruti. For 
if the absence of an “other” exists in Brahman as its 
qualifying adjunct or as a qualification per accidence 
( upalaksana), the principle of Monism will be compromised 
If such absence is Mithyl, the £ruti which teaches the 
absence of an existence (in terms of Nehananasti) will 
forfeit its truth - declaring character (tattvavedakatva). 

For all these reasons, the Neha nSnSsti <>ruti cannot 
be cited as evidence of the falsity of a “second” 


8. See fn 3 



CHAPTER XX 


DOCTRINE OF FALSITY OF THE WORLD 

IRRATIONAL 


The thesis of the falsity of the Universe can hardly stand 
the test of reasoning and has to be rejected lock, stock and 
barrel. An illusory phenomenon will have to satisfy the 
following conditions. It must have a real substrate (adhii\A&na) 
with its own identifiable charactar. There must be a real 
prototype (Pradhina) of the object superimposed on the 
odhizthdna and there must be a real resemblance between them 
which accounts for the illusion. There must be real defects 
of environment and visual or other defects, a real 
ignorance of the true nature of the object, for the time being, 
a real contradicting knowledge, a real perceipient who is the 
victim of the illusion and he must have hi> own real body, 
and sense organs. Not one of these requirements is satisfied 
in the Advaita theory of cosmic illusion. 

Just Sec - The Atman or the Advaita-Brahmsn which is 
said to be the adhhthdna (substrate) of this cosmic illusion, 
being void of all identifiable characteristics ( nir-dharmaka) 
and uncharacterisable (nlr-vi£esa) can have neither a generic 
nature nor any distinctive features of its own. An illusion 
about the nature of a given substrate can arise only when 
there is a knowledge of its generic nature and an absence of 
knowledge of its special features. These two are impossible 
in Atman or Brahman which by hypothesis, is devoid of all 
generic and specific attributes, alike, being nirdharmaka and 
nirvilesa. It should be obvious then that no illusions can 
arise where the substratum is known or unknown in its 


24 



186 Advaitasiddhi Vs Nyayamrita - A Re-Appraisal 

entirety. And there is no room for any distinction of being 
known partly and partly unknown in a being which is partless 
and aspcctless. (mmsesa) 

It can not be contended that a knowledge of the generic 
feature and absence of knowledge of the specific features of 
the given substrate are not the determinants of being a sub¬ 
stratum fadhisthdna) and that it would be much simpler to 
say that knowledge of the bare essence of the thing in question 
and absence of knowledge of specific attributes would be 
sufficient to account for the illusory experience and that these 
two requirements are fulfilled in the Advaitic position,—as 
Atman (or B.) being self-luminous is ‘'known” in its barest 
essence and being “Nirvisesa” it has no specific attributes. 

Vyasatirtha points out that the difficulty cannot be so 
easily got over. For, in the Advaita view also, there are 
three things which go to produce an illusion. (I) the absence 
of knowledge of such specific attribute* of the object of the 
illusion as will preclude the illusion (sad-viaesaga) (2) Sams- 
karas or residual impression* of the superimposed object 
deposited in the mind and their contact with the adhthlna 
and (3) real defects of environment and of the visual apparatus 
etc. The residual impressions which are latent cannot be 
brought to the surface in the absence of knowledge of the generic 
nature of the object of superimposition. As for absence of 
such characteristics as do not really exist in the superimposed 
abject {asad-visesapas) it will be equally true at time of 
the contradicting knowledge also, arising after the illusion 
is got over. They cannot therefore be regarded as the 
determinants of the illusion. 

It cannot be objected that it is not the knowledge of the 
absence of the specific attributes of the adhis/hana that gives 
rise to the illusion but only the absence of such knowledge as is 
hostile to the illusion. In Advaita, it is not the pure Caitanya 
which is hostile to fontal nescience which is the material cause 



Irrationality of Doctrine of Falsity of the World 1S7 

of the illusion but the final Vfttijnana (the Caramnvrtti) which 
reveals the pure self atone as its content and is produced by the 
intensive pursuit of Sravana, manana and dhyutia. The absence 
of knowledge of the special features of the adhhjhana of 
Cosmic illusion viz. the $uddha-Cit which is by hypothesis, 
"Nirvisesa” is not, therefore, in any way hostile to its being the 
adhisthsna of cosmic illusion. 


Here, Vyasatirtha raises the objection that according to 
the Advaita view that the purpose of Vptti is only to bring 
about the rapport of Caitanya (CairaHvoparaga), it cannot 
be deemed to be the liquidator of the nescience and that in the 
last analysis, only Caitanya can be the liquidator of Necicnce. 
If it is explained that what is meant to be conveyed by saying 
that Vrtti removes the nescience is that it is a determinant in 
doing so, by bringing about the necessary rapport (Sambandha- 
apSdakadvarS) with Caitanya*it would only confirm the ultimate 
position that it is the Caitanya which is primarily responsible 
for the removal of such nescience and that it is therefore 
hostile to it. Otherwise, there will be no prospect of its removal. 

Moreover, in Advaita, it is only the transcendental Self 
which is of the nature of pure consciousness ( jnaptirupam ) in 
the true sense o f the term, while Vrttij/jana is spoken of as 
'knowledge' or 'consciousness' only in a seconders sense of 
being the Means (karanam) of manifesting pure consciousness. 
Hence, VrttijriSna cannot be deemed to be hostile to ihe absence 
of knowledge of the specific features of the adhisfhana 
(substrate), but only pure Caitanya. This Caitanya being 
“Nirviiesa*" can have no generic or specific characteristics 
and so cannot be the sabstratum (adhijthina) of universal 
superimposition at all. Moreover as the Self and the not-self 
as consciousness and its object are universally known to be 
different from each other, there can be no superimposition of 
the one cn the other as their difference of nature is so patent to 
alUas recognised by the Advaitins themselves : 



I8S Advaitasiddhi Vs NySyim.jrta: A Re-Appraisal 

Tatiedamte vastinyatve tvattimatte parasparam 

Pratidvandvitayi lake prasiddhe nasli samsayah 

There can be no superimposition without some obscuration 
of the substrate. As the Atmic consciousness is always self- 
luminous, there is no possibility of its obscuration wholly or in 
part to admit of a superimposition of non-self on it due to 
the operation of Avidyl. Further Avidyl too being Pratibhasika 
whose existence is intuited by the Sakyl cannot be revealed and 
manifested to the Sikji as superimposed on it, if the said 
saksi-Caitanya itself is under superimposition and therefore 
not shining. As the self is partless, upldhis cannot obscure 
a part of it, leaving the other part untouched. If the upidhi 
should obscure and envelop the whole of Atman there will be 
no Atman left to be self-shining. 

If the substrate itself should appear in the guise of the 
object in our perception, like its aspect of "thisness'* appearing 
as '“this is silver”, it should take the form of being so 
impressed (anuviddha) as “the Atman is the pot {itmdgatoh) m . 
But it does not do so. Hence the theory of Atlnuvedha of 
objects of perception is far-fetched. When the jar is revealed to 
perception as “existing” why should such a simple fact be 
construed to mean that it is the Atman that it revealed in that 
presentation as underlying the jar ? or some other object ? 
How can the self which has no form be revealed to visual 
perception of the jar as the self ? 

Advaita dialecticians have argued - It is not necessary to 
assume the real existence of a Pradhlna (prototype) of the 
object superimposed to account for its residual impressions 
(jamskiras) contributing to the illusion. These Samskaras can 
go back on earlier ones and they upon still earlier ones, 
stretching to the dawn of cosmic illusion in the beginningless 
past. The fact that even when Samskam are present their not 
having been generated by valid knowledge does not seem to 
prevent the onset on illusions. This shows the Samsklras need 



Irrationality of Doctrine of Falsity of the world 119 

not refer to the real existence of a prototype and be derived 
from it. 

Moreover, the Dvaita philosophers are not committed to 
the view of the Nylya-Realiits that the object of an erroneous 
cognition, such as silver (in shell) is bodily existing at some 
other place and time. Hence, the real existence of a prototype 
(Pradhina) of the superimposed object is a gratuitous assump¬ 
tion and can be dispensed with. 

Vylsatlrtha replies - At this rate, in the name of simplicity 
of assumption it may be predicated that the mental impresion 
or idea of the substratum itself may be regarded as the Cause of 
the illusion without committing ourselves to the actual [existence 
of a substratum (adhi? thina) as such. This idea may be 
stretched back to remote past without landing on an actually 
existing /real) adhi§fhdna at all, as in £unyavftda Buddhism. 
By the same token, the reality of consciousness too may be 
dispensed with as the substrate of cosmic snperimposition. 
The Advaita vsdjn cannot reasonably contend that the substrate 
must be accepted as real as it is not contradicted by a subsequent 
cognition. The same appics to the Pradhina (prototype) too. 

When the shell-silver is disproved as mithya, it presuppose* 
the existence of real silver which is capable of fulfilling practical 
needs, as a corollary. In the same way, when this world is 
dismissed as Mithys, it should naturally lead to the assumption 
of another real world behind it to satisfy the practical needs- 
And such a world, whose genesis has been described in detail in 
the gratis {Srs\iirutis) cannot be sublated in its own substrate, 
like the self itself. 

The Advaitin himself recognises that the negation of the 
Prstibhlsika silver with reference to all the three periods of time 
has reference to the Vyavahartka silver (abhasasya prasaktyi 
anibhasasyo niiedhabj. By the same logic it must follow that 
the absolute negation of what is regarded as the Vylvahsrika — 



190 Advaitasiddhi Vs Nyaylmrta : A Re-Appraisal 

world by tie Neha nindsti — text should be considered to be a. 
negation of a PSramarthika world as the counterpositive of its- 
negation. 

If the negation of the world contemplated by the 
NehaninOsti-SitxW is only in respect of its Paramarthika-aspcct, 
the world could still be regarded as having an essential reality of 
its own without possessing Paramsrthikatva as an attribute-just- 
as the Advaita Brahmin retains its essential reality ( Sad-riipatva) 
without the attribute of Pdramarthika Satyatvam. since it is by 
hypothesis nir-dharmaka (without any attribute whatsoever). 
The Sadrupatva of the world would thus remain intact. 

The self and the not-self (objects) as “consciousness" and 
“jada-objects” are experienced to be intrinsically different. The 
self cannot be the substrate of a superimposition of the not-self 
as their difference is so patent and glaring-even as recognised, 
by the Advaitins : 

Tattedante svatanyatve tvatta mattd parasparam 

Pratidvandvitaya lake prasiddhe nasti samiayah. 

There can be no superimposition without the obscuration 
of the substrate. The Atman is, by hypothesis, of the very 
essence of pure seif-luminosity and cannot be made the 
substrate of any superimposition with its self-luminosity intact. 
If, in spite of it, there should be such an obscuration, how 
could there be any manifestation of cosmic Avidyi which is 
Said to be intuited by the Siksf, as superimposed, if the Caitanya 
itself has been obscured? As Caitanya is partless, it cannot 
be said to shine forth (for purposes of being tbe adhisfh&na) 
and not shine forth in part, for purposes of superimposition. 
The interposition of upadhis to conceal a [part of Caitanya and 
keep the other part self-luminous, would necessitate acceptance 
of parts in the being of Brahman (or Atman, which by hypothesis : 
is akhania Nirvisesa. This crucial difficulty has been highlighted 
by Madhva himself when he says : 



IrratiODality of Doctrine of Falsity of the Worid 191 
Virvitese svayam bhite kim ajnanen&vrtam bhavet (Madhva) 

In any case, cosmic illusion cannot be stretched back 
indefinitely to avoid the acceptance of a real prototype of the 
superimposed — beyond the present Kalpa, to facilitate the 
carrying over of SamskSras without reference to the existence 
of a real Original Prototype ( Prodhuna) to start with* 
Mo Samskiras of a Prototype can be carried over from a 
previous Kalpa to the present. The acceptance therefore of a 
really existing Pradhind (prototype of the superimposed object 
of illusions) cannot be dodged or evaded by taking shelter 
under the argument : 

Aropyasya pratitirupam yujyate na vastusatt.i (Bhamati) 

The philosophical theory that the cosmic appearance is an 
illusion of distorted imagination due to inexplicable Avidya is 
totally opposed to the spirit and letter of the Srutis Smjtis 
and Sutras (which) even as interpreted by Sankara in 
his commentaries — without the intrusion of his Paren. 
thetical comments to explain them away) solidly endorse 
the reality of the world and its values. Under the Sutra 
Janmddyasya yatah the Sruti Yato vS imani bhutSni jdyante is 
referred to. Under Ikgater nasabdam according to Sankara, 
the Sruti speaks of Brahman’s creative activity as the result of 

conscious effort. (ik$apurvakam) 

Tf the world were the outcome of an AdhySsa instead 
of being a reality, it is difficult to see the rationale of the 
Siitra Lokavattu 111i kaivalyam (B.S. 11.1.34) and the Srutj 
Aptak&masya ki sp\h& saying that tho’ the Supreme 
Brahman has no personal motive or purpose to serve in 
creating the world which is deemed to be a mere effortless 
sport of the Lord. Under the Sutra Vai%amyanairghwye... 
(II. 1.35) the charges of partiality and cruelty, in placing 
different souls under conditions of glaring inequalities of 
opportunities equipment and endowments has been answered 
as the result of taking into account the previous Karma 
of Souls. The orderly evotution of various Tattvas like 





192 Advaitasvddhi Vs Nylyimfta A Re-Appraisal 

Akiia, Viyu, Agni from one another is referred to in 
Tejo alas (II. 3. 10.) and the involution of these in the reverse 
order during Pralaya is referred to in Viparyayena. B.S- 
(11.3.14.). It would be absurd to talk of any actual genesis 
and development of Tattvas from one another or their 
involution later into one another is the reverse order, or a 
conscious effort in the process of creation on the part of the 
creator or his freedom from partiality and cruetly in ordering 
the world as we see it, or the emergence of one imaginary 
world from another imagined one of a previous kalpa or its 
involution in a definite order ! 

Dh&ti yathaptirvam akatpayat (R. V.) 

If the Srutis and Sutras are intent upon serious philoso¬ 
phising, they would not be indulging i s weaving picturesque 
cobwebs of an imaginary world, its origin and development 
and the careers of countless souls therein and their peregri¬ 
nations thro different worlds of heaven earth and hell. 

Nor can God the creator be treated as a Magician who 
deludes others for the fun of it. The irony of it is that in 
Advaita the Creator God is Himself superimposed by the Jivas 
themselves. If He is not imagined and superimposed by the 
Jivas, He must either be imagined and superimposed by 
Himself or by pure consciousness ( Cinmitra ). The idea of 
self-superimposition in impossible as one cannot Pre-exist one’s 
own being to superimpose oneself on oneself. Pure consci¬ 
ousness ( Cinmatra) being without body and organs can make 
no such superimposition. 

The doctrine of Cosmic Illusion has thus no leg to stand 
upon. It creates wore problems than it cart over hope to solve. 
consistent with experience, (Pratyak$a)J reason and revelation- 
Realism is thus the only viable alternative and the right view 
of the world for any sane philosopher to take. 

Anantadosadus tam ca heyam Miy&matam iubhaih. 



APPENDIX — I 


KRISHNADEVARAYAKRTI by Emperor Krishna 
devareya of Vijayanagar. From a Telugu Palm leaf MS. 
(incomplete) preserved in the Govt. Oriental MSS Library, 
Madras (D. 18299) 

cTTTTatnfifnfsrRT^srafrt aremmmq: i 
%gt?cT ftr<mW »q~Rf^TTT 
ntstj fcTBSf *TTTTfitHfI^ sft^JITTfaO: II 

HPffRffaTJT: 

»T?5ffv?RTf«nTm*T3^5T3r?TWJt . . . 9T: 

• r» 

VvRT*TTRHifflR^: VWIrTt I 

3 . ^n»¥T?afTOTOr %sr *ra?r ^iwftfir qrmq- 
ttjtVTT 3T**qTaqig«mq qfm?qq: I 

cT %?T?cTTq:R>TfqffgaT q^qlqfftqFqq 
fa?qrq?f qaf ff?* faqq 11 

i. *ftqrqqq §ifRW«rtf«: sftfqsqqqt qqfaifa: 

q fcwfbnfsq f?q?rT?% snqq gqrfrqrrwq 

*. q qvqTqftrT Rqi^qTVaqfq fw<fl?*Tq 

qqiqqq $?q*qTqsjq%*Tqqsnqqrq RqrffrT i 

\. q |!Wtqi5*f qftqtq q*qTqtaTJnTtq'fqf?r%qqVq: 
STfw»qqrc«wq*q 5*a qTqfaalqq 

i. q Trfa tT^rqfqqfltqpfrrqi^FR qW<*f fa^fqq i 

m?aTag«qtq qf^q^qiftqTq qqlfttq^fqqTqqqVq 11 

25 



194 Advaitasiddhi Vs NyaySmrta: A Re-Appraisal 


C. fraTRfacRTfiBHRfRRTRR * 

*T5ftsroimf?R?f!pW: R^tfiR TRTfR ggWRTTT I 

V $$R RfrRl RRTfff?^R * RRcITRTR I 

RTRlf«WTRt RTRfacfai: SHRR RT RWSfRRftRli: 1 

<\c. r>s^ WRwnRsigRifRsrarat faiRifg^iRifR^ fa*RRqR 

3?tra RfRt*R RRtqtr R*£*mRar i 

«n. q* r ^rrrt'r <rfa rtrtPt fsrf «fr^ vr^rt t 
Jsfy^IVlTSftfVTgfTfpTT fRRTT qra|Er?RRT?RR 

<\^. RfRI^j RR Rt^Ef R?g^R «ftn(T<ltft«ff gfa: 
qqfRfaq gmRlRgfqfw^Rl^fRijHRTfWIR I 
*T5«H*rra VRT RT*R fRT*Rlfaqr 

farcer qftRq RR&gqfiRR R^r g*r RfraiR n 


Transcript by courtesy of G. Kalyanasundaram Curator- 
in-charge Govt. Oriental MSS. Library Madras. 

Reproduced from ray HDSVL. 2nd Edn. 1986 



APPENDIX 11 

Guruparampara of Vyasatirtha 

Sri Madhvacarya 


195 



H . i~ . 

<a . H <9 I - 

H a £ « « 

•-* ca rf J si. t* 

a >h > a u 

o R J 

5 « n 13 g a* 

- <a >>«« g ■» « - 

2* 12 'i? 2* 5 2 ^ 
•3 > pi, £ a, as > 


i/^ sO r^- cc ^ o 



CA1TANYA (Vide HDSV. Chapter XXXIX). 







APPENDIX ill 


A BRIEF SKETCH OF THE LIFE. PERSONALITY. 
CAREER AND ACHIEVEMENTS OF VYASATIRTHA 

The period of Vyasatirtha was the age of the Renais¬ 
sance in the West. The renaissance in Indian thought 
brought about by him in the XVI century was chiefly 
responsible for putting the system of Madhva on the philoso. 
phical map of India, as one to be reckoned with. His 
treatise on the assessment of the relative merits of the 
Dvaita and Advaita systems of philosophy in his Syciyimria 
was directly responsible for the birth of Neo-Advaita as it 
came to be formulated by Madhusudana Sarasvati in his 
Advaitauddhi, who found it necessary and expedient to 
modify or depart from many of the rigid positions of the 
Prac/nas. Many discerning scholars have shown that the 
Sankara school of Vedanta would have suffered an 
irrecoverable set-back, if not total collapse, but for 
the timely defence put up by Madhusudana. The various 
shades of Myiya-Vaise?ika thought ending with the period 
of Udayana had been meticulously studied and reviewed 
in the writings of Madhva and Jayatirtha. The Pramdna- 
LakW'ia of Madhva to all intents and purposes was an implied 
corrective to some of the theories adumbrated by Gangesa 
in logic and epistemology However, it was left to Vyasatirtha 
t o undertake an exhaustive study, analysis and assessment of 
Gangesa’s work, along with the commentaries of Paksadhara, 
Rucidatta and others in the light of the corresponding positions 
of his own school, as set forth in the works of Madhva and 
Jayatirtha, to which he makes it a point to align his exposition 
and criticism. While hisvNyayamrta provoked a counter-attack 
within a reasonable time, the custodians of Navyanyaya 
school from Mithila and Navadvipa have observed a studied 
silence over the strictures of the Turkaidnda va on their logical 



198 Advaitasiddhi Vs NySylmrta : A Re-Appraisal 

system. They contented themselves with hailing the publication 
of Vylsatirtha’s Nynt. and expressing their stern disapproval 
and displeasure at his assailing them by proclaiming : 

Nyayamrtarjits kirtih Tandavena Vinas'its 

Indeed, Vylsatirtha’s work was meant to be a friendly 
criticism, unlike in the case of the Nym. from the point of 
view of a realistic metaphysics (as the common ground) to 
shake off its fascination for the theory of Parata^prlmlpya 
in the interest of meaningful Realism and improve the status 
of their Isvara and accept the Apauruseyatva of the Vedas as 
the ultimate source of the saving knowledge. 

Prof. Bagchi ( Inductive Reasoning. 1953) has presumed 
that the absence of any positive reaction to Vylsatirtha’s 
TarkatanQava from the Navya-Naiylyikas of Mithili and 
Navadvipa upto date, is (or was) probably due to absence of 
publicity of the Dvaita works in those parts. This is not 
well founded. The contemporary biography of Vylsatirtha 
shows that he had, very early in his Pontifical career, travelled 
rn the North. Logic being his forte, he would not have failed 
to visit the great centres of Navya-nylya, which he had 
already mastered under Srlpldarlja and exchange thoughts 
with the stalwarts there. The tradition about the encomium 
paid to him by Pak$adhara himself in the following terms : 

Yad adhitam tad adhitam yad anadhitam tad apyadhitam 

Pakfadhara vipak $o nivekfi vina Navina Vyisena 
probably dates from the period of their first meeting, 
before he had written his major works. 

In the Indroduction to his edition of the Tattvacintamavi 
(1973) with two commentaries, Pandita Ramanuja Tatacharya, 
retired V. C. of the Kendriya Vidyapitha, Tirupati, quoting 
the above verse interprets it as a compliment paid by Vylsa- 
tirtht himself to his adversary Pakjadhara Miira, in 



Appendix III 


199 


appreciation of his unparalleled learning, instead of the other 
way about, as accepted in the tradition of the Dvaita school. 

A little reflection will show that the natural trend of the 
verse is much more consistent with the other view. IfVyJsa- 
tlrtha had been the speaker of the verse, he would have worded 
the second line more appropriately as : 

Pak^adharasamo vipakso ndvek$i hi Vyasena 

Suffice it to say that it would be the height of impropriety 
and a stigma on the saintliness of a Paramahamsa and a true 
devotee of the Lord such as Vyisatirtha, who has been 
described in the inscriptions relating to him as absolutely free 
from self-conceit (nirahankdracitta) absorbed in the meditation 
of the glory of the Lord (PurSpapurusadhyanapusyatpuskala- 
murti) and so on, to think of him as ever venturing to call 
himself as Navina-Vyasa (a new “Veda-Vyftsa”). It would be 
tantamount to an act of Bhigavata-apacara to think of 
Vy&satirtha as susceptible to such odious self-conceit. One 
wonders what made Pandita Ramanujacharya to think of 
offering such a preposterous interpretation of a Verse 
preserved only in the Dvaita tradition. 

Madhva philosophy and its texts had been propagated 
in the north and in Bengal from as early as the days of 
Rsjendra Tiitha and his pupil Jayadhvaja, who have been 
reckoned as the precursors of the Caitanya Sampradiya. 
Vanam&li Misra who participated in the Nym-Advaitasiddhi 
controversy was a Mfidhva from the North. The biography of 
Somanstha records at least two spectacular disputations in 
Navyanysya to which Vyasatirtha was challenged by Visiting 
teams of scholars. It is speciflcally stated by Somanltha 
that in the great debate in the court of Narasa in Vijayanagar 
which lasted thirty days the rival team consisted of Veterans 
from Afiga, Vafiga and Kalinga besides Chola and Kerala and 
was led by Basavabham of Kalifiga. 



200 


Advaitasiddhi Vs NyiySmfta A Re-Appraisal 


We learn from Somanstha lhat Vyisatirtha commenced 
writing his three great works in the reign of V/ra Narasimha 
(1504 - 09), The first was the ffym , the Candrika the second 
and the Tarkatandeva was the third. All these were probably 
completed by 1520 in the reign of Krishnadevaraya. Now 
Pakjadhara’s date has been given as 1450 - 1510. As atypical 
Tsrkika, Vyisatirtha would certainly have arranged to send 
copies of his Tarkatindava to the famous centres of Mithili and 
Navadvipa for comments, as the very purpose of his writing 
it was to compel the attention of those scholars to it. In the 
circumstances, the theory of absence of publicity of his work 
in the north cannot be accepted. In fact, subsequent to 
VySsatirtha, another intrepid Dvaita Logician Satyanatha 
Tlrtha {1648 - 74) has challenged the views of the famous 
RaghunStha Siromagi, in his Abhinava-Tarkat'indava, which 
has also been published. If the Navya-Naiyayikas are still 
maintaining their silence, the reason can only be that they feel 
unequal to the task of a confrontation on the issue. It is to be 
earnestly wished that modern research scholars will come 
forward to profit by the discussions initiated by the 
TarkatdnQava in the interest of further advancement of Logical 
studies. 


Till the days of Vyrsatirtha, the thinkers of the Advaita 
school too had taken very little notice of the deeper layers of 
vitality of Dvaita system. They had neglected the great works 
of Jayatirtha too, probably under the impression that they were 
only routine commentaries on the works of Madhva with his 
own thoughts intertwined with the words of the originals which 
were addressed to the followers of the school. Apart from 
their self-complacency, they might have been put off the scent 
by this circumstance and missed a great deal. Vyisatirtha, 
therefore, chose the direct line of attack and wrote independent 
works to compel the attention of his contemporaries. In this he 
eucceeded remarkably, as the results have borne out. 



LIFE 


Born in 1460 A. D. in an affluent Kannada-speaking 
Vai??ava Brahmin family of Banner in the Mysore district of 
Karnataka, Yatirlja as he was named had his Upanayana and 
early Vedic studies followed by a course of liberal education in 
Kavya, Na(aka, Alamkara, Grammar and Logic. After 
spending some years with his parents on return from the 
Gurukula, he was taken to the seat of the family Guru, 
Brahma/iya Tfrtha at Abbur (near Channapatna), in fulfilment 
of a promise made by his parents before the birth of the child 
and was left with him. A year or so later, Yatirlja was 
inducted into the Sannylsa order under the name of Vyisa- 
tirtha and later succeeded Brahmapya Tirtha. as'pontiff of his 
ancient Mutt (for Pedigree See Appendix IT). 

We are fortunate in having an authentic historical biogra¬ 
phy of VySsat/rtha in an ornate Campuklvya in six Uilasas, 
VyHsayogicarita, written by an accomplished Poet (published 
in 1926 Reprint Edn. 1993 D.V.S.R.F. Bangalore). The 
author Somanfitha was a younger contemporary and came 
from an orthodox Sm»rta Brahmin family of Kancimandala. 
It was a family of Somayaji* and belonged to the Vatsa 
Golra. 

This full-length biography gives us an absorbing account 
of the early and later life of VySsatJrtha, his progressive rise 
to fame and name and the venerable position he attained in 
the estimation of the people and the successive Rulers of 
Vijayanagar as the Royal Preceptor, to his last days. Soma- 
nitha makes a specific reference to the Portuguese ambassadors 
to the court of Vijayanagar calling on Vy&satirtha with 
valuable presents and seeking audience with him : Dvipantara- 
bhupala - samprekita ■ pradhinapuru^air - asakrtsamarpyamaiiani 
bolnividhopaharapujandni ca viksivise^a ... (Text p. 65). The 
Portuguese travellers Paes and Nuniz knew him well. The report 
of Nuniz that Krishnadevaraya was "every day washed by 


26 



202 Advaitasiddhi Vs Nyeyjmrta A Re-Appraisal 

a learned Brahmin whom he held in highest esteem and 
"Who had never married or had touched a woman" (which can 
only refer to an acetic) which Sewell finds it difficult to 
believe, is not really so. It refers to a ceremonial bath with 
water from consecrated vessels, administered to an idol or to 
one’s 5ijya, as provided for by Acarya Madhava in his 
Tantras&ra (For details see my HDSV p. 291. 

The biography has vividly portrayed VyBsatirtha’s 
winsome personality, his even temper, his amazing erudition 
in all the branches of learning studied in his days, his courtesy 
and good humor and generous patronage of scholarship 
wherever found. 

His literary style is graceful without being ostentatious. 
He had the ability to compress a vast quantity of factual 
material and remifications of thought in a few telling phrases 
which stood him in good stead in his debates with rival 
scholars. The biography refers to two major polemical 
contests he had to face from jealous rival scholars. The first 
one took place in the early days of his stay at Chandragiri 
and the second, the more acrimonious, which took place in the 
reign of King Narasa in Vijayanagar itself. 

The latter has been described in great detail by Somanitha. 
An irate team of doughty scholars from Anga-Vanga-Kalinga- 
Malava-Choia and Kerala led by BasavabhaHa of Kalinga, 
Somanatha says, the team of irate scholars burst into the 
Assembly Hall of the King’s palace shouting slogans and 
pinning their Birudas (titles and certificates of scholarship) to 
the Pillars there and challenging Vy&satirtha to a debate and 
that King Narasa himself, tho’ knowing the calibre of Vyasa- 
trrtha, was shaken for a moment. The debate lasted for 
thirty days according to SomanStha and ended in a stunning 
victory to Vyasat/rtha. The team of abashed scholars was 
richly and generously rewarded by the victor. 

The Biographer has thrown new light on the beneficent role 
played by Vyisatfrtha in the social, political and cultural life of 



Appendix III 


203 


the Vijayanagar Empire, especially during the period of the 
second and third dynasties. So far, this has remained 
unknown to our modern historians who were inclined to dismiss 
the traditional accounts of his eminent role as a pious fabrication. 
But with the publication of the Vydsayogicarita in 1926, there is 
no more any justification to plead want of historical materials. 
The indifference and apathy of accounts given in the Madras 
University Historical Series XI and History and Culture of the 
Inditia People Val. VI of the Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, Bombay, 
are for this reason most disappointing. The Vydsayogicarita 
deserves to be treated not only as the major source of authentic 
information about his life and achievements but as a major source 
of Vijayanagar history as well, of the period. Not even Vidya- 
ranya, who is accounted to have played a leading role in the 
foundation of the Hindu state, has had the advantage of an 
authentic contemporary historical biography of such merit. 

The sixth Ullasa describes the spectacular Ratndbhiseka 
(bathing in gems) performed by Krishnadevaraya to Vyisatirtha, 
seating him on his own golden throne, as his Saviour and 
the Protector of the Kingdom during the dreaded period of 
Kuhuyoga in the king’s life. 

cf. De&adhipage banda kies angola kaledu 
Simhdsanavaneri meredi jagavariya 

(Purandaradisa). 

As early as in 1515 A. D. the King had hailed Vyisatirtha 
as his Guru in the stone inscription in the Vi/hala temple. His 
own work Krishnadevariyak rti, in Sanskrit of which a fragment 
is preserved in the Madras Government O. Library, refers to 
Vyisatirtha by name as “My Guru” (See Appendix I Verse 12). 
The accounts of the Portuguese travellers Paes and Nuniz 
also confirm this. Nuniz has referred to the King listening 
everyday to the preaching of a learned Brahmin whom he 
reverences and who "never married nor had touched a woman". 
This can only refer to an ascetic and there is no other 



204 Advaitasiddhi Vs Nyaylm^ta: A Re-Appraisal 

personage of that eminence associated with the life of Krishna- 
devarlya, as we know from the history of the times and the 
evidence of the King’s own inscriptions. (See also the phrase : 
Nr pen dram uku t i ra tnaniraji tan ijUn gh raye). 

Among the public benefactions of Vyisatirtha mention 
must be made of the building of the great irrigation lake in the 
township of Vyasa-samudra in the drought-stricken area of 
RiyalasmnS, which still irrigates hundreds of acres. Somanitha 
gives a thrilling penpicture of the discourses given by Vylsa- 
tf'rtha, of his great works, to his numerous ascetic disciples 
during his stay in the sylvan retreats of the lake, around 
1524 A D. 

According to Somanitha, soon after his succession to the 
Pi/ha, VyAsatirtha went on a pilgrimage to the South and made 
a long stay of some years at Kincipuram, to study the 
top-ranking works of Mimamsi and other £lstras with the 
most eminent experts there. This must have stood him in good 
itead in writing his great treatises Uter on. He then moved 
on to Mulblgal, the seat of the great scholar-Saint of Midhva 
Philosophy of the times, Lak$m/nlriyana Tirtha, under whom 
he studied the great classics of Madhva Slstra, as he himself 
tells us in his Mandaramanjari ■ Lak&minirayanakhy&d Dvaiti - 
kulatilakad adhUa-Madhva&astrimrtena Vy&sayatina. 

Later, at the instance of the Vidylguru, he goes to the 
seat of Saluva Narasimha at Chandragiii and stays there for 
some years, highly honoured by the Ruler. Somanitha tells us 
of the great debates to which Vylsatirtha was challenged 
at this period by veteran scholars of Nyiyaiastra trained in 
Navya-Nyaya of the Tattvacint&mani of Gange/a of Mithil*. 

Later, Vylsatirtha migrates to Vijayanagar at the invitation 
of the Ministers of Narasa and thence onwards made it the 
headquarters of his “Vi.vvapBvana-Ma/ha” for the rest of his 
life. The ruins of this Ma/ha can still be seen near 



Appendix III 


205 


the Vijaya-Vithala temple. During this period, he again went 
on an extensive tour of the North and the South of India. 
He must have met there many Veteran scholars of Navyanyaya. 
Advaita and other Darsanas on his tours and exchanged views 
with them. His north Indian disciple Laksmipati was 
probably initiated into the Suddha-Vaispava line, then. 

Most of the buildings of the Vyilsaraja Ma/ha especially 
in the South are to be found either in front of the premier 
Vi$nu temples there or flanking them, as at KSncfpuraro 
Kumbakopam, Srirangam, Tirumalai and Triplicane (Madras). 
Tradition associates his name with the worship of Sri Venka- 
/esvara at Tirumalai-Tirupati during a period of the crisis 
caused by an act of high sacrilege by the Archaka families 
there. Some special honors to his Mutt have been accorded 
for this reason. 

Somanalha reports that Vyisat/rtha had a very large 
number of ascetics, as his disciples : (Aparimitasisyayatikulair 
updsyaminah — Text p. 75). Tradition puts it at twenty four 
such as Lakimiklnta, Vijayindra, Vsdiraja, Govinda Tlpasa 
Niriayapa Yati. The last two are mentioned by name in 
Somanatha’s work. 

Vyasatirtha was an intellectual and a Mystic of the highest 
order at the same time. He poured out his heart to the Lord 
of the Universe in many a soulful Pada, in chaste Kannada, 
his mothei-tongue. His devotion to the Lord springs from 
both the head and the heart. After his Guru SripSdaraja 
he took up the leadership of the HaridSsa Order of Karnataka 
and inducted such great Saint-composers as Purandara DSsa. 
Kanaka DSsa and Vadiraja. The influence of the Haridlsai 
of Karnataka on the rise of Bhakti Pantha in other states like 
Maharashtra and Rajasthan, in the subsequent centuries is 
indicated by many facts. (See my HDSV, Chap. XXY p. 296) 

The Biographer informs us that VyJsatirtha began writing 
bis monumental works like the Candrikd, Nyiyamrtd and 



206 Advaitasiddhi Vs Nylytmfta A Re-Appraisal 

TarkatSfitfava in the reign of Vira Narasimha (1504 - 1509) : 
Tena Vasudhadhipena pratyahamupasevyarainah bhagavsn 
Sa taponidhifr sakaladharmajivatave tattvamatasthApanlya 
TAtparyacandriki — Tarkatandava— Nyayamfta pramukhsni 
alikavadimatabhanjanini mahiyamsi bhuysmsi kramenavyari- 
racat. (Text pp. 64 - 65) 

This is enough to disprove the story derived from some 
later-day accounts of the Uttaradi Mutt, quoted by M. R. 
Gopalacharya in his Introduction to C. R. Rao’s work Srimad 
Uttaridi Mutt. 1984. p. 2S) that “after Vydsaraya had written his 
Candriki and NySylmrta, he was taken by his Vidyiguru 
iripddaraja to the presence of Raghunalha Tirtha and that he 
presented them to him for his esteemd perusal ”. In the first 
place, it is very doubtful if Sr/pldarsja was still living when 
Vydsatmha had written his major works. That apart, according 
to the records of the Uttaradi Mutt itself, Raghunatha Tirtha 
had died in Dundubhi 1502 A. D. As Vyasatirtha, according to 
his authentic biography, had only begun to write his works in 
the reign of Vtranarasimha (1504 - 09) and as it would have 
taken several years to finish such monumental treatises amidst 
the numerous other engagements and commitments of Vyasa- 
ttrtha such as we have seen, these works would in -all probabi¬ 
lity have been completed in the early years of Krishnadevaraya’i 
reign between 1511 - 20. The story of their submission to 
Raghunatha Tirtha is thus entirely anachronistic and has to be 
dismissed as a pious concoction of unscrupulous zealots. 

Internal evidence of the works of VySsatirtha shows that 
he had authored two other (short) works in addition to the 
eight current in his name. The names of these have been 
given by him in his Mandaramanjari as Sattarka- Vil&sa and 
Bhedasanjivini. One of them probably was the one in reply 
to an Advaita work forwarded to him by the Kalinga King 
Vidyidhara Patra, as mentioned by Somanstha. (See my 
HDSV. pp. 291 - 92 for details). No Mss. of these have so far 
come to light. 



Appendix III 


207 


To ensure the stability and prosperity of the great Hindu 
Empire for the resuscitation of Mlnavadharma and promote 
a sense of unity, cohesion and cultural integration among the 
people all over the; country, VySsatirtha conceived the project 
of installing 732 images of Vira-HanumSn all over the land, to 
infuse the sense of values embodied in the life of Hanumanji. 
The first of the kind was the Yantroddhsra-Mukhyaprlija, 
installed by him in Hampi in 1532. This beautiful figure of 
Hanumin in diminutive form is seated in Dhyana posture, 
within two triangles placed one across the other one upside 
down and both encircled by a legend (mantra) in a script which 
has not so far been deciphered. The Yantrcddhara Hanumin 
is evidently an iconographic representation of Mukhya-Prana in 
the tfisu-Brlhmapa of the Brhaduranyaka Upanifad ; as inter¬ 
preted by Acirya Madhva. The other images of Hanumin 
including many Vira-Anjaneyas are still to be found worshipped 
in many towns and villages in South India. Those in the north 
could not now be easily located, for obvious reasons of political 
upheavals in the North in the succeeding centuries. One such 
Vigraha of Hanumin appears to have been consecrated and 
installed by VySsatritha in the course of his North Indian tour, 
within the precincts of the Badarinith temple, A communi¬ 
cation about the event is to be found in a letter of 11th 
October, 1979 by the Chief Executive Officer of the Badarinith” 
Kedsranrth Temple Committee, to the visiting Head of the 
VySsarSja Mutt. 


Somanatha’s biography of VySsatirtha has not come down 
to us in its entirety. It terminates with the account of it* 
public recital in the presence of VySsatirtha, by two gifted 
experts of recitation in an open assembly in the immediate 
presence of VySsatirtha himself, who is described as already 
quite old and wearing spectacles. Somanatha says he was 
introduced to VySsatirtha by one of his favourite disciples, 
Nlrlyapa tirtha (of the Kudli Aksobhyya Tirtha Mar ha) in the 
reign of Acvuladevarlya. If Somanltha’s biography of VySsa- 



208 Advaitasiddhi Vs Nyayimfta : A Re-Appraisal 

tirtha included an account of his last days also, it has not come 
down to us. The only Palm leaf Manuscript of the work had 
been found in the family of the priest worshipping the 
Brindavana (tomb) of the tenth successor of Vyssatirtha at 
Tirumukudlu. The last ullisa ends rather abrupthly, the conclu¬ 
ding pages of the incomplete part being repeated. There are 
no MangalScara.nas'lokas to indicate the conclusion, corres¬ 
ponding to the large number of introductory and benedictory 
verses numbering twentysix in all. The editor has valiantly 
grappled with the numerous lacunae in the Mss. It is high 
time this unique historical biography of one of the greatest 
luminaries of the Vijayanagar period and no less a personage 
than the Guru of its greatest Emperor Krishnadevaraya is 
thoroughly revised by a team of expert Sanskrit Scholars and 
republished. The Introduction provided by B. Venkobarao is 
a mine of historical research. The Head of the VySsaraja Mutt 
should lose no time to republish this work. 

After a long life of seventy-nine years of manysided 
activities and achievements of which sixtyone years had been 
spent on the Pontifical seat of the Madhva-Sampradsya, the 
venerable Vyasatirtha passed away at Vijayanagar in the 
cyclic year of Vilambi (1539 A.D.) The date is recorded in 
a song of Purandara Disa ( Cittaisida Vydsaraya-. ). His mortal 
remains were laid to rest in the island on the TungabhadrS 
river near Anegondi (the ancient capital) alongside the 
Brindavana (tomb) of Padmanlbha Tirtha (the first disciple of 
Acharya Madhva from the land of Godavari). As befitting 
the resting place of the mortal remains of the great Rajaguru 
of the greatest of the Kings of Vijayangar, his Brindavana 
stands majestically adorned, with royal honours in the form of 
artistic sculptural decorations and the royal elephant engraved 
on the front side, at the orders of the King Acyutadeva RSya 
himself. 



209 

APPENDIX IV 

Select List of Dr. B.N.K. Sharma’s Writings 

(l) RESEARCH PAPERS 

1. Pranahuti — Indian Educator, 

Madurai, 1928 

2 . Samkara’s Authorship of — Annals BORI Poona, 

Sarvasiddhantasara- 1930 

sangraha 

3. Grammar of the Gita—A — Annals BORI Poona, 

Vindication 1930 

4. New Light on — RPR Poona, 1931 

Gaudapada—Karikas 

5 . Further Light on — RPR Poona, Vol.II. 1 

Gaudapada—Karikas 

6. Madhva in Saura Purana — ABORI Poona, 1932 

7. Indra and Panini — I.H.Q. Calcutta, 1932 

8. Date of Srikantha and — ABORI Poona. 1932 
Brhatsamhita 

9. Still Further Light on the — RPR Poona, 1933 
Gaudapada Karikas 

10. Date of Bhagavata Purana — ABORI Poona, 1933 

11. Samkara’s Authorship of — ABORI Poona, 1933 
the Gita—Bhashya 

12. Life and Works of Vadiraja —P.O. Poona, 1933 

13. Critique of Sankara's — AUJ, 1933 
Rendering of ‘Yeyam Prete’ 

14. Rejoinder to Criticism of — AUJ, 1934 
above 

15. Life and Works of — AUJ, 1934 

Trivikrama Pandita 

16. Madhva-Vidyasankara — AUJ.II. 2 
Meeting A—Fiction 



210 


17. 

18. 


19. 

20 . 

21 . 

22 . 

23. 


24. 

25. 


26. 

27. 

28. 

29. 

30. 

31. 

32. 

33. 


Date of Madhva — AUJ, III 2 

Date of Madhva and His — AUJ, V. 1 
Disciples (A Reply to 
Rajapurohit’s Paper in the 
Pradnakamataka ) 


Bhaskara A Forgotten — I.H.Q. Calcutta, JL93 3 

Commentator on the 

Bhagavad-Gita 

Ancient Gita — LH.Q. Calcutta, 1935 

Commentators—A Reply to 
Prof. Otto Schrader 


Are the Gaudapada Karikas — P.O. Poona, 1935 
Sruti? 

Madhva's Underground — ABORI Poona, 1935 
Library at Kattatila 

Upanisadic Theory of — P.O., 1936 

Gaudapada-Karikas—A 
Reply to Dr. 

Venkatasubbiah 

Dale of Vadiraja — ABORI, 1936 

Madhva Influence on Bengal — Indian Culture, 
Vaishnavism Calcutta, V. 1 


Vijayindra Tirtha — AUJ, 1936 

Date of Umapati Sivacarya’s — P.O.Poona, 1938 
Sankalpanirakaranam 

History of Haridasa — QJMS Bangalore, XIX 

Literature 

Dvaita Literature — NLA Poona, 1939 


Age of Jayatirtha — NIA Poona, 1938 

Post-Vyasaraja — IJH.Q. Calcutta 1938 

Commentators 


True Date of Srikurmam — ABORI 1938 
Inscription 

Vijayindra and — NIA Poona, 1940 

Tarangin i-Ramacarya 



34. Dasaprakaranas 

35. Critique of 
Vyavaharika—Pramanya 

36. Life and Works of 
Vyasaraja 

37. Study of Brahmasutras 

38. Ancient Tamils and Their 
Vedic Faith 

39. Opening Verse of 
Mahabharata 

40. Trend of Gita 

41. Light on Javati-Jayate 
Controversy- 

42. Doctrine of Sakshi 

43. Yatra hi dvaviva jaghana 

44. Saints of Karnataka 

45. D.vaita-Vedanta 

46. Principles of Realistic 
Interpretation of Vedantic 
Texts 

47. Kamatak’s Contribution to 
Indian Philosophy 

48. Yajnavalkvan Fiction—A 
Critique 

49. Upanisadie Theory of 
Agama Prakarana 


— AUJ, VIII. ! 

— Annamalai Com. Vol., 
1941 

— F.W'. Thomas Com. 
Vol.. 1940 

— ABORI Silver Jub. 

No.. 1943 

— J.T.S. Mahal Lib., 
Tanjore 1944 

— ABORI, 1947 


— Karmarkar Com. VoL, 

1948 

— J.T S.M.L, Tanjore. 

1949 

— Siddhesvar Com. Vol. 
Hoshiarpur. 1950 

— P.O., 1950 

— Cul. Her. of India Ser. 
(R.K.M. Calcutta), 

Vol. IV 

— Tamil Encyclopedia 
Govt, of Madras, 1951 

— Bharatiya Vidya, 
Bombay, 1952 

— Divakar Com. Vol. 
Bombay, 1952 

— J. ABMM. Bangalore, 
1956 

— Bharatiya Vidya. 
Bombay, 1957 



212 


50. Bhagavala and — Mincinabaili, Dharwar, 

Bharatatatparya Nirnaya 1960 

Paricaya (Kannada) 

51. Svapnapadarthasatyatva — Jivottama, Kumta, 

(Kannada) L 1959 

52. Svapnapadarthasatyatva — Jivottama, Kumta, 

(Kannada) 2 1959 

53. Bhagavata Dharma — Purandaradasa 4th 

(Pujatattva) centenary Vol.,, 

Dharwar, 1964 

54. Place of Brahmasutras in — Prabuddhabhara... 

Vedantadarsana Almoda, 1965 

55. Schools of — Madhva Phil. 

Vaishnavism—Affinities and Conference Souvenir 

Divergences 

56. Dialectics of Vvasatirtha — Vidyaprasannatirtha 

Com. Vol., 1967 

57. Brahmanya Tirtha — Vidyaprasannatirtha 

Com. Vol., 1967 

58. Chaitanya and Prakasananda — P.B. Desai Com. Vol. 

Dharwar 

(2) ARTICLES 

1. Purandara Dasa — 4th Centenary Com. 

Vol. Hampi, 1964 

2. Aksobhya - Vidyaranya — Madhvasiddhanta 

Disputation Tirupati, 1964 

3. Sri Madhva and Udipi — Parvava Souvenir, 

1968' 

4. Souls in Dvaita Vedanta — S.M.S.O. Sabha Pub. 

5. Saguna and Nirguna Vicara — S.M.S.O. Sabha Pub. 

6. Importance and Scope of — Tattvada, 1968 
Brahmasutras 




213 


7. 

Raghavendra the King of 

— Bhavan’s Journal. 


Ascetics 

1970 

3. 

Message of Sanli Mantra 

— ABMM Souvenir. 1971 

9. 

Life, Works and Personality 

— Sonda Vadiraja 


of Vadiraja 

Souvenir, 1973 

10. Purandaragad—Not the 

— Panduranga Souvenir, 


Birth place of 

Purandaradasa 

Mysore, 1978 

11 . 

Tatlvamasi 

— DPJ Madras 

12. 

Ekame vad vitiy am 

— DPJ Madras, June 78 

13. 

Reply to Raghavachar’s 
Review of Brahmasutras 
and Their CC 

— DPJ, June 78 

14. 

Greatness of Badarayana 

— DPJ Madras, April 78 


Vyasa 


15. 

Status of Mandukya 
Upanishad 

— DPJ Madras, Dec. 77 

16. 

Madhva's Philosophy in a 

— Bhavan’s Journal, Feb 


Nutshell 

78 

17. 

The Historic Badari Yatra 

— DPJ, Nov. 78 


(3) INTRODUCTIONS TO OTHERS’ WORKS 

1. 

Introd. to Vijayindra’s 
Bhedavidyavilasa 

— Nanjangud, 1947 

2. 

Madhvavijava with C. of 

— Pejavar Mutt, Udipi, 


Visvapati 

1952 

3. 

Vadiraja's Snititattvaprakasa 

— Sode Mutt, Udipi, 



1954 

4. 

Vijayindra’s 

Upasamharavijaya 

— Nanjangud, 1956 

5. 

H.K. Vedavyasachar’s 

— Nanjangud, 1965 


Karnataka Haridasaru 


6. 

Synopsis of Vadaratnavali 

— Manipal Power Press, 


of Vishnudasacharya 

Udipi, 1967 



214 


7. Madhva's Yatipranavakaipa 

— MMS Sangha Udipi, 


1967 

8. Madhva's Gitabhashya and 

— MMS Sangha Udipi, 

Tatparya 

1954 

9. Seshachandrika 

— Pumaprajna 


Vidyapitha, Bangalore, 


1967 

10. Madhva’s Anubhashya 

— Dharmaprakash, 


Madras 

11. Lives of Vadiraja, 

— Gurugovindadasa Pub. 

Visvapriya, Jamkhandi 


Vadirajacharya etc. 


12. Tamil Rendering of 

— Kumbakonam, 1974 

Madhva’s 


Gitabhashya by M. Ramarao 


13. Vaduaja’s Nyayaratnavali 

— California, 1978 

Ed. with Eng. Tr. and 


Notes by Prof Stafford 


Betty 


14. Essays on Madhvavijaya 

— Srirangam, 1972 

Cantos by different Authors 


15. Ajayya Vijayindra 

— Parimala Pub. House, 


Nanjangud, 1974 

16. Gurugunastava with 

— Parimala Pub. House, 

commentary 

Nanjangud 

17. Narayana Pandita's 

— Sode Mutt, Udipi, 

Subhodaya Kavya 

1948 

18. Sudhakara Gurugunaratna 

— Bellary, 1989 

Mala 


ENDOWMENT LECTURES 

1. Narasimhacarya End. 

— Influence of Sanskrit 

Lectures Mythic Society, 

on Ancient Tamil 

Bangalore 

Sangam Works, 1982 



215 

2. Institute of World Culture, 
Bangalore 

3. Aroor Srinivasarao End. 
Madras University 

4. Kendriya Sanskrit 
Vidyapitha, Tirupati 


5. R. Narasimhacari 
End. Lecture, KSR1, 
Madras 


— Brhadaranyaka 
Upanisad, 1984 

— Dvaita Philosophy 
(three lectures) 
1989-90 

— Upanisadam 
Arthanimaye 
Madhvi-caryena 
anusrtf Nutanadrstih 
(Sanskrit), March 
1991 

— Two Major 
Contributions of DV to 
Ind. Epistemology 
1993 


SEMINARS 

1. Dvaita Vedanta Research — Contribution of Dvaita 

Foundation, Bangalore Philosophy to Indian 

Epistemology, (1990) 

2. International Seminar on — Three papers on 
Schools of Vedanta ‘Madras Dvaita Thought 1992 
University 

3. International Seminar on — Keynote Address 1992 
UpSsani, Somaiya College, 

Bombay-77 


PRESTIGIOUS AWARDS 


1. Central Sahitya Akademi 

2. President of India Award 

3. Govt, of Maharashtra’s 
Award 


— Sanskrit Research, 
1963 

— For eminent Sanskrit 
Scholars, 1991 

— Eminent Sanskrit 
Scholars (1992) 



216 

OTHER PUBLISHED WORKS OF Dr. B.N.K. SHARMA 


1. Catussutribhashya of Sri 
Madhva with two 
unpublished commentaries 
English Introduction and 
Notes 

2. Madhva’s Teachings in His 
Own Words 

3. Philosophy of Sri 
Madhvacharya 

4. History of Dvaita School of 
Vedanta and its Literature 

5. Lectures on Vedanta 

6. Brahmasutras and their 
Principal Commentaries of 
the Sankara, Ramanuja and 
Madhva Schools - A Critical 
Exposition in three 
Volumes. 

7. Satyam eva Jayate Madhva 
Hagiology 

8. Kannada Anuvada of 
History of Dvaita School of 
Vedanta and its Literature 

9. Madhva’s Aupanishadam 
Darsanam 

10- Brhadaranyaka Upanishad 
from Madhvacharya's 
Perspective 

i 1. English Translation of Sri 
Madhva’s 

Bhagavadgita- Bhashya 

12. English Rendering of Sri 
Jayatirtha’s Nyayasudha 
(PancadhikaranT) 


— Law Journal Press, 
Madras 1934 


— Bharatiya Vidya 
Bhavan, Bombay 3rd 
edn. 1979 

— 3rd edn. Delhi, ,1991 

— 2nd edn Delhi. 1981 

— Karnataka University, 
Dharwad, 1973 

— Reprint edn. 
Munshiram 
Manoharlal, Delhi, 
1986 


— Sri Vvasaraja Mutt, 
Bangalore, 1984 

— Dvaita Vedanta Studies 
and Research 
Foundation, Bangalore, 
in 2 Vols. 1987, 93. 

— -do- 1986 

— -do- 1988 


— Anandatirtha 
Pratishthana A.B.M.M. 
Bangalore (1989) 

— Raghavendra Asram 
Mallesvaram 
Bangalore. 1994. 



217 

Some Opinions about Dr. Sharma’s Works 

Till now no one has done so much service to Dvaita Vedanta 
thro’ the English language, as you have done, during the last 
half a century. Your name will live for ever in the history 
of Dvaita Vedanta. May Sri Hari and Vayu enable you to 
render still greater service and work in the field. 

— Sri Vishvesha Tirtha, 
Svamiji of Sri Pejavar Mutt, 
Udupi. 

I congratulate you on completing the comparative study 
of the Commentaries of the three Acharyas on the Brahmasutras. 
You have paid back, with compound interest, the debt you 
owed to the great Guru Srimad Anandatirtha Bhagavatpada 
and at the same time freed yourself from the debt of the 
Rishis (rishirina). Very few have the good fortune to achieve 
so much in their lives. 

—R.R. Diwakar, 

Chairman, Gandhi Peace Foundation, 
New Delhi 

I have great respect for Dr. B.N.K. Sharma and his profound 
scholarship. 

—Prin. N.G. Sura, Pune 

Dr. B.N.K. Sharma is a great scholar, a deeply religious 
thinker and a very humble devotee of the One Lord of All. 

—Dr. Richard V. D’Smet, SJ. 
De Nobili College, Pune 

To Dr. B.N.K. Sharma, who has revealed to me the greatness 
of Madhva’s and Badarayana’s thought, with deep respect, 
admiration and gratitude. 

—Prof. Jose Pereira, 
Dept, of Philosophy, 
Fordham University, Bronx, 
New York (U.S.A.) 



218 


I received my copy of my book “Vadiraja's Refutation" 
from my Publishers. 1 was pleased to see your generous 
Foreword, immediately preceding the Table of Contents. Your 
encouragement from the start and your scholarship from which 
I have borrowed so heavily, have meant so very much to 
me. 


— Prof. L. Stafford Betty, 

Asst. Prof, of Religion and Philosophy, 
California State College, Backersfield. 

You have indeed brought out a monumental work of which 
every Madhva should be proud. You have successfully 
demonstrated the superiority of our Acharya's Bhashya on the 
Sutras. I do not think any Madhva among Vaidiks or Laukiks 
to date has made so deep a study of almost aD our extent 
literature as yourself. I am looking forward to the publication 
of your son’s book on the Gitabhashva and Tatparva and their 
commentaries, in the near future. 

—BA. Krishnaswami Rao, 
Retd. Prof, of Physics, Bangalore, 

It is a thrilling experience even to handle Vol. ID. of your 
‘Brahmasutras and Their Principal Commentaries’. It has 
surpassed infinitely, all other works on the subject. 
Radhakrishnan is a poor competitor. I find an astounding 
uniformity of clarity and depth. Anybody else would have given 
up such a task, in sheer despair. You deserve the Jnanapilha 
Award for this. I will write to Delhi, in this regard. 

—Prof. RA. Malagi, 

Dept, of English, Gujarat University 

1 consider Dr. B.N.K. Sharma a modem Jayatirtha, Whal 
service our Tikacharya did in ancient days to Madhva 
Philosophy, our Dr. Sharma has done in modem times and 
1 feel it our duty to honour him to the best of our ability. 

—P. Krishnamurthy 
Advocate, Krtshnagiri. 



219 


Dr. B.N.K. Sharma’s services to the revival of interest 
in the Dvaita system and its literature in the context of modem 
needs have been incomparable. He has written books for all, 
—from the child to the most advanced Post Graduate students 
and scholars in Dvaita Vedanta. They will long tell us and 
our posterity what it is to be dedicated to a cause, so singularly 
attuned, at all times. 

—K. Rag hu pa thy Kao, 

BE. (Mech.) B.E. (Hons) 
MHCI1, M.A. (London) 
Dharmapralcash, 
Madras 84 



A 


220 

INDEX 


Abaddham Pat hit va Kucodyam Karoti 106 
Abhinava - Anyathakhyali 9, 41 
Abhinava - Tarkatandava 200 
Acyuta Devaraya 208, 

Advaita - Brahmasiddhi 67, 68 

Advaita Siddhi, 14, 18, 26, 42, 52, 62, 94, 153, 154, 160 
Akasa 

— as eternal and all pervasive 

acc. to an untraceable Sruti q. by S. 79, 80 
Akasa - Dvaita 24, 80. 

Aksobhya - Vidyaranva debate 

— on Tattvam asi vi 
Albert Schweitzer 13. 

Ajnlna real 

— as upadana of world 
in Advaita xvi. 

Anantakrishna Sastri 1,2,3 
AnekStmakatva (dual nature) of B. 

— stoutly opposed by S xxv, xxvi 
Anuktakathanat KvOpi xvi, 3 fn 
Anityatva 

— not same as ‘Mithyatva 131, 132 
Anandabodha 63, l62.Anandabhattaraka 10 
Apachedanyava (of P. Mlmamsa) 

— governing conditions of Appln. 113, 114, 

— Srutaprak&sa on 113 
Aparoksatva 62, 63 
Asal cen na prativeta 

— Ad intepn - refuted 16, 17, 20, 21 
Asad Asit - Ad intepn 26. 

— its reftn. 27 
Asat 

— can be counter positive of a negation 31. 

Asattva and Mithyatva 28, 30 

Atman (in Advaita) 

-nature of his Svampajnana questioned 71 -72 
Atmic Knowledge 



221 


— valid of invalid 75. 

Atman’s nature (in Advaita) 

— diffi in delining it as blissful 76, 77 
Atom Bomb 122 

AvidyS 

— Concept left vague by S 16 
AvidySnivritli 

— its status 63, 64, 87 
Avyakrta - AkSsa 80. 

B 

Baladeva viii 
85dha (Contradiction} 

— Ad. defn. 167 

— Loose meaning given by modem advaitins 128 

— Bad ha as defined by M. 129, - 131 

— as Svarupenanisedha A / c to 

— A. Siddhi - 92 
BadhakajnSna 

— its scope as defined in Ad. proves competence of Saksi 
to be assured of future useful unstuetifiability. 

Bagchi (Prof) IX. 198 
Basavabhalta of Kalinga 199 
Bhakti and Prapatti 15 
Bhakli Schools of Vedanta viii 
Bhamati 

— on the intrinsic character of a pramSna 135 
Bhaskara xxv 

Bheda Sanjivini 

— a lost work of Vyasatirtha 207 
Bidarahalli Srmiv5sic5rya 20 fn. 

Brahman 

— Perceivable by all senses 
acc - A - siddhi 85, 86 
Brahma Tarka Vi, 103. 

Brahma Siddhi 51. 

c 

Caitanya Sampradaya viii 
Caitanya (Consciousness) 54, 55 



222 


— its re.flri. in AvidySvritti as SSksi 
accepted by A-siddhi, examined 164 
Citsukha 41, 11, 

— his defn, of falsity 61 

— views on yogipratyaksa 57 
Contradiction (Bidha) 

— abuse of the term by modern writers 91, 128 
History and culture of the Indian people 203 

D 

Daniel 47 

Dasgupta vii, xix, xx 

— on MadhusOdana xix 
Dvaita System 

— its significant features i, ii, v 

— its denigration by modern writers xii, xiii 
Dvaita - Advaita Polemics. 

— its net result xxi 

Drgdrsya - Sambandha - anupapatn 

— objns answered 145 
Drsvalva 

— as Aparok$ayyavahSra - YogyatvibhSva 

— discussed 61-64 

— Other defns of Drsyatva 50-57 

£ 

Eteroality of Srutis 

— in Advaita 120 

G 

Gopalacarya MShuli 206 
God 

— as AindrajSJika in Ad. xviii 154 
God’s knowledge 

— status in Nyiya Phil. 76 

— its misrepresentation in Asiddhi 
discussed and refuted 73, 76, 77, 78 
Gr3hyalaksan£bh£va Tarka 

— of Buddhists 137 
GuruparamparS of VySsatirtha 178 



223 


J 

jayatirtha vii-6, 105, 124 fn 179 
Jivanmukti 13, 14, 64 
Jnana - nivarlyatvam 

— defn. in Ad, 34. 

K 

Kaipataru 113, 

Kasmiraka - Saddnanda 67 
Kilpanika - satvatva of world 

— granted by A-Siddhi viii 47 
Kavi Karnapura vii 

Kumdrila BhaUa, 48, 93, 117, 126 
Knowledge and its objecl 

— not organically connected acc. to Ad. 73-74 

— refn. of the above 75-78 
Krishnadevardya 197, 200 
KrishnadcvarSva Krti 193, 203 

L 

Laghucandrikd 44 

M 

Madlpjsudana Sarasvati xix, xxi 87, 106, 177. 

— his raillery 94 

— his improvised defn. of Upadanatva of B. xvii, xviii 

Madras Uni Historical series (XI) xi 200 
MahSbhasya 142 
MahamaUa x 
Mani 76, 78 

Mandana Misra 11, 83, Mariner’s compass 124 

Milhydlva 

— defns. 16 

— as Sadasad - Vilaksanatva viii 39, 42 
Milhyatva Vs Anilvatva viii 

Mula - Avidya 81, 86, 97, 160 



224 


N 

NSnS - AjnanavSda 169-171 

Narain K. (Dr) ix t xii, xiii, xvi, xxi, xxii, xxiv. 16, 23, 30, 
35, 44, 47, 65, 67, 97, 99, 104, 106, 107, 108, 136, 137, 
141. 

— refn. of his position that pratyaksa is always valid in Madhva 
Phil 106-107 

Neha nanasti sruti 

— import acc. to ad. discussed and refuted 174-182 
N"o - Vedanta 

— sponsored by Svami TapasySnanda x, xii, xxii, xxiii, xxiv 
132 

/ 

— its repudiation by S. in his BSB xxii-xxiv 

Neo - Vedanta’s rejection of Ad - concepts of Bsdha, Mithyatva 

and two level theory of Truth xxiv xxv 

Nescience 

— meaning 166, 167 Nityasuris 13, Nirvikalpaka Jnana 83 
Nrsimhasrama 67, 68 

Nuniz 201, 202 

Nym - Parichedas I-IV Survey of contents 4-14 

P 

Pacs 201 

Pak$adhara Misra viii, 198, 199 
Pancama - prakfiratS 

— of AvidySnivritti 176 
ParinSinavSda (of B) xiv, xxv 
paridhina - Visesfipti 

— M's. doctrine of creation 24 
Patanjali 

— on 101 senses of genitive case 142 

Pramfimatre nanugato gunah 76 
Pratvaksa 

— as upa jlvya praihana 

— in solving the conflict of Bheda and Abheda Srutis, 102, 
113, 114, 120 

— defects incidental to pralyaksa 101 
ParBcsa 

— its nature and scope 105 

Pariksita - pratyak^a 105, 117, 119, 154 



225 


Pratiyogitva 
-dei'n • 45. 

Pralikarma - VyavasthS 

— reviewed - 146 - 173 - 

R 

Radha Krishnan (Dr) xii, xxii 
Ramakrishna (Sri) xii xiii 
Rao C.R. 206 
Ralf Cudworth 53 
Ramanuja 

— type of theism, its limitations 13 
Ramanuja Tatachaiya (pandita) 198, 199 
RaghunStha Tirtha 206 

Raghunatha Siromani 68, 200 
Reality 

— criterion of in Dvaita 96, 97, 98 
Rucidatta viii. 197, 

s 

Sabda - Aparoksa 13 
Samksepa - Ssftraka 60, 145 
Sattarka - VilaSa 

— a lost work of Vvasatirtha 207 
Sfiksi (in Dvaita) ix 

— as immaculate principle of 

truth - determination 11, 15, 123, 124, 125 

— as Apperceiver and always veridical 16 

— intuits bliss of Selfhood in Susupti 136 

— its Sahajasakti 105, 105 fn. 

— in rel to PariksS 145. 

Saksi in Ad. 9 

— Rcflcn. of Caitanya in Avidvavrtti 

— So congenitally tainted 11 fn, 118 

— Tg’s criticism of it 123 
Sankara 137, 183 

his rejection of dual nature of B. xxiv 
SomanStha Kavi 201 

Space and time - unbounded acc. to DV. phil. 80, 37 
Sublation (bSdha) 



226 


— Scope of 91 

— governing condition of 116, 127 
Suddha - Brahman 

— in caramavrtti 54, 55, 60 

— as VrttivySpya 88 
Suddham - svaprakasam 

— how deviously interp by A siddhi 60 
Suresvara 157 

SaSlhidafidaka 142 
Super imposition (aropa) 

— of self on not - self, objns. 188 

— of non - self on self 190 

— self - superimposition 192 
Svarupa Taratamya in Moksa 

— in Dv. phil. 14, 15 
Svarupa - visesas 8 
Svarupena - Nisedha 

of world and shell - silver acc to Asiddhi - 26, 92 

— its nemesis 32 

T 

TadSkSratva 

of Vrtti 56, 66, 158, 164 

Tarangini 19, 27, 29, 39, 40, 42, 88, 91, 92, 95, 96 
Tarka Tandava 

— on roie of verifn. 107. 

TapasySnanda (Svami) vii, xxi, xxiii, xxv 132 
Tatvasuddhi 72 

Tattvamasi vii 
Theism 

— requirements of X 
Thibaut George 80 
Time and space 

— as unbounded 81 
Traikalika nisedha 

— as svarupenanisedha acc to Asiddhi 25, 31 

— its refn, 25, 32 

— in terms of P&ramarthikatva, also refuted 31 

— modem advaitins reaction to both the standpoints 132 
Truth - two tier theory of viii 



227 

■jr T 

U 

Ijdayana 135, 145, 149 

— on god’s knowledge 77 
Untraceable sruti q. by S. 79. 

UpSdanatva of B. 

— Various defns - viii, xiv 

— Madhusudkna's improvised defn. 

—. examined xv, xvi 
Lpajivvatva 

— Criteion of 109 - 11! 

Upadesa * SShasri 159 
Unreality of the world 

— Opposed to Srutis and smnis and irrational 185 

V 

VScaspati Misra 82, 109. 111. 135. 

Vadaratn5vali viii, 94. 

Validity of Knowledge 

— a qn. of fact and not of duration 131 - 133 
Yardhamana (Upadhyayaj viii 

Vedanta 

— Monopolisations of the term by advaitins refuted vii, xxvi 
Vedanta Oesika vi 

Vedanta Kaumudi 171 
VidySranya vi 

Tijuana V5da 137, 138, 139, Vijayindra Tirtha, 4, 34 
Vimuktatman 166. 

VjsvapJvana Matha 
Visvesa Tirtha * xxvi 

Visesas ii, 11, Vjsesana Visesyabhava 142 
VisayavisayibhSva relation 142. 

Vivckdnanda xi, xxii 
Visayatva (defn) - 142 

— difficulties in defining - 138 

— defns offered and discussed 137, 138, 145 - 147, 148, 
149. 

Visaya - Visayi - bh5va 137 

— one of the 101 senses of genitive case 
acc. to patanjali 142 
Visnud5sScirya 111, iv, 94 



228 


Vivartopadiinakaranatva of B in Ad. 

neither unknown to nor deliberately suppressed bv Madhva 
thinkers, as perversely alleged by Dr N'arain 24, 25. 

— Vritti doctrine 150, 152. 

— needs pre-existence of objects 152 
Vvasa Tirtha 

— Life, personality, career, etc. 201-208 

— acknowledged as his own guru by KLrsnadevaraya 194 
Vvasa yogi carita - 201. 203 

Y 

YSjnavalkva 88 
Yadrsam orahmanas satvam 

— Asiddhi’s misinterpn 94. 

Yantroddhara - Hanuman 207. 



229 


list of books consulted or used. 


1 Amalananda 
n Anandabhattaraka 

3 Anantakrishna Sastri 
4 ’ Bidarahalli Srinrvasacarya 

5 Brahmananda Sarasvati 

6 . Citsukha 

7. Dasgupta 
g. Iver S.V. 

9 . Jha Ganganath 

10. Kumarila Bhatta 

11 . Madhusudana Sarasvati 

12. Madhvacarya 

13. Mandana Misra 

14. Narain K. 


15. Prakasatman 

16. Radhakrishnan 

17. Ramacarya 
IS. Ramanuja 

19. Samkaracarya 

20. Sarvajnalman 

21. Shanna B.N.K. 


22. Somanatha 

23. Sriharsa 

24. Sudarsana Sun 

25. Suresvara 

26. Svami Tapasyananda 

27. Vacaspati Misra 

28. Vanamali Misra 

29. Vijavindra Tirtha 

30. Vimuktatman 

31. Visnudasacarya 

32. Vyasatinha 


Kalpataru C. on BSSB 

Nvm. Kantakoddhara 

Intro, to Hdn. of N'ym. etc. 

Nvm. Tnppani 

Laghucandrika 

T attvapradipika 

Hist, of I. Phil. Vol. IV. 

A-Siddhi (Eng. Tr.) 

A-Siddhi (Eng. Tr.) 

Slokavartika 

Advaita-siddhi 

Anu-Vvakhyana on BS 

Brahmasiddhi 

Critique of Madhva 

Refutation of Samkara 

School 

Vivarana 

Indian Phil. Vol. II 
Nvm. Tarangini 
Sribhasya 

Brahmasutra Bhasya 
Samksepasariraka 
Philosophy of Sri 
Madhvacarya Brahmasutras 
& Their Principal 
commentaries; History of 
Dvaita School of Vedanta 
and its literature. 
Vyasayogicarita 
Khandanakhandakhadya 
Srutaprakasa 
Brhadaranyaka Vartika 
Bhakti Schools of Vedanta 
Bhamati C. on BSSB 
Tarangini Saurabha 
N'ym. Amoda 
Istasidhhi 
Vadaratnavali 
Nyayamrta 



HR RATA 


Page 

Line 

For 

Read 

V 

20 

fUtadusanui 

£a»ad«{8oi 


35 

between 

between 

vj 

29 

Bnahme 

Brahma 


28 

Vaibbavepre- 

Vaibhavapru- 

X 


complacence 

complacsncy 

xii 

30 

uniference 

interference 

xxui 

25 

scholastic* 

icboib.su 

13 

3 

irrespective 

respective 

17 

27 

FTTVfWT 

6iW»i*n?r 

29 

22 

ataniabhava 

ruyasubfc ava 

32 

14 

sfaoice 

•choice 

35 

16 

a«lffW 


66 

19 

of non-Knowledge 

<fi Knowledge 

68 

J9 

turn ao 

turn out 

SO 

22 

belond* 

belong* 

86 

9 

primite 

premise 

90 

5 

Sommon 

Common 

31 

19 

bis 

is 

107 

15 

utsarge 

utsarga 

111 

13 

Paur td parya 

pcuf?Sparye 

i!5 

4 

by passe 

by passed 

ns 

7.7 

flats 

flaws 

1 17 

6 



119 

11 

ww rrortr 

rretrs 


12 



153 

24 

drdr/ya 

dtgdr/ya 

*61 

23 

im purls 

i.i puns 

168 

15 

Cognitailg 

Congenitally 

171 

10 

f&milar 

familiar 


23 

pragabnihasa 

prigabbavaaiUa 

173 

12 

iuktijna 

iuktijno 



Page 

List 

For 

Read 

174 

14 

case 

esse 

16 

whilted 

whittled 

175 


Page heading 

Neha nanasti 

176 

6 

Nilhya 

Mithya 

179 

26 

feet 

fact 

188 

2 

Tattedim le 

Tottedante .tvMdnyalre 

190 

17 

matta 

matte 

191 

12 

Pratifirupam yajytte 

pratitir upayujyate 




Or. Shanmi lias a »:t> of making even 
the dry dialectics appetising, wiili bis art of 
petSUJtsivo presentation in lucid, lively 
English, 

He holds that notwithstanding the 
subtleties, verbiage and innovations of con¬ 
cepts arid definitions, trotn time to time, the 
Nirvi.vejit-AdYaita of Sankara creates more 
problems than it can over hope to solve and 
that d is bound to be round disappointing 
hv the level-headed among laymen and 
intellectual* alike, in our time. 

Sn support, he has drawn pointed atten¬ 
tion to the urgent call to followers of 
Sankara-Vedanta, given by one of the lead- 
lag light* “f Ad'aita from the Kamakrishoa 
Mission. Swarm Iunasyanandn. to opt for 
a “Neo-Vedanta", in place of traditional 
Advaita, m the introduction to ins latesi work 
Bnakn Schools of Vedanta. (Madras lb!)|.) 



