Mother’s  Agenda 

I 


1951-1960 


Translated  from  French 


Institut  de  Recherches  Evolutives 


This  book  was  first  published  in  France  under  the  title  L'Agenda  de  Mere  — 1951-1960 
©  1978  Institut  de  Recherches  Evolutives,  Paris 
Rendered  into  English  under  the  direction  of  Satprem 


Table  of  Contents 


INTRODUCTION 

Topographical  Note 

1951-1957.  Notes  and  Fragments 

February  1951 

Undated  1951 
March  14.  1952 

August  2. 1952 

Undated  1951?! 

April  1954 
August  1954 
August  25. 1954 

March  26.  1955 

April  4. 1955 

June  9.  1955 
September  3. 1955 

September  15. 1955 

October  19.  1955 

October  t?)  1955 

October  1955 
January  (?)  1956 

Undated  1956 
January  (?)  1956 

Undated  1956 

Undated  1956 
February  29. 1956 

March  19. 1956 

March  20.  1956 

March  21.  1956 

Undated  1956 

April  4. 1956 

April  20,  1956 

April  23.  1956 

April  24.  1956 

Undated  1956 

Undated  1956 

May  2. 1956 

July  29. 1956 
August  10. 1956 
September  12. 1956 

September  14. 1956 

October  7,  1956 

October  8.  1956 

October  28.  1956 
November  22.  1956 

December  12,  1956 

December  26.  1956 

January  1. 1957 

January  18. 1957 

March  3. 1957 


April  9. 1957 

Undated  1957 

April  22.  1957 

July  3. 1957 

July  18. 1957 

Undated  1957 
September  27. 1957 

October  8.  1957 

October  17.  1957 

October  18.  1957 
November  12,  1957 

November  13.  1957 

Undated  1957 

Undated  1957 

Undated  1957 
December  13,  1957 

December  21.  1957 

Undated  1957 
January  1. 1958 

Undated  1958 
January  22. 1958 

January  25. 1958 

Undated  1958 
February  3. 1958 

February  3. 1958 

February  1958 

Undated  1958 
February  15. 1958 

February  25. 1958 

February  1958 

March  7.  1958 

April  3. 1958 

Undated  1958 

May  1. 1958 

May  10. 1958 

May  11. 1958 

May  17. 1958 

May  30. 1958 

June  6,  1958 

June  1958 
June  1958  (?) 

June  22, 1958 

July  2. 1958 

July  5. 1958 

July  6. 1958 

July  1958 
July  19. 1958 

July  21. 1958 

July  23. 1958 

July  t?)  1958 
August  7. 1958 

August  8. 1958 


August  9. 1958 

August  12. 1958 

August  29. 1958 

August  30. 1958 

September  1958 
September  16. 1958 

September  19. 1958 

October  1.  1958 

October  4,  1958 

Undated  1958 
October  6,  1958 

October  10,  1958 

October  17,  1958 

October  25.  1958 

November  2.  1958 

November  4.  1958 

Undated  1958 
November  8,  1958 

November  11,  1958 

November  14,  1958 

November  15,  1958 

November  20,  1958 

November  22,  1958 

November  26,  1958 

November  27,  1958 

November  28,  1958 

November  30,  1958 

December  1958 
December  4,  1958 

December  15.  1958 

December  24,  1958 

December  28,  1958 

January  6. 1959 

January  14. 1959 

January  21. 1959 

January  27. 1959 

January  31. 1959 

March  10.  1959 

March  (?  )  1959 

March  (?)  1959 

March  (?)  1959 

March  1959 
March  26.  1959 

March  (?)  1959 

March  (?)  1959 
End  March  1959 

April  7.  1959 

April  13.  1959 

Undated  1959 

April  21.  1959 

April  23.  1959 

April  24. 1959 


Early  May  1959 

May  1959 
Early  May  1959 

May  1959 
May  7.  1959 

May  19. 1959 

May  1959 
May  25. 1959 

May  28. 1959 

June  3. 1959 

June  4.  1959 

June  7,  1959 

June  8,  1959 

June  9,  1959 

June  11, 1959 

June  13, 1959 

June  13, 1959 

June  17.  1959 

June  25.  1959 

July  9. 1959 

July  10. 1959 

July  14. 1959 
July  24-25. 1959 

August  11. 1959 

August  15. 1959 

October  6.  1959 

October  15.  1959 
November  25.  1959 

Prayers  of  the  Consciousness  of  the  Cells  (1951  -  1959) 

January  28. 1960 

January  31. 1960 

March  3.  1960 

March  7.  1960 

April  7.  1960 

April  13.  1960 

April  14. 1960 

April  20.  1960 

April  24. 1960 

April  26.  1960 

May  6. 1960 

May  16. 1960 

May  21. 1960 

May  24. 1960 

May  28. 1960 
Undated  May  (?!  1960 

June  3. 1960 

June  4.  1960 
Undated  June  1960 

June  7,  1960 

June  11. 1960 
Undated.  June  1960 

July  12. 1960 


July  15. 1960 

July  18. 1960 

July  23. 1960 

July  26. 1960 
August  10. 1960 

August  16. 1960 

August  20. 1960 

August  27. 1960 
September  2, 1960 

September  20. 1960 

September  24. 1960 

October  2.  1960 

October  2,  1960 

October  8,  1960 

October  11.  1960 

October  15.  1960 

October  19.  1960 

October  22.  1960 

October  25.  1960 

October  30.  1960 

November  5,  1960 

November  8,  1960 

Undated,  1960 
November  12,  1960 

November  15,  1960 

November  26,  1960 

December  2,  1960 

December  13,  1960 

December  17.  1960 

December  20.  1960 

December  23,  1960 

December  25,  1960 

December  31.  1960 


This  Agenda...  is 
my  gift  to 
those  who  love  me 

Mother 


Come  towards  the  future. 

1893  (age  15) 

In  each  thing,  in  each  atom,  is  the  Divine  Presence.  Man's  mission  is  to  make  it  manifest. 

1910 

The  obstacle  is  bound  up  with  the  very  reason  of  the  work  to  be  accomplished:  such  is  the  present 
state  of  physical  matter's  imperfection.  Thus  whatever  the  possible  degree  of  the  perfection,  the 
consciousness,  the  knowledge  of  our  deepest  being,  the  very  fact  of  its  incarnation  in  a  physical 
body  creates  obstacles  to  the  purity  of  its  manifestation;  however,  the  aim  of  its  incarnation  is 
victory  over  these  obstacles,  the  transformation  of  matter. 

May  21,  1912 

The  conditions  in  which  men  live  upon  earth  are  the  result  of  their  state  of  consciousness.  To  want 
to  change  the  conditions  without  changing  the  consciousness  is  a  vain  chimera. 

Mother 


INTRODUCTION 


When  we  have  passed  beyond  humanity, 
then  we  shall  be  the  Man. 

Sri  Aurobindo 


This  AGENDA  ...  One  day,  another  species  among  men  will  pore  over  this  fabulous  document  as 
over  the  tumultuous  drama  that  must  have  surrounded  the  birth  of  the  first  man  among  the  hostile 
hordes  of  a  great,  delirious  Paleozoic.  A  first  man  is  the  dangerous  contradiction  of  a  certain  simian 
logic,  a  threat  to  the  established  order  that  so  genteelly  ran  about  amid  the  high,  indefeasible  ferns  - 
and  to  begin  with,  it  does  not  even  know  that  it  is  a  man.  It  wonders,  indeed,  what  it  is.  Even  to 
itself  it  is  strange,  distressing.  It  does  not  even  know  how  to  climb  trees  any  longer  in  its  usual  way 
-  and  it  is  terribly  disturbing  for  all  those  who  still  climb  trees  in  the  old,  millennial  way.  Perhaps  it 
is  even  a  heresy.  Unless  it  is  some  cerebral  disorder?  A  first  man  in  his  little  clearing  had  to  have  a 
great  deal  of  courage.  Even  this  little  clearing  was  no  longer  so  sure.  A  first  man  is  a  perpetual 
question.  What  am  I,  then,  in  the  midst  of  all  that?  And  where  is  my  law?  What  is  the  law?  And 
what  if  there  were  no  more  laws?  ...  It  is  terrifying.  Mathematics  -  out  of  order.  Astronomy  and 
biology,  too,  are  beginning  to  respond  to  mysterious  influences.  A  tiny  point  huddled  in  the  center 
of  the  world’s  great  clearing.  But  what  is  all  this,  what  if  I  were  ‘mad’?  And  then,  claws  all  around, 
a  lot  of  claws  against  this  uncommon  creature.  A  first  man  ...  is  very  much  alone.  He  is  quite 
unbearable  for  the  pre-human  ‘reason.’  And  the  surrounding  tribes  growled  like  red  monkies  in  the 
twilight  of  Guiana. 

One  day,  we  were  like  this  first  man  in  the  great,  stridulant  night  of  the  Oyapock.  Our  heart  was 
beating  with  the  rediscovery  of  a  very  ancient  mystery  -  suddenly,  it  was  absolutely  new  to  be  a 
man  amidst  the  diorite  cascades  and  the  pretty  red  and  black  coral  snakes  slithering  beneath  the 
leaves.  It  was  even  more  extraordinary  to  be  a  man  than  our  old  confirmed  tribes,  with  their 
infallible  equations  and  imprescriptible  biologies,  could  ever  have  dreamed.  It  was  an  absolutely 
uncertain  ‘quantum’  that  delightfully  eluded  whatever  one  thought  of  it,  including  perhaps  what 
even  the  scholars  thought  of  it.  It  flowed  otherwise,  it  felt  otherwise.  It  lived  in  a  kind  of  flawless 
continuity  with  the  sap  of  the  giant  balata  trees,  the  cry  of  the  macaws  and  the  scintillating  water  of 
a  little  fountain.  It  ‘understood’  in  a  very  different  way.  To  understand  was  to  be  in  everything.  Just 
a  quiver,  and  one  was  in  the  skin  of  a  little  iguana  in  distress.  The  skin  of  the  world  was  very  vast. 
To  be  a  man  after  rediscovering  a  million  years  was  mysteriously  like  being  something  still  other 
than  man,  a  strange,  unfinished  possibility  that  could  also  be  all  kinds  of  other  things.  It  was  not  in 
the  dictionary,  it  was  fluid  and  boundless  -  it  had  become  a  man  through  habit,  but  in  truth,  it  was 
fonnidably  virgin,  as  if  all  the  old  laws  belonged  to  laggard  barbarians.  Then  other  moons  began 
whirring  through  the  skies  to  the  cry  of  macaws  at  sunset,  another  rhythm  was  bom  that  was 
strangely  in  tune  with  the  rhythm  of  all,  making  one  single  flow  of  the  world,  and  there  we  went, 
lightly,  as  if  the  body  had  never  had  any  weight  other  than  that  of  our  human  thought;  and  the  stars 
were  so  near,  even  the  giant  airplanes  roaring  overhead  seemed  vain  artifices  beneath  smiling 
galaxies.  A  man  was  the  overwhelming  Possible.  He  was  even  the  great  discoverer  of  the  Possible. 
Never  had  this  precarious  invention  had  any  other  aim  through  millions  of  species  than  to  discover 
that  which  surpassed  his  own  species,  perhaps  the  means  to  change  his  species  -  a  light  and  lawless 
species.  After  rediscovering  a  million  years  in  the  great,  rhythmic  night,  a  man  was  still  something 
to  be  invented.  It  was  the  invention  of  himself,  where  all  was  not  yet  said  and  done. 

And  then,  and  then  ...  a  singular  air,  an  incurable  lightness,  was  beginning  to  fill  his  lungs.  And 
what  if  we  were  a  fable?  And  what  are  the  means? 

And  what  if  this  lightness  itself  were  the  means? 


A  great  and  solemn  good  riddance  to  all  our  barbarous  solemnities. 

Thus  had  we  mused  in  the  heart  of  our  ancient  forest  while  we  were  still  hesitating  between 
unlikely  flakes  of  gold  and  a  civilization  that  seemed  to  us  quite  toxic  and  obsolete,  however 
mathematical.  But  other  mathematics  were  flowing  through  our  veins,  an  equation  as  yet  unfonned 
between  this  mammoth  world  and  a  little  point  replete  with  a  light  air  and  immense  forebodings. 

It  was  at  this  point  that  we  met  Mother,  at  this  intersection  of  the  anthropoid  rediscovered  and 
the  ‘something’  that  had  set  in  motion  this  unfinished  invention  momentarily  ensnared  in  a  gilded 
machine.  For  nothing  was  finished,  and  nothing  had  been  invented,  really,  that  would  instill  peace 
and  wideness  in  this  heart  of  no  species  at  all. 

And  what  if  man  were  not  yet  invented?  What  if  he  were  not  yet  his  own  species? 

A  little  white  silhouette,  twelve  thousand  miles  away,  solitary  and  frail  amidst  a  spiritual  horde 
which  had  once  and  for  all  decided  that  the  meditating  and  miraculous  yogi  was  the  apogee  of  the 
species,  was  searching  for  the  means,  for  the  reality  of  this  man  who  for  a  moment  believes  himself 
sovereign  of  the  heavens  or  sovereign  of  a  machine,  but  who  is  quite  probably  something 
completely  different  than  his  spiritual  or  material  glories.  Another,  a  lighter  air  was  throbbing  in 
that  breast,  unburdened  of  its  heavens  and  of  its  prehistoric  machines.  Another  Epic  was  beginning. 
Would  Matter  and  Spirit  meet,  then,  in  a  third  PHYSIOLOGICAL  position  that  would  perhaps  be  at 
last  the  position  of  Man  rediscovered,  the  something  that  had  for  so  long  fought  and  suffered  in 
quest  of  becoming  its  own  species?  She  was  the  great  Possible  at  the  beginning  of  man.  Mother  is 
our  fable  come  true.  ‘All  is  possible’  was  her  first  open  sesame. 

Yes,  She  was  in  the  midst  of  a  spiritual  ‘horde,’  for  the  pioneer  of  a  new  species  must  always 
fight  against  the  best  of  the  old:  the  best  is  the  obstacle,  the  snare  that  traps  us  in  its  old  golden  mire. 
As  for  the  worst,  we  know  that  it  is  the  worst.  But  then  we  come  to  realize  that  the  best  is  only  the 
pretty  muzzle  of  our  worst,  the  same  old  beast  defending  itself,  with  all  its  claws  out,  with  its 
sanctity  or  its  electronic  gadgets.  Mother  was  there  for  something  else. 

‘Something  else’  is  ominous,  perilous,  disrupting  -  it  is  quite  unbearable  for  all  those  who 
resemble  the  old  beast.  The  story  of  the  Pondicherry  ‘Ashram’  is  the  story  of  an  old  clan  ferociously 
clinging  to  its  ‘spiritual’  privileges,  as  others  clung  to  the  muscles  that  had  made  them  kings  among 
the  great  apes.  It  is  anned  with  all  the  piousness  and  all  the  reasonableness  that  had  made  logical 
man  so  ‘infallible’  among  his  less  cerebral  brothers.  The  spiritual  brain  is  probably  the  worst 
obstacle  to  the  new  species,  as  were  the  muscles  of  the  old  orangutan  for  this  fragile  stranger  who 
no  longer  climbed  so  well  in  the  trees  and  sat,  pensive,  at  the  center  of  a  little,  uncertain  clearing. 
There  is  nothing  more  pious  than  the  old  species.  There  is  nothing  more  legal.  Mother  was 
searching  for  the  path  of  the  new  species  as  much  against  all  the  virtues  of  the  old  as  against  all  its 
vices  or  laws.  For,  in  truth,  ‘Something  Else’  ...  is  something  else. 

We  landed  there,  one  day  in  February  1954,  having  emerged  from  our  Guianese  forest  and  a 
certain  number  of  dead-end  peripluses;  we  had  knocked  upon  all  the  doors  of  the  old  world  before 
reaching  that  point  of  absolute  impossibility  where  it  was  truly  necessary  to  embark  into  something 
else  or  once  and  for  all  put  a  bullet  through  the  brain  of  this  slightly  superior  ape.  The  first  thing 
that  struck  us  was  this  exotic  Notre  Dame  with  its  burning  incense  sticks,  its  effigies  and  its 
prostrations  in  immaculate  white:  a  Church.  We  nearly  jumped  into  the  first  train  out  that  very 
evening,  bound  straight  for  the  Himalayas,  or  the  devil.  But  we  remained  near  Mother  for  nineteen 
years.  What  was  it,  then,  that  could  have  held  us  there?  We  had  not  left  Guiana  to  become  a  little 
saint  in  white  or  to  enter  some  new  religion.  ‘I  did  not  come  upon  earth  to  found  an  ashram;  that 
would  have  been  a  poor  aim  indeed,’  She  wrote  in  1934.  What  did  all  this  mean,  then,  this  ‘Ashram’ 
that  was  already  registered  as  the  owner  of  a  great  spiritual  business,  and  this  fragile,  little  silhouette 
at  the  center  of  all  these  zealous  worshippers?  In  truth,  there  is  no  better  way  to  smother  someone 
than  to  worship  him:  he  chokes  beneath  the  weight  of  worship,  which  moreover  gives  the 
worshipper  claim  to  ownership.  ‘Why  do  you  want  to  worship?’  She  exclaimed.  ‘You  have  but  to 
become!  It  is  the  laziness  to  become  that  makes  one  worship.’  She  wanted  so  much  to  make  them 


become  this  ‘something  else,’  but  it  was  far  easier  to  worship  and  quiescently  remain  what  one  was. 
She  spoke  to  deaf  ears.  She  was  very  alone  in  this  ‘ashram.’  Little  by  little,  the  disciples  fill  up  the 
place,  then  they  say:  it  is  ours.  It  is  ‘the  Ashram.’  We  are  ‘the  disciples.’  In  Pondicherry  as  in  Rome 
as  in  Mecca.  ‘I  do  not  want  a  religion!  An  end  to  religions!’  She  exclaimed.  She  struggled  and 
fought  in  their  midst  -  was  She  therefore  to  leave  this  Earth  like  one  more  saint  or  yogi,  buried 
beneath  haloes,  the  ‘continuatrice’  of  a  great  spiritual  lineage?  She  was  seventy-six  years  old  when 
we  landed  there,  a  knife  in  our  belt  and  a  ready  curse  on  our  lips. 

She  adored  defiance  and  did  not  detest  irreverence. 

No,  She  was  not  the  ‘Mother  of  the  Pondicherry  Ashram.’  Then  who  was  She?  ...  We  discovered 
Her  step  by  step,  as  one  discovers  a  forest,  or  rather  as  one  fights  with  it,  machete  in  hand  -  and 
then  it  melts,  one  loves,  so  sublime  does  it  become.  Mother  grew  beneath  our  skin  like  an  adventure 
of  life  and  death.  For  seven  years  we  fought  with  Her.  It  was  fascinating,  detestable,  powerful  and 
sweet;  we  felt  like  screaming  and  biting,  fleeing  and  always  coming  back:  ‘Ah!  You  won’t  catch 
me!  If  you  think  I  came  here  to  worship  you,  you’re  wrong!  ’  And  She  laughed.  She  always  laughed. 
We  had  our  bellyful  of  adventure  at  last:  if  you  go  astray  in  the  forest,  you  get  delightfully  lost  yet 
still  with  the  same  old  skin  on  your  back,  whereas  here,  there  is  nothing  left  to  get  lost  in!  It  is  no 
longer  just  a  matter  of  getting  lost  -  you  have  to  CHANGE  your  skin.  Or  die.  Yes,  change  species. 
Or  become  one  more  nauseating  little  worshipper  -  which  was  not  on  our  program.  ‘We  are  the 
enemy  of  our  own  conception  of  the  Divine,’  She  told  us  one  day  with  her  mischievous  little  smile. 
The  whole  time  -  or  for  seven  years,  in  any  event  -  we  fought  with  our  conception  of  God  and  the 
‘spiritual  life’:  it  was  all  so  comfortable,  for  we  had  a  supreme  ‘symbol’  of  it  right  there.  She  let  us 
do  as  we  pleased,  She  even  opened  up  all  kinds  of  little  heavens  in  us,  along  with  a  few  hells,  since 
they  go  together.  She  even  opened  the  door  in  us  to  a  certain  ‘liberation,’  which  in  the  end  was  as 
soporific  as  eternity  -  but  there  was  nowhere  to  get  out:  it  WAS  eternity.  We  were  trapped  on  all 
sides.  There  was  nothing  left  but  these  4m2  of  skin,  the  last  refuge,  that  which  we  wanted  to  flee  by 
way  of  above  or  below,  by  way  of  Guiana  or  the  Himalayas.  She  was  waiting  for  us  just  there,  at  the 
end  of  our  spiritual  or  not  so  spiritual  pirouettes.  Matter  was  her  concern.  It  took  us  seven  years  to 
understand  that  She  was  beginning  there,  ‘where  the  other  yogas  leave  off,’  as  Sri  Aurobindo  had 
already  said  twenty-five  years  earlier.  It  was  necessary  to  have  covered  all  the  paths  of  the  Spirit 
and  all  those  of  Matter,  or  in  any  case  a  large  number  geographically,  before  discovering,  or  even 
simply  understanding,  that  ‘something  else’  was  really  Something  Else.  It  was  not  an  improved 
Spirit  nor  even  an  improved  Matter,  but ...  it  could  be  called  ‘nothing,’  so  contrary  was  it  to  all  we 
know.  For  the  caterpillar,  a  butterfly  is  nothing,  it  is  not  even  visible  and  has  nothing  in  common 
with  caterpillar  heavens  nor  even  caterpillar  matter.  So  there  we  were,  trapped  in  an  impossible 
adventure.  One  does  not  return  from  there:  one  must  cross  the  bridge  to  the  other  side.  Then  one  day 
in  that  seventh  year,  while  we  still  believed  in  liberations  and  the  collected  Upanishads,  highlighted 
with  a  few  glorious  visions  to  relieve  the  commonplace  (which  remained  appallingly 
commonplace),  while  we  were  still  considering  ‘the  Mother  of  the  Ashram’  rather  like  some 
spiritual  super-director  (endowed,  albeit,  with  a  disarming  yet  ever  so  provocative  smile,  as  though 
She  were  making  fun  of  us,  then  loving  us  in  secret),  She  told  us,  ‘I  have  the  feeling  that  ALL  we 
have  lived,  ALL  we  have  known,  ALL  we  have  done  is  a  perfect  illusion  ...  When  I  had  the  spiritual 
experience  that  material  life  is  an  illusion,  personally  I  found  that  so  marvelously  beautiful  and 
happy  that  it  was  one  of  the  most  beautiful  experiences  of  my  life,  but  now  it  is  the  entire  spiritual 
structure  as  we  have  lived  it  that  is  becoming  an  illusion!  -  Not  the  same  illusion,  but  an  illusion  far 
worse.  And  I  am  no  baby:  I  have  been  here  for  forty-seven  years  now!’  Yes,  She  was  eighty-three 
years  old  then.  And  that  day,  we  ceased  being  ‘the  enemy  of  our  own  conception  of  the  Divine,’  for 
this  entire  Divine  was  shattered  to  pieces  -  and  we  met  Mother,  at  last.  This  mystery  we  call 
Mother,  for  She  never  ceased  being  a  mystery  right  to  her  ninety-fifth  year,  and  to  this  day  still, 
challenges  us  from  the  other  side  of  a  wall  of  invisibility  and  keeps  us  floundering  fully  in  the 
mystery  -  with  a  smile.  She  always  smiles.  But  the  mystery  is  not  solved. 

Perhaps  this  AGENDA  is  really  an  endeavor  to  solve  the  mystery  in  the  company  of  a  certain 


number  of  fraternal  iconoclasts. 


Where,  then,  was  ‘the  Mother  of  the  Ashram’  in  all  this?  What  is  even  ‘the  Ashram,’  if  not  a 
spiritual  museum  of  the  resistances  to  Something  Else.  They  were  always  -  and  still  today  -  reciting 
their  catechism  beneath  a  little  flag:  they  are  the  owners  of  the  new  truth.  But  the  new  truth  is 
laughing  in  their  faces  and  leaving  them  high  and  dry  at  the  edge  of  their  little  stagnant  pond.  They 
are  under  the  illusion  that  Mother  and  Sri  Aurobindo,  twenty-seven  or  four  years  after  their 
respective  departures,  could  keep  on  repeating  themselves  -  but  then  they  would  not  be  Mother  and 
Sri  Aurobindo!  They  would  be  fossils.  The  truth  is  always  on  the  move.  It  is  with  those  who  dare, 
who  have  courage,  and  above  all  the  courage  to  shatter  all  the  effigies,  to  de-mystify,  and  to  go 
TRULY  to  the  conquest  of  the  new.  The  ‘new’  is  painful,  discouraging,  it  resembles  nothing  we 
know!  We  cannot  hoist  the  flag  of  an  unconquered  country  -  but  this  is  what  is  so  marvelous:  it 
does  not  yet  exist.  We  must  MAKE  IT  EXIST.  The  adventure  has  not  been  carved  out:  it  is  to  be 
carved  out.  Truth  is  not  entrapped  and  fossilized,  ‘spiritualized’:  it  is  to  be  discovered.  We  are  in  a 
nothing  that  we  must  force  to  become  a  something.  We  are  in  the  adventure  of  the  new  species.  A 
new  species  is  obviously  contradictory  to  the  old  species  and  to  the  little  flags  of  the  already- 
known.  It  has  nothing  in  common  with  the  spiritual  summits  of  the  old  world,  nor  even  with  its 
abysms  -  which  might  be  delightfully  tempting  for  those  who  have  had  enough  of  the  summits,  but 
everything  is  the  same,  in  black  or  white,  it  is  fraternal  above  and  below.  SOMETHING  ELSE  is 
needed. 

‘Are  you  conscious  of  your  ceils?’  She  asked  us  a  short  time  after  the  little  operation  of  spiritual 
demolition  She  had  undergone.  ‘No?  Well,  become  conscious  of  your  cells,  and  you  will  see  that  it 
gives  TERRESTRIAL  results.’  To  become  conscious  of  one’s  cells?  ...  It  was  a  far  more  radical 
operation  than  crossing  the  Maroni  with  a  machete  in  hand,  for  after  all,  trees  and  lianas  can  be  cut, 
but  what  cannot  be  so  easily  uncovered  are  the  grandfather  and  the  grandmother  and  the  whole 
atavistic  pack,  not  to  mention  the  animal  and  plant  and  mineral  layers  that  form  a  teeming  humus 
over  this  single  pure  little  cell  beneath  its  millennial  genetic  program.  The  grandfathers  and 
grandmothers  grow  back  again  like  crabgrass,  along  with  all  the  old  habits  of  being  hungry,  afraid, 
falling  ill,  fearing  the  worst,  hoping  for  the  best,  which  is  still  the  best  of  an  old  mortal  habit.  All 
this  is  not  uprooted  nor  entrapped  as  easily  as  celestial  ‘liberations,’  which  leave  the  teeming  humus 
in  peace  and  the  body  to  its  usual  decomposition.  She  had  come  to  hew  a  path  through  all  that.  She 
was  the  Ancient  One  of  evolution  who  had  come  to  make  a  new  cleft  in  the  old,  tedious  habit  of 
being  a  man.  She  did  not  like  tedious  repetitions,  She  was  the  adventuress  par  excellence  -  the 
adventuress  of  the  earth.  She  was  wrenching  out  for  man  the  great  Possible  that  was  already  beating 
there,  in  his  primeval  clearing,  which  he  believed  he  had  momentarily  trapped  with  a  few  machines. 
She  was  uprooting  a  new  Matter,  free,  free  from  the  habit  of  inexorably  being  a  man  who  repeats 
himself  ad  infinitum  with  a  few  improvements  in  the  way  of  organ  transplants  or  monetary 
exchanges.  In  fact,  She  was  there  to  discover  what  would  happen  after  materialism  and  after 
spiritualism,  these  prodigal  twin  brothers.  Because  Materialism  is  dying  in  the  West  for  the  same 
reason  that  Spiritualism  is  dying  in  the  East:  it  is  the  hour  of  the  new  species.  Man  needs  to  awaken, 
not  only  from  his  demons  but  also  from  his  gods.  A  new  Matter,  yes,  like  a  new  Spirit,  yes,  because 
we  still  know  neither  one  nor  the  other.  It  is  the  hour  when  Science,  like  Spirituality,  at  the  end  of 
their  roads,  must  discover  what  Matter  TRULY  is,  for  it  is  really  there  that  a  Spirit  as  yet  unknown 
to  us  is  to  be  found.  It  is  a  time  when  all  the  ‘isms’  of  the  old  species  are  dying:  ‘The  age  of 
Capitalism  and  business  is  drawing  to  its  close.  But  the  age  of  Communism  too  will  pass  ...  ‘It  is  the 
hour  of  a  pure  little  cell  THAT  WILL  HAVE  TERRESTRIAL  REPERCUSSIONS,  infinitely  more 
radical  than  all  our  political  and  scientific  or  spiritualistic  panaceas. 

This  fabulous  discovery  is  the  whole  story  of  the  AGENDA.  What  is  the  passage?  How  is  the 
path  to  the  new  species  hewed  open?  ...  Then  suddenly,  there,  on  the  other  side  of  this  old 
millennial  habit  -  a  habit,  nothing  more  than  a  habit!  -  of  being  like  a  man  endowed  with  time  and 
space  and  disease:  an  entire  geometry,  perfectly  implacable  and  ‘scientific’  and  medical;  on  the 
other  side  ...  none  of  that  at  all!  An  illusion,  a  fantastic  medical  and  scientific  and  genetic  illusion: 


death  does  not  exist,  time  does  not  exist,  disease  does  not  exist,  nor  do  ‘scar’  and  ‘far’  -  another 
way  of  being  IN  A  BODY.  For  so  many  millions  of  years  we  have  lived  in  a  habit  and  put  our  own 
thoughts  of  the  world  and  of  Matter  into  equations.  No  more  laws!  Matter  is  FREE.  It  can  create  a 
little  lizard,  a  chipmunk  or  a  parrot  -  but  it  has  created  enough  parrots.  Now  it  is  SOMETHING 
ELSE  ...  if  we  want  it. 

Mother  is  the  story  of  the  free  Earth.  Free  from  its  spiritual  and  scientific  parrots.  Free  from  its 
little  ashrams  as  well  -  for  there  is  nothing  more  persistent  than  those  particular  parrots. 

Day  after  day,  for  seventeen  years,  She  sat  with  us  to  tell  us  of  her  impossible  odyssey.  Ah,  how 
well  we  now  understand  why  She  needed  such  an  ‘outlaw’  and  an  incorrigible  heretic  like  us  to 
comprehend  a  little  bit  of  her  impossible  odyssey  into  ‘nothing.’  And  how  well  we  now  understand 
her  infinite  patience  with  us,  despite  all  our  revolts,  which  ultimately  were  only  the  revolts  of  the 
old  species  against  itself.  The  final  revolt.  ‘It  is  not  a  revolt  against  the  British  government  which 
any  one  can  easily  do.  It  is,  in  fact,  a  revolt  against  the  whole  universal  Nature!’  Sri  Aurobindo  had 
proclaimed  fifty  years  earlier.  She  listened  to  our  grievances,  we  went  away  and  we  returned.  We 
wanted  no  more  of  it  and  we  wanted  still  more.  It  was  infernal  and  sublime,  impossible  and  the  sole 
possibility  in  this  old,  asphyxiating  world.  It  was  the  only  place  one  could  go  to  in  this  barbed- 
wired,  mechanized  world,  where  Cincinnati  is  just  as  crowded  and  polluted  as  Hong  Kong.  The  new 
species  is  the  last  free  place  in  the  general  Prison.  It  is  the  last  hope  for  the  earth.  How  we  listened 
to  her  little  faltering  voice  that  seemed  to  return  from  afar,  afar,  after  having  crossed  spaces  and 
seas  of  the  mind  to  let  its  little  drops  of  pure,  crystalline  words  fall  upon  us,  words  that  make  you 
see.  We  listened  to  the  future,  we  touched  the  other  thing.  It  was  incomprehensible  and  yet  filled 
with  another  comprehension.  It  eluded  us  on  all  sides,  and  yet  it  was  dazzlingly  obvious.  The  ‘other 
species’  was  really  radically  other,  and  yet  it  was  vibrating  within,  absolutely  recognizable,  as  if  it 
were  THAT  we  had  been  seeking  from  age  to  age,  THAT  we  had  been  invoking  through  all  our 
illuminations,  one  after  another,  in  Thebes  as  in  Eleusis  as  everywhere  we  have  toiled  and  grieved 
in  the  skin  of  a  man.  It  was  for  THAT  we  were  here,  for  that  supreme  Possible  in  the  skin  of  a  man 
at  last.  And  then  her  voice  grew  more  and  more  frail,  her  breath  began  gasping  as  though  She  had  to 
traverse  greater  and  greater  distances  to  meet  us.  She  was  so  alone  to  beat  against  the  walls  of  the 
old  prison.  Many  claws  were  out  all  around.  Oh,  we  would  so  quickly  have  cut  ourself  free  from  all 
this  fiasco  to  fly  away  with  Her  into  the  world’s  future.  She  was  so  tiny,  stooped  over,  as  if  crushed 
beneath  the  ‘spiritual’  burden  that  all  the  old  surrounding  species  kept  heaping  upon  her.  They 
didn’t  believe,  no.  For  them,  She  was  ninety-five  years  old  +  so  many  days.  Can  someone  become  a 
new  species  all  alone?  They  even  grumbled  at  Her:  they  had  had  enough  of  this  unbearable  Ray  that 
was  bringing  their  sordid  affairs  into  the  daylight.  The  Ashram  was  slowly  closing  over  Her.  The 
old  world  wanted  to  make  a  new,  golden  little  Church,  nice  and  quiet.  No,  no  one  wanted  TO 
BECOME.  To  worship  was  so  much  easier.  And  then  they  bury  you,  solemnly,  and  the  matter  is 
settled  -  the  case  is  closed:  now,  no  one  need  bother  any  more  except  to  print  some  photographic 
haloes  for  the  pilgrims  to  this  brisk  little  business.  But  they  are  mistaken.  The  real  business  will  take 
place  without  them,  the  new  species  will  fly  up  in  their  faces  -  it  is  already  flying  in  the  face  of  the 
earth,  despite  all  its  isms  in  black  and  white;  it  is  exploding  through  all  the  pores  of  this  battered  old 
earth,  which  has  had  enough  of  shams  -  whether  illusory  little  heavens  or  barbarous  little  machines. 
It  is  the  hour  of  the  REAL  Earth.  It  is  the  hour  of  the  REAL  man.  We  are  all  going  there  -  if  only 
we  could  know  the  path  a  little  ... 

This  AGENDA  is  not  even  a  path:  it  is  a  light  little  vibration  that  seizes  you  at  any  turning  -  and 
then,  there  it  is,  you  are  IN  IT.  ‘Another  world  in  the  world,’  She  said.  One  has  to  catch  the  light 
little  vibration,  one  has  to  flow  with  it,  in  a  nothing  that  is  like  the  only  something  in  the  midst  of 
this  great  debacle.  At  the  beginning  of  things,  when  still  nothing  was  FIXED,  when  there  was  not 
yet  this  habit  of  the  pelican  or  the  kangaroo  or  the  chimpanzee  or  the  XXth  century  biologist,  there 
was  a  little  pulsation  that  beat  and  beat  -  a  delightful  dizziness,  a  joy  in  the  world’s  great  adventure; 
a  little  never-imprisoned  spark  that  has  kept  on  beating  from  species  to  species,  but  as  if  it  were 
always  eluding  us,  as  if  it  were  always  over  there,  over  there  -  as  if  it  were  something  to  become, 


something  to  be  played  forever  as  the  one  great  game  of  the  world;  a  who-knows-what  that  left  this 
sprig  of  a  pensive  man  in  the  middle  of  a  clearing;  a  little  ‘something’  that  beats,  beats,  that  keeps 
on  breathing  beneath  every  skin  that  has  ever  been  put  on  it  -  like  our  deepest  breath,  our  lightest 
air,  our  air  of  nothing  -  and  it  keeps  on  going,  it  keeps  on  going.  We  must  catch  the  light  little 
breath,  the  little  pulsation  of  nothing.  Then  suddenly,  on  the  threshold  of  our  clearing  of  concrete, 
our  head  starts  spinning  incurably,  our  eyes  blink  into  something  else,  and  all  is  different,  and  all 
seems  surcharged  with  meaning  and  with  life,  as  though  we  had  never  lived  until  that  very  minute. 
Then  we  have  caught  the  tail  of  the  Great  Possible,  we  are  upon  the  wayless  way,  radically  in  the 
new,  and  we  flow  with  the  little  lizard,  the  pelican,  the  big  man,  we  flow  everywhere  in  a  world  that 
has  lost  its  old  separating  skin  and  its  little  baggage  of  habits.  We  begin  seeing  otherwise,  feeling 
otherwise.  We  have  opened  the  gate  into  an  inconceivable  clearing.  Just  a  light  little  vibration  that 
carries  you  away.  Then  we  begin  to  understand  how  it  CAN  CHANGE,  what  the  mechanism  is  -  a 
light  little  mechanism  and  so  miraculous  that  it  looks  like  nothing.  We  begin  feeling  the  wonder  of  a 
pure  little  cell,  and  that  a  sparkling  of  joy  would  be  enough  to  turn  the  world  inside  out.  We  were 
living  in  a  little  thinking  fishbowl,  we  were  dying  in  an  old,  bottled  habit.  And  then  suddenly,  all  is 
different.  The  Earth  is  free!  Who  wants  freedom? 

It  begins  in  a  cell. 

A  pure  little  cell. 

Mother  is  the  joy  of  freedom. 

Joyous  Agenda! 

SAT P REM 

Nandanam 
Deer  House 
August  19,  1977 


Topographical  Note 


From  the  time  of  Sri  Aurobindo’s  departure  (1950)  until  1957,  we  have  only  a  few  notes  and 
fragments  or  rare  statements  noted  from  memory.  These  are  the  only  landmarks  of  this  period, 
along  with  Mother’s  Questions  and  Answers  from  her  talks  at  the  Ashram  Playground.  A  few  of 
these  conversations  have  been  reproduced  here  insofar  as  they  mark  stages  of  the  Supramental 
Action. 

From  1957,  Mother  received  us  twice  a  week  in  the  office  of  Pavitra,  the  most  senior  of  the 
French  disciples,  on  the  second  floor  of  the  main  Ashram  building,  on  some  pretext  of  work  or 
other.  She  listened  to  our  queries,  spoke  to  us  at  length  of  yoga,  occultism,  her  past  experiences  in 
Algeria  and  in  France  or  of  her  current  experiences;  and  gradually,  She  opened  the  mind  of  the 
rebellious  and  materialistic  Westerner  that  we  were  and  made  us  understand  the  laws  of  the  worlds, 
the  play  of  forces,  the  working  of  past  lives  -  especially  this  latter,  which  was  an  important  factor  in 
the  difficulties  with  which  we  were  struggling  at  that  time  and  which  periodically  made  us  abscond. 
Mother  would  be  seated  in  this  rather  medieval-looking  chair  with  its  high,  carved  back,  her  feet  on 
a  little  tabouret,  while  we  sat  on  the  floor,  on  a  slightly  faded  carpet,  conquered  and  seduced, 
revolted  and  never  satisfied  -  but  nevertheless,  very  interested.  Treasures,  never  noted  down,  were 
lost  until,  with  the  cunning  of  the  Sioux,  we  succeeded  in  making  Mother  consent  to  the  presence  of 
a  tape  recorder.  But  even  then,  and  for  a  long  time  thereafter,  She  carefully  made  us  erase  or  delete 
in  our  notes  all  that  concerned  Her  rather  too  personally  -  sometimes  we  disobeyed  Her. 

But  finally  we  were  able  to  convince  Her  of  the  value  inherent  in  keeping  a  chronicle  of  the 
route. 

It  was  only  in  1958  that  we  began  having  the  first  tape-recorded  conversations,  which,  properly 
speaking,  constitute  Mother’s  Agenda.  But  even  then,  many  of  these  conversations  were  lost  or  only 
partly  noted  down.  Or  else  we  considered  that  our  own  words  should  not  figure  in  these  notes  and 
we  carefully  omitted  all  our  questions  -  which  was  absurd.  At  that  time,  no  one  -  neither  Mother, 
nor  ourself  -  knew  that  this  was  ‘the  Agenda’  and  that  we  were  out  to  explore  the  ‘Great  Passage.’ 
Only  gradually  did  we  become  aware  of  the  true  nature  of  these  meetings.  Furthermore,  we  were 
constantly  on  the  road,  so  much  so  that  there  are  sizable  gaps  in  the  text.  In  fact,  for  seven  years, 
Mother  was  patiently  preparing  the  instrument  that  would  be  able  to  traverse  the  adventure  without 
breaking  along  the  way. 

From  1960,  the  Agenda  took  its  final  shape  arid  grew  for  thirteen  years,  until  May  1973,  filling 
thirteen  volumes  in  all  (some  six  thousand  pages),  with  a  change  of  setting  in  March  1962  at  the 
time  of  the  Great  Turning  in  Mother’s  yoga  when  She  pennanently  retired  to  her  room  upstairs,  as 
had  Sri  Aurobindo  in  1926.  The  interviews  then  took  place  high  up  in  this  large  room  carpeted  in 
golden  wool,  like  a  ship’s  stateroom,  amidst  the  rustling  of  the  Copper  Pod  tree  and  the  cawing  of 
crows.  Mother  would  sit  in  a  low  rosewood  chair,  her  face  turned  towards  Sri  Aurobindo’s  tomb,  as 
though  She  were  wearing  down  the  distance  separating  that  world  from  our  own.  Her  voice  had 
become  like  that  of  a  child,  one  could  hear  her  laughter.  She  always  laughed,  this  Mother.  And  then 
her  long  silences.  Until  the  day  the  disciples  closed  her  door  on  us.  It  was  May  19,  1973.  We  did  not 
want  to  believe  it.  She  was  alone,  just  as  we  were  suddenly  alone.  Slowly,  painfully,  we  had  to 
discover  the  why  of  this  rupture.  We  understood  nothing  of  the  jealousies  of  the  old  species,  we  did 
not  yet  realize  that  they  were  becoming  the  ‘owners’  of  Mother  -  of  the  Ashram,  of  Auroville,  of 
Sri  Aurobindo,  of  everything  -  and  that  the  new  world  was  going  to  be  denatured  into  a  new 
Church.  There  and  then,  they  made  us  understand  why  She  had  pulled  us  from  our  forest,  one  day, 
and  chosen  as  her  confidant  an  incurable  rebel. 


1951-1957. 

Notes  and  Fragments 


February  1951 


(Note  written  by  hand  two  months  after  Sri  Aurobindo ’s  departure) 

The  lack  of  the  earth’s  receptivity  and  the  behavior  of  Sri  Aurobindo’s  disciples1  are  largely 
responsible  for  what  happened  to  his  body.  But  one  thing  is  certain:  the  great  misfortune  that  has 
just  beset  us  in  no  way  affects  the  truth  of  his  teaching.  All  he  said  is  perfectly  true  and  remains  so. 
Time  and  the  course  of  events  will  make  this  abundantly  clear. 


Undated  1951 


(This  note,  originally  written  in  English,  was  meant  for  the  officials  who  had  wanted  to  present 
Mother  with  the  Nobel  Peace  Prize  proposed  for  Sri  Aurobindo  in  1951) 

I  am  only  realizing  what  He  has  conceived. 

I  am  only  the  protagonist  and  the  continuator  of  His  work. 


March  14, 1952 

Since  the  beginning  of  the  earth  wherever  and  whenever  there  was  the  possibility  of  manifesting  a 
ray  of  consciousness,  I  was  there.2 


tin  an  ‘official’  version.  Mother  had  omitted  ‘and  the  behavior  of  Sri  Aurobindo’s  disciples.’ 


20riginal  English.  In  another  version,  Mother  wrote,  ‘a  ray  of  the  Consciousness.’ 


August  2, 1952 


Only  when  it  is  no  longer  necessary  for  my  body  to  resemble  the  bodies  of  men  in  order  to  make 
them  progress  will  it  be  free  to  be  supramentalized.3 

*  *  * 

Only  when  men  shall  depend  exclusively  upon  the  Divine  and  upon  nothing  else  will  the  incarnate 
god  no  longer  need  to  die  for  them.4 


Undated  195(?) 


(Concerning  a  letter  from  the  Government  of  India) 

I  had  an  intense  experience. 

I  saw,  felt,  perceived  that  despite  all  appearances  to  the  contrary,  the  world  is  on  the  way 
towards  the  true,  towards  the  day  when  governmental  powers  will  belong  to  those  who  have  the  true 
power,  the  power  of  Truth.5 


3Note  written  by  Mother  in  French. 


4Note  written  by  Mother  in  French. 


5Note  written  by  Mother  in  French. 


April  1954 


(A  few  experiences  of  the  body  consciousness6 ) 

With  the  same  accuracy,  one  can  say  that  all  is  divine  or  that  nothing  is  divine.  Everything  depends 
upon  the  angle  from  which  one  looks  at  the  problem. 

Likewise,  it  can  be  said  that  the  divine  is  a  perpetual  becoming  and  yet  also,  that  it  is  immutable 
for  all  eternity. 

To  deny  or  affirm  God’s  existence  is  equally  true,  but  each  is  only  partially  true.  It  is  by  rising 
above  both  affirmation  and  negation  that  one  may  draw  nearer  the  truth. 

It  can  further  be  said  that  whatever  happens  in  the  world  is  the  result  of  divine  will,  but  also  that 
this  will  has  to  be  expressed  and  manifested  in  a  world  that  contradicts  or  deforms  it;  these  are  two 
attitudes  having,  respectively,  the  practical  effect  of  either  submitting  with  peace  and  joy  to 
whatever  happens  or,  on  the  contrary,  ceaselessly  fighting  for  the  triumph  of  what  should  be.  To 
live  the  truth  one  must  know  how  to  rise  above  both  attitudes  and  combine  them. 

*  *  * 

Keep  your  own  conviction  if  it  helps  you  to  build  your  life;  but  know  that  it  is  only  one  conviction 
and  that  the  others  are  as  good  and  true  as  yours. 

*  * 

Tolerance  is  full  of  a  sense  of  superiority;  it  should  be  replaced  by  total  understanding. 

*  *  * 

Because  truth  is  not  linear,  but  global,  and  not  successive,  but  simultaneous,  it  can  therefore  not  be 
expressed  in  words:  it  must  be  lived. 


*  * 

To  acquire  a  total  and  perfect  awareness  of  the  world  as  it  is  in  all  its  details,  one  must  first  have  no 
more  personal  reactions  in  regard  to  any  of  these  details,  nor  even  any  spiritual  preference  as  to 
what  they  ought  to  be.  In  other  words,  a  total  acceptance  with  a  perfect  neutrality  and  indifference  is 
the  indispensable  condition  for  a  knowledge  through  integral  identification.  If  one  detail,  no  matter 
how  small,  escapes  this  neutrality,  this  detail  also  escapes  identification.  The  absence  of  personal 
reactions,  whatever  their  end,  even  the  most  exalted,  is  thus  a  basic  necessity  for  total  knowledge. 

So  we  could  say,  paradoxically,  that  we  can  only  know  a  thing  when  we  are  not  interested  in  it, 
or  rather,  more  precisely,  when  we  are  not  personally  concerned  with  it. 

*  * 

Whenever  a  god  has  donned  a  body,  it  was  always  with  the  intention  of  transfonning  the  earth  and 
creating  a  new  world.  Yet  until  now,  he  always  had  to  give  up  his  body  without  being  able  to 
complete  his  work;  and  it  has  always  been  said  that  the  earth  was  not  ready,  that  mankind  did  not 
fulfill  the  conditions  necessary  for  the  work  to  be  accomplished. 


6The  following  texts  were  written  by  Mother  in  French. 


But  it  is  the  very  imperfection  of  the  incarnate  god  that  makes  the  perfection  of  those  about  him 
indispensable.  If  the  god  incarnate  realized  the  perfection  needed  for  the  progress  to  be  made,  this 
progress  would  not  be  conditioned  by  the  state  of  the  surrounding  matter.  However, 
interdependence  is  doubtlessly  absolute  in  this  world  of  utmost  objectification,  and  a  certain  degree 
of  perfection  in  the  general  manifestation  is  indispensable  before  a  higher  degree  of  perfection  can 
be  realized  in  the  divine,  incarnate  being.  It  is  the  need  for  a  certain  perfection  in  the  environment 
that  drives  human  beings  to  progress;  it  is  the  insufficiency  of  this  progress,  whatever  it  may  be, 
that  impels  the  divine  being  to  intensify  his  effort  for  progress  in  his  own  body.  Thus  both 
movements  for  progress  are  simultaneous  and  complementary. 


August  1954 


(Further  experiences  of  the  body  consciousness1 ) 

When  we  look  back  upon  our  lives,  we  almost  always  feel  that  in  some  circumstance  or  other  we 
could  have  done  better,  even  though  at  each  minute  the  action  was  dictated  by  the  inner  truth  this  is 
because  the  universe  is  in  perpetual  motion,  and  what  was  perfectly  true  at  one  time  is  only  partly 
so  today.  Or,  to  express  it  more  precisely,  the  action  necessary  at  the  time  it  was  carried  out  is  no 
longer  so  at  the  present  time,  and  another  action  might  more  fruitfully  take  its  place. 

*  *  * 

When  we  speak  of  transformation,  the  meaning  of  the  word  is  still  vague  to  us.  It  gives  us  the 
impression  of  something  that  is  going  to  happen  which  will  set  everything  right.  The  idea  more  or 
less  boils  down  to  this:  if  we  have  difficulties,  the  difficulties  will  vanish;  those  who  are  ill  will  be 
cured  of  their  illness;  if  the  body  has  infirmities  or  incapacities,  the  infirmities  or  incapacities  will 
fade  away,  and  so  forth  ...  But  as  I  have  said,  it  is  very  vague,  it  is  only  an  impression.  Now,  what  is 
quite  remarkable  about  the  body  consciousness  is  that  it  is  unable  to  know  a  thing  with  precision 
and  in  all  its  details  except  when  it  is  just  about  to  be  realized.  Thus,  when  the  process  of 
transformation  becomes  clear,  when  we  are  able  to  know  by  what  sequence  of  movements  and 
changes  the  total  transformation  will  take  place,  in  what  order,  by  which  path,  as  it  were,  which 
things  will  come  first,  which  will  follow  -  when  everything  is  known,  in  all  its  details,  it  will  be  a 
sure  indication  that  the  hour  of  realization  is  near,  for  each  time  you  perceive  a  detail  accurately,  it 
means  that  you  are  ready  to  carry  it  out. 

In  the  meantime,  one  can  have  an  overall  view.  For  example,  it  is  quite  certain  that  under  the 
influence  of  the  supramental  light,  the  transformation  of  the  body  consciousness  will  take  place  first 
then  will  come  a  progress  in  the  mastery  and  control  of  all  the  movements  and  workings  of  all  the 
body’s  organs;  afterwards  this  mastery  will  gradually  change  into  a  kind  of  radical  modification  of 
the  movement  and  then  of  the  constitution  of  the  organ  itself.  All  this  is  certain,  although  rather 
vague  to  our  perception.  But  what  will  finally  take  place  -  once  the  various  organs  are  replaced  by 


7The  following  texts  were  written  by  Mother  in  French. 


centers  of  concentration  of  forces,  each  with  a  different  quality  and  nature  and  each  acting 
according  to  its  own  special  mode  -  is  still  a  mere  conception,  and  the  body  does  not  understand 
very  well,  for  it  is  still  very  far  from  the  realization,  and  the  body  can  really  understand  only  when  it 
is  on  the  point  of  being  able  to  do. 


*  *  * 

The  supramentalized  body  will  be  sexless  since  the  need  for  animal  procreation  will  no  longer  exist. 

*  *  * 

It  is  only  in  its  outward  form,  in  its  most  superficial  appearance  -  as  illusory  for  the  latest 
discoveries  of  today’s  science  as  for  the  experience  of  spirituality  in  former  ages  -  that  the  body  is 
not  divine. 

Supreme  Reality,  Supramental  Truth,  this  body  is  all-vibrant  with  intense  gratitude.  You  have 
given  it,  one  by  one,  all  the  experiences  that  can  lead  it  most  infallibly  towards  You.  It  has  reached 
a  state  where  the  identification  with  You  is  not  only  the  sole  thing  desirable,  but  also  the  sole  thing 
possible  and  natural. 

How  to  describe  these  experiences  that  are  at  extreme  opposite  ends?  At  one  end,  I  can  say, 
‘Lord,  to  be  truly  near,  truly  worthy  of  You,  must  one  not  drink  the  cup  of  humiliation  to  the  dregs, 
yet  not  feel  humiliated?  The  contempt  of  men  renders  one  truly  free  and  ready  to  belong  to  You 
alone.’ 

At  the  other  end,  I  would  say,  ‘Lord,  to  be  truly  near,  truly  worthy  of  You,  must  one  not  be 
transported  to  the  summits  of  human  appreciation,  yet  not  feel  glorified?  It  is  when  men  call  one 
Divine  that  one  feels  best  his  own  inadequacy  and  the  need  to  be  truly  and  totally  identified  with 
You.’ 

The  two  experiences  are  simultaneous,  one  does  not  negate  the  other;  on  the  contrary,  they  seem 
to  complement  each  other  and  become  intenser  thereby.  In  this  intensity,  the  aspiration  grows 
tremendously;  and  in  response,  Your  presence  becomes  evident  in  the  cells,  giving  the  body  the 
appearance  of  a  multicolored  kaleidoscope  whose  myriad  luminous  particles  in  constant  motion  are 
sovereignly  reorganized  by  an  invisible,  all-powerful  Hand. 


August  25,  19548 


(Mother  reads  to  the  disciples  an  excerpt  from  Sri  Aurobindo ’s  THE  MOTHER ,  in  which  he 
describes  the  different  aspects  of  the  Creative  Power  -  what  is  India  is  called  the  ‘Shakti,  ’  or  the 
‘Mother  ’  -  which  have  presided  over  universal  evolution.) 

‘  ...  There  are  other  great  Personalities  of  the  Divine  Mother,  but  they  were  more  difficult  to  bring 

8The  following  text  is  an  extract  from  a  ‘Wednesday  Class,’  when  every  Wednesday  Mother  would  answer  questions 
raised  by  the  disciples  and  children  at  the  Ashram  Playground. 


down  and  have  not  stood  out  in  front  with  so  much  prominence  in  the  evolution  of  the  earth-spirit. 
There  are  among  them  Presences  indispensable  for  the  supramental  realization,  -  most  of  all  one 
who  is  her  Personality  of  that  mysterious  and  powerful  ecstasy  and  Ananda9  which  flows  from  a 
supreme  divine  Love,  the  Ananda  that  alone  can  heal  the  gulf  between  the  highest  heights  of  the 
supramental  spirit  and  the  lowest  abysses  of  Matter,  the  Ananda  that  holds  the  key  of  a  wonderful 
divines”  Life  and  even  now  supports  from  its  secrecies  the  work  of  all  the  other  Powers  of  the 
universe.’ 

Sri  Aurobindo,  The  Mother 


(A  disciple:)  Sweet  Mother,  what  is  this  Personality  and  when  will  It  manifest? 

My  answer  is  ready. 

I  knew  you  would  ask  me  this  question  because  it  is  indeed  the  most  interesting  thing  in  the 
whole  passage  -  so  my  answer  is  ready,  along  with  my  answer  to  another  question.  But  first  let  me 
read  you  this  one.  You  asked,  ‘What  is  this  Personality  and  when  will  She  come?’  Here  is  my 
answer  (Mother  reads): 

‘She  has  come,  bringing  with  Her  a  splendor  of  power  and  love,  an  intensity  of  divine  joy 
heretofore  unknown  to  the  Earth.  The  physical  atmosphere  has  been  completely  changed  by 
her  descent,  penneated  with  new  and  marvelous  possibilities. 

But  if  She  is  ever  to  reside  and  act  here,  She  has  to  find  at  least  a  minimal  receptivity,  at  least 
one  human  being  with  the  required  vital  and  physical  qualities,  a  kind  of  super-Parsifal  gifted 
with  an  innate  and  integral  purity,  yet  possessing  at  the  same  time  a  body  strong  enough  and 
poised  enough  to  bear  unwaveringly  the  intensity  of  the  Ananda  She  brings. 

Thus  far,  She  has  not  found  what  is  needed.  Men  remain  obstinately  men  and  do  not  want  to 
or  are  unable  to  become  supermen.  All  they  can  receive  and  express  is  a  love  at  their  own 
dimension:  a  human  love  -  whereas  the  supreme  bliss  of  divine  Ananda  eludes  their 
perception. 

At  times,  finding  the  world  unready  to  receive  Her,  She  contemplates  withdrawing.  But  how 
cruel  a  loss  this  would  be! 

It  is  true  that  at  present,  her  presence  is  more  rhetorical  than  factual,  since  so  far  She  has  had 
no  chance  to  manifest.  Yet  even  so,  She  is  a  powerful  instrument  in  the  Work,  for  of  all  the 
Mother’s  aspects,  She  holds  the  greatest  power  to  transform  the  body.  Indeed,  those  cells 
which  can  vibrate  at  the  touch  of  the  divine  Joy,  receive  it  and  bear  it,  are  cells  reborn,  on 
their  way  to  becoming  immortal. 

But  the  vibrations  of  divine  Bliss  and  those  of  pleasure  cannot  cohabit  in  the  same  vital  and 
physical  house.  We  must  therefore  TOTALLY  renounce  all  feelings  of  pleasure  to  be  ready  to 
receive  the  divine  Ananda.  But  rare  are  those  who  can  renounce  pleasure  without  thereby 
renouncing  all  active  participation  in  life  or  sinking  into  a  stern  asceticism.  And  among  those 
who  realize  that  the  transfonnation  is  to  be  wrought  in  active  life,  some  pretend  that  pleasure 
is  a  form  of  Ananda  gone  more  or  less  astray  and  legitimize  their  search  for  self-satisfaction, 
thereby  creating  a  virtually  insuperable  obstacle  to  their  own  transfonnation.’ 

Now,  if  there  is  anything  else  you  wish  to  ask  me  ...  Anyone  may  ask,  anyone  -  anyone  who  has 
something  to  say  -  not  just  the  students. 

Mother,  even  if  we  have  not  previously  succeeded,  can  7  we  still  try? 

What?  (the  disciple  repeats  his  question)  Oh!  You  can  always  try! 


9 Ananda:  Divine  Joy. 


The  world  is  recreated  from  minute  to  minute.  If  you  knew  how  -  I  mean  if  you  could  change 
your  nature  -  you  could  recreate  a  new  world  this  very  minute! 

I  didn’t  say  She  HAD  gone.  I  said  She  was  CONTEMPLATING  it ...  at  times,  now  and  then. 

But  Mother,  if  She  came  down,  She  must  have  seen  a  possibility! 

She  came  down  because  there  WAS  a  possibility  -  because  things  had  reached  such  a  stage  that  it 
was  her  hour  to  come  down.  But  in  truth,  She  came  down  because  ...  because  I  thought  it  was 
possible  for  her  to  succeed. 

Possibilities  are  still  there  -  only  they  have  to  materialize. 

This  is  borne  out  by  the  fact  that  her  descent  took  place  at  a  given  moment  and  for  two  or  three 
weeks  the  atmosphere  -  not  only  of  the  Ashram  but  of  the  Earth  -  was  so  highly  charged  with  such 
a  power  of  such  an  intense  divine  Bliss  creating  so  marvelous  a  force  that  things  difficult  to  do 
before  could  be  done  almost  instantly. 

There  were  repercussions  the  world  over.  But  I  don’t  believe  that  a  single  one  of  you  noticed 
it ...  you  cannot  even  tell  me  when  it  happened,  can  you? 

When  did  it  happen  ? 

I  don’t  know  dates.  I  don’t  know,  I  never  remember  dates.  I  can  only  tell  you  this  ...  that  it  happened 
before  Sri  Aurobindo  left  his  body,  that  he  was  told  about  it  beforehand  and  that  he  ...  well,  he 
acknowledged  the  fact. 

But  there  was  a  formidable  battle  with  the  Inconscient,  for  when  I  saw  that  the  level  of 
receptivity  was  not  what  it  should  have  been,  I  blamed  the  Inconscient  ...  and  tried  to  wage  the 
battle  there. 

I  don’t  say  it  was  ineffectual,  but  between  the  result  obtained  and  the  result  hoped  for,  there  was 
a  considerable  difference.  But  as  I  said,  you  who  are  all  so  near,  so  steeped  in  this  atmosphere  ... 
who  among  you  noticed  anything?  -  You  simply  went  on  with  your  little  lives  as  usual. 

I  think  it  was  in  1946,  Mother,  because  you  told  us  so  many  things  at  that  time. 

Right. 

(A  child:)  Sweet  Mother,  now  that  She  has  come,  what  should  we  do? 

You  don’t  know? 

(silence) 


Try  to  change  your  consciousness. 


(silence) 


Now  you  may  ask  me  the  questions  you  wanted  to  ask  ...  That’s  all? 

Mother,  there  is  not  even  one  single  man? 

I  don’t  know. 

Mother,  you  are  wasting  your  time  with  all  these  Ashram  people. 

Oh!  ...  But  you  see,  from  an  occult  standpoint,  it  is  a  selection.  From  an  external  standpoint  you 
could  say  that  there  are  people  in  the  world  who  are  far  superior  to  you  (and  I  would  not  disagree!), 
but  from  an  occult  standpoint,  it  is  a  selection.  There  are  ...  It  can  be  said  that  without  a  doubt  the 


majority  of  young  people  here  have  come  because  it  was  promised  them  that  they  would  be  present 
at  the  Hour  of  Realization  -  but  they  just  don’t  remember  it!  (Mother  laughs)  I  have  already  said 
several  times  that  when  you  come  down  on  earth,  you  fall  on  your  head,  which  leaves  you  a  little 
dazed!  (laughter)  It’s  a  pity,  but  after  all,  you  don’t  have  to  remain  dazed  all  your  lives,  do  you? 
You  should  go  deep  within  yourselves  and  there  find  the  immortal  consciousness  -  then  you  can  see 
very  well,  you  can  very  clearly  remember  the  circumstances  in  which  you  ...  you  aspired  to  be  here 
for  the  Hour  of  the  Work’s  realization. 

But  actually,  to  tell  you  the  truth,  I  think  your  lives  are  so  easy  that  you  don’t  exert  yourselves 
very  much!  How  many  among  you  have  truly  an  INTENSE  need  to  find  their  psychic  beings?  To 
find  out  truly  who  they  are?  To  find  out  what  their  roles  are,  why  they  are  here?  ...  You  just  let 
yourselves  drift.  You  even  complain  when  things  aren’t  easy  enough!  You  just  take  things  as  they 
come.  And  sometimes,  should  an  aspiration  arise  in  you  and  you  encounter  some  difficulty  in 
yourself,  you  say,  ‘Oh,  Mother  is  there!  She’ll  take  care  of  it  for  me!’  And  you  think  about 
something  else. 

Mother,  previously  things  were  very  strict  in  the  Ashram,  but  not  now.  Why? 

Yes,  I  have  always  said  that  it  changed  when  we  had  to  take  the  very  little  children.  How  can  you 
envision  an  ascetic  life  with  little  sprouts  no  bigger  than  that?  It’s  impossible!  But  that’s  the  little 
surprise  package  the  war  left  on  our  doorstep.  When  it  was  found  that  Pondicherry  was  the  safest 
place  on  earth,  naturally  people  came  wheeling  in  here  with  all  their  baby  carriages  filled  and  asked 
us  if  we  could  shelter  them,  so  we  couldn’t  very  well  turn  them  away,  could  we?!  That’s  how  it 
happened,  and  in  no  other  way  ...  But,  in  the  beginning,  the  first  condition  for  coming  here  was  that 
you  would  have  nothing  more  to  do  with  your  family!  If  a  man  was  married,  then  he  had  to 
completely  overlook  the  fact  that  he  had  a  wife  and  children  -  completely  sever  all  ties,  have 
nothing  further  to  do  with  them.  And  if  ever  a  wife  asked  to  come  just  because  her  husband 
happened  to  be  here,  we  told  her,  ‘You  have  no  business  coming  here!  ’ 

In  the  beginning,  it  was  very,  very  strict  -  for  a  long  time. 

The  first  condition  was:  ‘Nothing  more  to  do  with  your  family  ...’  Well,  we  are  a  long  way  from 
that!  But  I  repeat  that  it  only  happened  because  of  the  war  and  not  because  we  stopped  seeing  the 
need  to  cut  all  family  ties;  on  the  contrary,  this  is  an  indispensable  condition  because  as  long  as  you 
hang  on  to  all  these  cords  which  bind  you  to  ordinary  life,  which  make  you  a  slave  to  the  ordinary 
life,  how  can  you  possibly  belong  to  the  Divine  alone?  What  childishness!  It  is  simply  not  possible. 
If  you  have  ever  taken  the  trouble  to  read  over  the  early  ashram  rules,  you  would  find  that  even 
friendships  were  considered  dangerous  and  undesirable  ...  We  made  every  effort  to  create  an 
atmosphere  in  which  only  ONE  thing  counted:  the  Life  Divine. 

But  as  I  said,  bit  by  bit  ...  things  changed.  However,  this  had  one  advantage:  we  were  too  much 
outside  of  life.  So  there  were  a  number  of  problems  which  had  never  arisen  but  which  would  have 
suddenly  surged  up  the  moment  we  wanted  a  complete  manifestation.  We  took  on  all  these 
problems  a  little  prematurely,  but  it  gave  us  the  opportunity  to  solve  them.  In  this  way  we  learned 
many  things  and  surmounted  many  difficulties,  only  it  complicated  things  considerably.  And  in  the 
present  situation,  given  such  a  large  number  of  elements  who  haven’t  even  the  slightest  idea  why 
they’re  here  (!  )  ...  well,  it  demands  a  far  greater  effort  on  the  disciples’  part  than  before. 

Before,  when  there  were  ...  we  started  with  35  or  36  people  -  but  even  when  it  got  up  to  150, 
even  with  150  -  it  was  as  if ...  they  were  all  nestled  in  a  cocoon  in  my  consciousness:  they  were  so 
near  to  me  that  I  could  constantly  guide  ALL  their  inner  or  outer  movements.  Day  and  night,  at  each 
moment,  everything  was  totally  under  my  control.  And  naturally,  I  think  they  made  a  great  deal  of 
progress  at  that  time:  it  is  a  fact  that  I  was  CONSTANTLY  doing  the  sadhana 10  for  them.  But  then, 
with  this  baby  boom  ...  The  sadhana  can’t  be  done  for  little  sprouts  who  are  3  or  4  or  5  years  old! 


10 Sadhana:  yogic  discipline  or  effort. 


It’s  out  of  the  question.  The  only  thing  I  can  do  is  wrap  them  in  the  Consciousness  and  try  to  see 
that  they  grow  up  in  the  best  of  all  possible  conditions.  However,  the  one  advantage  to  all  this  is 
that  instead  of  there  being  such  a  COMPLETE  and  PASSIVE  dependence  on  the  disciples’  part, 
each  one  has  to  make  his  own  little  effort.  Truly,  that’s  excellent. 

I  don’t  know  to  whom  I  was  mentioning  this  today  (I  think  it  was  for  a  Birthday11  )  ...  No,  I 
don’t  know  now.  It  was  to  someone  who  told  me  he  was  18  years  old.  I  said  that  between  the  ages 
of  18  and  20, 1  had  attained  a  constant  and  conscious  union  with  the  Divine  Presence  and  that  I  had 
done  this  ALL  ALONE,  without  ANYONE’S  help,  not  even  books.  When  a  little  later  I  chanced 
upon  Vivekananda’s  Raja  Yoga,  it  really  seemed  so  wonderful  to  me  that  someone  could  explain 
something  to  me!  And  it  helped  me  realize  in  only  a  few  months  what  would  have  otherwise  taken 
years. 

I  met  a  man  (I  was  perhaps  20  or  2 1  at  the  time),  an  Indian  who  had  come  to  Europe  and  who 
told  me  of  the  Gita.  There  was  a  French  translation  of  it  (a  rather  poor  one,  I  must  say)  which  he 
advised  me  to  read,  and  then  he  gave  me  the  key  (HIS  key,  it  was  his  key).  He  said,  ‘Read  the 
Gita  ...’  (this  translation  of  the  Gita  which  really  wasn’t  worth  much  but  it  was  the  only  one 
available  at  the  time  -  in  those  days  I  wouldn’t  have  understood  anything  in  other  languages;  and 
besides,  the  English  translations  were  just  as  bad  and  ...  well,  Sri  Aurobindo  hadn’t  done  his  yet!). 
He  said,  ‘Read  the  Gita  knowing  that  Krishna  is  the  symbol  of  the  immanent  God,  the  God  within.’ 
That  was  all.  ‘Read  it  with  THAT  knowledge  -  with  the  knowledge  that  Krishna  represents  the 
immanent  God,  the  God  within  you.’  Well,  within  a  month,  the  whole  thing  was  done! 

So  some  of  you  people  have  been  here  since  the  time  you  were  toddlers  -  everything  has  been 
explained  to  you,  the  whole  thing  has  been  served  to  you  on  a  silver  platter  (not  only  with  words, 
but  through  psychic  aid  and  in  every  possible  way),  you  have  been  put  on  the  path  of  this  inner 
discovery  ...  and  then  you  just  go  on  drifting  along:  ‘When  it  comes,  it  will  come.’  -  If  you  even 
spare  it  that  much  thought! 

So  that’s  how  it  is. 

But  I’m  not  at  all  discouraged,  I  just  find  it  rather  laughable.  Only  there  are  other  far  more 
serious  things;  for  example,  when  you  try  to  deceive  yourselves  -  that  is  not  so  pretty.  One  should 
not  mix  up  cats  and  kings.  You  should  call  a  cat  a  cat  and  a  king  a  king  -  and  human  instinct, 
human  instinct  -  and  not  speak  about  things  divine  when  they  are  utterly  human,  nor  pretend  to 
have  supramental  experiences  when  you  are  living  in  a  blatantly  ordinary  consciousness. 

If  you  look  at  yourselves  straight  in  the  face  and  you  see  what  you  are,  then  if  by  chance  you 
should  resolve  to  ...  But  what  really  astounds  me  is  that  you  don’t  even  seem  to  feel  an  intense 
NEED  to  do  this!  ‘But  how  can  we  know?’  Because  you  DO  know,  you  have  been  told  over  and 
over  again,  it  has  been  drummed  into  your  heads.  You  KNOW  that  you  have  a  divine  consciousness 
within  you.  And  yet  you  can  go  on  sleeping  night  after  night,  playing  day  after  day,  doing  your 
lessons  ad  infinitum  and  still  not  be  ...  not  have  a  BURNING  desire  and  will  to  come  into  contact 
with  yourselves!  -  With  yourselves,  yes,  the  you  just  there,  inside  (motion  towards  the  center  of  the 
chest)  ...  Really,  it’s  beyond  me! 

As  soon  as  I  found  out  -  and  no  one  told  me,  I  found  out  through  an  experience  -  as  soon  as  I 
found  out  that  there  was  a  discovery  to  be  made  within  myself,  well,  it  became  THE  MOST 
IMPORTANT  thing  in  the  world.  It  took  precedence  over  everything  else! 

And  when,  as  I  told  you,  I  chanced  upon  a  book  or  an  individual  that  could  give  me  just  a  little 
clue  and  tell  me,  ‘Here.  If  you  do  such  and  such,  you  will  find  your  path’  -  well  I  charged  into  it 
like  a  cyclone  ...  and  nothing  could  have  stopped  me. 

And  how  many  years  have  you  all  been  here,  half-asleep?  Naturally,  you’re  happy  to  think  about 
it  now  and  then  -  especially  when  I  speak  to  you  about  it  or  sometimes  when  you  read.  But  THAT  - 


1 1  Mother  received  each  disciple  individually  on  his  birthday. 


that  fire,  that  will  which  plows  through  all  barriers,  that  concentration  which  can  triumph  over 
EVERYTHING  ... 

Now  who  was  it  that  asked  me  what  you  should  do? 

(The  child:)  Me! 

Well,  that’s  what  you  have  to  do,  my  child.  I  have  just  told  you. 

(silence) 


Mother,  what  was  the  other  thing  you  wrote? 

I  thought  someone  might  ask  me,  ‘Why  doesn’t  She12  stay  for  your  sake?  Since  She  came  here 
because  you  called  Her,  then  why  doesn’t  She  stay  for  your  sake?’ 

But  no  one  asked  me  that. 

Tell  us,  Mother  -  we  really  want  to  know,  Sweet  Mother! 

For  Her,  this  body  is  but  one  instrument  among  so  many  others  in  an  eternity  of  ages  to  come,  and 
for  Her  its  only  importance  is  that  attributed  to  it  by  the  Earth  and  mankind  -  the  extent  to  which  it 
can  be  used  as  a  channel  to  further  Her  manifestation.  If  I  find  myself  surrounded  by  people  who 
are  incapable  of  receiving  Her,  then  for  Her,  I  am  quite  useless. 

It  is  very  clear.  So  it  is  not  I  who  can  make  Her  stay.  And  I  certainly  cannot  ask  Her  to  stay  for 
egotistical  reasons.  Moreover,  all  these  Aspects,  all  these  Personalities  manifest  constantly  -  but 
they  never  manifest  for  personal  reason.  Not  one  of  them  has  ever  thought  of  helping  my  body  - 
besides,  I  don’t  ask  them  to  because  that  is  not  their  purpose.  But  it  is  more  than  obvious  that  if  the 
people  around  me  were  receptive,  She  could  permanently  manifest  since  they  could  receive  Her  - 
and  this  would  help  my  body  enonnously  because  all  these  vibrations  would  run  through  it.  But  She 
never  gets  even  a  chance  to  manifest  -  not  a  single  one.  She  only  meets  people  ...  who  don’t  even 
feel  Her  when  She’s  there!  They  don’t  even  notice  Her,  they’re  not  even  aware  of  her  presence.  So 
how  can  She  manifest  in  these  conditions?  I’m  not  going  to  ask  Her,  ‘Please  come  and  change  my 
body.’  We  don’t  have  that  kind  of  relationship!  Furthermore,  the  body  itself  wouldn’t  agree.  It 
never  thinks  of  itself,  it  never  pays  attention  to  itself,  and  besides,  it  is  only  through  the  work  that  it 
can  be  transformed. 

Yes,  certainly  ...  had  there  been  any  receptivity  when  She  came  down  and  had  She  been  able  to 
manifest  with  the  power  with  which  She  came  ...  But  I  can  tell  you  one  thing:  even  before  Her 
coming,  when,  with  Sri  Aurobindo,  I  had  begun  going  down  (for  the  Yoga)  from  the  mental  plane 
to  the  vital  plane,  when  we  brought  our  yoga  down  from  the  mental  plane  into  the  vital  plane,  in 
less  than  a  month  (I  was  forty  years  old  at  the  time  - 1  didn’t  seem  very  old,  I  looked  less  than  forty, 
but  I  was  forty  anyway),  after  no  more  than  a  month  of  this  yoga,  I  looked  exactly  like  an  18  year 
old!  And  someone  who  knew  me  and  had  stayed  with  me  in  Japan13  came  here,  and  when  he  saw 
me,  he  could  scarcely  believe  his  eyes!  He  said,  ‘But  my  god,  is  it  you?’  I  said,  ‘Of  course!  ’ 

Only  when  we  went  down  from  the  vital  plane  into  the  physical  plane,  all  this  went  away  - 
because  on  the  physical  plane,  the  work  is  much  harder  and  we  had  so  much  to  do,  so  many  things 
to  change. 


12The  Mother  of  Ananda,  or  the  Creative  Power’s  aspect  of  Joy. 


13W.W.  Pearson,  a  friend  of  Rabindranath  Tagore,  who  had  come  from  Tagore’s  Ashram  in  1923;  Mother  had  met  him 
with  Tagore  in  1916  in  Japan. 


But  if  a  force  like  Hers  could  manifest  and  be  received  here,  it  would  have  INESTIMABLE 
results!  ... 

Well,  I  am  only  telling  you  all  this  because  I  thought  someone  might  ask  me  about  it,  but 
otherwise  ...  I  don’t  have  that  kind  of  relationship  with  Her.  You  see,  if  you  consider  this  body,  this 
poor  body,  it  is  very  innocent:  it  in  no  way  tries  to  draw  attention  to  itself  nor  to  attract  forces  nor  to 
do  anything  at  all  except  its  work  -  as  best  it  can.  And  that’s  how  it  stands:  its  importance  is 
proportionate  to  its  usefulness  ...  and  to  the  significance  the  world  attributes  to  it  -  since  its  action  is 
for  the  world. 

But  in  and  of  itself,  it  is  only  one  body  among  countless  others.  That’s  all. 

(To  the  disciple  handling  the  microphone:)  It’s  over  now. 

(Mother  gets  up  to  go,  but  while  leaving,  She  says  to  the  children  around  her:)  If  you  had  made 
just  one  little  decision  to  try  to  feel  your  psychic  being,  my  time  would  not  have  been  wasted. 


March  26,  1955 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Pondicherry,  March  26,  1955 

Mother,  once  more  I  come  to  ask  you  for  Mahakali’s14  intervention.  After  a  period  when  everything 
seemed  much  better,  I  again  awake  to  impossible  mornings  when  I  live  badly,  very  badly,  far  from 
you,  incapable  of  calling  you  and,  what’s  more,  of  feeling  your  Presence  or  your  help. 

I  don’t  know  what  mud  is  stirring  about  in  me,  but  everything  is  obscured,  and  I  cannot 
dissociate  myself  from  these  vital  waves. 

Mother,  without  Mahakali’s  grace,  I  shall  never  be  able  to  get  out  of  this  mechanical  round,  to 
shatter  these  old  formations,  ever  the  same,  which  keep  coming  back.  Mother,  I  beg  of  you,  help, 
me  to  BREAK  this  shell  in  which  I  am  suffocating.  Deliver  me  from  myself,  deliver  me  in  spite  of 
myself  Alone,  I  am  helpless;  sometimes  I  cannot  even  call  you!  May  your  force  come  and  burn  all 
my  impurities,  shatter  my  resistances. 

Signed:  Bernard15 


April  4, 1955 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 

Pondicherry,  April  4,  1955 

Mother,  for  more  than  a  year  now  I  have  been  near  you  and  nothing,  no  really  significant  inner 
experience,  no  sign  has  come  that  allows  me  to  feel  I  have  progressed  or  merely  to  show  me  that  I 
am  on  the  right  path.  I  cannot  even  say  I  am  happy. 

I  am  not  so  absurdly  pretentious  as  to  blame  the  divine,  nor  yourself  -  and  I  remain  quite 
convinced  that  all  this  is  my  own  fault.  Undoubtedly  I  have  not  known  how  to  surrender  totally  in 
some  part  of  myself,  or  I  do  not  aspire  enough  or  know  how  to  ‘open’  myself  as  needed.  Also,  I 
should  rely  entirely  upon  the  divine  to  take  care  of  my  progress  and  not  be  concerned  about  the 
absence  of  experiences.  I  have  therefore  asked  myself  why  I  am  so  far  away  from  the  true  attitude, 
the  genuine  opening,  and  I  see  two  main  reasons:  on  the  one  hand,  the  difficulties  inherent  in  my 

14 Mahakali:  the  eternal  Mother  in  her  warrior  aspect,  She  who  severs  the  heads  of  the  demons. 


15Such  was  our  old,  meaningless  name  (except  for  its  Germanic  root:  ‘hard  bear’)  until  a  certain  March  3,  1957,  when 
Mother  named  us  Sat-prem  (‘the  one  who  loves  truly’). 


own  nature,  and  on  the  other,  the  outer  conditions  of  this  sadhana.  These  conditions  do  not  seem  to 
be  conducive  to  helping  me  overcome  the  difficulties  in  my  own  nature. 

I  feel  that  I  am  turning  in  circles  and  taking  one  step  backward  for  each  one  forward. 
Furthennore,  instead  of  helping  me  draw  nearer  to  the  divine  consciousness,  my  work  in  the 
Ashram  (the  very  fact  of  working  -  for  to  change  work,  even  if  I  felt  like  it,  would  not  change  the 
overall  situation),  diverts  me  from  this  divine  consciousness,  or  at  least  keeps  me  in  a  superficial 
consciousness  from  which  I  am  unable  to  ‘unglue’  myself  as  long  as  I  am  busy  writing  letters,  doing 
translations,  corrections  or  classes.16  I  know  it’s  my  own  fault,  that  I  ‘should’  know  how  to  be 
detached  from  my  work  and  do  it  by  relying  upon  a  deeper  consciousness,  but  what  can  be  done? 
Unless  I  receive  the  grace,  I  cannot  ‘remember’  the  essential  thing  as  long  as  the  outer  part  of  my 
being  is  active. 

When  I  am  not  immediately  engrossed  in  work,  I  have  to  confront  a  thousand  little  temptations 
and  daily  difficulties  that  come  from  my  contact  with  other  beings  and  a  life  that  does  indeed 
remain  in  life.  Here,  even  more,  there  is  the  feeling  of  an  impossible  struggle,  and  all  these  Tittle’ 
difficulties  seem  to  gnaw  away  at  me;  scarcely  has  one  hole  been  filled  when  another  opens  up,  or 
the  same  one  reappears,  and  there  is  never  any  real  victory  -  one  has  constantly  to  begin  everything 
again.  Finally,  it  seems  to  me  that  I  really  live  only  one  hour  a  day,  during  the  evening  ‘distribution’ 
at  the  playground.17  It  is  scarcely  a  life  and  scarcely  a  sadhana! 

Consequently,  I  understand  much  better  now  why  in  the  traditional  yogas  one  ‘settled’  all  these 
difficulties  once  and  for  all  by  escaping  from  the  world,  without  bothering  to  transfonn  a  life  that 
seems  so  untransformable. 

I  am  not  now  going  to  renounce  Sri  Aurobindo’s  Yoga,  Mother,  for  my  whole  life  is  based  upon 
it,  but  I  believe  I  should  employ  other  means  -  which  is  why  I  am  writing  you  this  letter. 

By  continuing  this  daily  little  ant-like  struggle  and  by  having  to  confront  the  same  desires,  the 
same  ‘distractions’  every  day,  it  seems  to  me  I  am  wasting  my  energy  in  vain.  Sri  Aurobindo’s 
Yoga,  which  is  meant  to  include  life,  is  so  difficult  that  one  should  come  to  it  only  after  having 
already  established  the  solid  base  of  a  concrete  divine  realization.  That  is  why  I  want  to  ask  you  if  I 
should  not  ‘withdraw’  for  a  certain  time,  to  Almora,18  for  example,  to  Brewster’s  place,19  to  live  in 
solitude,  silence,  meditation,  far  away  from  people,  work  and  temptations,  until  a  beginning  of 
Light  and  Realization  is  concretized  in  me.  Once  this  solid  base  is  acquired,  it  would  be  easier  for 
me  to  resume  my  work  and  the  struggle  here  for  the  true  transformation  of  the  outer  being.  But  to 
want  to  transform  this  outer  being  without  having  fully  illumined  the  inner  being  seems  to  me  to  be 
putting  the  cart  before  the  horse,  or  at  least  condemning  myself  to  a  pitiless  and  endless  battle  in 
which  the  best  of  my  forces  are  fruitlessly  consumed. 

In  all  sincerity,  I  must  say  that  when  I  was  at  Brewster’s  place  in  Almora,  I  felt  very  near  to  that 
state  in  which  the  Light  must  surge  forth.  I  quite  understand  the  imperfection  of  this  process,  which 
involves  fleeing  from  difficulties,  but  this  would  only  be  a  stage,  a  strategic  ‘retreat,’  as  it  were. 

Mother,  this  is  not  a  vital  desire  seeking  to  divert  me  from  the  sadhana,  for  my  life  has  no  other 
meaning  than  to  seek  the  divine,  but  it  seems  to  be  the  only  solution  that  could  bring  about  some 

16For  a  long  time,  Satprem  took  care  of  the  correspondence  with  the  outside,  along  with  Pavitra  not  to  mention  editing 
the  Ashram  Bulletin  as  well  as  Mother’s  writings  and  talks  translating  Sri  Aurobindo’s  works  Unto  French,  and 
conducting  classes  at  the  Ashram’s  ‘International  Centre  of  Education.’ 


1 7Every  evening  at  the  Playground,  the  disciples  passed  before  Mother  one  by  one  to  receive  symbolically  some  food. 


18In  the  Himalayas. 


19An  American  artist,  an  old  friend  of  D.H.  Lawrence,  and  Satprem’s  friend. 


progress  and  get  me  out  of  this  lukewarm  slump  in  which  I  have  been  living  day  after  day.  I  cannot 
be  satisfied  living  merely  one  hour  a  day,  when  I  see  you. 

I  know  that  you  do  not  like  to  write,  Mother,  but  couldn’t  you  say  in  a  few  words  if  you  approve 
of  my  project  or  what  I  should  do?  In  spite  of  all  my  rebellions  and  discouragements  and 
resistances,  I  am  your  child.  O  Mother,  help  me! 

Signed:  Bernard 


(Mother ’s  reply) 


My  dear  child, 

No  doubt  it  would  be  better  to  go  to  Almora  for  a  while  -  not  for  too  long,  I  hope,  for  it  is 
needless  to  say  how  much  the  work  will  be  disrupted  by  this  departure  ... 

(Another  handwritten  version) 


4.7.55 


My  dear  child, 

You  may  go  to  Almora  if  you  think  it  will  help  you  break  this  shell  of  the  outer  consciousness, 
so  obstinately  impenetrable. 

Perhaps  being  far  away  from  the  Ashram  for  a  while  will  help  you  feel  the  special  atmosphere 
that  exists  here  and  that  cannot  be  found  anywhere  else  to  the  same  extent. 

In  any  event,  my  blessings  will  always  be  with  you  to  help  you  find,  at  long  last,  this  inner 
Presence  which  alone  gives  joy  and  stability. 

Signed:  Mother 


June  9, 1955 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Pondicherry,  June  9,  1955 

Mother,  I  cannot  say  that  it  is  a  nostalgia  for  the  outside  world  that  is  drawing  me  backwards  nor 
some  attachment  to  a  ‘personal’  form  of  life,  nor  even  some  vital  desire  seeking  its  own  satisfaction. 
That  old  world  no  longer  attracts  me,  and  I  do  not  see  at  all  what  I  would  do  there.  Yet  something  is 
standing  in  my  way. 

If  only  I  could  see  a  distinct  ‘error’  blocking  my  path  which  I  could  clearly  attack  ...  But  I  feel 
that  I  am  not  responsible,  that  it  is  not  my  personal  fault  if  I  remain  without  aspiration,  stagnating.  I 


feel  like  a  battlefield  of  contending  forces  that  are  beyond  me  and  against  which  I  can  do 
NOTHING.  Oh  Mother,  it  is  not  an  excuse  for  a  lack  of  will,  or  at  least  I  don’t  think  so  -  I 
profoundly  feel  like  a  helpless  toy,  totally  helpless. 

If  the  divine  force,  if  your  grace,  does  not  intervene  to  shatter  this  obscure  resistance  that  is 
drawing  me  downwards  in  spite  of  myself,  I  don’t  know  what  will  become  of  me  ...  Mother,  I  am 
not  blackmailing  you,  I  am  only  expressing  my  helplessness,  my  anguish. 

During  the  day,  I  live  more  or  less  calmly  in  my  little  morass,  but  as  evening  and  the  moment  to 
meet  you  draw  near,  then  the  forces  pinning  me  to  the  ground  begin  raging  beneath  your  pressure, 
and  I  feel  at  times  an  unbearable  tearing  that  burns  and  constricts  in  my  throat  like  tears  that  cannot 
be  shed.  Afterwards,  Truth  regains  possession  of  me  -  but  the  following  day  it  all  begins  again. 

Mother,  it  is  an  impossible,  absurd,  unlivable  life.  I  feel  as  though  I  have  no  hand  in  this  cruel 
little  game.  Oh  Mother,  why  doesn’t  your  grace  trust  that  deep  part  in  me  which  knows  so  well  that 
you  are  the  Truth?  Deliver  me  from  these  evil  forces  since,  profoundly,  it  is  you  and  you  alone  I 
want.  Give  me  the  aspiration  and  strength  I  do  not  have.  If  you  do  not  do  this  Yoga  for  me,  I  feel  I 
shall  never  have  the  strength  to  go  on. 

There  is  something  that  must  be  SHATTERED:  can  it  not  be  done  once  and  for  all  without 
lingering  on  indefinitely?  Mother,  I  am  your  child. 

Signed:  Bernard 


Mother,  this  letter  is  a  prayer. 


(Mother’s  reply) 


June  11,  1955 


My  dear  child, 

Your  case  is  not  unique;  there  are  others  (and  among  the  best  and  the  most  faithful)  who  are 
likewise  a  veritable  battlefield  for  the  forces  opposing  the  advent  of  the  truth.  They  feel  powerless 
in  this  battle,  sorrowful  witnesses,  victims  without  the  strength  to  fight,  for  this  is  taking  place  in 
that  part  of  the  physical  consciousness  where  the  supramental  forces  are  not  yet  fully  active, 
although  I  am  confident  they  soon  will  be.  Meanwhile,  the  only  remedy  is  to  endure,  to  go  through 
this  suffering  and  to  await  patiently  the  hour  of  liberation. 

While  reading  your  prayer,  I  too  prayed  that  it  be  heard. 

With  my  blessings. 

Signed:  Mother 


1955 


September  3, 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Pondicherry,  September  3,  1955 

Mother,  it  seems  that  for  weeks  I  have  been  knocking  against  myself  at  every  turn,  as  though  I  were 
in  a  prison,  and  I  cannot  get  out  of  it.  Mother,  I  need  your  Space,  your  Light,  to  get  out  of  this 
walled-in  night  that  is  suffocating  me. 

No  matter  where  I  concentrate,  in  my  heart,  above  my  head,  between  my  eyes,  I  bang 
everywhere  into  an  unyielding  wall;  I  no  longer  know  which  way  to  turn,  what  I  must  do,  say,  pray 
in  order  to  be  freed  from  all  this  at  last.  Mother,  I  know  that  I  am  not  making  all  the  effort  I  should, 
but  help  me  to  make  this  effort,  I  implore  your  grace.  I  need  so  much  to  find  at  last  this  solid  rock 
upon  which  to  lean,  this  space  of  light  where  finally  I  may  seek  refuge.  Mother,  open  the  psychic 
being  in  me,  open  me  to  your  sole  Light  which  I  need  so  much.  Without  your  grace,  I  can  only  turn 
in  circles,  hopelessly.  O  Mother,  may  I  live  in  you. 

Your  child, 
Signed:  Bernard 


September  15, 1955 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Pondicherry,  September  15,  1955 

Mother  ...  suddenly  everything  seems  to  have  crystallized  -  all  the  little  revolts,  the  little  tensions, 
the  ill  will  and  petty  vital  demands  -  forming  a  single  block  of  open,  determined  resistance.  I  have 
become  conscious  that  from  the  beginning  of  my  sadhana,  the  mind  has  led  the  game  -  with  the 
psychic  behind  -  and  has  ‘held  me  in  leash,’  helped  muzzle  all  contrary  movements,  but  at  no  time, 
or  only  rarely,  has  the  vital  submitted  or  opened  to  the  higher  influence.  The  rare  times  when  the 
vital  participated,  I  felt  a  great  progress.  But  now,  I  find  myself  in  front  of  this  solid  mass  that  says 
‘No’  and  is  not  at  all  convinced  of  what  the  mind  has  been  imposing  upon  it  for  almost  two  years 
now. 

Mother,  I  am  sufficiently  awakened  not  to  rebel  against  your  Light  and  to  understand  that  the 
vital  is  but  one  part  of  my  being,  but  I  have  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the  only  way  of 
‘convincing’  this  vital  is  not  to  force  or  stifle  it,  but  to  let  it  go  through  its  own  experience  so  it  may 
understand  by  itself  that  it  cannot  be  satisfied  in  this  way.  I  feel  the  need  to  leave  the  Ashram  for  a 
while  to  see  how  I  can  get  along  away  from  here  -  and  to  realize,  no  doubt,  that  one  can  really 
breathe  only  here. 

I  have  friends  in  Bangalore  whom  I  would  like  to  join  for  two  or  three  weeks,  perhaps  more, 
perhaps  less,  however  long  it  may  take  to  confront  this  vital  with  its  own  freedom.  I  need  a  vital 
activity,  to  move,  to  sail,  for  example,  to  have  friends  ...  etc.  The  need  I  am  feeling  is  exactly  that 


which  I  sought  to  satisfy  in  the  past  through  my  long  boat  journeys  along  the  coast  of  Brittany.  It  is 
a  kind  of  thirst  for  space  and  movement. 

Otherwise,  Mother,  there  is  this  block  before  me  that  is  obscuring  all  the  rest  and  taking  away 
my  taste  for  everything.  I  would  like  to  leave,  Mother,  but  not  in  revolt;  may  it  be  an  experience  to 
go  through  that  receives  your  approval.  I  would  not  like  to  be  cut  off  from  you  by  your  displeasure 
or  your  condemnation,  for  this  would  seem  to  me  terrible  and  leave  me  no  other  recourse  but  to 
plunge  into  the  worst  excesses  in  order  to  forget. 

Mother,  I  would  like  you  to  forgive  me,  to  understand  me  and,  above  all,  not  to  deprive  me  of 
your  Love.  I  would  like  you  to  tell  me  if  I  may  leave  for  a  few  weeks  and  how  you  feel  about  it.  It 
seems  to  me  that  I  am  profoundly  your  child,  in  spite  of  all  this?? 

Signed:  Bernard 


October  19,  195520 

The  three  images  of  total  self-giving  to  the  Divine: 

1.  To  prostrate  oneself  at  His  feet  in  a  surrender  of  all  pride,  with  a  perfect  HUMILITY. 

2.  To  unfold  one’s  being  before  Him,  to  open  entirely  one’s  body  from  head  to  toe,  as  one 
opens  a  book,  spreading  open  one’s  centers  so  as  to  make  all  their  movements  visible  in  a 
total  SINCERITY  that  allows  nothing  to  remain  hidden. 

3.  To  nestle  in  His  arms,  to  melt  in  Him  in  a  tender  and  absolute  CONFIDENCE. 

These  movements  may  be  accompanied  by  three  fonnulas,  or  any  one  of  them,  depending  upon  the 
case: 

1 .  May  Your  Will  be  done  and  not  mine. 

2.  As  You  will,  as  You  will... 

3.  I  am  Yours  for  eternity. 

Generally,  when  these  movements  are  made  in  the  right  way,  they  are  followed  by  a  perfect 
identification,  a  dissolution  of  the  ego,  bringing  about  a  sublime  felicity. 


20Note  written  by  Mother  in  French. 


October  (?)  1955 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Pondicherry 

Mother,  after  seeing  you,  I  received  a  letter  from  my  Bangalore  friends.  They  have  just  bought  an 
old  Mogul  residence  and  gardens  in  Hyderabad  that  used  to  belong  to  the  Nizam  ...  They  suggest 
that  their  new  property  would  be  an  enchanting  setting  for  writing  the  book  I  have  felt  like  writing 
for  years  but  never  wrote  because  I  was  always  on  the  move.  Anyway,  they  have  made  it  clear  that 
should  I  have  qualms  about  staying  with  them  too  long,  it  would  be  easy  for  them  to  find  me  some 
lucrative  work  that  would  not  be  too  time  consuming  -  which  would  allow  me  to  write  or  do 
whatever  I  wish  -  with  their  friend  the  Maharajah  of  Jaipur,  or  even  in  Hyderabad. 

All  this  tends  to  kindle  something  in  me  and  ignites  many  temptations  that  correspond  to  very 
diverse,  and  not  very  satisfied,  elements  within  me. 

To  complete  the  picture  -  for  I  don’t  know  what  inspiration  compels  me  to  expose  all  this  to  you 
in  such  detail  -  I  must  tell  you  that  these  friends  are  opium  users  and  that  opium  has  played  an 
important  role  in  my  life  and  continues  to  exert  a  strong  attraction  over  me,  the  attraction  of 
oblivion. 

So  that’s  the  situation.  All  this  is  in  conflict  within  me  and  all  the  more  so  since  it  is  happening 
now,  in  my  present  state  of  mind  that  you  know  so  well. 

It  seems  unlikely  that  I  would  know  how  to  resist  ...  and  yet  nothing  in  me  is  sure,  since  I  am 
impelled  to  write  you  in  the  hope  of  who  knows  what  miracle  that  might  show  me  my  way  and 
convince  my  whole  being. 

Mother,  I  would  like  at  the  same  time  to  be  your  child  and  to  leave! !  All  this  is  tearing  me  apart. 
Where  is  the  solution  to  such  an  impossibility? 

I  am  scarcely  worthy  of  being  your  child. 

But  that’s  how  it  is. 

Signed:  Bernard 


October  1955 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Bangalore 


Sweet  Mother,  during  the  three  days  since  I  left  the  Ashram,  I  have  never  ceased  feeling  your 
Presence  deep  within  me  like  the  one  thing  essential,  the  only  thing  solid  in  the  midst  of  all  these 
hazy  appearances.  As  I  entered  more  and  more  into  this  outer  world,  I  seemed  to  be  entering  a 
world  without  depth,  without  consistency,  where  all  sorts  of  things  and  beings  were  fluttering  like  a 
very  thin  veil  in  the  wind;  and  as  I  entered  into  this  wavering  world,  you  seemed  to  grow  within  me 
with  an  irrefutable  self-evidence,  like  the  only  real  thing,  my  only  reason  to  be  in  this  world  - 
without  you,  everything  withers  away  and  loses  its  Meaning. 

Mother,  never  before  have  I  felt  with  such  force  how  much  you  are  part  of  me,  nor  how  much  I 
belong  to  you,  irreversibly.  And  this  I  felt  not  only  in  my  mind  or  even  in  my  heart,  but  physically. 
Moreover,  during  the  several  weeks  when  I  went  through  this  latest  ‘crisis’  in  the  Ashram,  it 
seemed  to  me,  sweet  Mother,  that  a  physical  link  was  being  built  between  you  and  me.  Am  I 
wrong?  At  times,  I  had  the  feeling  that  you  were  no  longer  merely  ‘Mother’  in  Spirit,  but  rather  my 
Mother,  as  if  you  had  really  brought  me  into  the  world  physically  and  there  was  nothing  foreign 
anymore  in  our  relationship.  My  words  are  awkward,  but  you  will  know  how  to  see  the  Truth 
behind  them,  even  if  this  Truth  is  still  obscure  to  me. 

I  believed  I  had  committed  a  spiritual  ‘error’  by  leaving  the  Ashram.  But  now  it  seems  to  me 
that  this  experience  was  necessary,  for  it  put  me  glaringly  in  the  presence  of  my  life’s  Meaning  and 
its  profound  Reality.  In  a  way,  I  needed  to  ‘objectify’  my  presence  in  the  Ashram,  to  see  it  from  the 
outside.  Not  that  I  believe  these  to  be  good  or  even  bad  reasons  to  mentally  justify  this  flight,  but  I 
see  no  other  reason  for  this  departure.  And  I  find  myself  here  without  any  need  to  satisfy  the  least 
desire,  as  if  all  these  worldly  ‘pleasures’  no  longer  awaken  anything  at  all  in  me.  Your  grace  is 
there,  surely.  The  only  experience  I  have  had  is  smoking  opium.  Before,  I  found  it  very  refined  and 
calming,  but  this  time  I  found  only  stomach  cramps  and  a  joyless  vapidity.  It  is  strange,  but  I  feel 
that  nothing  has  a  hold  on  me  any  longer  and  the  only  people  who  seem  to  be  really  living  are  those 
in  the  Ashram.  The  others,  on  the  contrary,  are  only  pretending  and  are  all  completely  outside  of 
life,  however  paradoxical  that  might  appear. 

Sweet  Mother,  my  experience  is  over.  Will  you  allow  me  to  return  to  the  Ashram  towards  the 
middle  of  next  week?  There  is  no  more  struggle  or  conflict  in  me,  it  is  my  entire  being,  right  down 
to  the  physical,  that  needs  you,  that  wants  to  return  and  aspires  to  serve  you  -  joyfully,  peacefully. 
And  not  only  do  I  aspire  to  serve  you,  but  also  to  fight  against  these  dark,  ignorant  and  deceptive 
forces  so  as  to  be  worthy  of  your  Light,  the  true  Light  of  my  being.  I  see  no  other  meaning  for  my 
life,  for  all  life. 

Mother,  I  know  now  what  the  word  ‘consecration’  means.  I  want  to  consecrate  myself  wholly  to 
your  work,  with  my  heart,  my  mind,  my  body  and  my  soul.  I  belong  to  you  irrevocably, 
unreservedly.  I  know  that  nothing  else  exists  in  the  world  that  is  worthy  of  being  lived,  except  you. 
This  crisis  has  helped  me  to  see  into  myself  clearly,  and  I  believe  I  have  gained  something  from  it. 
Or  am  I  deluding  myself? 

Finally,  I  would  like  to  tell  you  how  grateful  I  am,  for  I  seem  to  feel  your  hand  everywhere,  your 
infinite  understanding  leading  me  towards  your  Light,  through  all  the  meanderings  of  my  nature, 
making  use  of  it  and  transforming  it,  uplifting  it  little  by  little  in  each  of  its  elements  and  in  the 
minutes”  details.  Thank  you,  Mother,  for  letting  me  find  you  -  and  forgive  this  terrible  child  who 
has  been  rebelling  against  the  force  of  transformation,  no  doubt  so  as  better  to  find  you  again. 

I  feel  myself  so  much  your  child  in  every  fiber  of  my  being.  Yes,  your  child. 

Signed:  Bernard 


(Mother ’s  reply) 


October  21,  1955 


My  dear  little  one,  yes,  you  may  return  immediately.  I  will  be  happy  to  see  you  again. 


You  are  right,  the  experience  was  necessary  and  it  was  fruitful. 

Your  good  letter  ...  just  what  I  was  expecting  from  you,  for  what  you  write  is  true;  I  too  feel  you 
so  very  close  to  me,  bound  by  an  indestructible  link,  as  if  I  had  formed  you,  not  only  spiritually,  but 
materially  as  well. 

I  look  forward  to  seeing  you  soon. 

With  all  my  tenderness, 
Signed:  Mother 


January  (?)  1956 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Pondicherry 

Mother,  I  invoke  the  Presence  of  Mahakali  to  break  all  my  RESISTANCES,  my  INERTIA,  my 
discouragement.  Rather  painful  shocks  than  this  tepidness!  Or  else,  why  am  I  here? 

O  Mother,  may  the  PRESENCE  of  Mahakali  be  with  me,  may  She  force  my  whole  being 
towards  the  Truth,  the  Light.  Bum  me,  Mother,  if  I  do  not  know  how  to  love  you! 

Signed:  Bernard 


Undated  1956 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Pondicherry 

All  artistic  creation  is  born  of  a  question,  a  conflict,  a  discord  with  oneself,  mankind  or  the  cosmos. 
What  painter,  what  poet,  what  writer  has  not  wrenched  from  this  conflict  the  best  of  his  art,  from 
Michelangelo  to  Goya,  from  Van  Gogh  to  Rodin,  from  Villon  to  Rimbaud,  Baudelaire  or 
Dostoevski?  And  the  work  of  art  -  the  painting,  novel  or  poem  -  is  a  hannony  torn  from  this 
disharmony,  a  conquest  over  some  chaos,  a  response  to  a  question  posed  by  man  -  a 
metamorphosis. 

Artistic  creation  relies  upon  that  which  is  most  unique  in  man,  most  singular  with  respect  to 
others,  and  it  is  through  this  singular  uniqueness  that  the  artist  achieves  his  metamorphosis,  his  re¬ 
creation  of  the  world;  it  is  through  this  that  he  seeks  to  commune  with  others,  himself  and  the 
world. 

Now,  Yoga  seeks  to  eliminate  conflict,  problems  or  questions.  Man  has  to  forget  all  this,  to 
cease  being  a  question. 

So  when  an  answer  has  been  given  to  every  question,  what  place  remains  for  the  work  of  art? 
When  all  is  metamorphosized  through  Transcendence,  what  place  remains  for  artistic 
metamorphosis?  When  all  is  supreme  harmony,  can  this  harmony  be  expressed  otherwise  than 
through  silence,  a  smile,  a  radiance  or  ‘inspired’  poetry  -  of  which  Sri  Aurobindo  is  the  sole 
example;  even  so,  his  poetry  is  not  drawn  from  the  human  level,  it  surpasses  the  human,  it  issues 
from  elsewhere. 

Must  artistic  creation  cease  being  human,  then;  must  it  cease  relying  upon  the  human?  -  which 


would  then  mean  having  to  reject  so  many  undeniably  great  painters,  poets  or  writers?  Must  one 
wait  to  be  open  to  the  supramental  planes  of  consciousness  before  being  able  to  reconcile  (assuming 
such  reconciliation  is  possible)  yoga  and  artistic  creation?  And,  until  then,  smother  all  that  sustains 
the  creative  elan,  i.e.  the  individual,  the  conflict,  that  part  of  oneself  which  every  creator  feels  to  be 
the  purest  human  part?  Must  one  extinguish  in  oneself  this  play  of  light  and  shadow  from  which  art 
derives  its  highest  accents? 

Signed:  Bernard 


January  (?)  1956 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Pondicherry 

Mother,  I  need  to  unburden  myself  of  all  that  is  wringing  my  heart,  and  if  the  Divine  exists 
somewhere,  it  is  to  him  that  I  would  like  to  express  my  profound  disgust.  For  all  this  is  profoundly 
scandalous,  absurd  and  revolting.  I  know  that  the  external  world  is  absurd  and  that  men  live  in  it 
vainly;  but  the  world  of  the  Ashram  is  no  less  absurd,  no  less  vain.  ‘Someone’  is  making  fun  of  us, 
‘someone’  is  deceiving  us  -  for  if  truly  there  is  some  witness  to  this  tragi-comedy  and  if  this  whole 
world  is  his  ‘game,’  it  is  a  cruel  game  and  he  is  a  cheater,  for  he  has  all  the  cards  in  his  hand  and  he 
pretends  to  make  us  play  a  game  in  which  we  are  inevitably  the  losers  -  a  game  we  cannot  play,  for 
we  are  helpless  miserable,  without  strength,  without  light. 

All  our  efforts  are  vain  and  sadly  ridiculous.  At  each  instant  we  must  begin  everything  anew, 
one  step  seems  to  lead  us  forward  another  to  draw  us  back.  We  desperately  turn  in  circles  and 
sometimes,  in  our  dizziness,  we  believe  we  glimpse  lights,  but  these  are  only  the  little,  dancing 
lights  of  our  own  fatigue,  our  own  weakness.  There  is  no  victory,  there  are  only  moments  of  respite. 
Meditation  brings  calm  and  peace,  of  course,  but  so  does  sleep.  We  are  all  seeking  release,  in  love, 
in  opium,  in  action,  in  war  or  in  power  -  or  in  Yoga;  but  one  means  is  just  as  vain  as  the  other. 
There  is  no  real  solution,  there  are  only  more  or  less  effective  ways  of  forgetting  for  an  hour,  or  a 
day,  that  we  are  men  alone  and  helpless. 

It  is  quite  possible,  even  quite  probable,  that  in  another  hour  or  another  day,  I  may  feel  quite  the 
contrary  of  what  I  now  write.  But  the  person  I  am  tomorrow  does  not  negate  he  who  I  am  today,  it 
only  makes  him  more  absurd,  more  unbearably  absurd.  The  one  who  I  am  right  now,  for  an  hour 
perhaps,  needs  to  cry  out  his  disgust  with  this  nameless  farce.  We  are  puppets,  fools,  and  I  am  ready 
to  admit  that  everything  is  just  a  state  of  consciousness  -  but  it  is  still  a  fool’s  state  of 
consciousness.  Tomorrow’s  puppet  who  might  ask  for  grace  from  the  divine,  and  believe  in  him, 
will  still  be  a  puppet,  a  pacified  and  resigned  puppet  -  but  a  marionette  no  less  absurd  playing  a 
game  no  less  absurd.  I  understand  those  who  go  about  planting  dynamite  everywhere;  if  they  seek 
death,  it  is  because  they  desperately  wanted  to  live  but  found  it  impossible  to  live.  One  cannot  live, 
one  can  only  flee  this  intolerable  existence  in  one  way  or  another.  Mother,  it  is  impossible  for  a  man 


to  look  at  himself  straight  in  the  face  in  a  completely  lucid  way  for  more  than  five  minutes  -  IF  HE 
DID,  HE  WOULD  KILL  HIMSELF  ...  SO  I  wonder  if  the  divine  -  if  he  exists  -  has  ever  known 
the  suffering  of  mankind.  If  he  exists,  why  doesn’t  he  give  men  the  strength  to  break  out  of  this 
‘Magic  Circle’  in  which  they  keep  turning  like  prisoners  in  a  cell.  Twelve  years  ago,  when  I  was 
twenty,  I  was  turning  in  circles  in  a  prison  cell  in  Bordeaux,21  awaiting  some  execution  or  other  - 
but  I  am  still  this  same  prisoner.  If  I  have  advanced  during  these  twelve  years,  it  is  in  despair,  in 
misery.  All  this  is  outrageous,  scandalous,  should  the  divine  exist. 

Leave  the  Ashram?  -  But  the  rest  of  the  world  is  just  as  absurd.  It  is  man  who  is  absurd,  and  god 
-  if  he  exists  -  is  a  pure  disgrace.  Mother,  I  am  SCANDALIZED,  and  I  feel  within  me  the  rebellion 
and  despair  of  all  men  who  surely  have  not  deserved  all  this. 

Signed:  Bernard 


Undated  1956 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Pondicherry 

Sweet  Mother,  with  all  the  sincerity  of  which  I  am  capable,  I  am  putting  before  you  an  important 
problem  (important  to  me)  so  that  you  may  help  me  resolve  it.  I  feel  that  I  am  coming  to  a  decisive 
turning  point,  but  something  is  preventing  me  from  going  any  further. 

All  my  past  is  weighing  down  on  me,  not  because  of  any  attachments,  for  I  regret  NOTHING  of 
my  past  and  my  only  hope  is  what  lies  before  me.  Yet  I  have  not  entirely  undergone  all  this  like  a 
marionette,  it  even  seems  to  me  that  ‘I’  have  created  it,  composed  it  like  a  book  -  for  the  last  fifteen 
years,  from  the  time  of  the  concentration  camps,  I  have  consciously  multiplied  my  experiences  and 
have  passed  through  a  whole  range  of  rebellions  and  situations  in  order  to  gather  the  basic  material 
for  a  book.  As  it  happens,  this  fonnulation  of  ‘my’  book  gradually  merged  with  the  search  for  my 
real  Self.  Now  I  know  what  I  was  seeking,  but  this  book  has  grown  with  me,  it  is  there  like  a 
powerful  formation  weighing  down  on  me,  and  it  weighs  on  me  all  the  more  now,  for  since  my 
contact  with  Sri  Aurobindo  all  my  past  experiences  seem  charged  with  meaning  and  symbolism.  I 
find  your  hand  in  it  everywhere,  and  I  can  now  connect  all  the  apparent  coincidences  and  sift  out  an 
extraordinary  necessity  that  has  led  me  here;  all  this  makes  a  dense,  living,  vibrant  book  that  weighs 
on  me.  I  need  to  cast  it  all  out,  to  free  myself,  to  write  this  book. 

Not  only  do  I  need  to  liquidate  this  past,  but  also  to  renew  my  choice,  to  strengthen  my  presence 
here  -  and  I  feel  this  book  as  a  commitment,  it  will  help  me  set  my  route  in  a  decisive  way.  It  is  a 
test. 


21  Satprem  was  arrested  by  the  Gestapo  in  Bordeaux  in  1943  for  resisting  the  German  occupation.  He  was  later  sent  to 
Buchenwald  and  Mauthausen. 


There  is  another  consideration  as  well  -  though  if  I  am  deluding  myself,  please  enlighten  me.  I 
feel  that  if  this  book  is  successful,  it  could  be  useful  to  others  and  serve  Sri  Aurobindo’s  work.  For  I 
have  had  the  opportunity  to  live  concretely,  the  hard  way,  many  of  the  questions  that  others  ask 
themselves.  Thus  all  my  past  experiences  appear  to  be  a  living  demonstration  of  a  teaching  to  which 
Sri  Aurobindo  is  the  key.  What  has  already  been  said  abstractly  or  philosophically,  I  can  say  in  the 
fonn  of  a  living  and  moving  novel.  I  think  that  I  feel  in  me  the  power  to  express  these  things. 

Sweet  Mother,  perhaps  I  am  deceiving  myself,  but  I  am  writing  you  explicitly  so  that  you  may 
enlighten  me.  I  am  not  telling  you  all  these  things  for  you  to  approve  of  my  need  to  write,  but  for 
you  to  tell  me  what  is  your  will.  I  do  not  want  to  be  ‘a  writer,’  but  your  child,  your  instrument. 
Only,  there  is  something  in  me  that  has  to  be  liquidated. 

The  problem  poses  itself  practically,  for  I  would  need  a  rather  long  period  of  uninterrupted  work 
to  be  rid  of  all  this.  Yet  I  have  carried  this  book  in  me  for  so  long  that  it  is  ready  in  every  detail  -  I 
could  finish  it  in  six  months.  Here,  I  am  too  occupied  with  other  things  to  finish  it  quickly. 
Furthennore,  I  feel  the  need  to  redefine  my  presence  here  from  an  outside  perspective.  I  thought  of 
going  to  Brewster’s  lodge  in  the  Himalayas.  There,  I  could  continue  some  of  the  work  I  have  been 
doing  with  Pavitra.  It  seems  to  me  that  I  would  come  back  freed  and  refortified  in  my  purpose  for 
being  here. 

Sweet  Mother,  am  I  deluding  myself?  What  is  your  will?  It  is  your  will  that  I  want,  not  my 
desire,  and  I  am  sure  you  will  give  me  the  strength  to  follow  your  directives,  whatever  they  be. 
Enlighten  me. 

I  am  your  child,  gratefully. 

Signed:  Bernard 


P.S.  Can  this  book  serve  You? 


Undated  1956 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Pondicherry 

Sweet  Mother,  here  is  what  has  been  happening  in  me  almost  every  evening:  I  am  literally  like  a 
bundle  of  compressed  force  that  somehow  can  neither  explode  nor  settle  down  and  dissolve.  The 
heaviness  in  my  chest  is  such  that  I  breathe  with  difficulty,  as  though  all  the  blood  in  my  body  were 
converging  there,  oppressing  me.  In  my  head,  the  pressure  at  times  is  so  intense  that  I  dare  not  even 
close  my  eyes  or  concentrate  further,  for  I  feel  it  could  crack.  My  entire  being  is  so  tense  and  filled 
with  force  that  it  seems  it  could  break  physically. 

Is  this  perhaps  a  dangerous  state?  Or  else  is  it  normal?  I  would  like  to  know  whether  this  feeling 
that  it  could  physically  crack  is  a  good  sign  or  a  bad  one.  If  it  is  a  bad  sign,  what  can  be  done? 


There  is  certainly  some  resistance  in  me,  something  that  fundamentally  says  ‘No,’  and  I  am 
mentally  trying  to  remain  calm,  unrebellious,  but  deep  down  it  resists.  I  am  not  at  all  in  search  of 
‘powers,’  but  is  this  negative  condition  enough  to  avert  accidents?  Could  you  enlighten  me?  What 
can  I  do  against  this  deep-rooted  resistance? 

Your  child, 
Signed:  Bernard 


P.S.  I  sleep  more  and  more  poorly. 


February  29, 195622 


FIRST  SUPRAMENTAL  MANIFESTATION 


(During  the  common  meditationon  Wednesday  the  29th  February  1956) 

This  evening  the  Divine  Presence,  concrete  and  material,  was  there  present  amongst  you.  I  had  a 
form  of  living  gold,  bigger  than  the  universe,  and  I  was  facing  a  huge  and  massive  golden  door 
which  separated  the  world  from  the  Divine. 

As  I  looked  at  the  door,  I  knew  and  willed,  in  a  single  movement  of  consciousness,  that  THE 
TIME  HAS  COME’,  and  lifting  with  both  hands  a  mighty  golden  hammer  I  struck  one  blow,  one 
single  blow23  on  the  door  and  the  door  was  shattered  to  pieces. 

Then  the  supramental  Light  and  Force  and  Consciousness  rushed  down  upon  earth  in  an 
uninterrupted  flow. 


22The  following  text  was  given  by  Mother  in  both  French  and  English. 


23Later  added  by  Mother 


March  19,  195624 


AGENDA  OF  THE  SUPRAMENTAL  ACTION  ON  EARTH 


On  March  19  during  the  translation  class 
the  inner  voice  said: 

‘Hold  yourself  straight’  and  the  body  sat  up  and  held  itself  absolutely  straight 

during  the  entire  class. 


March  20, 195625 


(Upon  awakening) 

The  control  over  the  movements  of  the  vertebrae,  lost  a  long  time  ago  (which  resulted  in  a  kind  of 
insensitivity  and  incapacity  to  move  them  at  will)  has  returned  to  a  great  extent:  the  consciousness 
is  once  again  able  to  express  itself  and  the  back  can  straighten  up  very  visibly. 

*  *  * 


(The  same  day  on  the  balcony26 ) 

Almost  a  total  straightening,  along  with  a  very  clear  perception  of  the  new  force  and  power  in  the 
cells  of  the  body. 


24Note  written  by  Mother  in  French  At  this  period,  Mother’s  back  was  already  bent.  This  straightening  of  her  back 
seems  to  be  the  first  physiological  effect  of  the  ‘Supramental  Manifestation’  of  February  29,  which  is  perhaps  the 
reason  why  Mother  noted  down  the  experience  under  the  name  ‘Agenda  of  the  Supramental  Action  on  Earth.’  It  was  the 
first  time  Mother  gave  a  title  to  what  would  become  this  fabulous  document  of  13  volumes.  The  experience  took  place 
during  a  ‘translation  class’  when,  twice  a  week,  Mother  would  translate  the  works  of  Sri  Aurobindo  into  French  before  a 
group  of  disciples. 


25Note  written  by  Mother  in  French. 


26Mother  appeared  on  her  balcony  daily  at  about  6  a.m.  to  give  a  few  moments  of  meditation  to  her  disciples  before  the 
beginning  of  the  day’s  work. 


March  21,  195627 

The  age  of  Capitalism  and  business  is  drawing  to  a  close. 

But  the  age  of  Communism,  too,  will  pass.  For  Communism  as  it  is  preached  is  not  constructive, 
it  is  a  weapon  to  combat  plutocracy.  But  when  the  battle  is  over  and  the  armies  are  disbanded  for 
want  of  employment,  then  Communism,  having  no  more  utility,  will  be  transformed  into  something 
else  that  will  express  a  higher  truth. 

We  know  this  truth,  and  we  are  working  for  it  so  that  it  may  reign  upon  earth. 


Undated  1956 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Pondicherry 

Sweet  Mother,  for  many  long  months  I  have  been  struggling  with  myself  in  a  painful  conflict,  and 
at  times  I  have  even  felt  certain  dangers.  Finally,  I  went  within  myself,  into  the  calm,  and  it  seemed 
to  me  that  I  would  do  well  to  go  away  for  a  while. 

I  had  thought  I  could  free  myself  from  this  conflict  by  writing  a  book.  But  in  fact,  it  is  not  the 
mind  that  needs  to  be  freed,  or  at  least  not  only  that,  it  is  the  vital  that  needs  to  WEAR  ITSELF 
OUT. 

I  believe  I  have  a  clear  mental  perception  of  the  goal  to  be  attained,  and  I  no  longer  doubt  the 
spiritual  meaning  of  my  life,  but  this  kind  of  mental  maturity  is  coming  into  conflict  with  a  vital  that 
is  too  ‘young’  and  has  not  yet  worn  itself  out  enough  on  the  open  road.  Here,  this  vital  force  has 
become  even  more  concentrated  and  is  unable  to  free  itself.  It  is  undoubtedly  a  question  of  time,  of 
aging.  Thus  all  my  energy,  especially  during  the  past  year,  has  been  spent  ‘negatively,’  as  it  were  - 
in  an  effort  not  to  leave.  This  struggle  seems  to  have  eliminated  all  positive  effort,  even  the  very 
meaning  of  my  presence  here. 

This  vital  force  is  no  longer  seeking  a  sexual  fulfillment  nor  success  in  a  world  it  no  longer 
believes  in,  but  it  needs  to  ‘move,’  to  come  out.  Perhaps  things  would  be  better  if  I  went  to  breathe 


27Note  written  by  Mother  in  French. 


a  bit  in  the  Himalayas?  I  don’t  want  to  do  anything  without  your  accord,  and  were  I  to  leave,  it 
would  be  after  the  15th  of  August. 

Sweet  Mother,  I  am  writing  you  all  this  calmly,  without  rebellion;  but  during  these  past  months, 
the  acuteness  of  the  conflict  has  become  so  great  that  at  times  I  feel  myself  in  danger.  I  am  putting 
all  this  before  you  so  that  you  may  tell  me  what  is  right. 

Sweet  Mother,  I  want  to  remain  your  child  in  spite  of  these  difficulties.  Forgive  me  for  taking  up 
your  time  and  for  being  so  poorly  surrendered. 

Signed:  Bernard 


April  4, 1956 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Pondicherry,  April  4,  1956 

Mother,  two  months  ago  I  had  a  clear  mental  perception  of  what  was  asked  of  me:  to  spend  the  rest 
of  my  life  here.  This  is  the  source  of  my  difficulties  and  of  the  inner  hell  I  have  been  living  through 
ever  since.  Each  time  I  try  to  emerge,  there  is  this  image  that  rises  up  in  me:  your-whole-life  -  and 
this  casts  me  into  a  violent  conflict.  When  I  came  here,  I  thought  of  staying  for  two  or  three  years; 
for  me  the  Ashram  was  a  means  of  realization,  not  an  end. 

I  understand  now  that  as  long  as  my  whole  being  has  not  ACCEPTED  that  it  must  finish  its  life 
here,  there  is  no  way  out  nor  any  ‘recovery’  possible.  Through  my  mental  force  alone,  this 
acceptance  is  impossible;  I  have  been  turning  infernally  in  circles  these  past  two  months,  and  the 
mind  is  in  league  with  the  vital.  Therefore,  a  force  greater  than  mine  must  help  me  accept  that  my 
way  is  here.  I  need  you,  Mother,  for  without  you  I  am  lost.  I  need  you  to  tell  me  that  the  Truth  of 
my  being  is  indeed  here  and  that  I  am  truly  ready  to  follow  this  path.  Mother,  I  beseech  you,  help 
me  to  see  the  truth  of  my  being,  give  me  some  sign  that  my  way  is  here  and  not  elsewhere.  I  beg  of 
you,  Mother,  help  me  to  know. 

I  also  had  a  very  clear  sensation  that  you  were  abandoning  me,  that  you  had  no  further  interest  in 
me  and  I  could  just  as  well  do  as  I  pleased.  Perhaps  you  cannot  forgive  some  of  my  inner  rebellions 
which  have  been  so  very  violent?  Am  I  totally  guilty?  Is  it  true  that  you  are  abandoning  me? 

I  am  broken  and  battered  in  the  depths  of  my  being  as  I  was  in  my  flesh  in  the  concentration 
camps.  Will  the  divine  grace  take  pity  on  me?  Can  you,  do  you  want  to  help  me?  Alone  I  can  do 
nothing.  I  am  in  an  absolute  solitude,  even  beyond  all  rebellion,  at  my  very  end. 

Yet  I  love  you  in  spite  of  all  that  I  am. 

Signed:  Bernard 


(Mother’s  reply) 


4.4.56 


My  child,  I  have  not  abandoned  you,  and  I  am  ready  to  forget,  to  efface  all  revolt. 
My  help  is  always  with  you. 


Signed:  Mother 


April  20, 1956 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Pondicherry,  April  20,  1956 

Sweet  Mother, 

The  difficulties  of  the  past  weeks  have  taught  me  that  as  soon  as  one  strays  from  the  true 
consciousness,  in  however  trifling  a  way,  anything  may  happen,  any  excess,  any  aberration,  any 
imbalance  -  and  I  have  felt  very  dangerous  things  prowling  about  me.  Mother,  you  told  me  in 
regard  to  Patrick28  that  the  law  of  the  manifestation  was  a  law  of  freedom,  even  the  freedom  to 
choose  wrongly.  This  evening,  it  has  been  my  very  deep  perception  that  this  freedom  is  virtually 
always  a  freedom  to  choose  wrongly.  I  harbor  a  great  fear  of  losing  the  true  consciousness  once 
again.  I  have  become  aware  of  how  fragile  everything  in  me  is  and  that  very  little  would  be  enough 
to  carry  me  away. 

Therefore,  Sweet  Mother,  I  come  to  ask  a  great  grace  of  you,  from  the  depths  of  my  heart:  take 
my  freedom  into  your  hands.  Prevent  me  from  falling  back,  far  away  from  you.  I  place  this  freedom 
in  your  hands.  Keep  me  safe,  Mother,  protect  me.  Grant  me  the  grace  of  watching  over  me  and  of 
taking  me  in  your  hands  completely,  like  a  child  whose  steps  are  unsure.  I  no  longer  want  this 
Freedom.  It  is  you  I  want,  the  Truth  of  my  being.  Mother,  as  a  grace,  I  implore  you  to  free  me  from 
my  freedom  to  choose  wrongly. 

I  am  your  child  and  I  love  you. 

Signed:  Bernard 


(Mother ’s  reply) 


4.21.56 


My  dear  child, 

Agreed  -  with  all  my  heart  I  accept  the  gift  you  give  me  of  your  freedom  to  choose  wrongly  ... 


28A  friend  of  Satprem's  who  died  insane  in  a  Japanese  hospital  in  India 


And  it  is  with  all  my  heart,  too,  that  I  shall  always  help  you  make  the  choice  that  leads  straight  to 
the  goal  -  that  is,  towards  your  real  self. 

With  all  my  affection  and  my  blessings. 

Signed:  Mother 


April  23, 1956 


Mother  takes  a  passage  from  Prayers  and  Meditations  of  September  23,  1914: 


The  Lord  hast  willed,  and 

A  new  Light  shall  break 

A  new  world  shall 

And  the  things  that  were  promised  shall  be  fulfilled. 

and  rewrites  it  as  follows  in  her  own  hand: 

29  February  -  29 

Thou  hast  willed,  and 

A  new  light  breaks 

A  new  world 

The  things  that  were  promised  are  fulfilled.29 


Thou  cost  execute; 
upon  the  earth, 

be  born. 


March 

I 

upon 

is 


Lord, 

execute: 

the  earth, 

born. 


April  24, 195630 

The  manifestation  of  the  Supramental  upon  earth  is  no  more  a  promise  but  a  living  fact,  a  reality. 

It  is  at  work  here,  and  one  day  will  come  when  the  most  blind,  the  most  unconscious,  even  the 
most  unwilling  shall  be  obliged  to  recognize  it. 


290riginal  English. 


30Original  English. 


Undated  1956 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 

Pondicherry 

Sweet  Mother,  I  feel  intensely,  almost  painfully,  how  much  all  my  relationships  with  the  outer 
world  are  FALSE,  obscure,  ignorant.  As  soon  as  I  am  away  from  the  heart  of  my  being,  all  my 
actions  are  approximations,  all  my  contacts  with  other  beings  are  turbid,  my  work  itself  becomes 
tainted  with  a  thousand  doubtful  little  motives.  Mother,  I  know  with  a  blinding  certitude  -  even  if 
this  certitude  is  only  mental  -  that  the  only  solution  is  to  come  into  contact  with  my  true  being.  I 
know  that  by  finding  my  true  being  I  shall  find  the  right  action,  the  right  relationships  with  the 
outside,  and  truth,  knowledge,  joy.  I  know  this  now  in  a  profound  way,  and  nothing  can  ever  turn 
me  away  from  it  again.  Every  evening,  this  Truth  comes  physically  to  embrace  me.  And  yet  every 
morning,  I  have  half-forgotten,  and  I  spend  nearly  the  whole  day  on  the  surface  of  my  being. 

O  Mother,  when  shall  my  truth  of  the  evening  become  my  truth  of  the  day? 

Something  FIAS  to  explode  in  me  and  take  possession  of  my  entire  being.  It  is  not  my  force  that 
can  achieve  this,  but  yours.  Mother,  I  beseech  you  to  open  in  me  the  doors  of  my  true  being.  I  no 
longer  want  this  false  relationship  with  the  outside,  this  life  of  approximation.  I  want  to  be  your 
instrument,  not  the  instrument  of  this  ignorant  and  suffering  ego.  Mother,  I  ask  only  for  the  true,  the 
Light,  that  which  is  my  real  self.  I  have  had  enough,  enough  of  this  surface  self  that  invades 
virtually  all  my  days. 

May  your  Will  be  done. 

Your  child  who  desperately  needs  you, 

Signed:  Bernard 


P.S.  What  is  the  obstacle? 


Undated  1956 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Pondicherry 

Sweet  Mother,  I  feel  it  is  good  to  tell  you  what  happened  within  me  yesterday  evening  during  the 
distribution,  if  only  to  express  my  infinite  gratitude. 

First  of  all,  I  began  by  feeling,  perceiving  in  an  absolutely  obvious  way,  that  it  is  you  and  you 
alone  who  has  been  doing  my  yoga,  that  you  have  been  doing  everything  for  me  and  that  you  have 
been  there  forever,  guiding  each  one  of  my  steps.  I  felt  luminously  that  without  you  I  would  never 
have  been  able  to  go  forward  a  single  step  and  that,  basically,  all  my  efforts  have  served  only  to 
teach  me  the  futility  of  my  efforts,  as  it  were,  and  to  lead  me  to  this  point  of  helplessness  where  I 
must  totally  surrender  myself  into  the  hands  of  a  greater  Force  -  into  your  hands.  And  I  felt  so 
absolutely  that  you  would  do  EVERYTHING  for  me  if  only  I  relied  upon  you  totally.  It  was  like  a 
liberation,  like  a  weight  that  you  lifted  from  my  heart.  No  longer  was  it  a  question  of  trying  to  cling 
inwardly,  of  pushing  and  pulling  until  I  was  stiff  and  aching  within;  it  was  enough  to  let  you  act. 

Then  I  felt  a  dual  movement  enter  into  me,  almost  a  physical  movement  that  followed  the 
rhythm  of  my  breathing,  as  though  every  time  I  breathed  in,  I  was  receiving  something,  and  every 
time  I  breathed  out,  I  was  offering  myself.  And  this  dual  movement  of  receiving  and  offering 
seemed  to  grow  within  me,  as  though  it  were  the  very  movement  of  the  world,  the  breathing  of  the 
world  that  receives  and  gives  itself.  And  I  perceived  that,  at  a  certain  moment,  this  rhythm  could 
stop,  the  circle  close  again,  the  two  breaths  join  in  a  luminous  immobility.  Then  vaguely,  I 
discerned  -  as  though  from  far  away,  behind  a  veil  -  a  kind  of  pure,  brilliant  white  light,  and  saw 
that  it  was  you  at  the  heart  of  the  world.  And  then  I  felt  how  marvelous  it  was  to  be  able  to  give 
myself.  I  seemed  to  have  grasped  the  secret  of  duality,  for  the  joy  of  offering,  for  the  joy  of  love. 
Then  I  felt  that  I  was  beginning  to  mentalize  things.  In  a  way,  I  was  afraid  of  recording  too  well 
what  was  happening,  and  I  held  myself  out  to  you  in  silence  and  in  love,  for  it  seemed  to  me  that  the 
experience  could  be  an  obstacle,  a  stopping  place,  whereas  one  must  always  go  farther.  Then  it 
seemed  that  you  were  there  -  I  did  not  see  you  exactly,  but  I  felt,  I  felt  that  you  were  smiling  at  me 
as  from  behind  a  veil.  The  distribution  ended  all  too  soon,  and  then  I  had  a  class.  But  even  this 
morning,  a  kind  of  joyous  confidence  in  my  heart  remains  with  me,  and  the  need  to  express  my 
infinite  gratitude,  my  love.  I  belong  to  you,  Mother,  with  my  body,  my  life,  my  mind. 

I  want  only  what  you  want. 

Everything  is  grace. 

Your  child, 
Signed:  Bernard 

P.S.  When  things  of  this  sort  happen,  should  one  bother  you  by  writing  about  them,  or  simply  be 
content  with  an  inner  gratitude? 


(Mother ’s  reply) 

It  does  not  bother  me  at  all,  and  you  did  well  to  write.  Your  experience  is  excellent,  and  I  was  very 
happy  to  read  it  -  it  shines  like  a  light  upon  a  new  horizon. 

With  you,  always. 


Signed:  Mother 


(Extract  from  the  Wednesday  class) 


Sweet  Mother,  you  said,  ‘The  Supramental  has  come  down  on  earth.  ’  What  does  this  mean, 

exactly?  You  also  said,  ‘The  things  that  were  promised  are  fulfilled.  ’  What  are  these  things? 

Oh,  really!  How  ignorant!  It  has  been  promised  for  such  a  very  long  time,  it  has  been  said  for  such  a 
very  long  time  -  not  only  here  in  the  Ashram,  but  ever  since  the  beginning  of  the  earth.  There  have 
been  all  kinds  of  predictions,  by  all  kinds  of  prophets.  It  has  been  said,  ‘There  will  be  a  new  heaven 
and  a  new  earth,  a  new  race  shall  be  born,  the  world  shall  be  transformed  ...’  Prophets  have  spoken 
of  this  in  every  tradition. 

You  said,  ‘They  are  fulfilled.  ’ 

Yes.  Then? 

Where  is  the  new  race? 

The  new  race?  Wait  for  something  like  ...  a  few  thousand  years  or  so,  and  you  will  see  it! 

When  the  mind  came  down  upon  earth,  something  like  a  million  years  went  by  between  the 
manifestation  of  the  mind  in  the  earth  atmosphere  and  the  appearance  of  the  first  man.  But  it  will  go 
faster  this  time  because  man  is  waiting  for  something,  he  has  a  vague  idea:  he  is  awaiting  in  some 
way  or  another  the  advent  of  the  superman.  Whereas  the  apes  were  certainly  not  awaiting  the  birth 
of  man,  they  never  thought  of  it  -  for  the  excellent  reason  that  they  probably  don’t  think  very  much! 
But  man  has  thought  about  it  and  is  waiting,  so  it  will  go  faster.  But  faster  probably  still  means 
thousands  of  years.  We  shall  speak  of  this  again  in  a  few  thousand  years! 

(silence) 

Those  who  are  ready  within,  who  are  open  and  in  touch  with  the  higher  forces,  those  who  have  had 
a  more  or  less  direct  personal  contact  with  the  Supramental  Light  and  Consciousness,  are  capable  of 
feeling  the  difference  in  the  earth  atmosphere. 

But  for  this  ...  only  like  can  know  like.  Only  the  Supramental  Consciousness  in  an  individual 
can  perceive  the  Supramental  acting  in  the  earth  atmosphere.  Those  who,  for  whatever  reason,  have 
developed  this  perception  can  see  it.  But  those  who  are  not  even  remotely  conscious  of  their  inner 
beings,  who  would  be  quite  at  a  loss  to  say  what  their  souls  look  like,  are  certainly  not  ready  to 
perceive  the  difference  in  the  earth  atmosphere.  They  still  have  quite  a  way  to  go  for  that.  Because, 
for  those  whose  consciousness  is  more  or  less  exclusively  centered  in  the  outer  being  -  mental,  vital 
and  physical  -  things  need  to  have  an  absurd  or  unexpected  appearance  to  be  noticeable.  And  then 
they  call  it  a  miracle. 

But  we  do  not  call  a  miracle  the  constant  miracle  of  the  forces  that  intervene  to  change 
circumstances  and  human  natures  and  which  have  very  far-reaching  consequences,  for  we  see  only 
the  appearance,  and  this  appearance  seems  quite  natural.  But  in  truth,  if  you  were  to  reflect  upon  the 


least  thing  that  happens,  you  would  be  forced  to  acknowledge  that  it  is  miraculous. 

It  is  simply  because  you  do  not  reflect  upon  it  and  assume  things  to  be  as  they  are,  what  they 
are,  unquestioningly;  otherwise  you  would  have  quite  a  number  of  opportunities  everyday  to  say  to 
yourself,  ‘But  look!  That  is  absolutely  amazing!  How  did  it  happen?’ 

Quite  simply,  the  habit  of  a  purely  superficial  way  of  seeing. 

Sweet  Mother,  what  should  be  our  attitude  towards  this  New  Consciousness? 

That  depends  upon  what  you  want  to  do  with  it. 

If  you  want  to  look  at  it  as  an  object  of  curiosity,  then  you  have  only  to  look  at  it,  to  try  to 
understand. 

If  you  want  it  to  change  you,  you  must  open  yourself  and  strive  to  progress. 

Will  we  benefit  collectively  or  individually  from  this  new  manifestation? 

Why  are  you  asking  this  question? 

Because  a  lot  of people  have  come  here,  and  they  are  asking,  ‘How  are  we  going  to  benefit  from 
it?’ 


Oh! 

And  why  should  they  benefit  from  it?  What  entitles  them  to  benefit  from  it?  Simply  because 
they  took  the  train  to  come  here? 

I  knew  some  people  who  came  here  a  long  time  ago,  something  like  (Oh,  I  don’t  recall  anymore, 
but  quite  a  long  time  ago!),  certainly  more  than  twenty  years  ago;  the  first  time  someone  died  in  the 
Ashram,  they  expressed  a  considerable  dissatisfaction:  ‘But  I  came  here  because  I  thought  this  yoga 
would  make  me  immortal!  If  you  can  still  die,  then  why  did  I  come  here?’ 

Well,  it’s  the  same  thing.  People  take  the  train  to  come  here  -  there  were  about  a  hundred  and 
fifty  more  people  than  usual31  -  simply  because  they  want  to  ‘benefit.’  But  this  may  be  exactly  why 
they  have  not  benefited  from  it!  Because  This  [the  supramental  consciousness]  has  not  come  to 
make  people  benefit  in  any  way  whatsoever! 

They  ask  if  their  inner  difficulties  will  be  easier  to  overcome. 

I  would  repeat  the  same  thing.  What  reason  and  what  right  have  they  to  ask  that  things  be  easier? 
What  have  they  done  on  their  side?  Why  should  it  be  easier?  To  satisfy  people’s  laziness  and  sloth  - 
or  what? 

Because  when  something  new  comes,  we  always  have  the  idea  of  benefiting  from  it. 

No!  Not  only  in  the  case  of  something  new:  in  every  case,  there  is  always  this  idea  of  benefiting. 
However,  that  is  the  best  way  to  get  nothing. 

Who  are  you  trying  to  fool?  The  Divine?  ...  That  is  hardly  possible. 

It’s  the  same  with  those  who  ask  for  an  interview.  I  tell  them,  ‘Look,  you  have  come  in  large 
numbers,  and  if  each  one  asks  me  for  an  interview,  how  could  I  possibly  find  enough  minutes  in  so 
few  days  to  see  everyone?  While  you’re  here,  I  wouldn’t  have  even  a  single  minute.’  Then  they 
retort,  ‘Oh,  I  have  taken  so  MUCH  trouble,  I  have  come  from  so  FAR  away,  I  have  come  from  way 


31Mother  is  referring  to  the  darshan  of  April  24,  1956.  Four  times  a  year,  for  ‘darshan,’  visitors  increasingly  poured 
into  the  Ashram  to  pass  one  by  one  before  Mother  (and  formerly,  Sri  Aurobindo)  to  receive  her  look. 


in  the  North,  I  have  travelled  for  so  many  hours  -  and  I  have  no  right  to  an  interview?’  I  reply,  ‘I’m 
sorry,  but  you  are  not  the  only  one  in  that  situation.’ 

And  that’s  how  it  is  -  swapping,  bargaining.  We  are  not  a  commercial  enterprise,  we  have  made 
it  clear  that  we  are  not  doing  business. 

The  number  of  disciples  is  increasing  now  day  by  day.  What  does  this  indicate? 

But  inevitably  -  it  will  increase  more  and  more!  Which  is  why  I  cannot  do  what  I  used  to  do  when 
there  were  one  hundred  and  fifty  people  in  the  Ashram.  If  they  had  just  a  little  bit  of  common  sense, 
they  would  understand  that  I  cannot  have  the  same  relationship  with  people  now  (just  imagine, 
1,800  people  these  last  days!),  so  I  cannot  have  the  same  relationship  with  1,845  people  (exactly,  I 
believe)  as  with  thirty  or  even  a  hundred.  That  seems  an  easy  enough  logic  to  understand. 

But  they  want  everything  to  remain  as  it  was  and,  as  you  say,  to  be  the  first  to  ‘benefit.’ 

Mother,  when  the  mind  came  down  into  the  earth  atmosphere,  the  ape  did  not  make  any  effort  to 
convert  himself  into  a  man,  did  he?  It  was  Nature  that  supplied  the  effort.  But  in  our  case  ... 

But  it’s  not  man  who  is  going  to  convert  himself  into  a  supennan! 

No? 

Just  try  a  little!  (laughter)  You  see,  it  is  something  else  that  is  going  to  do  the  work. 

So  we  are ... 

Only  -  yes,  there  is  an  ‘only,’  I  don’t  want  to  be  so  cruel:  NOW  MAN  CAN  COLLABORATE. 
That  is,  he  can  lend  himself  to  the  process,  with  good  will,  with  aspiration,  and  help  to  his  utmost. 
Which  is  why  I  said  it  will  go  faster.  I  hope  it  will  go  MUCH  faster.  But  even  if  it  does  go  much 
faster,  it  will  still  take  some  time! 

(silence) 

Look.  If  all  of  you  who  have  heard  of  this,  not  once  but  perhaps  hundreds  of  times,  who  have 
spoken  of  it  yourselves,  thought  about  it,  hoped  for  it,  wanted  it  (there  are  some  people  who  have 
come  here  only  for  this,  to  receive  the  Supramental  Force  and  to  be  transformed  into  supennen,  this 
has  been  their  goal  ...  )  then  how  is  it  that  you  were  ALL  such  strangers  to  this  Force  that  when  it 
came,  you  did  not  even  feel  it? ! 

Can  you  solve  that  problem  for  me?  If  you  find  the  solution  to  this  problem,  you  will  have  the 
solution  to  the  difficulty. 

I  am  not  speaking  of  people  from  outside  who  have  never  thought  about  it,  who  have  never  felt 
concerned  and  who  do  not  even  know  that  there  may  be  something  like  the  Supermind  to  receive,  in 
fact.  I  am  speaking  of  people  who  have  built  their  lives  upon  this  aspiration  (and  I  don’t  doubt  their 
sincerity  for  a  minute),  who  have  worked  -  some  of  them  for  thirty  years,  some  for  thirty-five, 
others  somewhat  less  -  all  the  while  saying,  ‘When  the  supennind  comes  ...  When  the  supermind 
comes  ...’  That  was  their  refrain:  ‘When  the  supennind  comes  ...’  Consequently,  they  were  really  in 
the  best  possible  frame  of  mind,  one  could  not  have  dreamt  of  a  better  predisposition.  How  is  it, 
then,  that  their  inner  preparation  was  so  ...  let’s  just  say  ‘incomplete,’  that  they  did  not  feel  the 
Vibration  immediately,  as  soon  as  it  came,  through  a  shock  of  identity? 

Individually,  each  one’s  goal  was  to  make  himself  ready,  to  enter  into  a  more  or  less  intimate 
individual  relationship  with  this  Force,  so  as  to  help  the  process;  or  else,  if  he  could  not  help,  at 
least  be  ready  to  recognize  and  be  open  to  the  Force  when  it  would  manifest.  Then  instead  of  being 
an  alien  element  in  a  world  in  which  your  OWN  inner  capacity  remains  unmanifest,  you  suddenly 


become  THAT,  you  enter  directly,  fully,  into  the  very  atmosphere:  the  Force  is  there,  all  around 
you,  permeating  you. 

If  you  had  had  a  little  inner  contact,  you  would  have  recognized  it  immediately,  don’t  you  think 
so? 

Well,  in  any  event,  that  was  the  case  for  those  who  had  a  little  inner  contact;  they  recognized  it, 
they  felt  it,  and  they  said,  ‘Ah,  there  it  is!  It  has  come!’  But  how  is  it  that  so  many  hundreds  of 
people  -  not  to  mention  the  handful  of  those  who  really  wanted  only  that,  thought  only  of  that,  had 
staked  their  whole  lives  on  that  -  how  is  it  that  they  felt  nothing?  What  can  this  mean? 

It  is  well  known  that  only  like  knows  like.  It  is  an  obvious  fact. 

There  was  indeed  a  possibility  to  enter  into  contact  with  the  Thing  individually  -  this  was  even 
what  Sri  Aurobindo  had  described  as  being  the  necessary  procedure:  a  certain  number  of  people 
would  enter  into  contact  with  this  Force  through  their  inner  effort  and  their  aspiration.  We  had 
called  it  the  ascent  towards  the  Supermind.  And  IF  and  when  they  had  touched  the  Supermind 
through  an  inner  ascent  (that  is,  by  freeing  themselves  from  the  material  consciousness),  they 
should  have  recognized  it  SPONTANEOUSLY  as  soon  as  it  came.  But  a  preliminary  contact  was 
indispensable  -  if  you  have  never  touched  it,  how  can  you  recognize  it? 

That’s  how  the  universal  movement  works  (I  read  this  to  you  a  few  days  ago):  through  their 
inner  effort  and  inner  progress,  certain  individuals,  who  are  the  pioneers,  the  forerunners,  enter  into 
communication  with  the  new  Force  which  is  to  manifest,  and  they  receive  it  in  themselves.  And 
because  a  number  of  calls  like  this  surge  forth,  the  thing  becomes  possible,  and  the  era,  the  time,  the 
moment  for  the  manifestation  comes.  This  is  how  it  happened  -  and  the  Manifestation  took  place. 

But  then,  all  those  who  were  ready  should  have  recognized  it. 

I  hasten  to  tell  you  that  some  did  recognize  it,  but  they  were  so  few  ...  But  as  for  those  who  ask 
these  questions,  who  even  took  the  trouble  to  come  here,  who  took  the  train  to  gulp  this  down  as 
you  gulp  down  a  soft  drink,  how  can  they  possibly  feel  anything  whatsoever  if  they  have  not 
prepared  themselves  at  all?  Yet  they  are  already  speaking  of  profiting:  ‘We  want  to  benefit  from 
it  ...  ‘ 

After  all,  if  they  have  even  a  tiny  bit  of  sincerity  (not  too  much,  it’s  tiring!),  a  tiny  bit  of 
sincerity,  it  is  quite  possible  (I  am  joking),  it  is  quite  possible  that  they  might  get  a  few  good  kicks 
to  make  them  go  faster!  It  is  possible.  In  fact,  I  think  that’s  what  will  happen. 

But  really,  this  attitude  ...  this  rather  overly  commercial  attitude,  is  usually  not  very  profitable.  If 
you  have  difficulties  and  you  sincerely  aspire,  it  is  likely  that  the  difficulties  will  diminish.  Let  us 
hope  so. 

(Turning  to  the  disciple)  So  you  may  tell  them  this:  be  sincere  and  you  will  be  helped. 

Mother,  vety  recently  a  text  has  been  circulating  which  says,  ‘What  has  just  now  happened, 

with  this  Victory,  is  not  a  descent  but  a  manifestation.  And  it  is  no  longer  merely  an  individual 

event:  the  Supermind  has  sprung  forth  into  the  universal  play.  ’ 

Yes,  yes,  yes!  I  indeed  said  all  that.  I  acknowledge  it.  And  so? 

It  is  said,  ‘The  supramental principle  is  at  work ... 

But  I  have  just  explained  the  whole  thing  to  you!  (Mother  laughs)  It’s  incredible! 

What  I  call  a  ‘descent’  is  this:  first  of  all,  the  consciousness  climbs  in  ascent,  then  you  catch  the 
Thing  up  above  and  redescend  with  it.  This  is  an  INDIVIDUAL  event. 

When  this  individual  event  has  taken  place  sufficiently  to  allow  a  more  general  possibility  to 
emerge,  it  is  no  longer  a  ‘descent’  but  a  ‘manifestation.’ 


What  I  call  a  ‘descent’  is  the  individual  movement  in  an  individual  consciousness.  But  when  a 
new  world  is  manifesting  in  an  old  world  -  as  when  similarly  the  mind  spread  over  the  earth  -  I  call 
it  a  manifestation. 

You  may  call  it  whatever  you  like,  it  makes  no  difference  to  me,  but  we  must  understand  each 
other. 

What  I  call  a  ‘descent’  takes  place  in  the  individual  consciousness.  In  the  same  way,  we  speak  of 
‘ascent’  (there  is  no  ascent  really,  there  is  no  high  or  low,  no  direction:  it’s  all  a  manner  of 
speaking)  -  we  speak  of  ‘ascent’  when  we  feel  ourselves  rising  up  towards  something,  and  we  call  it 
a  ‘descent’  when,  after  having  caught  this  thing,  we  bring  it  down  into  ourselves. 

But  when  the  doors  are  opened  and  the  flood  pours  in,  it  can  no  longer  be  called  a  ‘descent’:  it  is 
a  Force  that  spreads  everywhere.  Understood?  ...  Ah! 

I  don’t  care  what  words  you  use.  I  do  not  essentially  insist  upon  my  words,  but  I  explain  them  to 
you,  and  it’s  better  to  agree  on  words  beforehand,  for  otherwise  there’s  no  end  to  explanations. 

But  now,  you  may  reply  to  those  people  who  are  asking  these  insidious  questions  that  the  best 
way  to  receive  anything  whatsoever  is  not  to  pull,  but  to  give.  If  they  want  to  give  themselves  to  the 
new  life,  well,  the  new  life  will  enter  into  them. 

But  if  they  want  to  pull  the  new  life  into  themselves,  they  will  close  the  door  with  their  egoism. 
That’s  all. 


July  29,  195632 

O  Thou  who  art  always  there  -  present  in  all  I  do,  all  I  am  -  not  for  repose  do  I  aspire,  but  for  THY 
INTEGRAL  VICTORY. 


August  10,  195633 

32Note  written  by  Mother  in  French. 


33Note  written  by  Mother  in  English. 


My  Lord,  through  me  thou  hast  challenged  the  world  and  all  the  adverse  forces  have  risen  in 
protest.34 

But  Thy  Grace  is  winning  the  victory. 


September  12,  195635 


(During  the  Wednesday  class) 

...  A  supramental  entity  had  entirely  possessed  me. 

Something  a  little  taller  than  myself:  its  feet  extended  below  my  feet  and  its  head  went  a  little 
beyond  my  head. 

...  A  solid  block  with  a  rectangular  base  -  a  rectangle  with  a  square  base  -  one  single  piece. 

...  A  light,  not  like  the  golden  light  of  the  Supermind:  rather  a  kind  of  phosphorescence.  I  felt 
that  had  it  been  night,  it  would  have  been  physically  visible. 

...  And  it  was  denser  than  my  physical  body:  the  physical  body  seemed  to  me  almost  unreal  -  as 
though  crumbly  -  like  sand  running  through  your  fingers. 

...  I  would  have  been  incapable  of  speaking,  words  seemed  so  petty,  narrow,  ignorant. 

...  I  saw  (how  shall  I  put  it?)  the  successive  preparations  which  took  place,  in  certain  anterior 
beings,  in  order  to  achieve  this. 

...  It  felt  as  if  I  had  several  heads. 

...  The  experience  of  February  29  was  of  a  general  nature;  but  this  one  was  intended  for  me. 

...  An  experience  I  had  never  had. 

...  I  begin  to  see  what  the  supramental  body  will  be. 

...  I  had  had  a  somewhat  similar  experience  at  the  time  of  the  union  of  the  supreme  creative 
principle  with  the  physical  consciousness.  But  that  was  a  subtle  experience,  while  this  was  material 
-  in  the  body. 

...  I  did  not  have  the  experience,  I  did  not  look  at  it:  I  WAS  it. 

...  And  it  radiated  from  me:  myriads  of  little  sparks  that  were  penetrating  everybody  -  I  saw 
them  enter  into  each  one  of  those  present. 

34In  fact,  following  the  ‘Supramental  Manifestation’  of  February  29,  1956,  all  of  Mother’s  physical  difficulties 
increased,  as  though  all  the  obscurities  in  the  physical  consciousness  were  surging  forth  beneath  the  pressure  of  the  new 
light.  The  same  observation  applies  to  the  disciples  who  were  around  Mother  and  undoubtedly  to  the  world  as  a  whole. 
A  strange  “mysterious  acceleration’  was  beginning  to  take  hold  of  the  world. 


35This  text  was  noted  down  by  a  disciple  from  memory.  On  the  original  manuscript  submitted  for  her  approval,  Mother 
wrote,  ‘This  account  is  quite  correct,’  and  She  signed  the  text.  Words  added  or  corrected  by  Mother  are  in  italics. 


...  One  more  step. 


September  14, 1956 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Hyderabad,  September  14,  1956 


Sweet  Mother, 

Scarcely  has  a  moment  gone  by  since  I  left  that  I  have  not  thought  of  you,  but  I  wanted  to  wait 
for  things  to  be  clear  and  settled  in  me  before  writing,  for  you  obviously  have  other  things  to  do 
than  listen  to  platonic  declarations. 

My  friends  keep  telling  me  that  I  am  not  ready  and  that,  like  R,36  whom  they  knew,  I  should  go 
and  spend  some  time  in  society.  They  say  that  my  idea  of  going  to  the  Himalayas  is  absurd,  and 
they  advise  me  to  return  to  Brazil  for  a  few  years  to  stay  with  W  ...  W  is  an  elderly  American 
millionaire  -  the  only  ‘good’  rich  man  I  know  -  who  wanted  to  make  me  an  heir,  as  it  were,  to  his 
financial  affairs  and  who  treats  me  rather  like  a  son.  He  was  quite  disappointed  when  I  came  back  to 
India.  My  friends  tell  me  that  if  I  have  to  go  through  a  period  in  the  outside  world,  the  best  way  to 
do  it  is  to  remain  near  someone  who  is  fond  of  me,  while  at  the  same  time  ensuring  a  material 
independence  for  the  future. 

These  questions  of  money  do  not  interest  me.  In  fact,  nothing  interests  me  except  this  something 
I  feel  within  me.  The  only  question  for  me  is  to  know  whether  I  am  truly  ready  for  the  Yoga,  or  if 
my  failings  are  not  the  sign  of  some  immaturity.  Mother,  you  alone  can  tell  me  what  is  right. 

I  feel  a  bit  lost,  cut  off  from  you.  The  idea  of  going  to  the  Himalayas  is  absurd  and  I  am 
abandoning  it.  My  friends  tell  me  that  I  may  remain  with  them  as  long  as  I  wish,  but  this  is  hardly  a 
solution;  I  don’t  even  feel  like  writing  a  book  any  longer  -  nothing  seems  to  appeal  to  me  except  the 
trees  in  this  garden  and  the  music  that  fills  a  large  part  of  my  days.  There  is  no  solution  other  than 
the  Ashram  or  Brazil.  You  alone  can  tell  me  what  to  do. 

I  KNOW  that  ultimately  my  place  is  near  you,  but  is  that  my  place  at  present,  after  all  these 
failings?  Spontaneously,  it  is  you  I  want,  you  alone  who  represent  the  light  and  all  that  is  real  in  this 
world;  I  can  love  no  one  but  you  nor  be  interested  in  anything  but  this  thing  within  me,  but  will  it 
not  all  begin  again  once  I  have  returned  to  the  Ashram?  You  alone  know  the  stage  I  am  at,  what  is 
good  for  me,  what  is  possible. 

Sweet  Mother,  may  I  still  ask  for  your  Love,  your  help?  For  without  your  help,  nothing  is 
possible,  and  without  your  love,  nothing  has  any  meaning. 

I  feel  that  I  am  your  child  in  spite  of  all  my  contradictions  and  failings.  I  love  you. 

Signed:  Bernard 


36A  former  disciple  who  left  the  Ashram,  and  subsequently  committed  suicide. 


(Mother’s  reply) 


9.19.56 


My  dear  child, 

For  my  part,  there  has  been  no  ‘cut’  and  I  have  not  been  severe  ...  My  feelings  cannot  change, 
for  they  are  based  upon  something  other  than  outer  circumstances. 

But  perhaps  you  have  felt  this  way  because  you  had  left  your  work  in  the  Ashram  for  an  entirely 
personal,  that  is,  necessarily  egoistical  reason,  and  egoism  always  isolates  one  from  the  great 
current  of  universal  forces.  That  is  why,  too,  you  no  longer  clearly  perceive  my  love  and  my  help 
which  nevertheless  are  always  with  you. 

You  asked  me  what  I  see  and  whether  your  difficulties  will  not  reappear  upon  your  return  to  the 
Ashram.  It  may  well  be.  If  you  return  as  you  still  are  at  present,  it  may  be  that  after  a  very  short 
period  it  will  all  begin  again.  That  is  why  I  am  going  to  propose  something  to  you  -  but  to  accept  it 
you  will  have  to  be  heroic  and  very  determined  in  your  consecration  to  my  work. 

This  possibility  appeared  to  me  while  reading  what  you  wrote  about  your  sojourn  in  Brazil  with 
W,  the  only  ‘good’  rich  man  you  have  known.  Here  is  my  proposal,  which  I  express  to  you  quite 
plainly,  spontaneously,  as  it  presented  itself  to  me. 

Just  now,  the  work  is  being  delayed,  curtailed,  limited,  almost  endangered  for  want  of  money. 

That  which  you  would  not  do  for  yourself  personally,  would  you  not  do  it  for  the  divine  cause? 

Go  to  Brazil,  to  this  ‘good’  rich  man,  make  him  understand  the  importance  of  our  work,  the 
extent  to  which  his  fortune  would  be  used  to  the  utmost  for  the  good  of  all  and  for  the  earth’s 
salvation  were  he  to  put  it,  even  partially,  at  the  disposal  of  our  action.  Win  this  victory  over  the 
power  of  money,  and  by  so  doing  you  will  be  freed  from  all  your  personal  difficulties.  Then  you  can 
return  here  with  no  apprehension,  and  you  will  be  ready  for  the  transformation. 

Reflect  upon  this,  take  your  time,  tell  me  very  frankly  how  you  feel  about  it  and  whether  it 
appears  to  you,  as  it  does  to  me,  to  be  a  door  opening  onto  a  path  that  will  bring  you  back,  free  and 
strong  at  last  to  me. 

All  my  affection  is  with  you,  and  my  blessings  never  leave  you. 

Signed:  Mother 


October  7, 1956 

I  cried  towards  the  Light  and  Thou  gayest  me  knowledge. 

Z  asked  me,  ‘Why  didn’t  you  stop  it?’37 1  replied,  ‘Probably  because  I  am  not  omnipotent!’  Then 


37Mother  is  referring  to  a  strike  by  the  salaried  workers  of  the  Ashram,  one  of  the  numerous  internal  and  external 
difficulties  constantly  assailing  Her. 


he  insisted:  ‘No,  that’s  not  it.  I  make  no  distinction  between  your  will  and  the  divine  will  ...  and  I 
know  that  you  don’t  either.  So  why  didn’t  you  stop  it?’ 

And  suddenly,  I  understood. 

It  was  because  I  hadn’t  thought  of  it.  It  hadn’t  even  grazed  my  consciousness.  The  divine  will  is 
not  at  all  like  that,  it  is  not  a  will:  it  is  a  VISION,  a  global  vision,  that  sees  and  ...  No,  it  does  not 
guide  (to  guide  suggests  something  outside,  but  nothing  is  outside),  a  creative  vision,  as  it  were;  yet 
even  then,  the  word  ‘create’  does  not  here  have  the  meaning  we  generally  attribute  to  it. 

And  what  is  the  Ashram?  (I  don’t  even  mean  in  terms  of  the  Universe  -  on  Earth  only.)  A  speck. 
And  why  should  this  speck  receive  exceptional  treatment?  ...  Perhaps  if  people  here  had  realized  the 
supennind.  But  are  they  so  exceptional  as  to  expect  exceptional  treatment?  ... 

As  Sri  Aurobindo  says,  people  see  God  as  a  magnified  man:  he  is  the  Demiurge,  Jehovah  -  what 
I  call  the  ‘Lord  of  Falsehood.’ 

Arbitrariness.  But  the  Divine  is  not  like  that! 

People  say,  ‘I  gave  everything,  I  sacrificed  everything.  In  exchange,  I  expect  exceptional 
conditions  -  everything  should  be  beautiful,  harmonious,  easy.’ 

But  the  divine  vision  is  global.  The  people  in  the  Ashram  do  not  want  this  strike  ...  but  what 
about  the  others?  They  are  ignorant,  mean,  full  of  ill  will,  etc.,  but  in  their  own  way  they  are 
following  a  path,  and  why  should  they  be  deprived  of  the  Grace?  By  the  fact  that  their  action  is 
against  the  Ashram?  It  is  certainly  a  Grace. 

I  said  that  I  had  not  even  thought  of  intervening.  When  things  threatened  to  turn  bad,  I  simply 
applied  a  force  so  that  it  wouldn’t  become  too  serious. 

Complete  surrender  ...  It  is  not  a  matter  of  giving  what  is  small  to  something  greater  nor  of 
losing  one’s  will  in  the  divine  will;  it  is  a  matter  of  ANNULLING  one’s  will  in  something  that  is  of 
another  nature. 

What  comes  to  replace  this  human  will? 

A  consciousness  and  a  vision.  And  one  is  filled  with  joy  and  ... 

I  used  to  be  different  (although  I  was  said  to  be  non-interfering);  I  acted,  if  at  all,  to  defend 
myself  ...  But  I  understood  very  quickly  that  even  this  was  a  reaction  of  ignorance  and  that  things 
would  be  set  right  automatically  if  one  remained  in  the  true  consciousness. 

A  consciousness  that  sees  and  makes  you  see. 

Which  is  why  things  go  amiss  when  people  try  to  force  me  to  act:  I  am  outside  of  myself,  so  to 
speak.  As  soon  as  I  come  back  here,  with  no  one  around,  then  I  see. 

I  have  called  for  a  greater  ‘package’  of  Grace  and  asked  that  the  truth  of  things  prevail.  We  shall 
see  what  happens. 


October  8, 1956 


(At  about  6  a.m.,  before 
Mother  appeared  on  the  balcony) 


‘Be  always  at  the  height  of  yourself, 
in  all  circumstances.’ 

Then  I  wondered  when  and  how  I  am  at  the  height  of  myself  And  this  is  what  I  saw: 

Two  things  which  were  parallel  and  concomitant  -  that  is,  they  are  always  together: 

One  -  identity  with  the  Origin,  which  imparts  an  absolute  serenity  and  perfect  detachment  to  the 
action. 

The  other  -  identity  with  the  supreme  Grace,  which  obliterates  and  abolishes  all  errors 
committed  in  the  action  by  whomsoever  and  whatsoever  -  and  which  annuls  all  the  consequences  of 
these  errors. 

And  the  moment  I  perceived  this,  I  saw  that  my  third  attitude  in  action,  which  is  the  will  for 
progress  for  the  whole  earth  as  well  as  for  each  particular  individual,  was  not  the  height  of  my 
being. 


*  * 


(later,  at  10  a.m.) 

One  is  never  anything  but  a  divine  apprentice:  the  Divine  of  yesterday  is  only  an  apprentice  to  the 
Divine  of  tomorrow  ...  No,  I  am  not  speaking  of  a  progressive  manifestation  -  that  is  much  farther 
below. 

When  I  am  at  my  highest,  I  am  already  too  high  for  the  manifestation. 

I  have  gone  far  beyond  what  I  wrote  this  morning. 

What  if  the  human  is  too  heavy,  too  narrow,  too  obscure  to  follow  you? 

No,  it  is  exactly  the  opposite  of  what  you  are  saying.  It  is  not  that  the  Divine  in  his  divinity  is 
opposed  to  his  own  manifested  self  -  He  is  very  far  beyond,  beyond  the  necessity  for  Grace;  He 
perceives  his  unique  and  exclusive  responsibility,  and  that  it  is  He  and  He  alone  who  must  change 
in  His  Manifestation  so  that  all  may  change. 


*  * 


(later,  at  1  p.m.) 


Won ’t  you  at  least  take  a  flower? 

I  wanted  to  take  this  little  rose  (‘Tenderness  for  the  Divine  ’),  for  I  consider  it  to  be  the  manifestation 
nearest  to  divine  Love.  It’s  disinterested,  spontaneous,  intimate. 

This  is  what  I  wanted  to  take  with  me  to  my  super-heaven,  as  the  most  precious  thing  in  the 
human  heart. 


October  28, 1956 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Pondicherry,  October  28,  1956 

Sweet  Mother,  my  birthday  is  the  day  after  tomorrow,  the  30th.  I  come  to  place  my  inner  situation 
before  you  so  that  you  may  help  me  take  a  decision. 

I  am  facing  the  same  difficulties  as  before  my  departure  to  Hyderabad,  and  I  have  made  the 
same  mistakes.  The  main  reason  for  this  state  is  that,  on  the  one  hand,  words  and  ideas  seem  to  have 
lost  all  power  over  me,  and  on  the  other,  the  vital  elan  which  led  me  thus  far  is  dead.  So  upon  what 
shall  my  faith  rest?  I  still  have  some  faith,  of  course,  but  it  has  become  totally  ABSTRACT.  The 
vital  does  not  cooperate,  so  I  feel  all  withered,  suspended  in  a  void,  nothing  seems  to  give  me 
direction  anymore.  There  is  no  rebelliousness  in  me,  but  rather  a  void. 

In  this  state,  I  am  ceaselessly  thinking  of  my  forest  in  Guiana  or  of  my  travels  through  Africa 
and  the  ardor  that  filled  me  with  life  in  those  days.  I  seem  to  need  to  have  my  goal  before  me  and  to 
walk  towards  it.  Outer  difficulties  also  seem  to  help  me  resolve  my  inner  problems:  there  is  a  kind 
of  need  in  me  for  the  ‘elements’  -  the  sea,  the  forest,  the  desert  -  for  a  milieu  with  which  I  can 
wrestle  and  through  which  I  can  grow.  Here,  I  seem  to  lack  a  dynamic  point  of  leverage.  Here,  in 
the  everyday  routine,  everything  seems  to  be  falling  apart  in  me.  Should  I  not  return  to  my  forest  in 
Guiana? 

Mother,  I  implore  you,  in  the  name  of  whatever  led  me  to  you  in  the  first  place,  give  me  the 
strength  to  do  WHAT  HAS  TO  BE  DONE.  You  who  see  and  who  can,  decide  for  me.  You  are  my 
Mother.  Whatever  my  shortcomings,  my  difficulties,  I  feel  I  am  so  deeply  your  child. 

Signed:  Bernard 

P.S.  If  you  see  that  I  should  remain  here,  put  in  me  the  necessary  strength  and  aspiration.  I  shall 
obey  you.  I  want  to  obey  you. 


(Mother’s  reply) 


10.30.56 

One  should  beware  of  the  charm  of  memories.  What  remains  of  past  experiences  is  the  effect  they 
have  had  in  the  development  of  the  consciousness.  But  when  one  attempts  to  relive  a  memory  by 
placing  oneself  again  in  similar  circumstances,  one  realizes  quite  rapidly  how  devoid  they  are  of 
their  power  and  charm,  because  they  have  lost  their  usefulness  for  progress. 

You  are  now  beyond  the  stage  when  the  virgin  forest  and  the  desert  can  be  useful  for  your 
growth.  They  had  put  you  in  contact  with  a  life  vaster  than  your  own  and  they  widened  the  limits  of 
your  consciousness.  But  now  you  need  something  else. 

So  far,  your  whole  life  has  revolved  around  yourself;  all  you  have  done,  even  the  apparently 
most  disinterested  or  least  egoistic  act,  has  been  done  with  a  view  to  your  own  personal  growth  or 
illumination.  It  is  time  to  live  for  something  other  than  yourself,  something  other  than  your  own 


individuality. 

Open  a  new  chapter  in  your  existence.  Live,  no  longer  for  your  own  realization  or  the  realization 
of  your  ideal,  however  exalted  it  may  be,  but  to  serve  an  eternal  work  that  transcends  your 
individuality  on  all  sides. 

Signed:  Mother 


November  22, 1956 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Pondicherry,  November  22,  1956 


Sweet  Mother, 

For  weeks  on  end,  I  have  been  spending  nearly  all  my  nights  battling  with  serpents.  Last  night,  I 
was  attacked  by  three  different  kinds  of  serpents,  each  more  venomous  and  repugnant  than  the 
other??? 

Signed:  Bernard 


December  12, 1956 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Pondicherry,  December  12,  1956 

Mother,  a  letter  from  W.  He  is  leaving  Brazil  and  retiring  from  business  for  good. 

Mother,  what  can  I  do  with  my  life?  I  feel  absolutely  alone,  in  a  void.  What  hope  remains  since  I 
have  not  been  able  to  integrate  into  the  Ashram?  I  am  goalless.  I  am  from  nowhere.  I  am  good  for 
nothing. 


I  have  wanted  to  remain  near  you,  and  I  love  you,  but  there  is  something  in  me  that  does  not 
accept  an  ‘Ashram  ending.’  There  is  a  need  in  me  to  DO,  to  act.  But  what?  What?  Have  I  something 
to  do  in  this  life? 

For  years  I  have  dreamed  of  going  to  Chinese  Turkestan.  Should  I  head  in  that  direction?  Or 
towards  Africa? 

I  don’t  see  a  thing,  nothing.  Oh  Mother,  I  turn  towards  you  in  this  void  that  is  stifling  me.  Hear 
my  prayer.  Tell  me  what  I  must  do.  Give  me  a  sign.  Mother,  you  are  my  sole  recourse,  for  who  else 
would  show  me  the  path  to  be  taken,  who  else  but  you  would  love  me?  Or  is  my  fate  to  go  off  into 
the  night? 

Forgive  me,  Mother,  for  loving  you  so  poorly,  for  giving  myself  so  badly.  Mother,  you  are  my 
only  hope,  all  the  rest  in  me  is  utter  despair. 

Your  child, 
Signed:  Bernard 


December  26,  1956 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Pondicherry,  December  26,  1956 

Mother,  perhaps  it  would  be  good  if  I  told  you  what  is  happening  within  me,  as  sincerely  as  I  can: 

I  feel  that  this  Truth  of  my  being,  this  self  most  intensely  felt,  is  independent  from  any  form  or 
institution.  As  far  back  as  I  can  reach  in  my  consciousness,  this  ‘thing’  has  been  there;  it  was  what 
drove  me  at  an  early  age  to  liberate  myself  from  my  family,  my  religion,  my  country,  a  profession, 
marriage  or  society  in  general.  I  feel  this  ‘thing’  to  be  a  kind  of  absolute  freedom,  and  I  have  been 
feeling  within  me  this  same  profound  drive  for  more  than  a  year.  Is  this  need  for  freedom  wrong? 
And  yet  is  it  not  because  of  this  that  the  best  in  me  has  blossomed? 

This  is  actually  what  is  happening  in  me:  I  never  really  accepted  the  W  solution,  and  the 
solution  of  Somaliland  doesn’t  appeal  to  me.  But  I  feel  drawn  by  the  idea  of  Turkestan,  as  I  already 
told  you,  and  this  is  why: 

Ten  years  ago,  I  had  two  intuitions  -  the  first  of  which,  to  my  great  astonishment,  was  realized. 
It  was  that  I  had  something  important  to  do  in  South  America  -  and  though  I  never  could  have 
foreseen  such  a  voyage,  I  went  there.  The  second  was  that  I  had  something  to  do  in  Turkestan. 

Mother,  this  is  the  problem  around  which  I  have  desperately  been  turning  in  circles.  What  is  the 
truth  of  my  destiny?  Is  it  that  which  is  urging  me  so  strongly  to  leave,  or  that  which  is  struggling 
against  my  freedom?  For  ultimately,  sincerely,  what  I  want  is  to  fulfill  my  life’s  truth.  If  I  have  ever 
had  a  will,  then  it  is:  LET  BE  WHAT  MUST  BE.  Mother,  how  can  one  truly  know?  Is  this  drive, 
this  very  old  and  very  CLEAR  urge  in  me,  false?? 


Your  child, 
Signed:  Bernard 


January  1, 1957 


1957 


A  power  greater  than  that  of  Evil 
can  alone  win  the  victory. 

It  is  not  a  crucified 
but  a  glorified  body 
that  will  save  the  world. 


January  18, 1957 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Pondicherry,  January  18,  1957 


Sweet  Mother, 

The  conflict  that  is  tearing  me  apart  is  between  this  shadowy  part  of  a  past  that  does  not  want  to 
die,  and  the  new  light.  I  wonder  if,  rather  than  escaping  to  some  desert,  it  would  not  be  wiser  to 
resolve  this  conflict  by  objectify  it,  by  writing  this  book  I  spoke  to  you  about. 

But  I  would  like  to  know  whether  it  is  really  useful  for  me  to  write  this  book,  or  whether  it  is  not 
just  some  inferior  task,  a  makeshift. 

You  told  me  one  day  that  I  could  be  ‘useful’  to  you.  Then,  by  chance,  I  came  across  this  passage 
from  Sri  Aurobindo  the  other  day:  ‘Everyone  has  in  him  something  divine,  something  his  own,  a 
chance  of  perfection  and  strength  in  however  small  a  sphere  which  God  offers  him  to  take  or 
refuse.’ 

Could  you  tell  me,  as  a  favor,  what  this  particular  thing  is  in  me  which  may  be  useful  to  you  and 
serve  you?  If  I  could  only  know  what  my  real  work  is  in  this  world  ...  All  the  conflicting  impulses 
in  me  stem  from  my  being  like  an  unemployed  force,  like  a  being  whose  place  has  not  yet  been 
determined. 

What  do  you  see  in  me,  Mother?  Is  it  through  writing  that  I  shall  achieve  what  is  to  be  achieved 
-  or  does  all  this  still  belong  to  a  nether  world?  But  if  so,  then  of  what  use  am  I?  If  I  were  good  at 
something,  it  would  give  me  some  air  to  breathe. 

Your  child, 
Signed:  Bernard 


March  3, 1957 


(Letter  from  Mother  to  Satprem) 


3.3.57 

I  name  you  Satprem  (true  love)  for  it  is  only  when  you  awaken  to  divine  love  that  you  will  feel  that 
you  love. 

Signed:  Mother 


April  9, 1957 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Pondicherry ,  April  9,  1957 


Mother, 

I  would  like  to  throw  myself  at  your  feet  and  open  my  heart  to  you  -  but  I  cannot.  I  cannot. 

For  I  SEE  that,  were  I  to  give  in  now,  I  would  be  done  for  -  there  would  be  no  alternative  but  to 
live  out  the  rest  of  my  days  in  the  Ashram.  But  everything  in  me  rebels  at  this  idea.  The  idea  of 
winding  up  as  General  Secretary  of  the  Ashram,  like  Pavitra,  makes  my  skin  crawl.  It  is  absurd,  and 
I  apologize  for  speaking  this  way,  Mother,  for  I  admire  Pavitra  -  but  I  can’t  help  it,  I  can’t  do  it,  I 
do  not  want  to  end  up  like  that. 

For  more  than  a  year  now,  I  have  been  hypnotized  by  the  idea  that  if  I  give  in,  I  will  be 
‘condemned’  to  remain  here.  Once  more,  forgive  me  for  speaking  so  absurdly,  for  of  course  I  know 
it  is  not  a  ‘condemnation’;  and  yet  a  part  of  me  feels  that  it  would  be. 

Thus  I  am  so  tense  that  I  do  not  even  want  to  close  my  eyes  to  meditate  for  fear  of  yielding.  And 
I  fall  into  all  kinds  of  errors  that  horrify  me,  simply  because  the  pressure  is  too  strong  at  times,  and  I 
literally  suffocate.  Mother,  I  am  not  cut  out  to  be  a  ‘disciple.’ 


I  realize  that  all  the  progress  I  was  able  to  make  during  the  first  two  years  has  been  lost  and  I  am 
just  as  before,  worse  than  before  -  as  if  all  my  strength  were  in  ruin,  all  faith  in  myself  undone  -  so 
much  so  that  at  times  I  curse  myself  for  having  come  here  at  all. 

That  is  the  situation,  Mother.  I  feel  my  unworthiness  profoundly.  I  am  the  opposite  of  Satprem, 
unable  to  love  and  to  give  myself.  Everything  in  me  is  sealed  tight. 

So  what  is  to  be  done?  I  intend  asking  your  permission  to  leave  as  soon  as  the  book  is  finished  (I 
am  determined  to  finish  it,  for  it  will  rid  me  of  the  past  it  represents).  I  expect  nothing  from  the 
world,  except  a  bit  of  external  space,  in  the  absence  of  another  space. 

Signed:  Bernard 

P.S.  And  yet,  even  if  I  leave,  I  know  that  I  shall  have  to  come  back  here  ...  Everything  is  a  paradox, 
and  I  CANNOT  get  out  of  this  paradox. 


(Mother’s  reply) 


April  11,  1957 


My  dear  child, 

I  read  your  letter  yesterday,  and  here  is  the  answer  that  immediately  came  to  me.  I  add  to  it  the 
assurance  that  nothing  has  changed,  nor  can  change,  in  my  relationship  with  you,  and  that  you  are 
and  always  will  be  my  child  -  for  that  is  the  truth  of  your  being. 

Here  is  what  I  wrote: 

In  your  ignorance,  you  created  a  phantom  of  your  destiny,  and  then,  out  of  this  non-existent 
ghost,  you  made  a  hobgoblin  around  which  all  the  resistances  of  your  outer  nature  have  crystallized. 

It  is  a  double  ignorance: 

-  in  the  universe,  there  are  not  -  there  cannot  be  -  two  similar  destinies. 

-  each  one’s  destiny  is  inevitably  fulfilled,  but  the  nearer  one  is  to  the  Divine,  the  more  does  this 
destiny  assume  its  divine  qualities. 

I  am  saying  all  this  so  that  you  do  not  hypnotize  yourself  further  with  some  imaginary  and 
groundless  possibility. 

I  am  with  you  always. 

Signed:  Mother 


Undated  195738 


38The  following  conversation  was  noted  from  memory.  At  this  time  the  conversations  were  not  yet  tape-recorded,  and 
Satprem,  alas,  felt  it  proper  to  eliminate  all  personal  issues  so  that  only  the  ‘teaching’  would  remain.  The  ‘serious 
decision’  in  question  concerns  leaving  the  Ashram. 


When  a  serious  decision  has  to  be  made,  how  can  one  know  in  which  direction  lies  one ’s  true 

destiny? 

We  do  not  have  one  destiny,  but  several  destinies. 

Each  one  has  the  right  to  reunite  with  his  supreme  Origin  whatever  his  place  in  the  world  order 
-  that  is  the  gift  the  Divine  has  given  to  matter,  and  this  is  your  true  destiny.  And  it  is  a  special  gift 
given  to  the  earth;  it  does  not  exist  in  the  other  worlds.  At  the  same  time,  each  one  has  a  particular 
role  in  the  manifestation,  which  is  determined  by  the  Supreme,  but  this  same  role  can  exist  on 
different  levels  depending  upon  the  degree  of  evolution  of  ‘that’  which  is  within  you.  If  ‘that’ 
within  you  is  still  very  young,  your  realization  may  be  absolute  and  you  may  effectively  be  able  to 
reunite  with  the  Supreme,  but  the  field  of  realization  in  the  world  will  be  limited,  very  small.  Along 
the  vertical  plane,  you  may  be  able  to  touch  the  Supreme  directly,  in  spite  of  your  smallness,  but  on 
the  horizontal  plane,  the  extent  of  your  realization  will  be  infinitesimal.  We  could  take  the  example 
of  Maheshwari,  the  Mother  of  Might  and  All-Wisdom.  This  aspect  of  the  Mother  will  assume 
different  forms  depending  upon  the  degree  of  evolution  of  ‘that’  within  you:  it  might  be  a  mere  little 
group  leader,  a  queen,  an  empress.  She  will  be  in  the  group  leader  as  well  as  in  the  empress,  but  the 
field  of  realization  will  obviously  be  different. 

So,  along  this  same  vertical  line  that  leads  you  to  your  divine  Origin,  you  might  have  several 
outer  destinies  depending  upon  your  state  of  development.  The  yoga  seeks  to  accelerate  things,  but 
this  is  not  always  possible,  for  some  psychological  combinations  in  the  being  can  only  be  worked 
out  through  experience.  This  experience  may  take  a  few  lifetimes,  a  few  years,  a  few  months,  a  few 
minutes. 

When  seen  from  the  supreme  consciousness,  the  unfolding  of  all  the  destinies  and  all  the 
possibilities  of  destiny  is  something  infinitely  interesting.  For  example,  there  are  beings  accused  of 
megalomania  because  they  have  vast  projects  and  great  designs  which  do  not  always  fit  in  with  the 
world’s  present  possibilities.  Most  often,  it  is  a  simple  lack  of  judgment  on  their  part,  a  lack  of 
knowledge.  They  have  indeed  entered  into  communication  with  a  higher  truth,  something  that 
probably  corresponds  to  a  future  phase  of  their  destiny  (which  is  why  they  are  so  convinced),  but 
through  lack  of  judgment,  they  do  not  see  that  the  time  for  this  truth  has  not  yet  come,  that  the 
circumstances  are  not  yet  ready,  or  that  the  conditions  in  which  they  were  born  prevent  them  from 
carrying  out  what  they  feel  to  be  true.  There  is  a  gap  between  the  vision  of  a  truth  and  its  present 
possibilities  for  realization.  But  these  great  dreams  must  not  be  killed,  for  it  would  mean  killing 
something  of  your  own  future.  Above  all,  we  must  refuse,  energetically  reject,  this  hideous  morality 
of  the  Philistine  which  says  that  ‘nothing  ever  changes,’  this  flat  and  vulgar  common  sense  a  la 
Sancho  Panza.  Simply,  one  must  know  how  to  wait  and  to  nurture  one’s  dreams  for  a  long  time. 

To  conclude,  this  is  what  may  be  said:  in  the  universe,  there  are  no  two  destinies  alike  -  there 
cannot  be. 

Each  one’s  destiny  is  inevitably  fulfilled,  but  the  nearer  one  is  to  the  Divine,  the  more  this 
destiny  assumes  its  divine  qualities. 


April  22, 1957 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 

Pondicherry,  April  22,  1957 

Sweet  Mother, 

The  book  is  finished.39  I  would  like  to  give  it  to  you  personally,  if  it  would  not  disturb  you, 
whenever  you  wish. 

Your  child, 

Signed:  Satprem 


July  3, 1957 


(Extract  from  the  Wednesday  class) 

I  have  been  asked  if  we  are  doing  a  collective  yoga  and  what  are  the  conditions  of  a  collective  yoga. 

First,  I  could  tell  you  that  to  do  a  collective  yoga,  there  has  to  be  a  collectivity!  ...  And  I  could 
speak  to  you  about  the  different  conditions  required  to  be  a  collectivity.  But  last  night  (smiling),  I 
had  a  symbolic  vision  of  our  collectivity. 

This  vision  took  place  early  in  the  night  and  woke  me  up  with  a  rather  unpleasant  feeling.  Then  I 
fell  back  to  sleep  and  forgot  about  it;  but  a  little  while  ago,  when  I  was  thinking  of  the  question  put 
to  me,  it  returned.  It  returned  with  a  great  intensity  and  so  imperatively  that  now,  just  as  I  wanted  to 
tell  you  what  kind  of  collectivity  we  wish  to  realize  according  to  the  ideal  described  by  Sri 
Aurobindo  in  the  last  chapter  of  The  Life  Divine  -  a  gnostic,  supramental  collectivity,  the  only  kind 
that  can  do  Sri  Aurobindo’s  integral  yoga  and  be  realized  physically  in  a  progressive  collective 
body  becoming  more  and  more  divine  -  the  recollection  of  this  vision  became  so  imperative  that  I 
couldn’t  speak. 

Its  symbolism  was  very  clear,  though  of  quite  a  familiar  nature,  as  it  were,  and  because  of  its 
very  familiarity,  unmistakable  in  its  realism  ...  Were  I  to  tell  you  all  the  details,  you  would  probably 
not  even  be  able  to  follow:  it  was  rather  intricate.  It  was  a  kind  of  (how  can  I  express  it?)  -  an 
immense  hotel  where  all  the  terrestrial  possibilities  were  lodged  in  different  apartments.  And  it  was 
all  in  a  constant  state  of  transformation:  parts  or  entire  wings  of  the  building  were  suddenly  torn 
down  and  rebuilt  while  people  were  still  living  in  them,  such  that  if  you  went  off  somewhere  within 
the  immense  hotel  itself,  you  ran  the  risk  of  no  longer  finding  your  room  when  you  wanted  to  return 
to  it,  for  it  might  have  been  torn  down  and  was  being  rebuilt  according  to  another  plan!  It  was 


39L’Orpailleur. 


orderly,  it  was  organized  ...  yet  there  was  this  fantastic  chaos  which  I  mentioned.  And  all  this  was  a 
symbol  -  a  symbol  that  certainly  applies  to  what  Sri  Aurobindo  has  written  here40  regarding  the 
necessity  for  the  transformation  of  the  body,  the  type  of  transformation  that  has  to  take  place  for  life 
to  become  a  divine  life. 

It  went  something  like  this:  somewhere,  in  the  center  of  this  enonnous  edifice,  there  was  a  room 
reserved  -  as  it  seemed  in  the  story  -  for  a  mother  and  her  daughter.  The  mother  was  a  lady,  an 
elderly  lady,  a  very  influential  matron  who  had  a  great  deal  of  authority  and  her  own  views 
concerning  the  entire  organization.  Her  daughter  seemed  to  have  a  power  of  movement  and  activity 
enabling  her  to  be  everywhere  at  once  while  at  the  same  time  remaining  in  her  room,  which  was  ... 
well,  a  bit  more  than  a  room  -  it  was  a  kind  of  apartment  which,  above  all,  had  the  characteristic  of 
being  very  central.  But  she  was  constantly  arguing  with  her  mother.  The  mother  wanted  to  keep 
things  ‘just  as  they  were,’  with  their  usual  rhythm,  which  precisely  meant  the  habit  of  tearing  down 
one  thing  to  rebuild  another,  then  again  tearing  down  that  to  build  still  another,  thus  giving  the 
building  an  appearance  of  frightful  confusion.  But  the  daughter  did  not  like  this,  and  she  had 
another  plan.  Most  of  all,  she  wanted  to  bring  something  completely  new  into  the  organization:  a 
kind  of  super-organization  that  would  render  all  this  confusion  unnecessary.  Finally,  as  it  was 
impossible  for  them  to  reach  an  understanding,  the  daughter  left  the  room  to  go  on  a  kind  of  general 
inspection  ...  She  went  out,  looked  everything  over,  and  then  wanted  to  return  to  her  room  to  decide 
upon  some  final  measures.  But  this  is  where  something  rather  ...  peculiar  began  happening. 

She  clearly  remembered  where  her  room  was,  but  each  time  she  set  out  to  go  there,  either  the 
staircase  disappeared  or  things  were  so  changed  that  she  could  no  longer  find  her  way!  So  she  went 
here  and  there,  up  and  down,  searched,  went  in  and  out ...  but  it  was  impossible  to  find  the  way  to 
her  room!  Since  all  of  this  assumed  a  physical  appearance  -  as  I  said,  a  very  familiar  and  very 
common  appearance,  as  is  always  the  case  in  these  symbolic  visions  -  there  was  somewhere  (how 
shall  I  put  it?)  the  hotel’s  administrative  office  and  a  woman  who  seemed  to  be  the  manager,  who 
had  all  the  keys  and  who  knew  where  everyone  was  staying.  So  the  daughter  went  to  this  person 
and  asked  her,  ‘Could  you  show  me  the  way  to  my  room?’  -  ‘But  of  course!  Easily!’  Everyone 
around  the  manager  looked  at  her  as  if  to  say,  ‘How  can  you  say  that?’  However,  she  got  up,  and 
with  authority  asked  for  a  key  -  the  key  to  the  daughter’s  room  -  saying,  ‘I  shall  take  you  there.’ 
And  off  she  went  along  all  kinds  of  paths,  but  all  so  complicated,  so  bizarre!  The  daughter  was 
following  along  behind  her  very  attentively,  you  see,  so  as  not  to  lose  sight  of  her.  But  just  as  they 
should  have  come  to  the  place  where  the  daughter’s  room  was  supposed  to  be,  suddenly  the 
manageress  (let  us  call  her  the  manageress),  both  the  manageress  and  her  key  ...  vanished!  And  the 
sense  of  this  vanishing  was  so  acute  that ...  at  the  same  time,  everything  vanished! 

So  ...  to  help  you  understand  this  enigma,  let  me  tell  you  that  the  mother  is  physical  Nature  as 
she  is,  and  the  daughter  is  the  new  creation.  The  manageress  is  the  world’s  organizing  mental 
consciousness  as  Nature  has  developed  it  thus  far,  that  is,  the  most  advanced  organizing  sense  to 
have  manifested  in  the  present  state  of  material  Nature.  This  is  the  key  to  the  vision. 

Naturally,  when  I  awoke,  I  immediately  knew  what  could  resolve  this  problem  which  appeared 
so  absolutely  insoluble.  The  vanishing  of  the  manageress  and  her  key  was  an  obvious  sign  that  she 
was  altogether  incapable  of  leading  what  could  be  called  ‘the  creative  consciousness  of  the  new 
world’  to  its  true  place. 

I  knew  this,  but  I  did  not  have  a  vision  of  the  solution,  which  means  it  has  yet  to  manifest;  this 
‘thing’  had  not  yet  manifested  in  the  building,  this  fantastic  construction,  although  it  is  the  very 
mode  of  consciousness  which  could  transform  this  incoherent  creation  into  something  real,  truly 
conceived,  willed  and  materialized,  with  a  center  in  its  proper  place,  a  recognized  place,  and  with  a 
REAL  effective  power. 

(silence) 


40The  Supramental  Manifestation,  (Cent.  Ed.  XVI,  pp.  33-36.) 


The  symbolism  is  quite  clear  in  that  all  the  possibilities  are  there,  all  the  activities  are  there,  but  in 
disorder  and  confusion.  They  are  neither  coordinated  nor  centralized  nor  unified  around  the  central 
and  unique  truth  and  consciousness  and  will.  So  this  brings  us  back  ...  precisely  to  this  question  of  a 
collective  yoga  and  of  a  collectivity  capable  of  realizing  it.  What  should  this  collectivity  be? 

It  is  certainly  not  an  arbitrary  construction  of  the  type  built  by  men,  where  everything  is  put  pell- 
mell,  without  any  order,  without  reality,  and  which  is  held  together  by  only  illusory  ties.  Here,  these 
ties  were  symbolized  by  the  hotel’s  walls,  while  actually  in  ordinary  human  constructions  (if  we 
take  a  religious  community,  for  example),  they  are  symbolized  by  the  building  of  a  monastery,  an 
identity  of  clothing,  an  identity  of  activities,  an  identity  even  of  movement  -  or  to  put  it  more 
precisely:  everyone  wears  the  same  uniform,  everyone  gets  up  at  the  same  time,  everyone  eats  the 
same  thing,  everyone  says  his  prayers  together,  etc.;  there  is  an  overall  identity.  But  naturally,  on 
the  inside  there  remains  the  chaos  of  many  disparate  consciousnesses,  each  one  following  its  own 
mode,  for  this  kind  of  group  identification,  which  extends  right  up  to  an  identity  of  beliefs  and 
dogma,  is  absolutely  illusory. 

Yet  it  is  one  of  the  most  common  types  of  human  collectivity  -  to  group  together,  band  together, 
unite  around  a  common  ideal,  a  common  action,  a  common  realization  but  in  an  absolutely  artificial 
way.  In  contrast  to  this,  Sri  Aurobindo  tells  us  that  a  true  community  -  what  he  terms  a  gnostic  or 
supramental  community  -  can  be  based  only  upon  the  INNER  REALIZATION  of  each  one  of  its 
members,  each  realizing  his  real,  concrete  oneness  and  identity  with  all  the  other  members  of  the 
community;  that  is,  each  one  should  not  feel  himself  a  member  connected  to  all  the  others  in  an 
arbitrary  way,  but  that  all  are  one  within  himself.  For  each  one,  the  others  should  be  as  much 
himself  as  his  own  body  -  not  in  a  mental  and  artificial  way,  but  through  a  fact  of  consciousness,  by 
an  inner  realization. 

(silence) 

This  means  that  before  hoping  to  realize  such  a  gnostic  collectivity,  each  one  must  first  of  all 
become  (or  at  least  start  to  become)  a  gnostic  being.  It  is  obvious  that  the  individual  work  must  take 
the  lead  and  the  collective  work  follow;  but  the  fact  remains  that  spontaneously,  without  any 
arbitrary  intervention  of  will  the  individual  progress  IS  restrained  or  CHECKED,  as  It  were,  by  the 
collective  state.  Between  the  collectivity  and  the  individual,  there  exists  an  interdependence  from 
which  one  cannot  be  totally  free,  even  if  one  tries.  And  even  he  who  might  try,  in  his  yoga,  to  free 
himself  totally  from  the  human  and  terrestrial  state  of  consciousness,  would  be  at  least 
subconsciously  bound  by  the  state  of  the  whole,  which  impedes  and  PULLS  BACKWARDS.  One 
can  attempt  to  go  much  faster,  one  can  attempt  to  let  all  the  weight  of  attachments  and 
responsibilities  fall  off,  but  in  spite  of  everything,  the  realization  of  even  the  most  advanced  or  the 
leader  in  the  march  of  evolution  is  dependent  upon  the  realization  of  the  whole,  dependent  upon  the 
state  in  which  the  terrestrial  collectivity  happens  to  be.  And  this  PULLS  backwards  to  such  an 
extent  that  sometimes  one  has  to  wait  centuries  for  the  earth  to  be  ready  before  being  able  to  realize 
what  is  to  be  realized. 

This  is  why  Sri  Aurobindo  has  also  written  somewhere  else  that  a  double  movement  is 
necessary:  the  effort  for  individual  progress  and  realization  must  be  combined  with  the  effort  of 
trying  to  uplift  the  whole  so  as  to  enable  it  to  make  a  progress  indispensable  for  the  greater  progress 
of  the  individual:  a  mass  progress,  if  you  will,  that  allows  the  individual  to  take  a  further  step 
forward. 

And  now  you  understand  why  I  had  thought  it  would  be  useful  to  have  a  few  meditations  in 
common,  to  work  at  creating  a  common  atmosphere  a  bit  more  organized  than  ...  my  big  hotel  of 
last  night! 

So,  the  best  way  to  use  these  meditations  (and  they  are  going  to  increase,  since  we  are  now  also 
going  to  replace  the  ‘distributions’  with  short  meditations)  is  to  go  deep  within  yourselves,  as  far  as 
you  can,  and  find  the  place  where  you  can  feel,  perceive  and  perhaps  even  create  an  atmosphere  of 
oneness  wherein  a  force  of  order  and  organization  can  put  each  element  in  its  true  place,  and  out  of 


the  chaos  existing  at  this  hour,  make  a  new,  harmonious  world  surge  forth. 


July  18, 1957 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Pondicherry,  July  18,  1957 


Sweet  Mother, 

I  have  just  received  a  letter  from  my  friends  in  charge  of  the  French  Archaeological  Expedition 
to  Afghanistan.  They  need  someone  to  assist  them  on  their  next  field  excavations  (August  15 
December  15)  and  have  offered  to  take  me  if  I  wish  to  join  them. 

If  I  must  have  some  new  experience  outside,  this  one  has  the  advantage  of  being  short-termed 
and  not  far  away  from  India,  and  it  is  also  in  an  interesting  milieu.  The  only  disadvantage  is  that  I 
would  have  to  pay  for  the  trip  as  far  as  Kabul.  But  I  don’t  want  to  do  anything  that  displeases  you  or 
of  which  you  do  not  really  approve.  In  the  event  you  might  feel  this  to  be  a  worthwhile  experience, 
I  would  have  to  leave  by  the  beginning  of  August. 

I  place  this  in  your  hands,  sincerely. 

Your  child, 
Signed:  Satprem 


Undated  1957 


(Letter  from  Mother  to  Satprem) 


Thursday 


My  dear  child, 


Those  to  whom  I  have  said,  ‘You  are  my  children,’  are  always  so,  no  matter  where  they  are  or 
what  they  do. 

Thus  you  are  sure  of  always  remaining  my  child  -  for  the  rest,  act  according  to  your  heart,  and 
you  will  always  have  my  blessings. 

Signed:  Mother 


September  27,  1957 


(A  child’s  question  concerning  a  vision  in  which 
Mother  had  appeared  to  her  in  a  luminous  body) 

Why  have  you  come  as  we  are? 

Why  haven  ’t  you  come  as  you  really  are? 

Had  I  not  come  as  you  are,  I  would  never  have  been  able  to  be  close  to  you  and  tell  you: 
‘Become  what  I  am.’ 


October  8, 1957 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 

Pondicherry,  October  8,  1957 

Mother, 

I  come  to  ask  your  permission  to  leave  India.  For  more  than  a  year  now,  I  have  been  fighting  not 
to  leave,  but  this  seems  to  be  the  wrong  strategy. 


There  is  no  question  of  my  abandoning  the  path  -  and  I  remain  convinced  that  the  only  goal  in 
life  is  spiritual.  But  I  need  things  to  help  me  along  the  way:  I  am  not  yet  ripe  enough  to  depend 
upon  inner  strength  alone.  And  when  I  speak  of  the  forest  or  a  boat,  it  is  not  only  for  the  sake  of 
adventure  or  the  feeling  of  space,  but  also  because  they  mean  a  discipline.  Outer  constraints  and 
difficulties  help  me,  they  force  me  to  remain  concentrated  around  that  which  is  best  in  me.  In  a 
sense,  life  here  is  too  easy.  Yet  it  is  also  too  hard,  for  one  must  depend  on  one’s  own  discipline  -  I 
do  not  yet  have  that  strength,  I  need  to  be  helped  by  outer  circumstances.  The  very  difficulty  of  life 
in  the  outside  world  helps  me  to  be  disciplined,  for  it  forces  me  to  concentrate  all  my  vital  strength 
in  effort.  Here,  this  vital  part  is  unemployed,  so  it  acts  foolishly,  it  strains  at  the  leash. 

I  doubt  that  a  new  experience  outside  can  really  resolve  things,  but  I  believe  it  might  help  me 
make  it  to  the  next  stage  and  consolidate  my  inner  life.  And  if  you  wish,  I  would  return  in  a  year  or 
two. 

I  shall  soon  have  completed  the  revision41  of  The  Life  Divine  and  The  Human  Cycle,  so  I  believe 
I  shall  have  done  the  best  I  could,  at  present,  to  serve  you.  October  30th  is  my  birthday.  Could  I 
leave  immediately  thereafter? 

It  is  not  because  I  am  unhappy  with  the  Ashram  that  I  want  to  leave,  but  because  I  am  unhappy 
with  myself  and  because  I  want  to  master  myself  through  other  means. 

I  give  you  so  little  love,  but  I  have  tried  my  best,  and  my  departure  is  not  a  betrayal. 

Your  child, 
Signed:  Satprem 


(Mother’s  reply) 


Wednesday,  10.8.57 


My  dear  child, 

This  is  not  an  answer,  but  a  comment. 

There  is  a  joy  to  which  you  still  seem  completely  closed:  it  is  the  joy  of  SERVING. 

In  truth,  the  only  thing  in  the  world  that  interests  you,  directly  or  indirectly,  is  YOURSELF. 
That  is  why  you  feel  imprisoned  within  such  narrow,  stifling  limits. 

Signed:  Mother 


October  17, 1957 


(On  freedom) 


410f  Mother’s  French  translation  of  these  two  books  by  Sri  Aurobindo. 


There  are  all  kinds  of  freedom  -  mental  freedom,  vital  freedom,  spiritual  freedom  -  which  are  the 
fruits  of  successive  masteries.  But  a  completely  new  freedom  has  become  possible  with  the 
Supramental  Manifestation:  it  is  the  freedom  of  the  body. 

One  of  the  very  first  results  of  the  supramental  manifestation  was  to  give  the  body  a  freedom 
and  an  autonomy  it  has  never  before  known.  And  when  I  say  freedom,  I  don’t  mean  some 
psychological  perception  or  an  inner  state  of  consciousness,  but  something  else  and  far  better  -  it  is 
a  new  phenomenon  in  the  body,  in  the  cells  of  the  body.  For  the  first  time,  the  cells  themselves  have 
felt  that  they  are  free,  that  they  have  the  power  to  decide.  When  the  new  vibrations  came  and 
combined  with  the  old  ones,  I  felt  it  at  once  and  it  showed  me  that  a  new  world  was  really  taking 
birth. 

In  its  normal  state,  the  body  always  feels  that  it  is  not  its  own  master:  illnesses  invade  it  without 
its  really  being  able  to  resist  them  -  a  thousand  factors  impose  themselves  or  exert  pressure  upon  it. 
Its  sole  power  is  the  power  to  defend  itself,  to  react.  Once  the  illness  has  got  in,  it  can  fight  and 
overcome  it  -  even  modern  medicine  has  acknowledged  that  the  body  is  cured  only  when  it  decides 
to  get  cured;  it  is  not  the  drugs  per  se  that  heal,  for  if  the  ailment  is  temporarily  suppressed  by  a 
drug  without  the  body’s  will,  it  grows  up  again  elsewhere  in  some  other  form  until  the  body  itself 
has  decided  to  be  cured.  But  this  implies  only  a  defensive  power,  the  power  to  react  against  an 
invading  enemy  -  it  is  not  true  freedom. 

But  with  the  supramental  manifestation,  something  new  has  taken  place  in  the  body:  it  feels  it  is 
its  own  master,  autonomous,  with  its  two  feet  solidly  on  the  ground,  as  it  were.  This  gives  a 
physical  impression  of  the  whole  being  suddenly  drawing  itself  up,  with  its  head  lifted  high  -  I  am 
my  own  master. 

We  live  perennially  with  a  burden  on  our  shoulders,  something  that  bows  our  heads  down,  and 
we  feel  pulled,  led  by  all  kinds  of  external  forces,  we  don’t  know  by  whom  or  what,  nor  where  to  - 
this  is  what  men  call  Fate,  Destiny.  When  you  do  yoga,  one  of  the  first  experiences  -  the  experience 
of  the  kundalini,  as  it  is  called  here  in  India  -  is  precisely  one  in  which  the  consciousness  rises, 
breaks  through  this  hard  ‘lid,’  here,  at  the  crown  of  the  head,  and  at  last  you  emerge  into  the  Light. 
Then  you  see,  you  know,  you  decide  and  you  realize  -  difficulties  may  still  remain,  but  truly 
speaking  one  is  above  them.  Well,  as  a  result  of  the  supramental  manifestation,  it  is  THIS 
experience  that  came  into  the  body.  The  body  straightened  its  head  up  and  felt  its  freedom,  its 
independence. 

During  the  flu  epidemic,  for  example,  I  spent  every  day  in  the  midst  of  people  who  were  germ 
carriers.  And  one  day,  I  clearly  felt  that  the  body  had  decided  not  to  catch  this  flu.  It  asserted  its 
autonomy.  You  see,  it  was  not  a  question  of  the  higher  Will  deciding,  no.  It  didn’t  take  place  in  the 
highest  consciousness:  the  body  itself  decided.  When  you  are  way  above  in  your  consciousness,  you 
see  things,  you  know  things;  but  in  actual  fact,  once  you  descend  again  into  matter,  it  is  like  water 
running  through  sand.  In  this  respect,  things  have  changed,  the  body  has  a  DIRECT  power, 
independent  of  any  outer  intervention.  Even  though  it  is  barely  visible,  I  consider  this  to  be  a  very 
important  result. 

And  this  new  vibration  in  the  body  has  allowed  me  to  understand  the  mechanism  of  the 
transformation.  It  is  not  something  that  comes  from  a  higher  Will,  not  a  higher  consciousness  that 
imposes  itself  upon  the  body:  it  is  the  body  itself  awakening  in  its  cells,  a  freedom  of  the  cells 
themselves,  an  absolutely  new  vibration  that  sets  disorders  right  -  even  disorders  that  existed  prior 
to  the  supramental  manifestation. 

Naturally,  all  this  is  a  gradual  process,  but  I  am  hopeful  that  little  by  little  this  new 
consciousness  will  grow,  gain  ground  and  victoriously  resist  the  old  forces  of  destruction  and 
annihilation,  and  this  Fatality  we  believed  to  be  so  inexorable. 


October  18, 1957 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Pondicherry,  October  18,  1957 


Sweet  Mother, 

This  evening,  you  spoke  of  the  possibility  of  shortening  the  path  of  realization  to  a  few  months, 
days  or  hours.  And  yesterday,  when  you  talked  to  me  about  ‘the  freedom  of  the  body,’  you  spoke  of 
the  experience  of  the  Kundalini,  of  this  ‘breaking  of  the  lid’  that  makes  you  emerge  once  and  for  all, 
above  difficulties,  into  the  light. 

I  need  a  practical  method  corresponding  to  my  present  possibilities  and  to  results  of  which  I  am 
presently  capable.  I  feel  that  my  efforts  are  dispersed  by  concentrating  sometimes  here,  sometimes 
there  -  a  feeling  of  not  knowing  exactly  what  to  do  to  break  through  and  get  out  of  all  this.  Would 
you  point  out  some  particular  concentration  to  which  I  could  adhere,  a  particular  method  that  I 
would  stick  to? 

I  am  well  aware  that  a  supple  attitude  is  recommended  in  the  Yoga,  yet  for  the  time  being,  it 
seems  to  me  that  one  well-defined  method  would  help  me  hold  on42  -  this  practical  aspect  would 
help  me.  I  will  do  it  methodically,  obstinately,  until  it  cracks  for  good. 

Your  child, 
Signed:  Satprem 


November  12, 1957 

The  integral  yoga  is  made  up  of  an  uninterrupted  series  of  tests  that  you  must  pass  through  without 
any  advance  notice,  thereby  forcing  you  to  be  always  vigilant  and  attentive. 

Three  groups  of  examiners  conduct  these  tests.  Apparently  they  have  nothing  in  common  and 
their  methods  are  so  different,  at  times  even  so  seemingly  contradictory,  that  they  do  not  appear  to 
work  towards  the  same  goal,  and  yet  they  complete  one  another,  they  work  together  for  a  common 
aim  and  each  is  indispensable  for  the  integral  result. 


42This  unique  method  was  to  be  the  mantra,  as  Mother  herself  would  discover. 


These  three  categories  of  tests  are:  those  conducted  by  the  forces  of  Nature,  those  conducted  by 
the  spiritual  and  divine  forces,  and  those  conducted  by  the  hostile  forces.  This  latter  category  is  the 
most  deceptive  in  its  appearance,  and  a  constant  state  of  vigilance,  sincerity  and  humility  is  required 
so  as  not  to  be  caught  by  surprise  or  unprepared. 

The  most  commonplace  circumstances,  people,  the  everyday  events  of  life,  the  most  seemingly 
insignificant  things,  all  belong  to  one  or  another  of  these  three  categories  of  examiners.  In  this 
considerably  complex  organization  of  tests,  those  events  generally  considered  the  most  important  in 
life  are  really  the  easiest  of  all  examinations  to  pass,  for  they  find  you  prepared  and  on  your  guard. 
One  stumbles  more  easily  over  the  little  pebbles  on  the  path,  for  they  attract  no  attention. 

The  qualities  more  particularly  required  for  the  tests  of  physical  Nature  are  endurance  and 
plasticity,  cheerfulness  and  fearlessness. 

For  the  spiritual  tests:  aspiration,  confidence,  idealism,  enthusiasm  and  generosity  in  self-giving. 

For  the  tests  stemming  from  the  hostile  forces:  vigilance,  sincerity  and  humility. 

But  do  not  imagine  that  those  who  are  tested  are  on  one  side  and  those  who  test  on  the  other; 
depending  upon  the  times  and  circumstances,  we  are  both  examiners  and  examined,  and  it  may  even 
happen  that  simultaneously,  at  the  very  same  moment,  we  are  the  examined  and  the  examiner.  And 
whatever  benefits  we  derive  depend,  in  both  quality  and  quantity,  upon  the  intensity  of  our 
aspiration  and  the  alertness  of  our  consciousness. 

To  conclude,  a  final  recommendation:  never  pose  as  an  examiner.  For  while  it  is  good  to 
remember  constantly  that  perhaps  one  is  passing  a  very  important  test,  it  is,  on  the  other  hand, 
extremely  dangerous  to  imagine  oneself  entrusted  with  applying  tests  to  others,  for  that  is  an  open 
door  to  the  most  absurd  and  harmful  vanities.  It  is  not  an  ignorant  human  will  that  decides  these 
things  but  the  Supreme  Wisdom. 


*  *  * 

Each  time  a  progress  is  to  be  made,  there  is  a  test  to  pass. 


November  13, 1957 

Widen  yourself  as  far  as  the  extreme  bounds  of  the  universe  -  and  beyond. 

Take  upon  yourself  always  all  the  necessities  of  progress  and  dissolve  them  in  the  ecstasy  of 
Unity.  Then  you  will  be  divine. 


Undated  1957 


What  is  meant  exactly  by,  7  am  with  you.  ’  Are  we  really  always  heard  when  we  pray  of  struggle 

with  an  inner  problem  -  in  spite  of  our  blunders  and  imperfections,  even  in  spite  of  our  ill  will 

and  mistakes?  And  who  hears?  You  who  are  with  us? 

Is  it  you  in  your  supreme  consciousness,  an  impersonal  divine  force,  the  force  of  the  yoga,  or  you, 
the  embodied  Mother  with  your  physical  consciousness  -  a  personal  presence  really  intimate  to  our 
every  thought  and  act,  and  not  some  anonymous  force?  Can  you  tell  us  how  and  in  what  way  you 
are  present  with  us? 

It  is  said  that  Sri  Aurobindo  and  you  are  one  and  the  same  consciousness,  but  are  the  personal 
presence  of  Sri  Aurobindo  and  your  own  personal  presence  two  distinct  things,  each  playing  a 
particular  role? 

I  am  with  you  because  I  AM  you  or  you  are  me. 

‘I  am  with  you’  means  a  world  of  things,  for  I  am  with  you  at  every  level,  on  every  plane,  from 
the  supreme  consciousness  to  my  most  physical  consciousness.  Here,  in  Pondicherry,  you  cannot 
breathe  without  breathing  my  consciousness.  It  permeates  the  atmosphere  in  the  subtle  physical 
almost  materially  and  extends  right  to  the  lake,  seven  miles  away  from  here.  Beyond,  my 
consciousness  can  be  felt  in  the  material  vital,  and  then  on  the  mental  and  the  other  higher  planes 
everywhere.  When  I  came  here  for  the  first  time,  I  felt  Sri  Aurobindo’ s  atmosphere,  felt  it 
materially,  ten  miles  from  the  shore  -  ten  nautical  miles,  not  kilometers!  It  was  very  sudden,  very 
concrete,  a  pure  and  luminous  atmosphere,  light,  so  light  that  it  lifts  you  up. 

A  long  time  ago,  Sri  Aurobindo  had  this  reminder,  with  which  you  are  all  quite  familiar,  put  up 
everywhere  in  the  Ashram:  ‘Always  behave  as  if  the  Mother  was  looking  at  you;  because  she  is, 
indeed,  always  present.’ 

This  is  not  some  mere  sentence,  these  are  not  just  words,  it  is  a  fact.  I  am  very  concretely  with 
you,  and  those  with  a  subtle  vision  can  see  me. 

Generally  speaking,  my  Force  is  constantly  here  at  work,  constantly  changing  the  psychological 
elements  of  your  being  to  put  them  into  new  relationships  and  to  make  clear  to  you  the  diverse 
facets  of  your  nature  so  that  you  may  see  what  must  be  changed,  developed  or  eliminated. 

But  besides  all  this,  there  is  a  special  personal  bond  of  affection  between  you  and  me,  between 
all  who  have  turned  towards  Sri  Aurobindo ’s  teaching  and  me  -  and  of  course,  distance  does  not 
count;  you  may  be  in  France,  at  the  other  end  of  the  world,  or  in  Pondicherry,  but  this  bond  remains 
just  as  real  and  as  living.  Each  time  there  is  a  call,  each  time  I  need  to  know  something  to  send  out  a 
force,  an  inspiration,  a  protection  or  whatever  else,  a  sort  of  message  suddenly  comes  to  me,  and  I 
do  what  is  needed.  Obviously,  these  communications  come  to  me  at  any  moment  whatsoever,  and 
you  may  have  seen  me  more  than  once  suddenly  stop  in  the  middle  of  a  sentence  or  some  work:  it 
means  something,  some  communication  is  coming,  so  I  concentrate. 

There  is  more  than  a  bond  with  those  whom  I  have  accepted  as  disciples,  those  to  whom  I  have 
said  ‘yes’  -  there  is  an  emanation  of  myself.  Whenever  necessary,  this  emanation  notifies  me  as  to 
what  is  happening.  In  fact,  I  know  constantly,  but  all  these  things  are  not  registered  in  my  active 
memory,  otherwise  I  would  be  flooded  -  the  physical  consciousness  acts  as  a  filter:  things  are 
recorded  on  a  subtle  plane  and  remain  there  in  the  latent  state,  rather  like  music  that  is  silently 
recorded,  and  when  I  need  to  know  something  with  my  physical  consciousness,  I  plug  into  this 
subtle  plane  and  the  tape  starts  playing.  Then  I  can  see  things,  their  evolution  and  the  present  result. 

And  if,  for  some  reason  or  other,  you  write  asking  for  my  help,  and  I  answer,  ‘I  am  with  you,’ 


this  means  that  the  communication  with  you  becomes  active,  that  you  are  even  in  my  active 
consciousness  for  some  time  -  the  time  needed. 

And  this  bond  between  you  and  me  is  never  cut.  There  are  people  who  left  the  Ashram  a  long 
time  ago,  in  a  state  of  revolt,  and  yet  I  continue  to  know  them  and  to  take  care  of  them.  You  are 
never  abandoned. 

In  truth,  I  feel  responsible  for  everyone,  even  for  people  I  have  met  for  only  one  second  in  my 
life. 

Now,  you  know  that  Sri  Aurobindo  and  I  are  always  one  and  the  same  consciousness,  one  and 
the  same  person.  Only,  when  this  unique  force  or  presence  is  felt  in  your  individual  consciousness, 
it  assumes  different  forms  or  appearances  depending  upon  your  temperament,  your  aspirations,  your 
needs,  the  particular  cast  of  your  nature.  Your  individual  consciousness  is  like  a  fdter,  a  pointer,  as 
it  were;  it  makes  a  choice  and  settles  upon  one  possibility  in  the  infinity  of  divine  possibilities.  In 
truth,  the  Divine  gives  to  each  one  exactly  what  he  expects  from  Him.  If  you  believe  the  Divine  to 
be  distant  and  cruel,  He  will  be  distant  and  cruel,  because  it  may  be  necessary  for  your  supreme 
wellbeing  to  feel  the  wrath  of  God.  He  will  be  Kali43  for  the  worshippers  of  Kali,  and  bliss  for  the 
bhakta.44  He  will  be  the  All-Knowledge  of  seekers  after  Knowledge,  the  Transcendent  Impersonal 
of  the  illusionist.  He  will  be  an  atheist  for  the  atheist,  and  the  love  of  the  lover.  He  will  be  fraternal 
and  near,  an  ever  faithful  friend,  ever  helpful,  to  those  who  feel  him  as  the  inner  guide  of  each 
movement,  at  each  minute.  And  if  you  believe  that  He  can  erase  everything,  He  will  erase  all  your 
faults,  all  your  errors,  tirelessly,  and  at  each  moment  you  will  feel  his  infinite  Grace.  In  truth,  the 
Divine  is  what  you  expect  of  Him  in  your  deep  aspiration. 

And  once  you  enter  into  this  consciousness  where  all  things  are  seen  with  a  single  look,  the 
infinite  multitude  of  the  Divine’s  relationships  with  men,  you  realize  how  wonderful  everything  is, 
in  every  detail.  You  can  also  look  at  the  history  of  mankind  and  see  how  much  the  Divine  has 
evolved  depending  upon  what  men  have  understood,  desired,  hoped  for  or  dreamed;  how  he  was 
materialistic  with  the  materialist,  and  how  each  day  he  grows,  draws  nearer,  becomes  more 
luminous,  as  the  human  consciousness  widens.  Everyone  is  free  to  choose.  The  perfection  of  this 
endless  variety  of  relationships  between  man  and  God  throughout  the  history  of  the  world  is  an 
unutterable  wonder.  Yet  all  this  together  is  but  a  second  in  the  total  manifestation  of  the  Divine. 

The  Divine  is  with  you  according  to  your  aspirations.  This  does  not  mean,  naturally,  that  He 
bends  to  the  whims  of  your  outer  nature  -  I  am  speaking  here  of  the  truth  of  your  being.  Yet 
sometimes  He  does  fashion  himself  according  to  your  outer  aspirations;  and  if,  like  the  devout,  you 
live  alternately  in  estrangement  and  embrace,  ecstasy  and  despair,  the  Divine  too  will  be  estranged 
from  you  or  draw  near,  according  to  your  belief.  Therefore,  one’s  attitude  is  extremely  important, 
even  one’s  outer  attitude.  People  do  not  know  just  how  important  faith  is,  how  faith  is  miracle  -  the 
creator  of  miracles.  For  if  at  each  moment,  you  expect  to  be  uplifted  and  drawn  towards  the  Divine, 
He  will  come  and  uplift  you,  and  He  will  be  there,  very  near,  nearer  and  nearer. 


43 Kali:  the  warrior  (or  destroyer)  aspect  of  the  Divine. 


44 Bhakta:  one  who  follows  the  path  of  love. 


Undated  1957 


THE  MOTHER’S  SUTRAS45 

1)  Be  ambitious  for  nothing,  above  all  pretend  nothing,  but  be  at  each  instant  the  utmost  of  what 
you  can  be.46 

2)  As  for  your  place  in  the  universal  manifestation,  only  the  Supreme  can  assign  it  to  you. 

3)  It  is  the  Supreme  Lord  who  has  ineluctably  decreed  the  place  you  occupy  in  the  universal 
concert,  but  whatever  be  this  place,  you  have  equally  the  same  right  as  all  others  to  ascend  the 
supreme  summits  right  to  the  supramental  realization. 

4)  What  you  are  in  the  truth  of  your  being  is  decreed  in  an  irrevocable  way,  and  nothing  nor 
anyone  can  stop  you  from  being  it;  but  the  path  you  take  to  get  there  is  left  to  your  own  free  choice. 

5)  On  the  road  of  the  ascending  evolution,  every  one  is  free  to  choose  the  direction  he  will  take: 
the  swift  and  steep  climb  towards  the  summits  of  Truth,  to  the  supreme  realization,  or  turning  his 
back  to  the  peaks,  the  easy  descent  to  the  interminable  meanderings  of  endless  incarnations. 

6)  In  the  course  of  time  and  even  in  the  course  of  your  present  life,  you  can  make  your  choice 
once  and  for  all,  irrevocably,  and  then  you  have  only  to  confirm  it  with  every  new  occasion;  or  else 
if  you  do  not  take  a  definite  decision  from  the  beginning,  you  will  have  to  choose  anew  at  each 
moment  between  the  falsehood  and  the  Truth. 

7)  But  even  in  the  event  you  have  not  made  the  irrevocable  decision  at  the  outset,  should  you 
have  the  good  fortune  to  live  during  one  of  these  unimaginable  hours  of  universal  history  when  the 
Grace  is  present,  embodied  upon  earth,  It  will  offer  you,  at  certain  exceptional  moments,  the 
renewed  possibility  of  making  a  final  choice  that  will  lead  you  straight  to  the  goal. 


Undated  1957 


(On  past  lives) 

If  we  are  to  speak  of  these  things  truly,  we  must  speak  of  everything,  in  all  details,  for  among  the 
innumerable  experiences  I  have  had  for  nearly  eighty  years,  many  were  of  such  variety  and 
apparently  so  contradictory  that  in  truth  it  can  be  said  that  all  is  possible.  Therefore,  to  say 
something  about  past  lives  without  retrieving  the  thread  that  runs  through  all  the  elements  is  to  open 


45 Sutra:  aphorism,  in  Sanskrit. 


46This  first  Sutra  was  ultimately  destined  to  become  the  epigraph  to  Satprem’s  first  novel,  L  ’Orpailleur. 


the  door  to  dogmatism.  One  day  they  will  say,  ‘Mother  said  this,  Mother  said  that  and  that  is, 
alas,  how  dogmas  are  born. 

So  given  the  multiplicity  of  experiences  and  the  impossibility  of  spending  my  life  speaking  and 
writing,  you  must  clearly  understand  that  everything  is  possible  and  not  be  dogmatic.  Nevertheless, 
I  can  give  you  a  few  general  indications. 

It  is  only  when  one  is  consciously  identified  with  his  divine  Origin  that  he  can  speak  with 
complete  truthfulness  of  a  memory  of  past  lives.  Sri  Aurobindo  speaks  of  a  progressive 
manifestation  of  the  Spirit  in  the  forms  it  inhabits.  When  one  reaches  the  summit  of  this 
manifestation,  one  has  a  plunging  view  of  the  path  already  traversed,  and  one  remembers. 

But  that  does  not  mean  remembering  in  a  mental  way.  Those  who  claim  to  have  been  this  or  that 
baron  in  the  Middle  Ages  or  such  and  such  a  person  who  lived  at  such  and  such  a  place  during  such 
and  such  a  time  are  fantasizing;  they  are  simply  victims  of  their  own  mental  fancies.  For  what 
remains  of  past  lives  are  not  beautiful  illustrated  classics  in  which  you  see  yourself  as  a  great  lord  in 
a  castle  or  a  victorious  general  at  the  head  of  his  anny  -  all  that  is  fiction.  What  remains  is  the 
memory  of  the  INSTANTS  when  the  psychic  being  emerged  from  the  depths  of  your  being  and 
revealed  itself  to  you,  or  in  other  words,  the  memory  of  those  moments  when  you  were  fully 
conscious.  The  growth  of  the  consciousness  is  effected  progressively  through  evolution,  and  the 
memory  of  past  lives  is  generally  limited  to  the  critical  moments  of  this  evolution,  to  the  great, 
decisive  turning  points  that  have  marked  some  progress  in  your  consciousness. 

While  living  such  minutes  of  your  life,  you  do  not  at  all  care  about  remembering  whether  you 
were  Lord  so  and  so  who  lived  at  such  and  such  a  place  during  such  and  such  a  time  -  it  is  not  the 
memory  of  your  civil  status  that  remains.  On  the  contrary,  you  lose  sight  of  these  petty  external 
things,  these  minor  perishable  details,  so  as  to  be  fully  ablaze  in  this  revelation  of  the  soul  or  this 
divine  contact.  And  when  you  recall  these  minutes  of  your  past  lives,  the  memory  is  so  intense  that 
it  seems  very  near,  still  living  -  much  more  living  than  most  of  the  ordinary  memories  of  your 
present  life.  At  times,  in  dreams,  when  you  enter  into  contact  with  certain  planes  of  consciousness, 
you  may  also  have  memories  with  this  same  intensity,  this  vibrant  hue,  as  it  were,  so  much  more 
intense  than  the  colors  and  things  of  the  physical  world.  These  being  the  moments  of  true 
consciousness,  all  assumes  an  extraordinary  radiance,  everything  is  vibrant,  everything  is  charged 
with  a  quality  that  eludes  our  ordinary  vision. 

These  minutes  of  contact  with  the  soul  are  often  those  that  mark  a  decisive  turning  point  in  one’s 
life,  a  step  forward;  a  progress  in  consciousness,  and  they  frequently  result  from  a  crisis,  a  situation 
of  extreme  intensity,  when  a  call  surges  forth  from  the  whole  being,  a  call  so  strong  that  the  inner 
consciousness  pierces  through  the  unconscious  layers  that  envelop  it  and  is  revealed  fully  luminous 
upon  the  surface.  This  very  strong  call  of  the  being  can  also  call  forth  the  descent  of  a  divine 
emanation,  an  individuality,  a  divine  aspect  that  unites  with  your  own  individuality  at  a  given 
moment  to  do  a  given  work,  to  win  a  particular  battle,  to  express  this  thing  or  that.  Then,  when  the 
work  is  accomplished,  this  emanation  most  often  withdraws.  So  it  may  be  that  one  retains  the 
memory  of  the  circumstances  surrounding  these  minutes  of  revelation  or  inspiration,  one  sees  again 
a  landscape,  the  color  of  a  garment  one  was  wearing,  the  shade  of  one’s  skin,  things  that  were 
around  you  at  that  particular  moment  -  all  this  is  imprinted  in  an  indelible  way,  with  an 
extraordinary  intensity,  for  the  details  of  ordinary  life  are  then  also  revealed  in  their  true  intensity, 
their  true  tonality.  The  consciousness  that  reveals  itself  in  you  reveals  at  the  same  time  the 
consciousness  in  things.  These  details  can  sometimes  help  you  reconstitute  the  period  in  which  you 
lived  or  the  deeds  that  were  accomplished,  surmise  the  country  where  you  lived,  but  it  is  quite  easy, 
too,  to  fantasize  and  mistake  one’s  imaginings  for  reality. 

You  should  not  conclude,  however,  that  all  memories  of  past  lives  refer  to  moments  of  great 
crisis,  important  missions  or  revelations.  Sometimes  these  are  very  simple,  transparent  minutes 
when  a  perfect  and  integral  hannony  of  the  being  is  expressed.  And  these  may  correspond  to 
entirely  insignificant  external  situations. 


But  apart  from  the  things  that  were  around  you  at  that  minute,  apart  from  that  minute  of  contact 
with  your  psychic  being,  nothing  remains.  Once  the  privileged  moment  has  passed,  the  psychic 
being  sinks  back  into  its  inner  somnolence  and  the  whole  outer  life  fades  into  a  monotonous  gray 
which  leaves  no  trace.  In  fact,  something  of  the  same  phenomenon  occurs  in  the  course  of  your 
present  life:  apart  from  those  exceptional  moments  when  you  are  at  the  summit  of  your  mental,  vital 
or  even  physical  being,  the  rest  of  your  existence  seems  to  fade  into  an  uninteresting,  dull  tonality, 
and  it  matters  very  little  whether  you  have  been  at  this  place  or  some  other  or  whether  you  have 
done  this  thing  rather  than  another.  If  suddenly  you  try  to  look  at  your  life  in  order  to  gather  its 
essence  -  to  peer  twenty  or  thirty  or  forty  years  behind  you  -  you  will  see  two  or  three  images 
spontaneously  leap  before  you,  and  they  are  the  true  minutes  of  your  life,  but  all  the  rest  fades 
away.  A  spontaneous  choice  and  a  tremendous  elimination  thus  take  place  in  your  consciousness. 
This  gives  you  an  idea  of  what  happens  in  regard  to  past  lives:  a  choice  of  a  few  special  moments, 
and  an  immense  elimination. 

Of  course,  one’s  early  lives  are  quite  rudimentary  and  little  remains  of  them,  a  few  scattered 
memories.  But  the  more  you  progress  in  consciousness  and  the  more  the  psychic  being  consciously 
associates  itself  with  the  outer  activities,  the  more  abundant,  coherent  and  precise  do  the  memories 
become  -  yet  here  too  the  memory  that  remains  is  that  of  the  contact  with  the  soul,  and  sometimes 
of  the  things  associated  with  the  psychic  revelation  -  not  your  civil  status  nor  the  ever-changing 
setting.  And  this  explains  why  these  so-called  memories  of  animal  lives  partake  of  the  highest 
fantasies;  in  animals,  the  divine  spark  is  too  deeply  buried  to  come  to  the  surface  consciously  and  be 
associated  with  the  outer  life.  One  must  become  a  totally  conscious  being,  in  all  the  parts  of  the 
being,  and  be  totally  united  with  one’s  divine  origin  before  one  can  truly  say  that  one  recalls  his 
past  lives. 


December  13, 1957 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Pondicherry,  December  13,  1957 

Sweet  Mother,  this  is  what  is  rising  from  my  soul:  I  feel  in  me  something  unemployed,  something 
seeking  to  express  itself  in  life.  I  want  to  be  like  a  knight,  your  knight,  and  go  off  in  search  of  a 
treasure  that  I  could  bring  back  to  you.  The  world  has  lost  all  sense  of  the  wonderful,  all  beauty  of 
Adventure,  this  quest  known  to  the  knights  of  the  Middle  Ages.  It  is  this  that  calls  so  relentlessly 
within  me,  this  need  for  a  quest  in  the  world  and  for  a  beautiful  Adventure  which  at  the  same  time 
would  be  an  adventure  of  the  soul.  How  I  wish  that  the  two  things,  inner  and  outer,  be  JOINED,  that 
the  joy  of  action,  of  the  open  road  and  the  quest  help  the  soul’s  blossoming,  that  they  be  like  a 
prayer  of  the  soul  expressed  in  life.  The  knights  of  the  Middle  Ages  knew  this.  Perhaps  it  is  all 
childish  and  absurd  in  the  midst  of  this  20th  century,  but  this  is  what  I  feel,  this  that  is  summoning 
me  to  leave  -  not  anything  base,  not  anything  mediocre,  only  a  need  for  something  in  me  to  be 
fulfdled.  If  only  I  could  bring  you  back  a  beautiful  treasure! 


After  that,  perhaps  I  would  be  riper  to  accept  the  everyday  life  of  the  Ashram,  and  know  how  to 
give  myself  better. 

Mother,  I  feel  all  this  very  strongly;  I  need  your  help  to  follow  the  true  path  of  my  being  and 
fulfill  this  new  outer  cycle,  should  you  see  that  it  has  to  be  fulfilled.  I  feel  so  strongly  that 
something  remains  for  me  to  DO.  Guide  me,  Sweet  Mother. 

Your  child, 
Signed.  Satprem 


December  21, 1957 


The  other  day  you  told  me  that  in  order  to  know  things,  you  plug  into  the  subtle  plane,  and  there 

it  all  unrolls  as  on  a  tape  recorder.  How  does  this  work,  exactly? 

There  is  a  whole  gradation  of  planes  of  consciousness,  from  the  physical  consciousness  to  my 
radiant  consciousness  at  the  very  highest  level,  that  which  knows  the  Will  of  the  Supreme.  I  keep  all 
these  planes  of  consciousness  in  front  of  me,  working  simultaneously,  coordinatedly,  and  I  am 
acting  on  each  plane,  gathering  the  information  proper  to  each  plane,  so  as  to  have  the  integral  truth 
of  things.  Thus,  when  I  have  a  decision  to  make  in  regard  to  one  of  you,  I  plug  into  you  directly 
from  that  level  of  the  supreme  consciousness  which  sees  the  deep  truth  of  your  being.  But  at  the 
same  time,  my  decision  is  shaped,  as  it  were,  by  the  information  given  to  me  by  the  other  planes  of 
consciousness  and  particularly  by  the  physical  consciousness,  which  acts  as  a  recorder. 

This  physical  consciousness  records  all  it  sees,  all  your  reactions,  your  thoughts,  all  the  facts  - 
without  preference,  without  prejudice,  without  persona]  will.  Nothing  escapes  it.  Its  work  is  almost 
mechanical.  Therefore  I  know  what  to  tell  or  to  ask  you  according  to  the  integral  truth  of  your  being 
and  its  present  possibilities.  Ordinarily,  in  the  normal  man,  the  physical  consciousness  does  not  see 
things  as  they  are,  for  three  reasons:  because  of  ignorance,  because  of  preference,  and  because  of  an 
egoistic  will.  You  color  what  you  see,  eliminate  what  displeases  you.  In  short,  you  see  only  what 
you  desire  to  see. 

Now,  I  recently  had  a  very  striking  experience:  a  discrepancy  occurred  between  my  physical 
consciousness  and  the  consciousness  of  the  world.  In  some  instances  decisions  made  in  the  Light 
and  the  Truth  produced  unexpected  results,  upheavals  in  the  consciousness  of  others  that  were 
neither  foreseen  nor  desired,  and  I  did  not  understand.  No  matter  how  hard  I  tried,  I  could  not 
understand  -  and  I  emphasize  this  word  ‘understand.’  At  last,  I  had  to  leave  my  highest 
consciousness  and  pull  myself  down  into  the  physical  consciousness  to  find  out  what  was 
happening.  And  there,  in  my  head,  I  saw  what  appeared  to  be  a  little  cell  bursting,  and  suddenly  I 
understood:  the  recording  had  been  defective.  The  physical  consciousness  had  neglected  to  register 
certain  of  your  lower  reactions.  It  could  not  have  been  through  preference  or  through  personal  will 
(these  things  were  eliminated  from  my  consciousness  long,  long  ago).  But  I  saw  that  this  most 
material  consciousness  was  already  completely  permeated  with  the  transforming  supramental  truth, 


and  it  could  no  longer  follow  the  rhythm  of  normal  life.  It  was  much  more  attuned  to  the  true 
consciousness  than  to  the  world!  I  couldn’t  possibly  blame  it  for  lagging  behind;  on  the  contrary,  it 
was  in  front,  too  far  ahead!  There  was  a  discrepancy  between  the  rhythm  of  the  transformation  of 
my  being  and  the  world’s  own  rhythm.  The  supramental  action  on  the  world  is  slow,  it  does  not  act 
directly  -  it  acts  by  infiltration,  by  traversing  the  successive  layers,  and  the  results  are  slow  to  come 
about.  So  I  had  to  pull  myself  violently  down  in  order  to  wait  for  the  others. 

One  must  at  times  know  how  not  to  know. 

This  experience  showed  me  once  more  the  necessity  to  be  perfectly  humble  before  the  Lord.  It  is 
not  enough  merely  to  rise  to  the  heights,  to  the  ethereal  planes  of  consciousness:  these  planes  have 
also  to  descend  into  matter  and  illuminate  it.  Otherwise,  nothing  is  really  done.  One  must  have  the 
patience  to  establish  the  communication  between  the  high  and  the  low.  I  am  like  a  tempest,  a 
hurricane  -  if  I  listened  to  myself,  I  would  tear  into  the  future,  and  everything  would  go  flying!  But 
then,  there  would  no  longer  be  any  communication  with  the  rest. 

One  must  have  the  patience  to  wait. 

Humility,  a  perfect  humility,  is  the  condition  for  all  realization.  The  mind  is  so  cocksure.  It 
thinks  it  knows  everything,  understands  everything.  And  if  ever  it  acts  through  idealism  to  serve  a 
cause  that  appears  noble  to  it,  it  becomes  even  more  arrogant  more  intransigent,  and  it  is  almost 
impossible  to  make  it  see  that  there  might,  be  something  still  higher  beyond  its  noble  conceptions 
and  its  great  altruistic  or  other  ideals.  Humility  is  the  only  remedy.  I  am  not  speaking  of  humility  as 
conceived  by  certain  religions,  with  this  God  that  belittles  his  creatures  and  only  likes  to  see  them 
down  on  their  knees.  When  I  was  a  child,  this  kind  of  humility  revolted  me,  and  I  refused  to  believe 
in  a  God  that  wants  to  belittle  his  creatures.  I  don’t  mean  that  kind  of  humility,  but  rather  the 
recognition  that  one  does  not  know,  that  one  knows  nothing,  and  that  there  may  be  something 
beyond  what  presently  appears  to  us  as  the  truest,  the  most  noble  or  disinterested.  True  humility 
consists  in  constantly  referring  oneself  to  the  Lord,  in  placing  all  before  Him.  When  I  receive  a 
blow  (and  there  are  quite  a  few  of  them  in  my  sadhana),  my  immediate,  spontaneous  reaction,  like  a 
spring,  is  to  throw  myself  before  Him  and  to  say,  ‘Thou,  Lord.’  Without  this  humility,  I  would 
never  have  been  able  to  realize  anything.  And  I  say  ‘I’  only  to  make  myself  understood,  but  in  fact 
‘I’  means  the  Lord  through  this  body,  his  instrument.  When  you  begin  living  THIS  kind  of  humility, 
it  means  you  are  drawing  nearer  to  the  realization.  It  is  the  condition,  the  starting  point. 

*  *  * 


(Note  written  by  Mother  in  connection  with  the  conversation  of  December  21,  1957) 

At  the  very  top,  a  constant  vision  of  the  Supreme’s  will. 

In  the  world,  an  overall  vision  of  what  is  to  be  done. 

Individually,  at  each  moment  and  in  each  circumstance,  the  vision  ‘of  the  truth  of  the  moment, 
of  the  circumstance,  of  the  individual. 

In  the  external  consciousness,  the  impersonal  and  mechanical  recording  of  what  is  happening 
and  of  what  are  the  people  and  things  that  comprise  both  the  field  of  action  and  the  limitations 
imposed  upon  this  action.  The  recording  is  innately  automatic  and  mechanical,  without  any  kind  of 
evaluation,  as  objective  as  possible. 


Undated  1957 


(Note  from  Mother  to  Satprem) 


It  is  within  oneself 
that  one  finds 
the  Pretentaine.47 


47 Pretentaine:  name  of  the  boat  on  which  Satprem  wanted  to  sail  around  the  world  alone. 


January  1, 1958 

(Extract  from  the  Wednesday  class) 


O  Nature,  Material  Mother, 

thou  hast  said  that  thou  wilt  collaborate 

and  there  is  no  limit 

to  the  splendor  of  this  collaboration. 


(Message  of  January  1,  1958) 


Sweet  Mother,  will  you  explain  this  year’s  message? 

There  is  nothing  to  explain.  It  is  an  experience,  something  that  took  place,  and  when  it  took  place,  I 
noted  it  down;  and  it  so  happens  that  it  occurred  just  as  I  remembered  that  I  had  to  write  something 
for  the  new  year  (which  at  that  time  was  the  following  year,  that  is,  the  year  beginning  today). 
When  I  remembered  that  I  had  to  write  something  -  not  because  of  that,  but  simultaneously  -  this 
experience  came,  and  when  I  noted  it  down,  I  realized  that  it  was  ...  the  message  for  this  year! 

(Mother  reads  the  notation  of  her  experience) 

During  one  of  our  classes  (October  30,  1957),  I  spoke  of  the  limitless  abundance  of  Nature,  this 
tireless  Creatrice  who  takes  the  multitude  of  forms,  mixes  them  together,  separates  them  again  and 
refonns  them,  again  undoes  them,  again  destroys  them,  in  order  to  move  on  to  ever  new 
combinations.  As  I  said,  it  is  a  huge  cauldron.  Things  get  churned  up  in  it  and  somehow  something 
emerges;  if  it’s  defective,  it  is  thrown  back  in  and  something  else  is  taken  out  ...  One  fonn,  two 
fonns  or  a  hundred  forms  make  no  difference  to  her,  there  are  thousands  upon  thousands  of  forms  - 
and  one  year,  a  hundred  years,  a  thousand  years,  millions  of  years,  what  difference  does  it  make? 
Eternity  lies  before  her!  She  quite  obviously  enjoys  herself  and  is  in  no  hurry.  If  you  speak  to  her  of 
pressing  on  or  of  rushing  through  some  part  of  her  work  or  other,  her  reply  is  always  the  same:  ‘But 
what  for?  Why?  Aren’t  you  enjoying  it?’ 

The  evening  I  told  you  these  things,  I  totally  identified  myself  with  Nature  and  I  entered  into  her 
play.  And  this  movement  of  identification  brought  forth  a  response,  a  new  kind  of  intimacy  between 
Nature  and  myself,  a  long  movement  of  drawing  ever  nearer  which  culminated  in  an  experience  that 
came  on  November  8. 

Nature  suddenly  understood.  She  understood  that  this  newborn  Consciousness  does  not  seek  to 
reject  her,  but  wants  to  embrace  her  entirely.  She  understood  that  this  new  spirituality  does  not 
stand  apart  from  life,  does  not  timorously  recoil  before  the  awesome  richness  of  her  movement,  but 
on  the  contrary  wants  to  integrate  all  her  facets.  She  understood  that  the  supramental  consciousness 
is  not  there  to  diminish  her  but  to  make  her  complete. 

Then,  from  the  supreme  Reality  came  this  command:  ‘Awaken,  O  Nature,  to  the  joy  of 
collaboration.’  And  suddenly,  all  Nature  rushed  forth  in  an  immense  bounding  of  joy,  saying,  ‘I 
accept!  I  will  collaborate!’  And  at  the  same  time,  there  came  a  calm,  an  absolute  tranquillity,  to 
allow  this  receptacle,  this  body,  to  receive  and  contain  without  breaking  and  without  losing 
anything  of  the  Joy  of  Nature  that  was  rushing  forth  in  a  movement  of  grateful  recognition  like  an 
overwhelming  flood.  She  accepted,  she  saw  -  with  all  eternity  before  her  -  that  this  supramental 
consciousness  would  fulfill  her  more  perfectly  and  impart  a  still  greater  force  to  her  movement  and 
more  richness,  more  possibilities  to  her  play. 

And  suddenly,  as  if  resounding  from  every  corner  of  the  earth,  I  heard  these  great  notes  which 
are  sometimes  heard  in  the  subtle  physical  -  rather  like  those  of  Beethoven’s  Concerto  in  D  -  which 


come  at  moments  of  great  progress,  as  though  fifty  orchestras  were  bursting  forth  all  at  once 
without  a  single  discordant  note,  to  sound  the  joy  of  this  new  communion  of  Nature  and  Spirit,  the 
meeting  of  old  friends  who,  after  a  long  separation,  find  each  other  once  more. 

Then  came  these  words:  ‘O  Nature,  Material  Mother,  thou  hast  said  that  thou  wilt  collaborate, 
and  there  is  no  limit  to  the  splendor  of  this  collaboration.’ 

And  the  radiant  felicity  of  this  splendor  was  perceived  in  a  perfect  peace. 

Such  was  the  birth  of  this  year’s  message. 

(Then  Mother  comments) 

I  have  one  thing  to  add:  we  must  not  misinterpret  the  meaning  of  this  experience  and  imagine  that 
henceforth  everything  will  take  place  without  difficulties  or  always  in  accordance  with  our  personal 
desires.  It  is  not  at  this  level.  It  does  not  mean  that  when  we  do  not  want  it  to  rain,  it  will  not  rain! 
Or  when  we  want  some  event  to  take  place  in  the  world,  it  will  immediately  take  place,  or  that  all 
difficulties  will  be  abolished  and  everything  will  be  like  a  fairy  tale.  It  is  not  like  that.  It  is 
something  more  profound.  Nature  has  accepted  into  her  play  of  forces  the  newly  manifested  Force 
and  has  included  it  in  her  movements.  But  as  always,  the  movements  of  Nature  take  place  on  a  scale 
infinitely  surpassing  the  human  scale  and  invisible  to  the  ordinary  human  consciousness.  It  is  more 
of  an  inner,  psychological  possibility  that  has  been  bom  in  the  world  than  a  spectacular  change  in 
earthly  events. 

I  mention  this  because  you  might  be  tempted  to  believe  that  fairy  tales  are  going  to  be  realized 
upon  earth.  The  time  has  not  yet  come. 

(silence) 

We  must  have  a  great  deal  of  patience  and  a  very  wide  and  very  complex  vision  to  understand  how 
things  work. 

(silence) 

The  miracles  that  are  taking  place  are  not  what  could  be  called  literary  miracles,  for  they  do  not  take 
place  as  in  storybooks.  They  are  visible  only  to  a  very  profound  vision  of  things  -  very  profound, 
very  comprehensive,  very  vast. 

(silence) 

You  first  have  to  be  able  to  follow  the  methods  and  the  means  of  the  Grace  to  recognize  its  action. 
You  first  have  to  be  able  to  remain  unblinded  by  appearances  to  see  the  deeper  truth  of  things. 


Undated  195848 

1)  The  Divine  alone  is  true  -  all  the  rest  is  falsehood. 


48Note  written  by  Mother  in  English. 


2)  The  Divine  alone  is  real  -  all  the  rest  is  illusion. 

3)  The  Divine  alone  is  life  -  all  the  rest  belongs  to  the  kingdom  of  death. 

4)  The  Divine  alone  is  light  -  all  the  rest  is  semi-obscurity. 

5)  The  Divine  alone  is  love  -  all  the  rest  is  selfish  sentimentality. 

And  yet  the  Divine  is  everywhere,  in  the  ignorant  man  as  well  as  in  the  sage. 
And  yet  the  Divine  is  everywhere,  in  the  sinner  as  well  as  in  the  saint. 


January  22,  1958 

It  is  an  error  to  confuse  Joy  and  Felicity.  They  are  two  very  different  things.  Not  only  are  their 
vibrations  different,  but  their  colors  are  different.  The  color  of  Felicity  is  blue,  a  clear  silvery  blue 
(the  blue  of  the  Ashram  flag),  very  luminous  and  transparent.  And  it  has  a  passive  and  fresh  quality 
that  refreshes  and  rejuvenates. 

Whereas  Joy  is  a  golden  rose  color,  a  pale  gold  with  a  tinge  of  red,  a  very  pale  red.  It  is  active, 
warm,  fortifying,  intensifying.  The  first  is  sweetness,  the  second  is  tenderness. 

And  Bliss  -  what  I  spontaneously  call  Bliss  -  is  the  synthesis  of  both.  It  is  found  in  the  very 
heights  of  the  supramental  consciousness,  in  a  diamond  light,  an  uncolored,  sparkling  light 
containing  all  the  colors.  Joy  and  Felicity  form  two  sides  of  a  triangle  that  has  Bliss  at  its  apex. 

Bliss  contains  coolness  and  warmth,  passivity  and  activity,  repose  and  action,  sweetness  and 
tenderness,  all  at  the  same  time.  Divine  tenderness  ...  is  something  very  different  from  sweetness  - 
it  is  a  paroxysm  of  joy,  a  vibration  so  strong  that  the  body  feels  it  will  burst,  so  it  is  forced  to  widen. 

The  diamond  light  of  Bliss  has  the  power  to  melt  all  hostile  forces.  Nothing  can  resist  it.  No 
consciousness,  no  being,  no  hostile  will  can  draw  near  it  without  immediately  being  dissolved,  for  it 
is  the  Divine  light  in  its  pure  creative  power. 


January  25,  195849 


49Note  written  by  Mother  in  English  (with  a  touch  of  irony  so  reminiscent  of  Sri  Aurobindo). 


(Concerning  Pakistan) 

It  is  quite  evident  that  for  some  reason  or  other  -  or  perhaps  for  no  reason  at  all  -  the  Supreme  has 
changed  His  mind  about  it. 


Undated  1958 

When  the  hostile  forces  want  to  attack  those  around  me  but  do  not  succeed  in  making  them  overtly 
hostile  to  Sri  Aurobindo’s  work  or  in  making  them  turn  against  me  personally,  they  always  use  the 
same  tactic,  with  the  same  argument:  ‘You  may  have  all  the  inner  realizations  you  want,’  they  say, 
‘the  most  beautiful  experiences  possible  inside  your  four  Ashram  walls,  but  as  far  as  the  outer  world 
is  concerned,  your  life  is  wasted,  lost.  There  is  an  abyss  you  will  never  bridge  between  your  inner 
experience  and  a  concrete  realization  in  the  world.  ’ 

This  is  the  number  one  argument  of  the  hostile  forces.  I  know  it  well  -  for  millions  of  years  I 
have  been  hearing  them  say  the  same  thing  over  and  over  again,  and  each  time  I  unmask  them.  It  is 
a  lie,  it  is  THE  Lie.  All  that  seeks  to  establish  a  divorce  between  the  Earth  and  the  Spirit,  all  that 
separates  the  inner  experience  from  the  divine  realization  in  the  world  is  good  for  their  purpose.  But 
just  the  opposite  is  true!  It  is  the  inner  realization  that  is  the  key  to  the  outer  realization.  How  can 
you  possibly  know  the  true  thing  you  have  to  realize  in  the  world  as  long  as  you  do  not  possess  the 
truth  of  your  being? 


February  3, 1958 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Pondicherry,  February  3,  1958 


Sweet  Mother, 

What  you  told  me  today  at  noon  has  left  me  stunned.  I  had  decided  to  have  my  own  way,  but 
now  I  pray  to  be  true. 


I  would  like  to  tell  you  that  ‘I  am  staying,’  very  simply,  for  something  in  me  wants  this,  but  I  am 
afraid  to  make  a  decision  that  I  may  not  be  able  to  keep.  A  force  other  than  mine  is  needed.  In  short, 
you  have  to  do  the  willing  for  me,  to  utter  a  word  that  would  help  me  understand  truly  that  I  must 
stay  here.  Grant  me  the  grace  of  helping  and  enlightening  me.  I  would  like  to  decide  without 
preference,  in  obedience  to  the  sole  Truth  and  in  accordance  with  my  real  possibilities. 

I  have  received  a  long  letter  from  Swami,50  who  in  essence  says  that  I  should  be  able  to  realize 
what  I  have  to  realize  right  here  with  you,  but  he  does  not  refuse  to  take  me  with  him  should  I 
persist  in  my  intention. 

Mother,  I  am  placing  all  this  in  your  hands,  sincerely. 

I  am  your  child. 

Signed:  Satprem 


February  3, 1958 


(The  following  experience  was  later  read  out  to  the  Wednesday  class  on  2.19.58) 

Between  the  beings  of  the  supramental  world  and  men,  there  exists  approximately  the  same  gap  as 
between  men  and  animals.  Sometime  ago,  I  had  the  experience  of  identification  with  animal  life, 
and  it  is  a  fact  that  animals  do  not  understand  us;  their  consciousness  is  so  constituted  that  we  elude 
them  almost  entirely.  And  yet  I  have  known  domestic  animals  -  cats  and  dogs,  but  especially  cats  - 
who  made  an  almost  yogic  effort  of  consciousness  to  understand  us.  But  generally,  when  they 
watch  us  living  and  acting,  they  don’t  understand,  they  don’t  SEE  US  as  we  are  and  they  suffer 
because  of  us.  We  are  a  constant  enigma  to  them  Only  a  very  tiny  part  of  their  consciousness  is 
linked  to  us.  And  it  is  the  same  for  us  when  we  try  to  look  at  the  supramental  world.  Only  when  the 
link  of  consciousness  has  been  built  shall  we  see  it  -  and  even  then,  only  that  part  of  our  being 
which  has  undergone  the  transformation  will  be  capable  of  seeing  it  as  it  is  -  otherwise  the  two 
worlds  would  remain  as  separate  as  the  animal  world  and  the  human  world. 

The  experience  I  had  on  February  3  proves  this.  Before,  I  had  had  an  individual,  subjective 
contact  with  the  supramental  world,  whereas  on  February  3, 1  went  strolling  there  in  a  concrete  way 
-  as  concretely  as  I  used  to  go  strolling  in  Paris  in  times  past  -  in  a  world  that  EXISTS  IN  ITSELF, 
beyond  all  subjectivity. 

It  is  like  a  bridge  being  built  between  the  two  worlds. 

This  is  the  experience  as  I  dictated  it  immediately  thereafter: 

(silence) 


50A  Sannyasi,  or  wandering  monk,  whom  Satprem  would  join  a  few  weeks  later  in  Ceylon,  on  February  27,  and  who 
would  initiate  him  as  a  Sannyasi.  Unfortunately,  almost  all  the  correspondence  from  this  period  has  been  lost. 


The  supramental  world  exists  in  a  pennanent  way,  and  I  am  there  permanently  in  a  supramental 
body.  I  had  proof  of  this  today  when  my  earthly  consciousness  went  there  and  consciously  remained 
there  between  two  and  three  o’clock  in  the  afternoon:  I  now  know  that  for  the  two  worlds  to  join  in 
a  constant  and  conscious  relationship  what  is  missing  is  an  intermediate  zone  between  the  existing 
physical  world  and  the  supramental  world  as  it  exists.  This  zone  has  yet  to  be  built,  both  in  the 
individual  consciousness  and  in  the  objective  world,  and  it  is  being  built.  When  fonnerly  I  used  to 
speak  of  the  new  world  that  is  being  created,  I  was  speaking  of  this  intermediate  zone.  And 
similarly,  when  I  am  on  ‘this’  side  -  that  is,  in  the  realm  of  the  physical  consciousness  -  and  I  see 
the  supramental  power,  the  supramental  light  and  substance  constantly  penneating  matter,  I  am 
seeing  and  participating  in  the  construction  of  this  zone. 

I  found  myself  upon  an  immense  ship,  which  is  the  symbolic  representation  of  the  place  where 
this  work  is  being  carried  out.  This  ship,  as  big  as  a  city,  is  thoroughly  organized,  and  it  had 
certainly  already  been  functioning  for  quite  some  time,  for  its  organization  was  fully  developed.  It 
is  the  place  where  people  destined  for  the  supramental  life  are  being  trained.  These  people  (or  at 
least  a  part  of  their  being)  had  already  undergone  a  supramental  transformation  because  the  ship 
itself  and  all  that  was  aboard  was  neither  material  nor  subtle-physical,  neither  vital  nor  mental:  it 
was  a  supramental  substance.  This  substance  itself  was  of  the  most  material  supramental,  the 
supramental  substance  nearest  the  physical  world,  the  first  to  manifest.  The  light  was  a  blend  of  red 
and  gold,  forming  a  unifonn  substance  of  luminous  orange.  Everything  was  like  that  -  the  light  was 
like  that,  the  people  were  like  that  -  everything  had  this  color,  in  varying  shades,  however,  which 
enabled  things  to  be  distinguished  from  one  another.  The  overall  impression  was  of  a  shadowless 
world:  there  were  shades,  but  no  shadows.  The  atmosphere  was  full  of  joy,  calm,  order;  everything 
worked  smoothly  and  silently.  At  the  same  time,  I  could  see  all  the  details  of  the  education,  the 
training  in  all  domains  by  which  the  people  on  board  were  being  prepared. 

This  immense  ship  had  just  arrived  at  the  shore  of  the  supramental  world,  and  a  first  batch  of 
people  destined  to  become  the  future  inhabitants  of  the  supramental  world  were  about  to  disembark. 
Everything  was  arranged  for  this  first  landing.  A  certain  number  of  very  tall  beings  were  posted  on 
the  wharf.  They  were  not  human  beings  and  never  before  had  they  been  men.  Nor  were  they 
permanent  inhabitants  of  the  supramental  world.  They  had  been  delegated  from  above  and  posted 
there  to  control  and  supervise  the  landing.  I  was  in  charge  of  all  this  since  the  beginning  and 
throughout.  I  myself  had  prepared  all  the  groups.  I  was  standing  on  the  bridge  of  the  ship,  calling 
the  groups  forward  one  by  one  and  having  them  disembark  on  the  shore.  The  tall  beings  posted 
there  seemed  to  be  reviewing  those  who  were  disembarking,  allowing  those  who  were  ready  to  go 
ashore  and  sending  back  those  who  were  not  and  who  had  to  continue  their  training  aboard  the  ship. 
While  standing  there  watching  everyone,  that  part  of  my  consciousness  coming  from  here  became 
extremely  interested:  it  wanted  to  see,  to  identify  all  the  people,  to  see  how  they  had  changed  and  to 
find  out  who  had  been  taken  immediately  as  well  as  those  who  had  to  remain  and  continue  their 
training.  After  awhile,  as  I  was  observing,  I  began  to  feel  pulled  backwards  and  that  my  body  was 
being  awakened  by  a  consciousness  or  a  person  from  here51  -  and  in  my  consciousness,  I  protested: 
‘No,  no,  not  yet!  Not  yet!  I  want  to  see  who’s  there!’  I  was  watching  all  this  and  noting  it  with 
intense  interest  ...  It  went  on  like  that  until,  suddenly,  the  clock  here  began  striking  three,  which 
violently  jerked  me  back.  There  was  the  sensation  of  a  sudden  fall  into  my  body.  I  came  back  with  a 
shock,  but  since  I  had  been  called  back  very  suddenly,  all  my  memory  was  still  intact.  I  remained 
quiet  and  still  until  I  could  bring  back  the  whole  experience  and  preserve  it. 

The  nature  of  objects  on  this  ship  was  not  that  which  we  know  upon  earth;  for  example,  the 
clothes  were  not  made  of  cloth,  and  this  thing  that  resembled  cloth  was  not  manufactured  -  it  was  a 
part  of  the  body,  made  of  the  same  substance  that  took  on  different  forms.  It  had  a  kind  of  plasticity. 
When  a  change  had  to  be  made,  it  was  done  not  by  artificial  and  outer  means  but  by  an  inner 
working,  by  a  working  of  the  consciousness  that  gave  the  substance  its  form  or  appearance.  Life 


5 1  Indeed,  one  of  the  people  near  Mother  had  pulled  Her  out  of  the  experience. 


created  its  own  forms.  There  was  ONE  SINGLE  substance  in  all  things;  it  changed  the  nature  of  its 
vibration  according  to  the  needs  or  uses. 

Those  who  were  sent  back  for  more  training  were  not  of  a  uniform  color;  their  bodies  seemed  to 
have  patches  of  a  grayish  opacity,  a  substance  resembling  the  earth  substance.  They  were  dull,  as 
though  they  had  not  been  wholly  permeated  by  the  light  or  wholly  transformed.  They  were  not  like 
this  all  over,  but  in  places. 

The  tall  beings  on  the  shore  were  not  of  the  same  color,  at  least  they  did  not  have  this  orange 
tint;  they  were  paler,  more  transparent.  Except  for  a  part  of  their  bodies,  only  the  outline  of  their 
fonns  could  be  seen.  They  were  very  tall,  they  did  not  seem  to  have  a  skeletal  structure,  and  they 
could  take  on  any  form  according  to  their  needs.  Only  from  their  waists  to  their  feet  did  they  have  a 
permanent  density,  which  was  not  felt  in  the  rest  of  their  body.  Their  color  was  much  more  pallid 
and  contained  very  little  red,  it  verged  rather  on  gold  or  even  white.  The  parts  of  whitish  light  were 
translucid;  they  were  not  absolutely  transparent,  but  less  dense,  more  subtle  than  the  orange 
substance. 

Just  as  I  was  called  back,  when  I  was  saying,  ‘Not  yet  ...  ,’  I  had  a  quick  glimpse  of  myself,  of 
my  form  in  the  supramental  world.  I  was  a  mixture  of  what  these  tall  beings  were  and  the  beings 
aboard  the  ship.  The  top  part  of  myself,  especially  my  head,  was  a  mere  silhouette  of  a  whitish  color 
with  an  orange  fringe.  The  more  it  approached  the  feet,  the  more  the  color  resembled  that  of  the 
people  on  the  ship,  or  in  other  words,  orange;  the  more  it  went  up  towards  the  top,  the  more 
translucid  and  white  it  was,  and  the  red  faded.  The  head  was  only  a  silhouette  with  a  brilliant  sun  at 
its  center;  from  it  issued  rays  of  light  which  were  the  action  of  the  will. 

As  for  the  people  I  saw  aboard  ship,  I  recognized  them  all.  Some  were  here  in  the  Ashram,  some 
came  from  elsewhere,  but  I  knew  them  as  well.  I  saw  everyone,  but  as  I  realized  that  I  would  not 
remember  everyone  when  I  came  back,  I  decided  not  to  give  any  names.  Besides,  it  is  unnecessary. 
Three  or  four  faces  were  very  clearly  visible,  and  when  I  saw  them,  I  understood  the  feeling  that  I 
have  had  here,  on  earth,  while  looking  into  their  eyes:  there  was  such  an  extraordinary  joy  ...  On  the 
whole,  the  people  were  young;  there  were  very  few  children,  and  their  ages  were  around  fourteen  or 
fifteen,  but  certainly  not  below  ten  or  twelve  (I  did  not  stay  long  enough  to  see  all  the  details). 
There  were  no  very  old  people,  with  the  exception  of  a  few.  Most  of  the  people  who  had  gone 
ashore  were  of  a  middle  age  -  again,  except  for  a  few.  Several  times  before  this  experience,  certain 
individual  cases  had  already  been  examined  at  a  place  where  people  capable  of  being 
supramentalized  are  examined;  I  had  then  had  a  few  surprises  which  I  had  noted  -  I  even  told  some 
people.  But  those  whom  I  disembarked  today  I  saw  very  distinctly.  They  were  of  a  middle  age, 
neither  young  children  nor  elderly  people,  with  only  a  few  rare  exceptions,  and  this  quite 
corresponded  to  what  I  expected.  I  decided  not  to  say  anything,  not  to  give  any  names.  As  I  did  not 
stay  until  the  end,  it  would  be  impossible  for  me  to  draw  an  exact  picture,  for  it  was  neither 
absolutely  clear  nor  complete.  I  do  not  want  to  say  things  to  some  and  not  say  them  to  others. 

What  I  can  say  is  that  the  criterion  or  the  judgment  was  based  EXCLUSIVELY  on  the  substance 
constituting  the  people  -  whether  they  belonged  completely  to  the  supramental  world  or  not, 
whether  they  were  made  of  this  very  special  substance.  The  criterion  adopted  was  neither  moral  nor 
psychological.  It  is  likely  that  their  bodily  substance  was  the  result  of  an  inner  law  or  an  inner 
movement  which,  at  that  time,  was  not  in  question.  At  least  it  is  quite  clear  that  the  values  are 
different. 

When  I  came  back,  along  with  the  memory  of  the  experience,  I  knew  that  the  supramental  world 
was  permanent,  that  my  presence  there  is  permanent,  and  that  only  a  missing  link  is  needed  to  allow 
the  consciousness  and  the  substance  to  connect  -  and  it  is  this  link  that  is  being  built.  At  that  time, 
my  impression  (an  impression  which  remained  rather  long,  almost  the  whole  day)  was  of  an 
extreme  relativity  -  no,  not  exactly  that,  but  an  impression  that  the  relationship  between  this  world 
and  the  other  completely  changes  the  criterion  by  which  things  are  to  be  evaluated  or  judged.  This 
criterion  had  nothing  mental  about  it,  and  it  gave  the  strange  inner  feeling  that  so  many  things  we 


consider  good  or  bad  are  not  really  so.  It  was  very  clear  that  everything  depended  upon  the  capacity 
of  things  and  upon  their  ability  to  express  the  supramental  world  or  be  in  relationship  with  it.  It  was 
so  completely  different,  at  times  even  so  opposite  to  our  ordinary  way  of  looking  at  things!  I  recall 
one  little  thing  that  we  usually  consider  bad  ...  actually  how  funny  it  was  to  see  that  it  is  something 
excellent!  And  other  things  that  we  consider  important  were  really  quite  unimportant  there! 
Whether  it  was  like  this  or  like  that  made  no  difference.  What  is  very  obvious  is  that  our 
appreciation  of  what  is  divine  or  not  divine  is  incorrect.  I  even  laughed  at  certain  things  ...  Our  usual 
feeling  about  what  is  anti-divine  seems  artificial,  based  upon  something  untrue,  unliving  (besides, 
what  we  call  life  here  appeared  lifeless  in  comparison  with  that  world);  in  any  event,  this  feeling 
should  be  based  upon  our  relationship  between  the  two  worlds  and  according  to  whether  things 
make  this  relationship  easier  or  more  difficult.  This  would  thus  completely  change  our  evaluation  of 
what  brings  us  nearer  to  the  Divine  or  what  takes  us  away  from  Him.  With  people,  too,  I  saw  that 
what  helps  them  or  prevents  them  from  becoming  supramental  is  very  different  from  what  our 
ordinary  moral  notions  imagine.  I  felt  just  how  ...  ridiculous  we  are. 

(Then  Mother  speaks  to  the  children) 

There  is  a  continuation  to  all  this,  which  is  like  the  result  in  my  consciousness  of  the  experience  of 
February  3,  but  it  seems  premature  to  read  it  now.  It  will  appear  in  the  April  issue  [of  the  Bulletin], 
as  a  sequel  to  this. 

But  one  thing  -  and  I  wish  to  stress  this  point  to  you  -  which  now  seems  to  me  to  be  the  most 
essential  difference  between  our  world  and  the  supramental  world  (and  it  is  only  after  having  gone 
there  consciously,  with  the  consciousness  that  ordinarily  works  here,  that  this  difference  appeared  to 
me  in  what  might  be  called  its  enormity):  everything  here,  except  for  what  happens  within  and  at  a 
very  deep  level,  seemed  absolutely  artificial  to  me.  Not  one  of  the  values  of  ordinary  physical  life  is 
based  upon  truth.  Just  as  we  have  to  buy  cloth,  sew  it  together,  then  put  it  on  our  backs  in  order  to 
dress  ourselves,  likewise  we  have  to  take  things  from  outside  and  then  put  them  inside  our  bodies  in 
order  to  feed  ourselves.  For  everything,  our  life  is  artificial. 

A  true,  sincere,  spontaneous  life,  as  in  the  supramental  world,  is  a  springing  forth  of  things 
through  the  fact  of  conscious  will,  a  power  over  substance  that  shapes  this  substance  according  to 
what  we  decide  it  should  be.  And  he  who  has  this  power  and  this  knowledge  can  obtain  whatever  he 
wants,  whereas  he  who  does  not  has  no  artificial  means  of  getting  what  he  desires. 

In  ordinary  life,  EVERYTHING  is  artificial.  Depending  upon  the  chance  of  your  birth  or 
circumstances,  you  have  a  more  or  less  high  position  or  a  more  or  less  comfortable  life,  not  because 
it  is  the  spontaneous,  natural  and  sincere  expression  of  your  way  of  being  and  of  your  inner  need, 
but  because  the  fortuity  of  life’s  circumstances  has  placed  you  in  contact  with  these  things.  An 
absolutely  worthless  man  may  be  in  a  very  high  position,  and  a  man  who  might  have  marvelous 
capacities  of  creation  and  organization  may  find  himself  toiling  in  a  quite  limited  and  inferior 
position,  whereas  he  would  be  a  wholly  useful  individual  if  the  world  were  sincere. 

It  is  this  artificiality,  this  insincerity,  this  complete  lack  of  truth  that  appeared  so  shocking  to  me 
that  ...  one  wonders  how,  in  a  world  as  false  as  this  one,  we  can  arrive  at  any  truthful  evaluation  of 
things. 

But  instead  of  feeling  grieved,  morose,  rebellious,  discontent,  I  had  rather  the  feeling  of  what  I 
spoke  of  at  the  end:  of  such  a  ridiculous  absurdity  that  for  several  days  I  was  seized  with  an 
uncontrollable  laughter  whenever  I  saw  things  and  people!  Such  a  tremendous  laughter,  so 
absolutely  inexplicable  (except  to  me),  because  of  the  ridiculousness  of  these  situations. 

When  I  invited  you  on  a  voyage  into  the  unknown,  a  voyage  of  adventure,52 1  did  not  know  just 
how  true  were  my  words!  And  I  can  promise  those  who  are  ready  to  embark  upon  this  adventure 
that  they  will  make  some  very  astonishing  discoveries. 


52See  Questions  and  Answers  (July  lo,  1957). 


February  1958 


(A  few  days  after  the  experience  of  February  3,  Mother  had  other  experiences  that  seemed  a 

continuation  of  it) 

Everyone  carries  with  him,  in  his  atmosphere,  what  Sri  Aurobindo  calls  the  ‘Censors’;  in  a  way, 
they  are  the  permanent  delegates  of  the  hostile  forces.  Their  role  is  to  criticize  mercilessly  each  act, 
each  thought,  the  least  movement  of  the  consciousness,  and  to  place  you  before  the  most  hidden 
motives  of  your  behavior,  to  expose  the  least  lower  vibration  accompanying  your  apparently  purest 
or  highest  thoughts  or  acts. 

It  is  not  here  a  question  of  morality.  These  gentlemen  are  not  moralizing  agents,  although  they 
know  very  well  how  to  make  use  of  morality!  And  when  they  are  dealing  with  a  scrupulous 
conscience,  they  can  harass  it  pitilessly,  whisper  to  it  at  every  minute,  ‘You  should  not  have  done 
this,  you  should  not  have  done  that,  you  should  have  done  such  and  such,  said  such  and  such;  now 
you  have  ruined  everything,  you  have  made  an  irreparable  mistake,  just  see  how  everything  is 
irremediably  lost  now  because  of  the  mistake  you  made.’  They  can  even  possess  the  consciousness 
of  some  people:  you  chase  the  thought  away  and  vrrm!  -  two  minutes  later,  back  it  comes!  You 
chase  it  away  again,  but  there  it  is  still  hammering  away  at  you. 

Each  time  I  meet  these  gentlemen,  I  give  them  a  hearty  welcome,  for  they  force  you  to  be 
absolutely  sincere,  they  unearth  the  subtlest  hypocrisy  and  at  each  moment  place  you  before  your 
most  secret  vibrations.  And  they  are  intelligent,  with  an  intelligence  infinitely  surpassing  our  own! 
They  know  everything,  they  know  how  to  set  your  least  thought  against  you,  your  least  argument  or 
action,  with  a  really  wonderful  subtlety.  Nothing  escapes  them.  But  what  gives  a  hostile  shading  to 
these  beings  is  that,  first  and  foremost,  they  are  defeatists.  They  always  present  you  with  the  darkest 
side  of  the  picture  and  if  necessary  distort  your  own  intentions.  They  are  truly  instruments  of 
sincerity.  Yet  they  always  overlook  one  thing,  deliberately,  something  they  reject  and  cast  far 
behind,  as  if  it  didn’t  exist  -  the  divine  Grace.  They  overlook  prayer,  this  spontaneous  prayer  that 
suddenly  surges  up  from  the  depths  of  your  being  like  an  intense  call  and  makes  the  Grace  descend 
and  changes  the  course  of  things. 

And  each  time  that  you  have  made  some  progress  or  passed  to  a  higher  level,  they  put  you  back 
in  the  presence  of  all  the  actions  of  your  past  and  in  a  few  months,  a  few  days  or  a  few  minutes 
make  you  pass  all  the  tests  again,  at  a  higher  level.  And  it  does  not  help  to  brush  aside  the  thought, 
saying,  ‘Oh,  I  know!’  and  throw  a  little  cloak  over  it  so  as  not  to  see.  You  have  to  face  and  conquer, 
keep  your  consciousness  filled  with  light,  be  unwavering,  uncomplaining,  without  a  single  vibration 
in  the  cells  of  the  body,  and  then  the  attack  dissolves. 

The  other  day,  too,  in  your  supramental  experience,  you  said  that  moral  values  had  lost  all  their 

meaning. 

But  our  conceptions  of  Good  and  Evil  are  so  ridiculous!  Our  ideas  of  what  is  near  to  the  Divine  or 
far  from  the  Divine  are  so  absurd!  The  experience  of  the  other  day  [February  3]  was  quite  a 


revelation  to  me,  and  I  came  out  of  it  utterly  changed.  I  suddenly  understood  a  great  many  things 
from  the  past  -  certain  actions  parts  of  my  life  that  had  remained  inexplicable  -  in  truth,  the  shortest 
path  from  one  point  to  another  is  not  the  straight  line  we  imagine! 

And  the  whole  time  this  experience  lasted,  one  hour  (an  hour  of  THAT  time  is  long!),  I  was  in 
an  extraordinarily  mirthful,  almost  inebriated  state  ...  The  difference  between  the  two 
consciousnesses  is  such  that  when  you  are  in  one,  the  other  seems  unreal  like  a  dream.  When  I  came 
back,  I  was  at  first  struck  by  the  futility  of  life  here;  our  petty  conceptions  seem  so  comical,  so 
laughable  ...  We  say  that  certain  people  are  mad,  but  their  madness  is  perhaps  a  great  wisdom  from 
the  supramental  point  of  view,  and  their  behavior  is  perhaps  very  near  the  truth  of  things  -  I  am  not 
speaking  of  the  obscure  insane  who  have  had  some  brain  disorder,  but  of  many  other 
incomprehensible  mad  people,  the  luminous  mad:  they  have  wanted  to  leap  across  the  border  too 
quickly,  and  the  rest  did  not  follow. 

When  one  looks  at  the  world  of  men  from  the  supramental  consciousness,  the  dominant 
characteristic  is  a  feeling  of  oddity,  of  artificiality  -  a  world  that  is  absurd  because  it  is  artificial. 
This  world  is  false  because  its  material  appearance  does  not  at  all  express  the  profound  truth  of 
things.  There  is  as  if  a  discrepancy  between  the  appearance  and  what  lies  within.  Thus,  a  man  with  a 
divine  power  deep  within  him  may,  on  the  outer  plane,  find  himself  in  the  situation  of  a  slave.  It’s 
preposterous!  Whereas  in  the  supramental  world,  the  will  acts  directly  upon  the  substance,  and  the 
substance  is  obedient  to  this  will.  When  you  want  to  clothe  yourself,  the  substance  you  are  living  in 
immediately  assumes  the  form  of  clothing  to  cover  you.  When  you  want  to  move  from  one  place  to 
another,  your  will  is  sufficient  to  carry  you  without  your  needing  any  kind  of  vehicle  or  artificial 
means.  Thus,  for  example,  the  ship  in  my  experience  had  no  need  of  any  mechanism  whatsoever  in 
order  to  move;  it  was  the  will  that  shaped  the  substance  according  to  its  needs.  When  it  was 
necessary  to  disembark,  the  wharf  formed  by  itself.  When  I  wanted  the  groups  to  go  ashore,  those 
who  had  to  do  so  automatically  knew  it,  without  my  having  to  say  a  word,  and  they  came  in  the 
right  order.  Everything  took  place  in  silence,  there  was  no  need  to  speak  to  be  understood;  but 
aboard  the  ship,  the  silence  itself  did  not  give  this  artificial  impression  it  gives  here.  Here,  when  we 
want  silence,  we  have  to  keep  our  mouths  shut:  silence  is  the  opposite  of  noise.  There,  the  silence 
was  vibrant,  living,  active  and  comprehensive,  comprehensible. 

The  absurdity  here  consists  of  all  the  artificial  means  that  have  to  be  used.  Any  imbecile  has 
more  power  if  he  has  more  means  by  which  to  acquire  the  necessary  artifice.  Whereas  in  the 
supramental  world,  the  more  one  is  conscious  and  in  contact  with  the  truth  of  things,  the  more 
authority  has  the  will  over  the  substance.  The  authority  is  a  true  authority.  If  you  want  clothes,  you 
have  to  have  the  power  to  make  them,  a  real  power.  If  you  do  not  have  this  power,  well  then,  you 
remain  naked.  There  are  no  artificial  means  to  compensate  for  this  lack  of  power.  Here,  not  once  in 
a  million  times  is  authority  the  expression  of  something  true.  Everything  is  colossally  stupid. 

When  I  came  back  down  (‘came  back  down’  is  a  manner  of  speaking,  for  it  is  neither  high  nor 
low,  nor  within  nor  without,  it  is  ...  somewhere),  it  took  me  a  while  to  readjust.  I  even  recall  having 
said  to  someone,  ‘Now  we  are  going  to  regress  into  our  usual  stupidity.’  But  I  understood  a  lot  of 
things,  and  I  came  back  from  there  with  a  decisive  force.  Now  I  know  that  our  way  of  seeing  things 
here,  our  petty  moral  values,  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  values  of  the  supramental  world. 


Undated  1958 


For  me,  the  subtle  physical  is  far  more  real  than  this  distorted  world,  but  to  see  it  you  have  to  be 
conscious  there,  whereas  people  want  to  get  effects  which  give  them  the  impression  of  the 
marvelous  and  the  miraculous  and  they  want  the  subtle  physical  to  become  visible  in  the  material 
world  IN  SPITE  OF  the  falsehood.  What  makes  the  great  difference  for  the  ordinary  physical 
consciousness  is  this:  it  wants  to  come  into  contact  with  that  in  spite  of  the  falsehood,  whereas  the 
universal  law  is,  get  out  of  the  falsehood  and  that  will  become  true  for  you. 

For  me,  this  subtle  world  is  far  more  real  than  the  material  world  -  much  truer,  much  more 
tangible,  concrete,  real  -  but  for  others  in  this  material  world  to  believe  in  the  subtle  worlds,  either 
they  must  have  some  beginning  of  experience,  or  else  they  must  agree  to  have  confidence  and  say, 
‘All  right,  they  say  it’s  like  that,  therefore  it  must  be  like  that.’  Otherwise,  to  be  convinced  they 
want  the  truth  to  manifest  in  a  world  of  falsehood  in  spite  of  the  falsehood.  Their  attitude  is  like 
this:  ‘We  are  willing  to  admit  that  it  is  possible,  that  it  is  real,  but  as  long  as  it  has  not  manifested 
here,  we  do  not  quite  believe  in  it.  ’ 

Are  you  referring  to  the  supramental  world? 

It  applies  to  everything:  every  true  thing  in  the  world,  including  all  the  fairy  tale  miracles.  Things 
that  appear  miraculous  to  the  physical  consciousness  happen  in  an  altogether  different  way,  but  to  it 
they  are  indeed  miraculous  since  they  don’t  depend  on  any  physical  processes.  As  I  have  said,53  to 
travel  from  one  place  to  another  there  is  no  need  for  any  means  of  transport,  to  feed  ourselves  it  is 
not  necessary  to  put  external  things  into  the  body,  to  dress  ourselves  we  have  no  need  to  put  on 
clothes,  etc  ...  .  The  play  of  forces  is  the  spontaneous  expression  of  Truth  and  of  the  true  Will,  the 
true  vision. 

The  question  remains:  for  those  who  have  seen  and  to  whom  things  have  happened  in  this  way 
(like  the  little  child,  for  example,  who  was  playing  with  fairies),  is  it  that  they  enter  into  this 
consciousness  and  then  remember  when  they  leave  it,  or  is  it  that  this  state  really  manifests  here? 
For  me,  this  is  still  a  question. 

As  this  experience  often  happens  to  people  with  a  simple  heart  and  mind,  quite  possibly  they 
don’t  realize  that  for  a  while  they  have  lived  in  another  consciousness  and  in  another  world  and  then 
have  come  back  to  an  ordinary  condition  where  they  remember  the  other  thing.  For  them,  they  do 
not  see  the  difference. 


February  15, 1958 

Last  night,  I  had  the  vision  of  what  this  supramental  world  could  become  if  men  were  not 
sufficiently  prepared.  The  confusion  existing  at  present  upon  earth  is  nothing  in  comparison  to  what 
could  take  place.  Imagine  that  every  powerful  will  has  the  power  to  transform  matter  as  it  likes!  If 


53Experience  of  the  ‘Supramental  Ship.’ 


the  sense  of  collective  oneness  did  not  grow  in  proportion  to  the  development  of  power,  the 
resulting  conflict  would  be  yet  more  acute  and  chaotic  than  our  material  conflicts. 


February  25,  1958 


(On  suffering) 

These  surface  things  are  not  dramatic.  More  and  more,  they  seem  to  me  like  soap  bubbles, 
especially  since  February  3. 

Some  people  come  to  see  me  in  utter  despair,  in  tears,  in  what  they  call  terrible  moral  suffering; 
when  I  see  them  like  that  I  slightly  shift  the  needle  in  that  part  of  my  consciousness  containing  all  of 
you,  and  when  they  leave,  they  are  completely  relieved.  It  is  just  like  a  compass  needle  -  I  slightly 
shift  the  needle  in  my  consciousness,  and  it’s  over.  Naturally,  through  habit,  it  returns  later  on.  But 
these  are  mere  soap  bubbles. 

I  too  have  known  suffering,  but  there  was  always  a  part  of  me  that  knew  how  to  hold  itself  back 
and  remain  aloof. 

The  only  thing  in  the  world  that  still  appears  intolerable  to  me  now  is  all  physical  deterioration, 
physical  suffering,  the  ugliness  the  powerlessness  to  express  this  capacity  of  beauty  inherent  in 
every  being.  But  this,  too,  will  be  conquered  one  day.  Here,  too  the  power  will  come  one  day  to 
shift  the  needle  a  little.  Only,  one  has  to  climb  higher  in  consciousness:  the  deeper  into  matter  you 
want  to  descend,  the  higher  must  you  ascend  in  consciousness. 

It  will  take  time.  Sri  Aurobindo  was  surely  right  when  he  spoke  of  a  few  centuries. 


February  1958 

Yesterday  morning,  while  reading  a  letter  from  A.H.,  I  understood  the  Christian  symbolism.  It 
could  be  that  some  people  understand  ...  Anyway,  I  suddenly  understood  ...  It  is  extremely 
metaphysical.  I  followed  the  idea  from  a  metaphysical  point  of  view,  along  the  lines  of  what  we 
were  saying  yesterday:  this  ‘error’  committed  that  allowed  the  world  to  become  what  it  is.  But  at  the 


extreme  limit,  there  always  remains  the  question,  ‘How  is  it  possible?’  I  was  no  longer  seeing  this 
with  the  mind. 

I  came  to  the  conclusion  that  from  a  practical  standpoint,  the  solution  is  that  the  part  of 
humanity  expressing  this  Error  in  its  life  and  its  consciousness  should  ...  or  to  put  it  another  way, 
that  part  of  humanity,  of  the  human  consciousness,  capable  of  uniting  with  the  Supermind  and  of 
liberating  itself,  will  be  completely  transformed.  This  humanity  is  moving  towards  a  future  reality 
not  yet  expressed  in  its  outer  fonn.  Whereas  the  part  of  humanity  nearer  to  the  simplicity  of  the 
animal  or  of  Nature  will  be  reabsorbed  by  Nature  and  entirely  reassimilated.  The  possibility  of  a 
mental  consciousness  that  allows  for  perversion  -  that  makes  mental  perversion  such  an 
excruciating  thing  -  will  be  abolished.  It  will  disappear.  These  things  will  no  longer  be. 

In  the  vision,  I  went  much  deeper  into  this  thought.  I  saw  all  the  stages,  but  I  no  longer  see  them 
now.  I  can  no  longer  explain  -  there  was  suddenly  a  vision  that  understood  the  idea  of  atonement 
and  redemption.  It  was  not  formulated  in  words.  Also,  the  idea  that  only  an  act  of  faith  in  a  divine 
intervention  could  ...  was  the  means  of  salvation.  This  was  the  idea  of  salvation.  I  understood  Christ 
and  faith  in  Christ.  I  understood  it,  and  it  did  not  apply  uniquely  to  Christianity  or  to  original  sin.  I 
understood  what  original  sin  and  redemption  through  faith  in  Christ  meant. 


March  7, 1958 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Kataragama,  March  7,  1958 


Sweet  Mother, 

Since  my  departure,  I  have  been  feeling  your  Force  continually,  almost  constantly.  And  I  feel  an 
infinite  gratitude  that  you  are  there,  and  that  this  thread  from  you  to  me  keeps  me  anchored  to 
something  in  this  world.  Simply  knowing  that  you  exist,  that  you  are  there,  that  I  have  a  goal,  a 
center  -  fills  me  with  infinite  gratitude.  On  a  street  in  Madras,  the  day  after  I  left,  I  suddenly  had  a 
poignant  experience:  I  felt  that  if  ‘that’  were  not  in  me,  I  would  fall  to  pieces  on  the  sidewalk,  I 
would  crumble,  nothing  would  be  left,  nothing.  And  this  experience  remains.  Like  a  litany, 
something  keeps  repeating  almost  incessantly,  ‘I  need  you,  need  you,  I  have  only  you,  you  alone  in 
the  world.  You  are  all  my  present,  all  my  future,  I  have  only  you  ...’  Mother,  I  am  living  in  a  state  of 
need,  like  hunger. 

On  the  way,  I  stopped  at  J  and  E’s  place.  They  are  living  like  native  fishermen,  in  loincloths,  in 
a  coconut  grove  by  the  sea.  The  place  is  exceedingly  beautiful,  and  the  sea  full  of  rainbow-hued 
coral.  And  suddenly,  within  twenty-four  hours,  I  realized  an  old  dream  -  or  rather,  I  ‘purged’ 
myself  of  an  old  and  tenacious  dream:  that  of  living  on  a  Pacific  island  as  a  simple  fisherman.  And 
all  at  once,  I  saw,  in  a  flash,  that  this  kind  of  life  totally  lacks  a  center.  You  ‘float’  in  a  nowhere.  It 
plunges  you  into  some  kind  of  higher  inertia,  an  illumined  inertia,  and  you  lose  all  true  substance. 

As  for  me,  I  am  totally  out  of  my  element  in  this  new  life,  as  though  I  were  uprooted  from 


myself.  I  am  living  in  the  temple,  in  the  midst  of  pujas,54  with  white  ashes  on  my  forehead,  barefoot 
dressed  like  a  Hindu,  sleeping  on  cement  at  night,  eating  impossible  curries,  with  some  good 
sunburns  to  complete  the  cooking.  And  there  I  am,  clinging  to  you,  for  if  you  were  not  there  I  would 
collapse,  so  absurd  would  it  all  be.  You  are  the  only  reality  -  how  many  times  have  I  repeated  this 
to  myself,  like  a  litany!  Apart  from  this,  I  am  holding  up  quite  well  physically.  But  inside  and 
outside,  nothing  is  left  but  you.  I  need  you,  that’s  all.  Mother,  this  world  is  so  horrifyingly  empty.  I 
really  feel  that  I  would  evaporate  if  you  weren’t  there.  Well,  no  doubt  I  had  to  go  through  this 
experience  ...  Perhaps  I  will  be  able  to  extract  some  book  from  it  that  will  be  of  use  to  you.  We  are 
like  children  who  need  a  lot  of  pictures  in  order  to  understand,  and  a  few  good  kicks  to  realize  our 
complete  stupidity. 

Swami  must  soon  take  to  the  road  again,  through  Ceylon,  towards  March  20  or  25.  So  I  shall  go 
wandering  with  him  until  May;  towards  the  beginning  of  May,  he  will  return  to  India.  I  hope  to 
have  learned  my  lesson  by  then,  and  to  have  learned  it  well.  Inwardly,  I  have  understood  that  there 
is  only  you  -  but  it’s  these  problem  children  on  the  surface  who  must  be  made  to  toe  the  line  once 
and  for  all. 

Sweet  Mother,  I  am  in  a  hurry  to  work  for  you.  Will  you  still  want  me?  Mother,  I  need  you,  I 
need  you.  I  would  like  to  ask  you  an  absurd  question:  Do  you  think  of  me?  I  have  only  you,  you 
alone  in  the  world. 

Your  child, 
Signed:  Satprem 


*  *  * 


(Mother’s  reply) 


March  11,  58 


My  dear  child 

It  is  good,  very  good  -  in  truth,  everything  is  taking  place  as  expected,  as  the  best  expected.  And 
I  am  so  happy  for  this. 

To  your  question,  I  reply:  I  do  not  think  of  you,  I  feel  you;  you  are  with  me,  I  am  with  you,  in 
the  light ... 

Your  place  has  remained  vacant  here;  you  alone  can  fill  it,  and  it  awaits  your  return,  when  the 
moment  comes. 


As  soon  as  the  ‘problem  children’  on  the  surface  will  also  have  learned  their  lesson,  you  have 
only  to  let  me  know  of  the  date  of  your  return  and  you  will  be  welcome. 

With  you  always  and  everywhere. 

Signed:  Mother 


54Puja:  Hindu  temple  ceremony. 


April  3, 1958 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Kataragama,  April  3,  1958 


Sweet  Mother, 

I  was  waiting  for  things  to  be  well  established  in  me  before  writing  you  again.  An  important 
change  has  occurred:  it  seems  that  something  in  me  has  ‘clicked’  -  what  Sri  Aurobindo  calls  the 
‘central  will,’  perhaps  -  and  I  am  living  literally  in  the  obsession  of  divine  realization.  This  is  what  I 
want,  nothing  else,  it  is  the  only  goal  in  life,  and  at  last  I  have  understood  (not  with  the  head)  that 
the  outer  realization  in  the  world  will  be  the  consequence  of  the  inner  realization.  So  thousands  of 
times  a  day,  I  repeat,  ‘Mother,  I  want  to  be  your  instrument,  ever  more  conscious,  I  want  to  express 
your  truth,  your  light.  I  want  to  be  what  you  want,  as  you  want,  when  you  want.’  There  is  in  me 
now  a  kind  of  need  for  perfection,  a  will  to  abolish  this  ego,  a  real  understanding  that  to  become 
your  instrument  means  at  the  same  time  to  find  the  perfect  plenitude  of  one’s  personality.  So  I  am 
living  in  an  almost  constant  state  of  aspiration,  I  feel  your  force  constantly,  or  nearly  so,  and  if  I  am 
‘distracted’  a  few  minutes,  I  experience  a  void,  an  uneasiness  that  calls  me  back  to  you. 

And  at  the  same  time,  I  saw  that  it  is  you  who  is  doing  everything,  you  who  aspires  in  me,  you 
who  wants  the  progress,  and  that  all  ‘I’  myself  am  in  this  affair  is  a  screen,  a  resisting  obstacle.  O 
Mother,  break  this  screen  that  I  may  be  wholly  transparent  before  you,  that  your  transforming  force 
may  purify  all  the  secret  recesses  in  my  being,  that  nothing  may  remain  but  you  and  you  alone.  O 
Mother,  may  all  my  being  be  a  living  expression  of  your  light,  your  truth. 

Mother,  from  the  depths  of  my  being,  I  offer  you  a  sole  prayer:  may  I  become  your  more  and 
more  perfect  instrument,  a  sword  of  light  in  your  hands.  Oh,  to  get  out  of  this  ego  that  belittles 
everything,  diminishes  everything,  to  emerge  from  it!  All  is  falsehood  in  it. 

And  I,  who  understood  nothing  of  love,  am  beginning  to  suspect  who  Satprem  is.  Mother,  your 
grace  is  infinite,  it  has  accompanied  me  everywhere  in  my  life. 

We  are  still  in  Kataragama,  and  we  shall  only  go  up  to  northern  Ceylon,  to  Jaffna,  around  the 
15th,  then  return  to  India  towards  the  beginning  of  May  if  the  visa  problems  are  settled.  Only  in 
India,  at  the  temple  of  Rameswaram,  can  I  receive  the  orange  robe.  I  am  living  here  as  a  sannyasi, 
but  dressed  in  white,  like  a  Hindu.  It  is  a  stark  life,  nothing  more.  I  have  seen  however,  that  truth 
does  not  lie  in  starkness  but  in  a  change  of  consciousness.  (Desire  always  finds  a  means  to  entrench 
itself  in  very  small  details  and  in  very  petty  and  stupid,  though  well-rooted,  avidities.) 

Mother,  I  am  seeing  all  the  mean  pettiness  that  obstructs  your  divine  work.  Destroy  my 
smallness  and  take  me  unto  you.  May  I  be  sincere,  integrally  sincere. 

With  infinite  gratitude,  I  am  your  child. 

Signed:  Satprem 

P.S.  My  system  is  not  in  perfect  condition  due  to  this  absurdly  spiced  food,  and  the  river  water  that 
is  used  for  everything. 


(Mother ’s  reply) 


Sri  Aurobindo  Ashram,  4.10.58 


My  dear  child, 


It  is  with  great  joy  that  I  shall  receive  you  when  you  return  in  May. 

We  have  a  lot  of  work  to  do  together,  because  I  have  kept  everything  for  your  return. 

I  am  trying  to  be  near  you  as  MATERIALLY  as  possible  in  order  to  help  your  body  victoriously 
pass  through  the  test. 

I  want  it  to  come  out  of  this  tempered  forever,  above  all  attacks. 

May  the  joy  of  luminous  love  be  with  you. 

Until  we  meet, 

Signed:  Mother 


Undated  1958 


(Concerning  one  of  her  commentaries  on  the  Dhammapada,  in  the  chapter  ‘The  Thousand,  ’Mother 

remarks:) 


All  this  seems  quite  dogmatic. 

Each  time,  only  ONE  aspect  of  the  question  is  considered,  whereas  to  be  truly  accurate, 
EVERYTHING  would  have  to  be  said.  It  should  be  emphasized  that  this  is  only  ONE  point  of  view 
and  that  there  are  also  all  the  others.  But  people  ...  that  swamps  them!  They  don’t  like  it,  they  are 
happier  when  they  can  cling  to  something  solid. 


May  1,  1958 

These  days  I  am  having  every  possible  experience  in  the  body,  one  after  the  other.  Yesterday  and 
this  morning  ...  oh,  this  morning! 

I  saw  there  (center  of  the  heart)  the  Master  of  the  Yoga;  he  was  no  different  from  me,  but 
nevertheless  I  saw  him,  and  he  even  seemed  slightly  imbued  with  color.  Well,  he  does  everything, 
he  decides  everything,  he  organizes  everything  with  an  almost  mathematical  precision  and  in  the 
smallest  details  -  everything. 


To  do  the  divine  Will  -  I  have  been  doing  the  sadhana  for  a  long  time,  and  I  can  say  that  not  a 
day  has  passed  that  I  have  not  done  the  Divine’s  Will.  But  I  didn’t  know  what  it  was!  I  was  living  in 
all  the  inner  realms,  from  the  subtle  physical  to  the  highest  regions,  yet  I  didn’t  know  what  it  was  ... 
I  always  had  to  listen,  to  refer  things,  to  pay  attention.  Now,  no  more  -  bliss!  There  are  no  more 
problems,  and  everything  is  done  in  such  harmony!  Even  if  I  had  to  leave  my  body,  I  would  be  in 
bliss!  And  it  would  happen  in  the  best  possible  way. 

Only  now  am  I  beginning  to  understand  what  Sri  Aurobindo  has  written  in  The  Synthesis  of 
Yoga!  And  the  human  mind,  the  physical  mind,  appears  so  stupid,  so  stupid! 


May  10,  1958 

This  morning,  I  suddenly  looked  at  my  body  (usually,  I  don’t  look  at  it  -  I  am  inside  it,  working),  I 
looked  at  my  body  and  said  to  myself,  ‘Let’s  see,  what  would  a  witness  say  about  this  body?’  -  the 
witness  Sri  Aurobindo  speaks  of  in  The  Synthesis  of  Yoga.  Nothing  very  remarkable.  So  I 
fonnulated  it  like  this  (Mother  reads  a  written  note): 

‘This  body  has  neither  the  uncontested  authority  of  a  god  nor  the  imperturbable  calm  of  the 
sage.’ 

So,  what  then? 

‘It  is  as  yet  only  an  apprentice  in  supermanhood.’ 

That  is  all  it  is  trying  to  be. 

I  saw  and  understood  very  well  that  by  concentrating,  I  could  have  given  it  the  attitude  of  the 
absolute  authority  of  the  eternal  Mother.  When  Sri  Aurobindo  told  me,  ‘You  are  She,’  at  the  same 
time  he  bestowed  upon  my  body  this  attitude  of  absolute  authority.  But  as  I  had  the  inner  vision  of 
this  truth,  I  concerned  myself  very  little  with  the  imperfections  of  the  physical  body  -  I  didn’t 
bother  about  that,  I  only  used  it  as  an  instrument.  Sri  Aurobindo  did  the  sadhana  for  this  body, 
which  had  only  to  remain  constantly  open  to  his  action.55 

Afterwards,  when  he  left  and  I  had  to  do  the  Yoga  myself,  to  be  able  to  take  his  physical  place,  I 
could  have  adopted  the  attitude  of  the  sage,  which  is  what  I  did  since  I  was  in  an  unparalleled  state 
of  calm  when  he  left.  As  he  left  his  body  and  entered  into  mine,  he  told  me,  ‘You  will  continue,  you 
will  go  right  to  the  end  of  the  work.’  It  was  then  that  I  imposed  a  calm  upon  this  body  -  the  calm  of 
total  detachment.  And  I  could  have  remained  like  that. 

But  in  a  way,  absolute  calm  implies  withdrawal  from  action,  so  a  choice  had  to  be  made 
between  one  or  the  other.  I  said  to  myself,  ‘I  am  neither  exclusively  this  nor  exclusively  that.’  And 
actually,  to  do  Sri  Aurobindo ’s  work  is  to  realize  the  Supramental  on  earth.  So  I  began  that  work 
and,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  this  was  the  only  thing  I  asked  of  my  body.  I  told  it,  ‘Now  you  shall  set 
right  everything  which  is  out  of  order  and  gradually  realize  this  intermediate  supermanhood 
between  man  and  the  supramental  being  or,  in  other  words,  what  I  call  the  superman.’ 


55This  last  sentence  was  later  added  by  Mother  in  writing. 


And  this  is  what  I  have  been  doing  for  the  last  eight  years,  and  even  much  more  during  the  past 
two  years,  since  1956.  Now  it  is  the  work  of  each  day,  each  minute. 

That’s  where  I  am.  I  have  renounced  the  uncontested  authority  of  a  god,  I  have  renounced  the 
unshakable  calm  of  the  sage  ...  in  order  to  become  the  supennan.  I  have  concentrated  everything 
upon  that. 

We  shall  see. 

I  am  learning  to  work.  I  am  only  an  apprentice,  simply  an  apprentice  - 1  am  learning  the  trade! 

* 


(Soon  afterwards) 

In  a  considerable  number  of  people,  it  is  their  body,  the  physical  body,  that  obstinately  resists. 

The  difficulty  is  greater  for  Westerners  than  for  Indians.  It’s  as  though  their  substance  were 
steeped  in  falsehood.  It  also  happens  with  Indians,  of  course,  but  generally  the  falsehood  is  much 
more  in  the  vital  than  in  the  physical  -  because  after  all,  the  physical  has  been  utilized  by  bodies 
belonging  to  enlightened  beings.  The  European  substance  seems  steeped  in  rebellion;  in  the  Indian 
substance  this  rebelliousness  is  subdued  by  an  influence  of  surrender.  The  other  day,  someone  was 
telling  me  about  some  Europeans  with  whom  he  corresponds,  and  I  said,  ‘But  tell  them  to  read,  to 
learn,  to  follow  The  Synthesis  of  Yoga!  -  it  leads  you  straight  to  the  path.’  Whereupon  he  replied, 
‘Oh,  but  they  say  it’s  full  of  talk  on  surrender,  surrender,  always  surrender  ...’  and  they  want  none 
of  it. 

They  want  none  of  it!  Even  if  the  mind  accepts,  the  body  and  the  vital  refuse.  And  when  the 
body  refuses,  it  refuses  with  the  stubbornness  of  a  stone. 

Is  it  not  due  to  the  body ’s  unconsciousness? 

No.  From  the  minute  it  is  conscious,  it  is  conscious  of  its  own  falsehood!  It  is  conscious  of  this  law, 
of  that  law,  of  this  third  law  that  fourth  law,  this  tenth  law  -  everything  is  a  Taw.’  ‘We  are  subject 
to  physical  laws:  this  will  produce  such  and  such  a  result  if  you  do  that,  this  will  happen,  etc.’  Oh!  It 
reeks!  I  know  it  well.  I  know  it  very  well.  These  laws  reek  of  falsehood.  In  the  body,  we  have  no 
faith  in  the  divine  Grace,  none,  none,  none,  none!  Those  who  have  not  undergone  a  tapasya56  as  I 
have,  say,  ‘Yes,  all  these  inner  moral  things,  feelings,  psychology,  all  that  is  very  good;  we  want  the 
Divine  and  we  are  ready  to  ...  But  all  the  same,  material  facts  are  material  facts,  they  have  their 
concrete  reality,  after  all  an  illness  is  an  illness,  food  is  food,  and  everything  you  do  has  a 
consequence,  and  when  you  are  ...’  -  bah,  bah,  bah,  bah,  bah! 

We  must  understand  that  this  isn’t  true  -  it  isn’t  true,  it’s  a  falsehood,  all  this  is  sheer  falsehood. 
It  is  NOT  TRUE,  it  is  not  true! 

If  only  we  would  accept  the  Supreme  inside  our  bodies,  if  we  had  the  experience  I  had  a  few 
days  ago57  :  the  supreme  Knowledge  in  action  along  with  the  complete  abolition  of  all 
consequences,  past  and  future.  Each  second  has  its  own  eternity  and  its  own  law,  which  is  a  law  of 
absolute  truth. 

When  I  had  this  experience,  I  understood  that  only  a  month  ago  I  was  still  uttering  mountain¬ 
sized  imbecilities.  And  I  laughed  to  the  point  of  almost  approving  those  who  say,  ‘But  all  the  same, 
the  Supreme  does  not  decide  the  number  of  sugar  cubes  you  put  in  your  coffee!  That  would  be  to 
project  your  own  way  of  being  onto  the  Supreme.’  But  this  is  an  Himalayan  imbecility!  It  is  a 

56Tapasya:  yogic  discipline  or  askesis. 


57May  1,  1958. 


stupidity,  the  mind’s  pretentious  stupidity  projecting  itself  onto  the  divine  life  and  imagining  that 
the  divine  life  conforms  to  its  own  projection. 

The  Supreme  does  not  decide:  He  knows.  The  Supreme  does  not  want:  He  sees.  And  it  is  so  for 
each  thousandth  of  a  second,  eternally.  That’s  all.  And  it  is  the  only  true  condition. 

I  know  that  the  experience  I  had  the  other  day  is  new  and  that  I  was  the  first  person  on  earth  to 
have  it.  But  it  is  the  only  thing  that  is  true.  All  the  rest ... 

I  began  my  sadhana  at  birth,  without  knowing  that  I  was  doing  it.  I  have  continued  it  throughout 
my  whole  life,  which  means  for  almost  eighty  years  (even  though  for  perhaps  the  first  three  or  four 
years  of  my  life  it  was  only  something  stirring  about  in  unconsciousness).  But  I  began  a  deliberate, 
conscious  sadhana  at  about  the  age  of  twenty- two  or  twenty- three,  upon  prepared  ground.  I  am  now 
more  than  eighty  years  old:  I  have  thought  of  nothing  but  that,  I  have  wanted  nothing  but  that,  I  had 
no  other  interest  in  life,  and  not  for  a  single  minute  have  I  ever  forgotten  that  it  was  THAT  that  I 
wanted.  There  were  not  periods  of  remembering  and  forgetting:  it  was  continuous,  unceasing,  day 
and  night,  from  the  age  of  twenty-four  -  and  I  had  this  experience  for  the  first  time  about  a  week 
ago!  So,  I  say  that  people  who  are  in  a  hurry,  people  who  are  impatient,  are  arrogant  fools. 

...  It  is  a  hard  path.  I  try  to  make  it  as  comfortable  as  possible,  but  nevertheless,  it  is  a  hard  path. 
And  it  is  obvious  that  it  cannot  be  otherwise.  You  are  beaten  and  battered  until  you  understand. 
Until  you  are  in  that  state  in  which  all  bodies  are  your  body.  But  at  that  point,  you  begin  to  laugh! 
You  were  upset  by  this,  hurt  by  that,  you  suffered  from  this  or  that  -  but  now,  how  laughable  it  all 
seems!  And  not  only  the  head,  but  the  body  too  finds  it  laughable! 

(silence) 

...  but  it  is  so  deeply  rooted:  all  the  reactions  of  the  body-consciousness  are  like  that,  with  a  kind  of 
shrinking  at  the  idea  of  allowing  a  higher  power  to  intervene. 

(silence) 

From  the  positive  point  of  view,  I  am  convinced  that  we  agree  upon  the  result  to  be  obtained,  that  is, 
an  integral  and  unreserved  consecration  -  in  love,  knowledge  and  action  -  to  the  Supreme  AND  TO 
HIS  WORK.  I  say  to  the  Supreme  and  to  his  work  because  consecration  to  the  Supreme  alone  is  not 
enough.  Now  we  are  here  for  the  supramental  realization,  this  is  what  is  expected  of  us,  but  to  reach 
it,  our  consecration  to  it  must  be  total,  unreserved  absolutely  integral.  I  believe  you  have  understood 
this  -  in  other  words,  that  you  have  the  will  to  realize  it. 

From  the  negative  point  of  view  -  I  mean  the  difficulties  to  be  overcome  -  one  of  the  most 
serious  obstacles  is  that  the  ignorant  and  falsifying  outer  consciousness,  the  ordinary  consciousness 
legitimizes  all  the  so-called  physical  laws,  causes,  effects  and  consequences,  all  that  science  has 
discovered  physically  and  materially.  All  this  is  an  unquestionable  reality  to  the  consciousness,  a 
reality  that  remains  independent  and  absolute  even  in  the  face  of  the  eternal  divine  Reality. 

And  it  is  so  automatic  that  it  is  unconscious. 

When  it  is  a  question  of  movements  like  anger,  desire,  etc.,  you  recognize  that  they  are  wrong 
and  must  disappear,  but  when  material  laws  are  in  question  -  laws  of  the  body,  for  example,  its 
needs,  its  health,  its  nourishment,  all  those  things  -  they  have  such  a  solid,  compact,  established  and 
concrete  reality  that  it  appears  absolutely  unquestionable. 

Well,  to  be  able  to  cure  that,  which  of  all  the  obstacles  is  the  greatest  (I  mean  the  habit  of  putting 
spiritual  life  on  one  side  and  material  life  on  the  other,  of  acknowledging  the  right  of  material  laws 
to  exist),  one  must  make  a  resolution  never  to  legitimize  any  of  these  movements,  at  any  cost. 

To  be  able  to  see  the  problem  as  it  is,  it  is  absolutely  indispensable,  as  a  first  step,  to  get  out  of 
the  mental  consciousness,  even  out  of  a  mental  transcription  (in  the  highest  mind)  of  the 
supramental  vision  and  truth.  A  thing  cannot  be  seen  as  it  is,  in  its  truth,  except  in  the  supramental 
consciousness,  and  if  you  try  to  explain,  it  immediately  begins  to  escape  you  because  you  are 


obliged  to  give  it  a  mental  formulation. 

As  for  me,  I  saw  the  thing  only  at  the  time  of  this  experience,58  and  as  a  result  of  this  experience. 
But  it  is  impossible  to  formulate  even  the  experience  itself,  and  as  soon  as  I  endeavored  to 
formulate  it  and  the  more  I  was  able  to  formulate  it,  the  more  the  thing  faded,  escaped. 

Consequently,  if  you  do  not  remember  having  had  the  experience,  you  are  left  in  the  same 
condition  as  before,  but  with  the  difference  that  now  you  know,  you  can  know,  that  these  material 
laws  do  not  correspond  to  the  truth  -  that’s  all.  They  do  not  at  all  correspond  to  the  truth,  so 
consequently,  if  you  want  to  be  faithful  to  your  aspiration,  you  must  in  no  way  legitimize  all  that. 
Rather,  you  must  say  that  it  is  an  infirmity  from  which  we  are  suffering  for  the  moment,  for  an 
intermediate  period  -  it  is  an  infirmity  and  an  ignorance  -  for  it  really  is  an  ignorance  (this  is  not 
just  a  word):  it  is  ignorance,  it  is  not  the  thing  as  it  is,  even  in  regard  to  our  present  material  bodies. 
Therefore,  we  will  not  legitimize  anything.  What  we  say  is  this  -  it  is  an  infirmity  which  has  to  be 
endured  for  the  time  being,  until  we  get  out  of  it,  but  we  do  NOT  ACKNOWLEDGE  all  this  as  a 
concrete  reality.  It  does  NOT  have  a  concrete  reality,  it  has  a  false  reality  -  what  we  call  concrete 
reality  is  a  false  reality. 

And  the  proof  -  I  have  the  proof  because  I  experienced  it  myself  -  is  that  from  the  minute  you 
are  in  the  other  consciousness,  the  true  consciousness,  all  these  things  which  appear  so  real,  so 
concrete,  change  INSTANTLY.  There  are  a  number  of  things,  certain  material  conditions  of  my 
body  -  material  -  that  changed  instantly.  It  did  not  last  long  enough  for  everything  to  change,  but 
some  things  changed  and  never  returned,  they  remained  changed.  In  other  words,  if  that 
consciousness  were  kept  constantly,  it  would  be  a  perpetual  miracle  (what  we  would  call  a  miracle 
from  our  ordinary  point  of  view),  a  fantastic  and  perpetual  miracle!  But  from  the  supramental  point 
of  view,  it  would  not  be  a  miracle  at  all,  it  would  be  the  most  normal  of  things. 

Therefore,  if  we  do  not  want  to  oppose  the  supramental  action  by  an  obscure,  inert  and  obstinate 
resistance,  we  have  to  admit  once  and  for  all  that  none  of  these  things  should  be  legitimized. 


May  11,  1958 

One  of  the  things  that  most  gives  me  the  feeling  of  the  miraculous  is  when  these  obscure  throngs59  - 
really  tamasic60  beings,  in  fact,  with  children  crying,  people  coughing  -  when  all  that  is  gathered 
there,  and  then  suddenly  ...  silence. 


58May  1,  1958. 


59Mother  is  referring  to  her  “Darshan,”  when  four  times  a  year  She  appeared  on  her  balcony  high  above  the  assembled 
mass  of  disciples  and  visitors  on  the  street  below.  The  “darshan  days”  were  February  21,  April  24,  August  15  and 
November  24. 


60Tamas:  in  Indian  psychology,  inertia  and  obscurity. 


Each  time  that  happens,  I  have  truly  the  feeling  of  a  miracle!  I  immediately  say,  ‘Oh,  Lord! 
Your  Grace  is  infinite!’ 


*  *  * 

Something  quite  curious  took  place  during  a  recent  meditation.  I  no  longer  recall  when  exactly,  but 
it  was  at  a  time  when  there  were  many  visitors,  for  the  courtyard  was  full.  After  perhaps  no  more 
than  a  few  minutes,  I  suddenly  heard  a  distinct  voice,  coming  from  my  right,  say  ‘OM,’  like  that. 
And  then  a  second  time,  ‘OM.’  What  an  impact  it  had  upon  me!  I  felt  an  emotion  here  (gesture 
towards  the  heart)  as  I  have  not  felt  for  years  and  years  and  years.  And  all,  all,  all  was  filled  with 
light,  with  force  -  it  was  absolutely  marvelous.  It  was  an  invocation,  and  during  the  whole 
meditation  the  Presence  was  resplendent. 

I  said  to  myself,  ‘Who  could  have  done  that?’  I  was  not  sure  if  only  I  had  heard  it,  so  I  asked. 
The  reply  was,  ‘But  it  was  the  ship  leaving!’  There  was  actually  a  ship  which  had  left  during  the 
night61  -  that  is  in  support  of  those  who  said  it  was  a  ship.  But  for  me,  it  was  SOMEONE  because  I 
felt  someone  there  and  I  thought,  Oh!  If  someone,  in  the  ardor  of  his  soul,  said  that  in  this  ...  what  I 
could  call  an  atheistic  silence.  Because  people  here  are  so  afraid  of  following  tradition,  of  being  the 
slaves  of  the  old  things,  that  they  cast  out  anything  closely  or  remotely  resembling  religion. 

It  was  very  strange,  because  my  first  reaction  was  one  of  bewildennent:  how  is  it  that 
someone  ...  I  was  really  bewildered  for  a  fraction,  not  even  the  fraction  of  a  second.  And  then... 

In  any  event,  if  it  wasn’t  a  man,  if  it  was  a  ship,  then  the  ship  said  it!  Because  it  was  THAT  -  it 
was  that,  it  was  nothing  other  than  an  invocation.  And  the  result  was  fantastic! 

People  immediately  thought,  ‘Oh,  it’s  the  ship!’  Well,  even  if  it  was  a  ship,  it  was  the  ship  that 
said  OM! 

And  then  I  wondered,  ‘If  we  were  to  repeat  the  mantra  we  heard  the  other  day62  (Om  Namo 
Bhagavateh  ... )  during  the  half-hour  meditation,  what  would  happen?’ 

What  would  happen? 

And  these  things  act  upon  my  body.  It  is  strange,  but  it  coagulates  something:  all  the  cellular  life 
becomes  one  solid,  compact  mass,  in  a  tremendous  concentration  -  with  a  single  vibration.  Instead 
of  all  the  usual  vibrations  of  the  body,  there  is  now  only  one  single  vibration.  It  becomes  as  hard  as 
a  diamond,  a  single  massive  concentration,  as  if  all  the  cells  of  the  body  had  ... 

I  became  stiff  from  it.  When  the  forest  scene63  was  over,  I  was  so  stiff  that  I  was  like  that 
(gesture):  one  single  mass. 


61  The  waters  off  Pondicheny  occasionally  serve  as  a  port. 


62During  an  Indian  film  on  Dhruva  in  which  this  manna  was  chanted  for  a  long  time.  This  film  was  shown  at  the 
Ashram  Playground  on  April  29,  1958. 


63In  the  same  film. 


May  17,  1958 


Actually,  when  I  myself  am  perfect,  I  believe  that  all  the  rest  will  become  perfect  automatically.  But 
it  does  not  seem  possible  to  become  perfect  without  there  being  a  beginning  of  realization  from  the 
other  side.  So  it  proceeds  like  that,  bumping  from  one  side  to  the  other,  and  we  go  stumbling  along 
like  a  drunken  man! 


May  30,  1958 


(On  Hostile  Forces) 

I  have  noticed  that  in  at  least  ninety-nine  cases  out  of  a  hundred,  it  is  an  excuse  people  give  to 
themselves.  I  have  seen  that  practically,  in  the  case  of  almost  all  the  people  who  write  to  me  saying, 
‘I  am  being  violently  attacked  by  hostile  forces,’  it’s  an  excuse  they  are  giving.  It  means  that  certain 
things  in  their  nature  do  not  want  to  yield,  so  they  put  all  the  blame  on  the  hostile  forces. 

As  a  matter  of  fact,  my  tendency  is  more  and  more  towards  something  in  which  the  role  of  these 
hostile  forces  will  be  reduced  to  that  of  an  examiner  -  which  means  that  they  are  there  to  test  the 
sincerity  of  your  spiritual  quest.  These  elements  have  a  reality  in  their  action  and  for  the  work  -  this 
is  their  great  reality  -  but  when  you  go  beyond  a  certain  region,  it  all  grows  dim  to  such  a  degree 
that  it  is  no  longer  so  well  defined,  so  distinct.  In  the  occult  world,  or  rather  if  you  look  at  the  world 
from  the  occult  point  of  view,  these  hostile  forces  are  very  real,  their  action  is  very  real,  quite 
concrete,  and  their  attitude  towards  the  divine  realization  is  positively  hostile;  but  as  soon  as  you  go 
beyond  this  region  and  enter  into  the  spiritual  world  where  there  is  no  longer  anything  but  the 
Divine  in  all  things,  and  where  there  is  nothing  undivine,  then  these  ‘hostile  forces’  become  part  of 
the  total  play  and  can  no  longer  be  called  ‘hostile  forces’:  it  is  only  an  attitude  that  they  have 
adopted  -  or  more  precisely,  it  is  only  an  attitude  adopted  by  the  Divine  in  his  play. 

This  again  belongs  to  the  dualities  that  Sri  Aurobindo  speaks  of  in  The  Synthesis  of  Yoga,  these 
dualities  that  are  being  reabsorbed.  I  don’t  know  if  he  spoke  of  this  particular  one;  I  don’t  think  so, 
but  it’s  the  same  thing.  It’s  again  a  certain  way  of  seeing.  He  has  written  of  the  Personal-Impersonal 
duality,  Ishwara-Shakti,  Purusha-Prakriti ...  but  there  is  still  one  more:  Divine  and  anti-divine. 


June  6, 1958 


It’s  all  the  same  thing,  but  the  word  realization  can  be  reserved  for  something  that  is  durable,  that 
does  not  wear  off.  Because  everything  on  earth  fades  away  -  everything  fades  away,  nothing 
remains.  In  this  sense,  there  has  never  been  any  realization,  for  everything  fades  away.  Nothing  is 
ever  pennanent.  And  I  know  for  myself:  I  am  doing  the  sadhana  at  a  gallop,  as  it  were;  never  are 
two  experiences  identical  nor  do  they  recur  in  the  same  way.  As  soon  as  something  is  established, 
the  next  thing  begins  immediately.  It  may  appear  to  fade  away,  but  it  doesn’t  fade  away;  rather,  it  is 
the  basis  upon  which  the  next  thing  is  built. 


*  * 

This  morning  while  I  was  on  the  balcony,  I  had  an  interesting  experience:  the  experience  of  man’s 
effort,  in  all  its  forms  and  through  all  the  ages,  to  approach  the  Divine.  And  I  seemed  to  be  growing 
wider  and  wider  so  that  all  the  forms  and  all  the  ways  of  approaching  the  Divine  attempted  by  man 
would  be  contained  in  the  present  Work. 

It  was  represented  by  a  kind  of  image  in  which  I  was  as  vast  as  the  Universe,  and  each  way  of 
approaching  the  Divine  was  like  a  tiny  image  containing  the  characteristic  form  of  this  approach. 
And  my  impression  was  this:  Why  do  people  always  limit,  limit  themselves?  Narrow,  narrow, 
narrow!  They  understand  only  when  it  is  narrow. 

Take  all!  Take  all  within  you.  And  then  you  will  begin  to  understand  -  you  will  begin. 

*  * 

It  was  in  1910  that  I  had  this  sort  of  reversal  of  consciousness  about  which  I  spoke  the  other 
evening  -  that  is,  the  first  contact  with  the  higher  Divine  -  and  it  completely  changed  my  life. 

From  that  moment  on,  I  was  conscious  that  all  one  does  is  the  expression  of  the  indwelling 
Divine  Will.  But  it  is  the  Divine  Will  AT  THE  VERY  CENTER  of  oneself,  although  for  a  while 
there  remained  an  activity  in  the  physical  mind.  But  this  was  stilled  two  or  three  days  after  I  saw  Sri 
Aurobindo  for  the  first  time  in  1914,  and  it  never  started  up  again.  Silence  settled.  And  the 
consciousness  was  established  above  the  head. 

In  the  first  experience  [of  1910],  the  consciousness  was  established  in  the  psychic  depths  of  the 
being,  and  from  that  poise  issued  the  feeling  of  no  longer  doing  anything  but  what  the  Divine 
wanted  -  it  was  the  consciousness  that  the  divine  Will  was  all-powerful  and  that  there  was  no 
longer  any  personal  will,  although  there  was  still  some  mental  activity  and  everything  had  to  be 
made  silent.  In  1914,  it  was  silenced,  and  the  consciousness  was  established  above  the  head.  Here 
(the  heart)  and  here  (above  the  head),  the  connection  is  constant. 

Does  one  exclude  the  other? 

They  exist  simultaneously;  it’s  the  same  thing.  When  you  start  becoming  truly  conscious,  you 
realize  that  it  depends  upon  the  kinds  of  activities  you  have  to  do.  When  you  do  a  certain  kind  of 
work,  it  is  in  the  heart  that  the  Force  gathers  to  radiate  outwards,  and  when  you  do  another  kind  of 
work,  it  is  above  the  head  that  the  Force  concentrates  to  radiate  outwards,  but  the  two  are  not 
separate:  the  center  of  activity  is  here  or  there  depending  upon  what  you  have  to  do. 

As  for  the  latest  experience,64 1  can’t  say  for  sure  that  no  one  has  ever  had  it,  because  someone 


64May  1,  1958. 


like  Ramakrishna,  individuals  like  that,  could  have  had  it.  But  I  am  not  sure,  for  when  I  had  this 
experience  (not  of  the  divine  Presence,  which  I  had  already  felt  in  the  cells  for  a  long  time,  but  the 
experience  that  the  Divine  ALONE  is  acting  in  the  body,  that  He  has  BECOME  the  body,  yet  all  the 
while  retaining  his  character  of  divine  omniscience  and  omnipotence)  well,  the  whole  time  it 
remained  actively  like  that,  it  was  absolutely  impossible  to  have  the  LEAST  disorder  in  the  body, 
and  not  only  in  the  body,  but  IN  ALL  THE  SURROUNDING  MATTER.  It  was  as  if  every  object 
obeyed  without  even  needing  to  decide  to  obey:  it  was  automatic.  There  was  a  divine  hannony  in 
EVERYTHING  (it  took  place  in  my  bathroom  upstairs,  certainly  to  demonstrate  that  it  exists  in  the 
most  trivial  things),  in  everything,  constantly.  So  if  that  is  established  in  a  permanent  way,  there 
CAN  NO  LONGER  be  illness  it  is  impossible.  There  can  no  longer  be  accidents,  there  can  no 
longer  be  illness,  there  can  no  longer  be  disorders,  and  everything  should  harmonize  (probably  in  a 
progressive  way)  just  as  that  was  harmonized:  all  the  objects  in  the  bathroom  were  full  of  a  joyful 
enthusiasm  -  everything  obeyed,  everything! 

As  it  was  the  first  experience,  it  started  to  fade  slightly  when  I  began  having  contact  with 
people;  but  I  really  had  the  feeling  that  it  was  a  first  experience,  new  upon  earth.  For  I  have 
experienced  an  absolute  identity  of  the  will  with  the  divine  Will  ever  since  1910,  it  has  never  left 
me.  It  isn’t  that,  it’s  SOMETHING  ELSE.  It  is  MATTER  BECOMING  THE  DIVINE.  And  it  really 
came  with  the  feeling  that  this  thing  was  happening  for  the  first  time  upon  earth.  It  is  difficult  to  say 
for  sure,  but  Ramakrishna  died  of  cancer,  and  now  that  I  have  had  the  experience,  I  know  in  an 
ABSOLUTE  way  that  this  is  impossible.  If  he  had  decided  to  go  because  the  Divine  wanted  him  to 
go,  it  would  have  been  an  orderly  departure,  in  total  harmony  and  with  a  total  will,  whereas  this 
illness  is  a  means  of  disorder. 

Is  this  experience  of  May  1  related  to  the  Supramental  Manifestation  of 1956?  Is  it  a 

supramental  experience? 

It  is  the  result  of  the  descent  of  the  supramental  substance  into  Matter.  Only  this  substance  -  what  it 
has  put  into  physical  Matter  -  could  have  made  it  possible.  It  is  a  new  ferment.  From  the  material 
standpoint,  it  removes  from  physical  Matter  its  tamas,  the  heaviness  of  its  unconsciousness,  and 
from  the  psychological  standpoint,  its  ignorance  and  its  falsehood.  Matter  is  subtilized.  But  it  has 
surely  come  only  as  a  first  experience  to  show  how  it  will  be. 

It  is  truly  a  state  of  absolute  omniscience  and  omnipotence  in  the  body  which  changes  all  the 
vibrations  around  it. 

It  is  likely  that  the  greatest  resistance  will  be  in  the  most  conscious  beings  due  to  a  lack  of 
mental  receptivity,  due  to  the  mind  itself  which  wants  things  to  continue  (as  Sri  Aurobindo  has 
written)  according  to  its  own  mode  of  ignorance.  So-called  inert  matter  is  much  more  easily 
responsive,  much  more  -  it  does  not  resist.  And  I  am  convinced  that  among  plants,  for  example,  or 
among  animals,  the  response  will  be  much  quicker  than  among  men.  It  will  be  more  difficult  to  act 
upon  a  very  organized  mind;  beings  who  live  in  an  entirely  crystallized,  organized  mental 
consciousness  are  as  hard  as  stone!  It  resists.  According  to  my  experience,  what  is  unconscious  will 
certainly  follow  more  easily.  It  was  a  delight  to  see  the  water  from  the  tap,  the  mouthwash  in  the 
bottle,  the  glass,  the  sponge  -  it  all  had  such  an  air  of  joy  and  consent!  There  is  much  less  ego,  you 
see,  it  is  not  a  conscious  ego. 

The  ego  becomes  more  and  more  conscious  and  resistant  as  the  being  develops.  Very  primitive, 
very  simple  beings,  little  children  will  respond  first,  because  they  don’t  have  an  organized  ego.  But 
these  big  people!  People  who  have  worked  on  themselves,  who  have  mastered  themselves,  who  are 
organized,  who  have  an  ego  made  of  steel,  it  will  be  difficult  for  them. 

Unless  they  go  beyond  all  this  and  have  enough  spiritual  knowledge  to  be  able  to  make  the  ego 
surrender  ...  in  which  case  the  realization  will  naturally  be  much  greater  -  it  will  be  more  difficult  to 
accomplish,  but  the  result  will  be  far  more  complete. 


When  you  had  this  experience  of  February  3,  1958  [the  supramental  ship],  the  vision  of  your 
usual  consciousness,  which  is  nevertheless  a  Truth  Consciousness,  no  longer  seemed  true  to  you 
at  all.  Did  you  see  things  you  had  never  before  seen,  or  did  you  see  things  in  another  way? 

Yes,  one  enters  into  another  world. 

This  consciousness  here  is  true  in  relation  to  this  world  as  it  is,  but  the  other  ...  is  something  else 
entirely.  An  adjustment  is  needed  for  the  two  to  touch,  otherwise  one  jumps  from  one  to  the  other. 
And  that  serves  no  purpose.  A  progressive  passage  has  to  be  built  between  the  two.  This  means  that 
a  whole  number  of  rungs  of  consciousness  are  missing.  This  consciousness  here  must  consciously 
connect  with  that  consciousness  there,  which  means  a  multitude  of  stairs  passing  from  one  to  the 
other.  Then  we  will  be  able  to  rise  up  progressively,  and  the  whole  will  arise. 

Its  action  will  be  somewhat  similar  to  what  is  described  in  the  Last  Judgment,  which  is  an 
entirely  symbolic  expression  of  something  that  makes  us  discern  between  what  belongs  to  the  world 
of  falsehood  which  is  destined  to  disappear  and  what  belongs  to  this  same  world  of  ignorance  and 
inertia  but  is  transformable.  One  will  go  to  one  side  and  the  other  to  the  other  side.  All  that  is 
transformable  will  be  permeated  more  and  more  with  this  new  substance  and  this  new 
consciousness  to  such  an  extent  that  it  will  rise  towards  it  and  serve  as  a  link  between  the  two  but  all 
that  belongs  incorrigibly  to  falsehood  and  ignorance  will  disappear.  This  was  also  prophesied  in  the 
Gita:  among  what  we  call  the  hostile  or  anti-divine  forces,  those  capable  of  being  transformed  will 
be  uplifted  and  go  off  towards  the  new  consciousness,  whereas  all  that  is  irrevocably  in  darkness  or 
belongs  to  an  evil  will  shall  be  destroyed  and  vanish  from  the  Universe.  And  a  whole  part  of 
humanity  that  has  responded  to  these  forces  rather  too  ...  zealously  will  certainly  vanish  with  them. 
And  this  is  what  was  expressed  in  this  concept  of  the  Last  Judgment. 


June  1958 


(At  the  time  of publishing  the  following  conversation  of  March  19,  1958,  in  the  Ashram  ‘ Bulletin ,  ’ 
Mother  added  certain  commentaries  that  have  a  direct  bearing  upon  the  preceding  conversation 
about  the  Last  Judgment,  and  She  incorporated  an  entire  passage  from  the  conversation  of  the  end 

of  February  1958  on  the  same  subject.) 

One  thing  seems  clear:  humanity  has  reached  such  a  generalized  state  of  tension  -  tension  in  effort, 
tension  in  action,  tension  even  in  daily  life  -  with  such  an  excessive  hyperactivity,  such  an  overall 
restlessness,  that  the  species  as  a  whole  seems  to  have  reached  a  point  where  it  must  either  burst 
through  the  resistance  and  surge  forth  into  a  new  consciousness,  or  else  sink  back  into  an  abysm  of 
obscurity  and  inertia. 

This  tension  is  so  total  and  so  generalized  that  obviously  something  must  break.  It  cannot  go  on 
like  this.  Yet  all  this  is  a  sure  sign  that  a  new  principle  of  force,  consciousness  and  power  has  been 
infused  into  matter  and  by  its  very  pressure  has  produced  this  acute  state.  Outwardly,  we  might 
expect  to  see  the  old  habitual  means  used  by  Nature  whenever  she  wants  to  bring  about  an 


upheaval;  but  here  there  is  a  new  phenomenon,  which  is  evidently  visible  only  in  a  select  few, 
although  even  these  few  are  widespread  enough  -  this  phenomenon  is  not  localized  in  one  point  or 
one  place  in  the  world,  for  the  signs  are  to  be  found  in  every  country  all  over  the  earth:  the  will  to 
find  a  new,  a  higher,  an  ascending  solution,  an  effort  to  surge  forth  into  a  vaster,  more 
encompassing  perfection. 

Certain  ideas  of  a  more  general,  more  extensive,  more  collective  nature,  as  it  were,  are  being 
worked  out  and  are  at  work  in  the  world.  And  the  two  go  together:  a  greater  and  more  total 
possibility  of  destruction  and  an  inventiveness  that  unrestrainedly  increases  the  possibility  of 
catastrophe,  a  catastrophe  that  would  be  much  more  massive  than  it  has  ever  been;  and  at  the  same 
time,  the  birth,  or  rather  the  manifestation,  of  much  higher  and  more  comprehensive  ideas  and  wills 
which,  when  heard,  will  bring  a  vaster,  more  extensive,  more  complete  and  more  perfect  solution 
than  before. 

This  struggle,  this  conflict  between  the  constructive  forces  of  an  ascending  evolution,  of  an 
increasingly  perfect  and  divine  realization,  and  the  more  and  more  destructive  forces  -  powerfully 
destructive,  forces  of  an  uncontrollable  madness  -  is  becoming  more  obvious,  unmistakably  visible, 
and  it  is  a  kind  of  race  or  battle  as  to  which  will  be  first  to  reach  its  goal.  All  the  hostile,  anti-divine 
forces,  these  forces  of  the  vital  world,  seem  to  have  descended  upon  earth  and  are  using  it  as  their 
field  of  action;  and  at  the  same  time,  a  new,  higher,  more  powerful  spiritual  force  has  also 
descended  upon  earth  to  bring  a  new  life  to  it.  This  renders  the  battle  more  bitter,  violent  and 
visible,  but  apparently  more  decisive,  too,  which  is  why  we  may  hope  to  arrive  at  an  early  solution. 

There  was  a  time,  not  so  very  long  ago,  when  man’s  spiritual  aspiration  was  turned  towards  a 
silent,  inactive  peace,  detached  from  all  the  things  of  this  world,  an  evasion  of  life  to  avoid  the 
struggle,  precisely,  to  rise  above  the  battle,  to  be  liberated  from  effort.  It  was  a  spiritual  peace 
where,  along  with  the  cessation  of  tension,  struggle  and  effort,  suffering  in  all  its  forms  also  ceased, 
and  this  was  considered  the  true  and  unique  expression  of  the  spiritual  and  divine  life.  This  is  what 
was  considered  divine  grace,  divine  succor,  divine  intervention.  And  even  now,  in  this  age  of 
anguish,  tension  and  hypertension,  this  sovereign  peace  is  of  all  help  the  best  received,  the  most 
welcome,  the  relief  asked  and  hoped  for.  For  many,  it  is  still  the  true  sign  of  divine  intervention,  of 
divine  grace. 

In  fact,  no  matter  what  you  wish  to  realize,  you  must  begin  by  establishing  this  perfect  and 
immutable  peace  -  it  is  the  necessary  basis  for  any  work;  but  unless  you  are  thinking  of  an 
exclusive  or  personal  and  egoistic  liberation,  you  cannot  stop  there.  There  is  yet  another  aspect  to 
the  divine  grace,  the  aspect  of  progress  that  will  be  victorious  over  all  obstacles,  the  aspect  that  will 
propel  humanity  into  a  new  realization,  open  the  doors  unto  a  new  world,  enable  not  only  a  select 
few  to  benefit  from  the  divine  realization,  but  through  their  influence,  their  example  and  their 
power,  bring  a  new  and  better  condition  to  the  rest  of  humanity. 

It  opens  vistas  of  realization  into  the  future  and  already  foreseen  possibilities  through  which  an 
entire  section  of  humanity,  which  is  consciously  or  unconsciously  open  to  the  new  forces,  will  be 
lifted  up,  as  it  were,  towards  a  higher,  more  hannonious,  more  perfect  life  ...  and  even  if  individual 
transformations  are  not  permissible  nor  possible  in  all  cases,  at  least  there  will  be  a  kind  of  uplifting 
of  the  whole,  a  harmonization  of  everything,  enabling  a  new  order,  a  new  harmony  to  be  established 
and  the  anguish  of  disorder  and  the  present  strife  to  disappear  and  be  replaced  by  an  order  that  will 
allow  for  the  harmonious  working  of  the  whole. 

There  will  be  other  consequences  that  by  opposite  means  will  tend  to  eradicate  the  perversion 
and  ugliness  created  in  life  due  to  the  intervention  of  the  mind,  a  whole  range  of  deformations  that 
have  aggravated  suffering,  misery,  moral  poverty,  a  whole  zone  of  sordid  and  repugnant  miseries 
that  makes  an  entire  portion  of  human  life  so  hideous.  That  must  disappear.  That  is  what  in  many 
respects  makes  humanity  infinitely  inferior  to  animal  life,  with  its  simplicity  and  its  natural 
spontaneity,  and  which  in  spite  of  everything  is  harmonious.  Suffering  among  animals  is  never  as 
miserable  and  sordid  as  it  is  in  a  whole  section  of  humanity  perverted  by  a  mentality  exclusively 


turned  towards  egoistic  needs. 

One  must  rise  above,  surge  forth  into  the  Light  and  the  Harmony,  or  sink  back  down  into  the 
simplicity  of  a  wholesome,  unperverted  animal  life. 

( After  a  moment  of  silence,  Mother  adds) 

But  those  who  cannot  be  lifted  up,  who  refuse  to  progress,  will  automatically  lose  the  use  of  the 
mental  consciousness  and  fall  back  into  an  infrahuman  stage. 

I’ll  tell  you  of  an  experience  I  had  which  will  help  you  better  understand.  It  was  a  short  while 
after  the  supramental  experience  of  February  3,  and  I  was  still  in  that  state  where  things  of  the 
physical  world  seemed  so  remote,  so  absurd.  A  group  of  visitors  asked  permission  to  greet  me,  and 
they  came  one  evening  to  the  playground.  They  were  rich  people  -  that  is,  they  had  more  money 
than  they  needed  to  live.  Among  them  was  a  woman  in  a  saree.  She  was  very  fat,  and  her  saree  was 
so  arranged  as  to  hide  her  body.  When  she  bent  over  to  receive  my  blessings,  a  comer  of  her  saree 
fell  open,  uncovering  part  of  her  body,  a  bare  belly.  An  enormous  belly.  It  came  as  a  shock  to  me  ... 
There  are  obese  people  who  are  not  at  all  repugnant,  but  there  I  suddenly  saw  the  perversion,  the 
rottenness  that  this  abdomen  concealed.  It  was  like  an  enormous  abscess  expressing  greed,  vice, 
depravity  of  taste,  sordid  desire  that  seeks  satisfaction  as  no  animal  would,  grossly,  and  above  all, 
perversely.  I  saw  the  perversion  of  a  depraved  mind  placed  at  the  service  of  the  basest  appetites. 
Then,  in  a  flash,  something  leapt  forth  from  me,  a  prayer,  like  a  Veda:  ‘O  Lord,  it  is  this  that  must 
vanish!’ 

One  can  well  understand  that  physical  misery  or  the  unequal  distribution  of  the  world’s  wealth 
could  be  remedied.  One  can  think  of  economic  and  social  solutions  that  could  remedy  all  that,  but 
this  particular  misery,  this  mental  misery,  this  vital  perversion  -  it  is  this  that  cannot  change,  that 
does  NOT  WANT  to  change.  And  those  who  belong  to  this  kind  of  humanity  are  condemned  in 
advance  to  disintegration. 

The  meaning  of  original  sin  is  precisely  this:  the  perversion  that  began  with  the  mind. 

That  part  of  humanity,  of  the  human  consciousness,  which  is  able  to  unite  with  the  Supermind 
and  liberate  itself  will  be  completely  transformed.  It  is  moving  towards  its  future  reality  as  yet 
unexpressed  in  the  outer  fonn;  the  part  very  close  to  the  simplicity  of  the  animal,  close  to  Nature, 
will  be  reabsorbed  by  Nature  and  thoroughly  reassimilated.  But  that  corrupted  part  of  the  human 
consciousness,  which  through  its  wrong  use  of  the  mind  allows  this  perversion,  will  be  abolished. 

That  kind  of  humanity  belongs  to  an  unfruitful  attempt  -  and  will  be  eliminated,  like  so  many 
other  abortive  species  which  have  vanished  in  the  course  of  universal  history. 

Certain  prophets  in  the  past  had  this  apocalyptic  vision,  but  as  usual  things  became  mixed,  and 
along  with  their  vision  of  the  apocalypse  they  did  not  have  the  vision  of  the  supramental  world  that 
will  come  to  uplift  the  consenting  part  of  humanity  and  transform  this  physical  world.  However,  to 
give  hope  to  those  born  into  this  perverted  part  of  the  human  consciousness,  redemption  through 
faith  was  taught:  those  who  have  faith  in  the  sacrifice  of  the  Divine  in  Matter  will  automatically  be 
saved,  in  another  world  -  faith  alone,  without  understanding,  without  intelligence.  They  never  saw 
the  supramental  world,  nor  did  they  see  that  the  great  Sacrifice  of  the  Divine  in  Matter  is  that  of  an 
involution  which  will  lead  to  the  total  revelation  of  the  Divine  in  Matter  itself. 


June  1958  (?)65 


We  are  preparing  upon  earth  the  connecting-point,  that  point  of  communication  and  junction 
between  the  mental  and  terrestrial  human  consciousness  and  the  supramental  and  superhuman 
Consciousness.  It  is  a  whole  intennediate  world  that  is  being  worked  out,  a  new  creation 
manifesting  and  materializing. 

In  order  to  be  realized  here  upon  earth,  this  creation  must  utilize  the  already  existing  material 
means  and  powers,  but  in  a  new  way,  adapted  to  the  new  needs.  One  of  the  most  essential  powers  is 
the  financial  power. 


June  22,  195866 

Do  not  ask  questions  about  the  details  of  the  material  existence  of  this  body:  they  are  in  themselves 
of  no  interest  and  must  not  attract  attention. 

Throughout  all  this  life,  knowingly  or  unknowingly,  I  have  been  what  the  Lord  wanted  me  to  be, 
I  have  done  what  the  Lord  wanted  me  to  do.  That  alone  matters. 


July  2, 1958 

Ramdas67  must  be  a  continuation  of  the  line  of  Chaitanya,  Ramakrishna,  etc  ...  . 

65Note  written  by  Mother. 

66Note  written  by  Mother  in  English. 

61  Ramdas:  a  yogi  from  Northwest  India  who  followed  the  path  of  love  (bhakti).  His  whole  yoga  consisted  in  repeating 
the  name  Ram.  He  founded  the  Anand-ashram  in  Kanhargad,  Kerala.  He  was  bom  in  1884  and  died  in  1963. 


(silence) 


A  subject  for  this  evening  ... 

Something  I  have  never  said  completely.  On  the  one  hand,  there  is  the  attitude  of  those  in 
yesterday  evening’s  film68 :  God  is  everything,  God  is  everywhere,  God  is  in  he  who  smites  you  (as 
Sri  Aurobindo  wrote  -  ‘God  made  me  good  with  a  blow,  shall  I  tell  Him:  O  Mighty  One,  I  forgive 
you  your  harm  and  cruelty  but  do  not  do  it  again!’),  an  attitude  which,  if  extended  to  its  ultimate 
conclusion,  accepts  the  world  as  it  is:  the  world  is  the  perfect  expression  of  the  divine  Will.  On  the 
other  hand,  there  is  the  attitude  of  progress  and  transformation.  But  for  that,  you  must  recognize  that 
there  are  things  in  the  world  which  are  not  as  they  should  be. 

In  The  Synthesis  of  Yoga,  Sri  Aurobindo  says  that  this  idea  of  good  and  bad,  of  pure  and  impure, 
is  a  notion  needed  for  action;  but  the  purists,  such  as  Chaitanya,  Ramakrishna  and  others,  do  not 
agree.  They  do  not  agree  that  it  is  indispensable  for  action.  They  simply  say:  your  acceptance  of 
action  as  a  necessary  thing  is  contrary  to  your  perception  of  the  Divine  in  all  things. 

How  can  the  two  be  reconciled? 

I  recall  that  once  I  tried  to  speak  of  this,  but  no  one  followed  me,  no  one  understood,  so  I  did  not 
insist.  I  left  it  open  and  never  pursued  it  further,  for  they  could  not  decipher  anything  or  find  any 
meaning  in  what  I  was  saying.  But  now  I  could  give  a  very  simple  answer:  Let  the  Supreme  do  the 
work.  It  is  He  who  has  to  progress,  not  you! 

Ramdas  does  not  at  all  consider  that  the  world  as  it  is,  is  good. 

No,  but  I  know  all  these  people,  I  know  them  thoroughly!  I  know  Chaitanya,  Ramakrishna  and 
Ramdas  thoroughly.  They  are  utterly  familiar  to  me.  It  doesn’t  bother  them.  These  are  people  who 
live  with  a  certain  feeling,  who  have  an  entirely  concrete  experience  and  live  in  this  experience,  but 
they  don’t  care  at  all  if  their  formation  -  they  have  not  even  crystallized  it,  they  leave  it  like  that, 
vague  -  contains  things  that  are  mutually  contradictory,  because,  in  appearance,  they  reconcile 
them.  They  do  not  raise  any  questions,  they  do  not  have  the  need  for  an  absolutely  clear  vision;  their 
feeling  is  absolutely  clear,  and  that’s  enough  for  them.  Ramakrishna  was  like  that;  he  said  the  most 
contradictory  things  without  being  bothered  in  the  least,  and  they  are  all  exactly  and  equally  true. 

But  this  crystal  clear  vision  Sri  Aurobindo  had,  where  everything  is  in  its  place,  where 
contradictions  no  longer  exist  -  they  never  soared  to  that  height.  This  was  the  thing,  this  really 
crystalline,  perfect  supramental  vision,  even  from  the  standpoint  of  understanding  and  knowledge. 
They  never  went  that  far. 

(Soon  afterwards) 

Each  element,  let  us  say  each  individual  element  (even  though  it  is  not  exactly  like  that),  is  in  its 
place  according  to  whether  the  Grace  acts  on  the  individual  or  on  the  collectivity. 

When  the  Grace  acts  on  the  collectivity,  each  thing,  each  element,  each  principle,  is  put  in  its 
place  as  the  result  of  a  karmic  logic  in  the  universal  movement.  This  is  what  gives  us  the  impression 
of  disorder  and  confusion  as  we  see  it. 

When  the  Grace  acts  on  the  individual,  it  gives  to  each  the  maximum  position  according  to  what 
he  is  and  what  he  has  realized. 

And  then,  there  is  a  super-grace,  as  it  were,  which  works  in  a  few  exceptional  cases,  which 
places  you  not  according  to  what  you  are  but  according  to  what  you  are  to  become,  which  means 
that  the  universal  cosmic  position  is  ahead  of  the  individual’s  progress. 


68Bishnupriya,  a  Bengali  film. 


And  it  is  then  that  you  should  keep  silent  and  fall  on  your  knees. 


July  5, 1958 

I  have  just  explained  to  Z  my  program  for  getting  out  of  the  present  difficulties,69  and  I  think  if  he 
has  not  concluded  that  I  am  totally  mad,  it  is  because  he  has  an  immense  respect  for  me!  But  as 
always  in  these  cases,  there  is  such  a  joy  in  me,  such  an  exultation:  all  the  cells  are  dancing.  I 
understand  why  people  begin  singing,  dancing,  etc.  It  takes  a  formidable  power  to  remain  like  that 
(gesture  of  solidity):  there  is  such  a  desire  in  the  throat  to  sing! 

*  *  * 

S  brought  me  a  photograph  (taken  on  2.21.58  during  the  Darshan).  A  saint  with  a  halo!  (Mother 
laughs  mockingly.) 

The  eyes  are  nice. 

Yes,  I  remember.  It  was  towards  the  end  of  the  Darshan  and  I  was  repeating  within  me,  ‘Lord, 
Lord,  Lord,  Lord  ...’  But  wordlessly.  It  came  like  that  (gesture)  and  went  far,  far,  far,  far!  It  is  all 
here  (motion  around  the  head).  And  that  (Mother  points  to  her  chin)  is  determination  (but  there 
should  have  been  a  little  more  light  on  the  chin!),  the  realizing  will. 

That’s  it:  the  capacity  to  be  an  ABSOLUTELY  receptive  passivity  -  like  that  -  in  TOTAL 
silence  and  surrender,  and  at  the  same  time  here,  there,  an  IRREDUCIBLE,  OMNIPOTENT  will 
with  a  total  power  to  effectuate,  shattering  all  resistances.  Both  simultaneously  without  one 
inhibiting  the  other,  in  the  same  joy  -  that  is  the  GREAT  secret!  The  hannonization  of  opposites,  in 
joy  and  plenitude,  ALWAYS,  ALWAYS,  for  all  problems:  that  is  the  great  secret. 


July  6, 1958 

This  morning  I  asked  myself  the  question,  ‘is  money  truly  under  Nature’s  control?’  I  shall  have  to 


69In  regard  to  the  Ashram’s  financial  difficulties. 


see  ...  Because  for  me  personally,  she  always  gives  everything  in  abundance. 

When  I  was  young,  I  was  as  poor  as  a  turkey,  as  poor  as  could  be!  As  an  artist,  I  sometimes  had 
to  go  out  in  society  (as  artists  are  forced  to  do).  I  had  lacquered  boots  that  were  cracked  ...  and  I 
painted  them  so  it  wouldn’t  show!  This  is  to  tell  you  the  state  I  was  in  -  poor  as  a  turkey.  So  one 
day,  in  a  shop  window,  I  saw  a  very  pretty  petticoat  much  in  fashion  then,  with  lace,  ribbons,  etc.  (It 
was  the  fashion  in  those  days  to  have  long  skirts  which  trailed  on  the  floor,  and  I  didn’t  have  a 
petticoat  which  could  go  with  such  things  -  I  didn’t  care,  it  didn’t  matter  to  me  in  the  least,  but 
since  Nature  had  told  me  I  would  always  have  everything  I  needed,  I  wanted  to  make  an 
experiment.)  So  I  said,  ‘Well,  I  would  very  much  like  to  have  a  petticoat  to  go  with  those  skirts.’  I 
got  five  of  them!  They  came  from  every  direction! 

And  it  is  always  like  that.  I  never  ask  for  anything,  but  if  by  chance  I  say  to  myself,  ‘Hmm, 
wouldn’t  it  be  nice  to  have  that,’  mountains  of  them  pour  in!  So  last  year,  I  made  an  experiment,  I 
told  Nature,  ‘Listen,  my  little  one,  you  say  that  you  will  collaborate,  you  told  me  I  would  never  lack 
anything.  Well  then,  to  put  it  on  a  level  of  feelings,  it  would  really  be  fun,  it  would  give  me  joy  (in 
the  style  of  Krishna’s  joy),  to  have  A  LOT  of  money  to  do  everything  I  feel  like  doing.  It’s  not  that 
I  want  to  increase  things  for  myself,  no;  you  give  me  more  than  I  need.  But  to  have  some  fun,  to  be 
able  to  give  freely,  to  do  things  freely,  to  spend  freely  -  I  am  asking  you  to  give  me  a  crore  of 
rupees70  for  my  birthday! 

She  didn’t  do  a  thing!  Nothing,  absolutely  nothing:  a  complete  refusal.  Did  she  refuse  or  was 
she  unable  to?  It  may  be  that ...  I  always  saw  that  money  was  under  the  control  of  an  asuric  force.  (I 
am  speaking  of  currency,  ‘cash’;  I  don’t  want  to  do  business.  When  I  try  to  do  business,  it  generally 
succeeds  very  well,  but  I  don’t  mean  that.  I  am  speaking  of  cash.)  I  never  asked  her  that  question. 

You  see,  this  is  how  it  happened:  there’s  this  Ganesh71  ...  We  had  a  meditation  (this  was  more 
than  thirty  years  ago)  in  the  room  where  ‘Prosperity’72  is  now  distributed.  There  were  eight  or  ten  of 
us,  I  believe.  We  used  to  make  sentences  with  flowers;  I  arranged  the  flowers,  and  each  one  made  a 
sentence  with  the  different  flowers  I  had  put  there.  And  one  day  when  the  subject  of  prosperity  or 
wealth  came  up,  I  thought  (they  always  say  that  Ganesh  is  the  god  of  money,  of  fortune,  of  the 
world’s  wealth),  I  thought,  ‘Isn’t  this  whole  story  of  the  god  with  an  elephant  trunk  merely  a  lot  of 
human  imagination?’  Thereupon,  we  meditated.  And  who  should  I  see  walk  in  and  park  himself  in 
front  of  me  but  a  living  being,  absolutely  alive  and  luminous,  with  a  trunk  that  long  ...  and  smiling! 
So  then,  in  my  meditation,  I  said,  ‘Ah!  So  it’s  true  that  you  exist!’  -  ‘Of  course  I  exist!  And  you 
may  ask  me  for  whatever  you  wish,  from  a  monetary  standpoint,  of  course,  and  I  will  give  it  to 
you!’ 

So  I  asked.  And  for  about  ten  years,  it  poured  in,  like  this  (gesture  of  torrents).  It  was  incredible. 
I  would  ask,  and  at  the  next  Darshan,  or  a  month  or  several  days  later,  depending,  there  it  was. 

Then  the  war  and  all  the  difficulties  came,  bringing  a  tremendous  increase  of  people  and 
expenditure  (the  war  cost  a  fortune  -  anything  at  all  cost  ten  times  more  than  before),  and  suddenly, 
finished,  nothing  more.  Not  exactly  nothing,  but  a  thin  little  trickle.  And  when  I  asked,  it  didn’t 
come.  So  one  day,  I  put  the  question  to  Ganesh  through  his  image  (!  ),  I  asked  him,  ‘What  about 
your  promise?’  -  ‘I  can’t  do  it,  it’s  too  much  for  me;  my  means  are  too  limited!’  -  ‘Ah!’  I  said  to 
myself  (laughing),  ‘What  bad  luck!’  And  I  no  longer  counted  on  him. 

Once  someone  even  asked  Santa  Claus!  A  young  Muslim  girl  who  had  a  special  liking  for 
‘Father  Christmas’  -  I  don’t  know  why,  as  it  was  not  part  of  her  religion!  Without  saying  a  word  to 


70About  one  million  dollars. 


IXGcmesh:  a  god  with  the  head  of  an  elephant;  the  son  of  Parvati,  the  Divine  Mother. 


72The  room  where,  on  the  first  of  each  month,  Mother  distributed  to  the  disciples  their  needs  for  the  month. 


me,  she  called  on  Santa  Claus  and  told  him,  ‘Mother  doesn’t  believe  in  you;  you  should  give  Her  a 
gift  to  prove  to  Her  that  you  exist.  You  can  give  it  to  Her  for  Christmas.’  And  it  happened!  ...  She 
was  quite  proud. 

But  it  only  happened  like  that  once.  And  as  for  Ganesh,  that  was  the  end  of  it.  So  then  I  asked 
Nature.  It  took  her  a  long  time  to  accept  to  collaborate.  But  as  for  the  money,  I  shall  have  to  ask  her 
about  it;  because  for  me  personally,  it  is  still  going  on.  I  think,  ‘Hmm,  wouldn’t  it  be  nice  to  have  a 
wristwatch  like  that.’  And  I  get  twenty  of  them!  I  say  to  myself,  ‘Well,  if  I  had  that  ...’  and  I  get 
thirty  of  them!  Things  come  in  from  every  side,  without  my  even  uttering  a  word  -  I  don’t  even  ask, 
they  just  come. 

The  first  time  I  came  here  and  spoke  with  Sri  Aurobindo  about  what  was  needed  for  the  Work, 
he  told  me  (he  also  wrote  it  to  me)  that  for  the  secure  achievement  of  the  Work  we  would  need  three 
powers:  one  was  the  power  over  health,  the  second  was  the  power  over  government,  and  the  third 
was  the  power  over  money. 

Health  naturally  depends  upon  the  sadhana;  but  even  that  is  not  so  sure:  there  are  other  factors. 
As  for  the  second,  the  power  over  government,  Sri  Aurobindo  looked  at  it,  studied  it,  considered  it 
very  carefully,  and  finally  he  told  me,  ‘There  is  only  one  way  to  have  that  power:  it  is  TO  BE  the 
government.  One  can  influence  individuals,  one  can  transmit  the  will  to  them,  but  their  hands  are 
tied.  In  a  government,  there  is  no  one  individual,  nor  even  several  who  is  all-powerful  and  who  can 
decide  things.  One  must  be  the  government  oneself  and  give  it  the  desired  orientation.’ 

For  the  last,  for  money,  he  told  me,  ‘I  still  don’t  know  exactly  what  it  depends  on.’  Then  one 
day  I  entered  into  trance  with  this  idea  in  mind,  and  after  a  certain  journey  I  came  to  a  place  like  a 
subterranean  grotto  (which  means  that  it  is  in  the  subconscient,  or  perhaps  even  in  the  inconscient) 
which  was  the  source,  the  place  and  the  power  over  money.  I  was  about  to  enter  into  this  grotto  (a 
kind  of  inner  cave)  when  I  saw,  coiled  and  upright,  an  immense  serpent,  like  an  all  black  python, 
fonnidable,  as  big  as  a  seven-story  house,  who  said,  ‘You  cannot  pass!’  -  ‘Why  not?  Let  me  pass!’ 
-  ‘Myself,  I  would  let  you  pass,  but  if  I  did,  “they”  would  immediately  destroy  me.’  -  ‘Who,  then, 
is  this  “they”?’  -  ‘They  are  the  asuric’  powers  who  rule  over  money.  They  have  put  me  here  to 
guard  the  entrance,  precisely  so  that  you  may  not  enter.  ’  -  ‘And  what  is  it  that  would  give  one  the 
power  to  enter?’  Then  he  told  me  something  like  this:  ‘I  heard  (that  is,  he  himself  had  no  special 
knowledge,  but  it  was  something  he  had  heard  from  his  masters,  those  who  ruled  over  him),  I  heard 
that  he  who  will  have  a  total  power  over  the  human  sexual  impulses  (not  merely  in  himself,  but  a 
universal  power  -  that  is,  a  power  enabling  him  to  control  this  everywhere,  among  all  men)  will 
have  the  right  to  enter.’  In  other  words,  these  forces  would  not  be  able  to  prevent  him  from  entering. 

A  personal  realization  is  very  easy,  it  is  nothing  at  all;  a  personal  realization  is  one  thing,  but  the 
power  to  control  it  among  all  men  -  that  is,  to  control  or  master  such  movements  at  will, 
everywhere  -  is  quite  another.  I  don’t  believe  that  this  ...  condition  has  been  fulfilled.  If  what  the 
serpent  said  is  true  and  if  this  is  really  what  will  vanquish  these  hostile  forces  that  rule  over  money, 
well  then,  it  has  not  been  fulfilled. 

It  has  been  fulfilled  to  a  certain  extent  -  but  it’s  negligible.  It  is  conditional,  limited:  in  one  case, 
it  works;  in  another,  it  doesn’t.  It  is  quite  problematic.  And  naturally,  where  terrestrial  things  are 
involved  (I  don’t  say  universal,  but  in  any  case  terrestrial),  when  it  is  something  involving  the  earth, 
it  must  be  complete;  there  cannot  be  any  approximations. 

Therefore,  it’s  an  affair  between  the  asuras73  and  the  human  species.  To  transform  itself  is  the 
only  solution  left  to  the  human  species  -  in  other  words,  to  tear  from  the  asuric  forces  the  power  of 
ruling  over  the  human  species. 

You  see,  the  human  species  is  a  part  of  Nature,  but  as  Sri  Aurobindo  has  explained,  from  the 
moment  mind  expressed  itself  in  man,  it  put  him  into  a  relationship  with  Nature  very  different  from 
the  relationship  all  the  lower  species  have  with  her.  All  the  lower  species  right  up  to  man  are 


ll>Asuras:  the  demons  or  dark  forces  of  the  mental  plane. 


completely  under  the  rule  of  Nature;  she  makes  them  do  whatever  she  wants,  and  they  can  do 
nothing  without  her  consent.  Whereas  man  begins  to  act  and  to  live  as  an  equal;  not  as  an  equal  in 
terms  of  power,  but  from  the  standpoint  of  consciousness  (he  is  beginning  to  do  so  since  he  has  the 
capacity  to  study  and  to  find  out  Nature’s  secrets).  He  is  not  superior  to  her,  far  from  it,  but  he  is  on 
an  equal  footing.  And  so  he  has  acquired  -  this  is  a  fact  -  he  has  acquired  a  certain  power  of 
independence  that  he  immediately  used  to  put  himself  under  the  influence  of  the  hostile  forces, 
which  are  not  terrestrial  but  extra-terrestrial. 

I  am  speaking  of  terrestrial  Nature.  Through  their  mental  power,  men  had  the  choice  and  the 
freedom  to  make  pacts  with  these  extraterrestrial  vital  forces.  There  is  a  whole  vital  world  that  has 
nothing  to  do  with  the  earth,  it  is  entirely  independent  or  prior  to  earth’s  existence,  it  is  self-existent 
-  well,  they  have  brought  that  down  here!  They  have  made  ...  what  we  see!  And  such  being  the  case 
...  This  is  what  terrestrial  Nature  told  me:  ‘It  is  beyond  my  control.’ 

So  considering  all  that,  Sri  Aurobindo  came  to  the  conclusion  that  only  the  supramental 
power  ...  (Mother  brings  down  her  hands)  as  he  said,  will  be  able  to  rule  over  everything.  And  when 
that  happens,  it  will  be  all  over  -  including  Nature.  For  a  long  time,  Nature  rebelled  (I  have  written 
about  it  often).  She  used  to  say,  ‘Why  are  you  in  such  a  hurry?  It  will  be  done  one  day.’  But  then 
last  year,  there  was  that  extraordinary  experience.74  And  it  was  because  of  that  experience  that  I  told 
her,  ‘Well,  now  that  we  agree,  give  me  some  proof;  I  am  asking  you  for  some  proof-  do  it  for  me.’ 
She  didn’t  budge,  absolutely  nothing. 

Perhaps  it  is  a  kind  of ...  it  can  hardly  be  called  an  intuition,  but  a  kind  of  divination  of  this  idea 
that  made  people  speak  of  ‘selling  one’s  soul  to  the  devil  for  money,’  of  money  being  an  evil  force, 
which  produces  this  shrinking  on  the  part  of  all  those  who  want  to  lead  a  spiritual  life  -  but  as  for 
that,  they  shrink  from  everything,  not  only  from  money! 

Perhaps  it  would  not  be  necessary  to  have  this  power  over  all  men,  but  in  any  event,  it  should  be 
great  enough  to  act  upon  the  mass.  It  is  likely  that  once  a  certain  movement  has  been  mastered  to 
some  degree,  what  the  mass  does  or  doesn’t  do  (this  whole  human  mass  that  has  barely,  barely 
emerged  into  even  the  mental  consciousness)  will  become  quite  irrelevant.  You  see,  the  mass  is  still 
under  the  great  rule  of  Nature.  I  am  referring  to  mental  humanity,  predominantly  mental,  which 
developed  the  mind  but  misused  it  and  immediately  set  out  on  the  wrong  path  -  first  thing. 

There  is  nothing  to  say  since  the  first  thing  done  by  the  divine  forces  which  emanated  for  the 
Creation  was  to  take  the  wrong  path!75  That  is  the  origin,  the  seed  of  this  marvelous  spirit  of 
independence  -  the  negation  of  surrender,  in  other  words.  Man  said,  ‘I  have  the  power  to  think;  I 
will  do  with  it  what  I  want,  and  no  one  has  the  right  to  intervene.  I  am  free,  I  am  an  independent 
being,  IN-DE-PEN-DENT!  So  that’s  how  things  stand:  we  are  all  independent  beings! 

But  yesterday,  in  fact,  I  was  looking  (with  all  these  mantras  and  these  prayers  and  this  whole 
vibration  that  has  descended  into  the  atmosphere,  creating  a  state  of  constant  calling  in  the 
atmosphere),  and  I  remembered  the  old  movements  and  how  everything  now  has  changed!  I  was 
also  thinking  of  the  old  disciplines,  one  of  which  is  to  say,  ‘I  am  That.’76  People  were  told  to  sit  in 
meditation  and  repeat,  ‘I  am  That,’  to  reach  an  identification.  And  it  all  seemed  to  me  so  obsolete, 
so  childish,  but  at  the  same  time  a  part  of  the  whole.  I  looked,  and  it  seemed  so  absurd  to  sit  in 
meditation  and  say,  ‘I  am  That’!  ‘I,’  what  is  this  ‘I’  who  is  That;  what  is  this  ‘I,’  where  is  it?  ...  I 
was  trying  to  find  it,  and  I  saw  a  tiny,  microscopic  point  (to  see  it  would  almost  require  some 
gigantic  instrument),  a  tiny,  obscure  point  in  an  im-men-sity  of  Light,  and  that  little  point  was  the 

74The  experience  ofNature’s  collaboration  (November  8,  1957). 


75In  effect,  according  to  tradition,  the  first  divine  forces  that  emanated  for  the  creation  were  the  Asuras,  who  turned 
into  demons.  The  gods  were  created  later  to  repair  the  disorder  engendered  by  the  demons. 


16So  ’ham  the  traditional  mantra  of  the  Vedantic  path,  which  declares  that  the  world  is  an  illusion. 


body.  At  the  same  time  -  it  was  absolutely  simultaneous  -  I  saw  the  Presence  of  the  Supreme  as  a 
very,  very,  very,  VERY  immense  Being,  within  which  was  ‘I’  in  an  attitude  of ...  (‘I’  was  only  a 
sensation,  you  see),  an  attitude  ...  (gesture  of  surrender)  like  this.  There  were  no  limits,  yet  at  the 
same  time,  one  felt  the  joy  of  being  permeated,  enveloped  and  of  being  able  to  widen,  widen,  widen 
indefinitely  -  to  widen  the  whole  being,  from  the  highest  consciousness  to  the  most  material 
consciousness.  And  then,  at  the  same  time,  to  look  at  this  body  and  to  see  every  cell,  every  atom 
vibrating  with  a  divine,  radiant  Presence  with  all  its  Consciousness,  all  its  Power,  all  its  Will,  all  its 
Love  -  all,  all,  really  -  and  a  joy!  An  extraordinary  joy.  And  one  did  not  disturb  the  other,  nothing 
was  contradictory  and  everything  was  felt  at  the  same  time.  That  was  when  I  said,  ‘But  truly!  This 
body  had  to  have  the  training  it  has  had  for  more  than  seventy  years  to  be  able  to  bear  all  that 
without  starting  to  cry  out  or  dance  or  leap  up  or  whatever  it  might  be!’  No,  it  was  calm  (it  was 
exultant,  but  it  was  very  calm),  and  it  remained  in  control  of  its  movements  and  its  words.  In  spite 
of  the  fact  that  it  was  really  living  in  another  world,  it  could  apparently  act  normal  due  to  this 
strenuous  training  in  self-control  by  the  REASON  -  by  the  reason  -  over  the  whole  being,  which 
has  tamed  it  and  given  it  such  a  great  cohesive  power  that  I  can  BE  in  the  experience,  I  can  LIVE 
this  experience,  and  at  the  same  time  respond  with  the  most  amiable  of  smiles  to  the  most  idiotic 
questions! 

And  then,  it  always  ends  in  the  same  way,  by  a  canticle  to  the  action  of  the  grace:  ‘O,  Lord!  You 
are  truly  marvelous!  All  the  experiences  I  have  needed  to  pass  through  You  have  given  to  me,  all 
the  things  I  needed  to  do  to  make  this  body  ready  You  have  made  me  do,  and  always  with  the 
feeling  that  it  was  You  who  was  making  me  do  it’  -  and  with  the  universal  disapproval  of  all  the 
right-minded  humanity! 


July  1958 

To  do  this  Yoga,  one  must  have  at  least  some  sense  of  beauty.  Without  it,  one  lacks  one  of  the  most 
important  aspects  of  the  physical  world. 

There  is  a  beauty  of  the  soul,  a  dignity  of  the  soul  -  it  is  a  thing  to  which  I  am  very  sensitive,  a 
thing  that  moves  me  and  arouses  great  respect  in  me,  always. 

A  beauty  of  the  soul? 

Yes,  it  shows  through  in  the  face;  this  kind  of  dignity,  beauty,  harmony  of  an  integral  realization. 
When  the  soul  shows  through  in  the  physical,  it  imparts  this  dignity,  this  beauty,  this  majesty,  the 
majesty  that  comes  from  being  the  Tabernacle.  Thus,  even  things  that  have  no  particular  beauty 
assume  a  sense  of  eternal  beauty,  of  THE  eternal  beauty. 

In  this  way,  I  have  seen  faces  change  from  one  extreme  to  the  other  in  a  flash.  Someone  who 
had  this  kind  of  beauty,  harmony,  this  sense  of  divine  dignity  in  the  body,  and  suddenly  the 
perception  of  the  obstacle  or  the  difficulty  comes,  then  the  sense  of  wrong,  of  unworthiness  -  there 
is  a  sudden  distortion  in  the  appearance,  a  kind  of  decomposition  of  the  features!  And  yet  it  is  the 
same  face.  It  takes  place  in  a  flash,  it’s  frightful.  This  kind  of  hideousness  of  torment,  of 


degradation  (it  is  exactly  what  has  been  expressed  in  religions  as  the  ‘torment  of  sin’),  it  changes 
your  face  unrecognizably!  Even  features  that  are  beautiful  in  themselves  become  frightful  -  and 
they  are  the  same  features,  the  same  person. 

Thus  I  saw  how  horrible  is  the  sense  of  sin,  how  much  it  belongs  to  the  world  of  falsehood. 


July  19, 1958 

A  peach  should  ripen  on  the  tree;  it’s  a  fruit  that  should  be  picked  when  the  sun  is  upon  it.  Just  as 
the  sun  falls  on  it,  you  come  along,  pluck  it  and  bite  into  it.  Then  it  is  absolute  paradise. 

There  are  two  such  fruits  -  peaches  and  golden  green  plums.  It  is  the  same  for  both.  You  must 
take  them  warm  from  the  tree,  bite  into  them,  and  you  are  filled  with  the  taste  of  paradise. 

Every  fruit  should  be  eaten  in  a  special  way. 

At  heart,  this  is  the  symbol  of  the  earthly  Paradise  and  the  tree  of  Knowledge:  by  biting  into  the 
fruit  of  Knowledge,  one  loses  the  spontaneity  of  movement  and  begins  objectivizing,  learning, 
questioning.  So  as  soon  as  they  ate  of  this  fruit,  they  were  full  of  sin. 

I  say  that  every  fruit  should  be  eaten  in  its  own  way.  The  being  who  lives  according  to  his  own 
nature,  his  own  truth,  must  spontaneously  find  the  right  way  of  using  things.  When  you  live 
according  to  the  truth  of  your  being,  you  don’t  need  to  learn  things:  you  do  them  spontaneously, 
according  to  the  inner  law.  When  you  sincerely  follow  your  nature,  spontaneously  and  sincerely, 
you  are  divine.  As  soon  as  you  think  or  look  at  yourself  acting  or  start  questioning,  you  are  full  of 
sin. 

It  is  man’s  mental  consciousness  that  has  filled  all  Nature  with  the  idea  of  sin  and  all  the  misery 
it  brings.  Animals  are  not  at  all  unhappy  in  the  way  we  are.  Not  at  all,  not  at  all,  except  -  as  Sri 
Aurobindo  says  -  those  that  are  corrupted.  Those  that  are  corrupted  are  those  that  live  with  men. 
Dogs  have  the  sense  of  sin  and  guilt,  for  their  whole  aspiration  is  to  resemble  man.  Man  is  the  god. 
Hence  there  is  dissimulation,  hypocrisy:  dogs  lie.  But  men  admire  that.  They  say,  ‘Oh!  How 
intelligent  they  are!’ 

They  have  lost  their  divinity. 

Truly,  the  human  species  is  at  a  point  in  the  spiral  which  is  not  very  pretty. 

But  isn  7  a  dog  more  conscious,  more  evolved  than  a  tiger,  or  higher  in  the  spiral  -  that  is, 

nearer  the  Divine? 

It’s  not  a  question  of  being  conscious.  There  is  no  doubt  that  man  is  more  evolved  than  the  tiger,  but 
the  tiger  is  more  divine  than  man.  One  shouldn’t  confuse  things.  These  are  two  entirely  different 
things. 

The  Divine  is  everywhere,  in  everything.  We  should  never  forget  it  -  not  for  a  second  should  we 
forget  it.  He  is  everywhere,  in  everything;  and  in  an  unconscious  but  spontaneous,  therefore  sincere, 
way,  all  that  exists  below  the  mental  manifestation  is  divine,  without  mixture;  in  other  words,  it 


exists  spontaneously  and  in  harmony  with  its  nature.  It  is  man  with  his  mind  who  has  introduced  the 
idea  of  guilt.  Naturally,  he  is  much  more  conscious!  There’s  no  question  about  it,  it’s  a  fact, 
although  what  we  call  consciousness  (what  ‘we’  call  it,  that  is,  what  man  calls  consciousness)  is  the 
power  to  objectify  and  mentalize  things.  It  is  not  the  true  consciousness,  but  it’s  what  men  call 
consciousness.  So  according  to  the  human  mode,  it  is  obvious  that  man  is  much  more  conscious 
than  the  animal,  but  the  human  brings  in  sin  and  perversion  which  do  not  exist  outside  of  this  state 
we  call  ‘conscious’  -  which  in  fact  is  not  conscious  but  merely  consists  in  mentalizing  things  and  in 
having  the  ability  to  objectify  them. 

It  is  an  ascending  curve,  but  a  curve  that  swerves  away  from  the  Divine.  So  naturally,  one  has  to 
climb  much  higher  to  find  a  higher  Divine,  since  it  is  a  conscious  Divine,  whereas  the  others  are 
divine  spontaneously  and  instinctively,  without  being  conscious  of  it.  All  our  moral  notions  of  good 
and  evil,  all  of  that,  are  what  we  have  thrown  over  the  creation  with  our  distorted  and  perverted 
consciousness.  It  is  we  who  have  invented  it. 

We  are  the  distorting  intermediary  between  the  purity  of  the  animal  and  the  divine  purity  of  the 
gods. 


July  21, 1958 

Human  beings  don’t  know  how  to  keep  energy.  When  something  happens  -  an  accident  or  an 
illness,  for  example  -  and  they  ask  for  help,  a  double  or  a  triple  dose  of  energy  is  sent.  If  they 
happen  to  be  receptive,  they  receive  it.  This  energy  is  given  for  two  reasons:  to  restore  order  out  of 
the  disorder  caused  by  the  accident  or  illness,  and  to  impart  a  transformative  force  to  repair  or 
change  the  source  of  the  illness  or  accident. 

But  instead  of  using  the  energy  in  this  way,  they  immediately  throw  it  out.  They  start  stirring 
about,  reacting,  working,  speaking  ...  They  feel  full  of  energy  and  they  throw  it  all  out!  They  can’t 
keep  anything.  So  naturally,  since  the  energy  was  not  sent  to  be  wasted  like  that  but  for  an  inner 
use,  they  feel  absolutely  flat,  run  down.  And  it  is  universal.  They  don’t  know,  they  do  not  know 
how  to  make  this  movement  -  to  turn  within,  to  use  the  energy  (not  to  keep  it,  it  doesn’t  keep),  to 
use  it  to  repair  the  damage  done  to  the  body  and  to  go  deeply  within  to  find  the  reason  for  this 
accident  or  illness,  and  there  to  change  it  by  an  aspiration,  an  inner  transformation.  Instead  of  that, 
right  away  they  start  speaking,  stirring  about,  reacting,  doing  this  or  that! 

In  fact,  the  immense  majority  of  human  beings  feel  they  are  living  only  when  they  waste  their 
energy.  Otherwise,  it  does  not  seem  to  them  to  be  life. 

Not  to  waste  energy  means  to  utilize  it  towards  the  ends  for  which  it  was  given.  If  energy  is 
given  for  the  transformation,  for  the  sublimation  of  the  being,  it  must  be  used  for  that;  if  energy  is 
given  to  restore  something  that  has  been  disrupted  in  the  body,  it  must  be  used  for  that. 

Naturally,  if  a  special  work  is  given  to  someone  along  with  the  energy  to  do  this  work,  it’s  very 
good  as  long  as  it  is  being  used  towards  the  end  for  which  it  was  given. 

But  as  soon  as  a  man  feels  energetic,  he  immediately  rushes  into  action.  Or  else,  those  who 
don’t  have  the  sense  of  doing  something  useful  start  gossiping.  And  still  worse,  those  who  have  no 


control  over  themselves  become  intolerant  and  start  arguing!  If  someone  contradicts  their  will,  they 
feel  full  of  energy  and  they  mistake  that  for  a  ‘godlike  wrath’ ! 


July  23,  1958 

In  the  final  analysis,  seeing  the  world  such  as  it  is  and  seems  meant  to  be  irremediably,  human 
intellect  has  decided  that  this  universe  must  be  an  error  of  God  and  that  the  manifestation  or 
creation  is  certainly  the  result  of  a  desire,  the  desire  to  manifest,  know  oneself,  enjoy  oneself.  So  the 
only  thing  to  do  is  to  put  an  end  to  this  error  as  soon  as  possible  by  refusing  to  cling  to  desire  and  its 
fatal  consequences. 

But  the  Supreme  Lord  answers  that  the  comedy  is  not  entirely  played  out,  and  He  adds:  ‘Wait 
for  the  last  act;  undoubtedly  you  will  change  your  mind.  ’ 


July  (?)  1958 

Why,  by  what  mechanism,  do  mental  formulations  dissipate  an  experience  and  make  it  lose  the 

major  part  of  its  power  of  action  on  the  consciousness? 

Suppose,  for  example,  you  want  to  undo  a  wrong  movement  and,  as  the  result  of  a  grace,  the  Force 
is  sent  for  this  purpose  and  begins  acting  upon  the  consciousness.  Then  if  you  pull  it  towards  you, 
as  it  were,  to  try  to  formulate  it,  naturally  you  deconcentrate  it,  disperse  and  dissipate  it. 

But  that’s  not  all;  the  simple  fact  of  speaking  to  another  person  automatically  opens  you  to  all 
that  can  come  from  that  person.  An  exchange  always  takes  place.  His  curiosity,  his  obscurity,  his 
good  or  sometimes  even  his  bad  will  interfere,  modify,  distort. 

Whereas  if  you  wish  to  speak  of  your  experience  to  your  guru  and  he  consents  to  listen  to  you,  it 
means  that  he  ADDS  his  force,  his  knowledge,  his  experience  to  the  working  of  the  Force  and  he 
helps  its  effectuation. 

But  the  damage  caused  by  the  formulation  still  exists? 


Yes,  but  he  repairs  it. 


August  7, 1958 

It  is  very  difficult  to  manage  both  at  the  same  time:  the  transformation  of  the  body  and  taking  care 
of  people.  But  what  can  I  do?  I  told  Sri  Aurobindo  I  would  do  the  work,  and  I  am  doing  it  -  I  cannot 
just  abandon  everything. 

When  I  think  of  the  time  the  hatha  yogis  devote  to  the  work  on  the  body  -  they  do  nothing  but 
that;  they  do  nothing  but  that  all  the  time,  until  they  have  attained  a  certain  point.  This  is  in  fact  the 
reason  why  Sri  Aurobindo  wanted  none  of  it:  he  found  that  it  took  a  lot  of  time  for  a  rather  meager 
result. 


*  *  * 

Day  and  night,  I  am  investigating  all  that  has  to  be  transformed  ...  I  can  assure  you  that  there  is 
plenty  of  work! 

Last  night,  I  had  many  dreams  (not  really  dreams,  but  ...  );  I  used  to  find  them  very  interesting 
because  they  gave  me  certain  indications,  all  kinds  of  things,  but  when  I  saw  it  all  now,  I  said  to 
myself,  ‘Good  Lord!  What  a  waste  of  time!  Instead,  I  could  be  living  in  a  supramental 
consciousness  and  seeing  things.’  So  during  the  night,  I  made  a  resolution  to  change  all  this  too.  My 
nights  have  to  change.  I  am  already  changing  my  days;  now  my  nights  have  to  change.  But  then  all 
this  subconscious  in  Matter,  all  this,  it  all  has  to  change!  There’s  no  choice,  it  has  to  be  seen  to. 

Once  you  set  to  this  work,  it  is  such  a  fonnidable  task!  But  what  can  I  do? 


August  8, 1958 

It’s  remarkable  that  things  you  have  understood  in  your  consciousness  ...  reappear  as  problems  to  be 
solved  in  the  cells  of  the  body. 

In  the  cells,  both  things  are  there.  The  body  is  convinced  of  the  divine  Presence  everywhere,  that 
all  is  the  Divine  -  it  lives  in  that;  and  at  the  same  time,  it  shrinks  from  certain  contacts!  I  saw  that 


this  morning,  both  things  at  once,  and  I  said,  ‘Lord,  I  know  nothing  at  all!’ 

There  (gesture  above  the  head),  everything  has  been  resolved,  I  could  write  books  on  how  to 
resolve  this  or  that,  how  the  synthesis  is  made,  etc.,  but  here  ( the  body)  ...  /  live  this  synthesis 
stumblingly.  The  two  coexist,  but  it  is  still  not  THAT  (gesture,  hands  clasped  together,  pointing 
upwards). 

(silence) 

What  problems  come  up!  If  there  were  a  plague  or  cholera,  for  example,  would  the  supramental 
Force  in  the  cells,  the  supramental  realization,  be  able  to  restore  order  out  of  the  disorder  that  allows 
the  epidemic  to  be?  I  don’t  mean  on  an  individual  level  -  individually,  if  you  are  in  a  certain 
consciousness,  you  can  remain  untouched  -  I  am  not  speaking  of  that,  I  am  speaking  impersonally, 
as  it  were. 

We  know  nothing.  We  believe  we  know,  but  as  soon  as  it  is  a  question  of  that  (the  body),  we 
know  nothing.  As  soon  as  we  are  in  the  subtle  physical,  we  know  everything,  we  live  in  bliss  -  but 
here,  we  know  nothing,  nothing,  absolutely  nothing. 


August  9, 1958 

If  human  love  came  forth  unalloyed,  it  would  be  all-powerful.  Unfortunately,  in  human  love,  there 
is  as  much  SELF  love  as  love  for  the  beloved;  it  is  not  a  love  that  makes  you  forget  yourself. 

Evidently  the  gods  of  the  Puranas  are  a  good  deal  worse  than  human  beings,  as  we  saw  in  that 
film  the  other  day77  (and  that  story  was  absolutely  true).  The  gods  of  the  Overmind  are  infinitely 
more  egocentric  -  the  only  thing  that  counts  for  them  is  their  power,  the  extent  of  their  power.  Man 
has  in  addition  a  psychic  being,  so  consequently  he  has  true  love  and  compassion  -  wherein  lies  his 
superiority  over  the  gods.  It  was  very,  very  clearly  expressed  in  this  film,  and  it’s  very  true. 

The  gods  are  faultless,  for  they  live  according  to  their  own  nature,  spontaneously  and  without 
constraint;  it  is  their  godly  way.  But  if  one  looks  at  it  from  a  higher  point  of  view,  if  one  has  a 
higher  vision,  a  vision  of  the  whole,  they  have  fewer  qualities  than  man.  In  this  film,  it  was  proved 
that  through  their  capacity  for  love  and  self-giving,  men  can  have  as  much  power  as  the  gods,  and 
even  more  -  when  they  are  not  egoists,  when  they  can  overcome  their  egoism. 

Certainly  man  is  nearer  the  Supreme  than  the  gods.  Provided  he  fulfills  the  necessary  conditions, 
he  can  be  nearer  -  he  isn’t  so  automatically,  but  he  can  be,  he  has  the  power,  the  potentiality  to  be. 


77 Anusuya:  wife  of  the  rishi  Atri  and  endowed  with  a  great  inner  force.  In  her  husband’s  absence,  three  gods  came 
(Brahma,  Vishnu  and  Shiva)  disguised  as  brahmins  and  asked  her  for  something  to  eat.  Then  they  refused  to  eat  unless 
she  served  them  naked.  Since  they  were  brahmins,  she  could  not  send  them  away  without  feeding  them,  so  by  her  inner 
power,  she  changed  them  into  babies  and  served  them  naked.  This  film  was  shown  at  the  Ashram  Playground  on  August 
5,  1958. 


August  12, 1958 


{Letter  from  Mother  to  Satprem,  travelling) 

8.12.58 

My  dear  child, 

Behind  all  the  appearances  and  diverse  entities,  I  am  always  present  near  you,  and  my  love 
enfolds  you. 

I  have  put  the  work  aside  and  shall  be  happy  to  do  it  with  you  upon  your  return. 

My  blessings  never  leave  you. 

Signed:  Mother 


August  29, 1958 


(Note  written  by  Mother  after  an  experience  She  had  during  a  playground  meditation  when  Swami 
J.J.  was  present.  It  was  this  swami  with  whom  Satprem  journeyed  in  the  Himalayas  to  receive 

tantric  initiation.1* ) 

The  mantra  written  upon  each  of  the  souvenirs79  from  the  Himalayas  has  a  strong  power  of  evoking 
the  Supreme  Mother. 

At  the  Thursday  evening  meditation,  he  appeared  as  the  ‘Guru  of  Tantric  Initiation,’  magnified 
and  seated  upon  a  symbolic  representation  of  the  forces  and  riches  of  material  Nature  (in  the  middle 
of  the  playground,  to  my  left),  and  he  put  into  my  hand  something  sufficiently  material  for  me  to 
feel  the  vibrations  physically,  and  it  had  a  great  realizing  power.  It  was  a  kind  of  luminous  and  very 
vibrant  globe  which  I  held  in  my  hands  during  the  whole  meditation. 

78Satprem  would  later  part  company  with  this  Swami  and  follow  a  thorough  tantric  discipline  with  another  guru  who 
will  henceforth  be  called  X  in  the  Agenda. 


79The  Swami  brought  back  various  objects  and  souvenirs  from  the  Himalayas  which  he  presented  to  Mother. 


S,  who  was  sitting  in  front  of  me,  spontaneously  asked  me  afterwards  what  I  had  been  holding  in 
my  hands  during  the  meditation,  and  she  described  it  thus:  ‘It  was  round,  very  soft  and  luminous 
like  the  moon.’ 


August  30,  1958 


(In  the  presence  of  Pavitra  and  Abhay  Singh, 80  Mother  recounts  a  vision  she  had  during  the  night) 

It  was  just  at  four  o’clock  in  the  morning,  and  it  woke  me  up.  It  was  exactly  like  this  ...  I  was 
apparently  in  my  bathroom,  and  I  had  to  open  the  door  between  the  bathroom  and  Sri  Aurobindo’s 
room;  the  moment  I  put  my  hand  on  the  doorknob,  I  knew  with  an  absolute  certainty  that 
destruction  was  awaiting  me  behind  the  door.  It  had  the  form  or  image  of  those  great  invaders  of 
India,  those  who  had  swooped  down  upon  India  and  destroyed  everything  in  their  wake  ...  But  it 
was  only  an  impression. 

So  the  door  had  to  be  opened  and  I  ...  felt  and  said,  ‘Lord,  may  your  will  be  done.’  I  opened  the 
door  and  behind  it  was  Z81  in  the  same  clothes  he  wears  when  he  drives,  and  he  was  leaning  against 
one  of  those  big  tractor  tires  -  or  perhaps  he  was  holding  it  at  the  same  time.  I  was  so  dumbfounded 
that  I  woke  up.  It  took  me  a  little  while  to  be  able  to  understand  what  it  might  mean,  and 
afterwards  ...  Even  now,  I  still  don’t  know  ...  What  was  I?  Was  I  India,  or  was  I  the  world?  ...  I 
don’t  know.  And  what  did  Z  represent?  ...  It  was  as  imperative  and  clear,  as  positive  and  absolute  as 
could  be:  the  certitude  that  destruction  was  behind  the  door,  that  it  was  inevitable.  And  it  had  the 
fonn  of  those  great  Tartar  or  Mongol  invaders,  those  people  who  came  from  the  North  and  invaded 
India,  who  pillaged  everything  ...  That’s  what  it  was  like.  But  what  Z  was  doing  there  I  don’t  know. 
What  does  he  represent?  ...  The  first  impulse  was  to  tell  Abhay  Singh,  ‘Forbid  him  to  drive  the 
tractor.  ’ 

(Pavitra:)  What  was  he  holding  in  his  hands,  Mother? 

Huge  tires  ...  He  was  standing  there,  like  that,  with  a  very  majestic  air.  He  was  wearing  his  white 
outfit,  those  long  pyjamas  ... 

(Abhay  Singh:)  Yesterday  he  drove  the  station  wagon  for  the  visitors. 

Does  it  also  have  large  tires? 

(Pavitra:)  A  little  bigger  than  jeep  tires. 


80The  disciple  who  managed  the  Ashram  ‘Atelier’:  mechanical  workshop,  maintenance  garage,  automobile  service,  etc. 


81 A  young  disciple  who  worked  in  the  Atelier. 


No,  it  came  up  to  here  (gesture  to  the  top  of  the  head).  It  seemed  to  be  a  tractor  tire,  but  it  did  not 
have  the  heavy  tread  that  tractor  tires  have. 

(Abhay  Singh:)  There  are  tractor  tires  that  have  no  tread. 

Ah!  So  ...  He  was  standing,  and  it  came  up  to  here  (same  gesture).  So  it  must  have  been  a  tractor 
tire.  What  could  it  represent,  he,  and  the  tractor?  ...  I  don’t  know  ...  It  was  not  personal,  you  see  -  I 
mean  this  body.  It  had  nothing  to  do  with  that. 

( Pavitra :)  The  industrialization  of  India? 


(silence) 


I  don’t  know. 


September  1958 


(Fragment  of  a  conversation  concerning  the  translation  into  French  of  Sri  Aurobindo ’s 
aphorism:  ’ Knowledge  is  so  much  of  the  truth,  seen  in  a  distorted  medium,  as  the  mind  arrives  at 
by  groping;  Wisdom  what  the  eye  of  divine  vision  sees  in  the  spirit.  ’  Mother  compares  the  Truth  to 

a  pure  white  light,  then  continues:) 

...  But  this  white,  precisely,  is  composed  of  all  the  colors.  So  when  you  perceive  a  thing,  instead  of 
seeing  it  as  white,  there  are  a  certain  number  of  colors  that  completely  elude  your  perception:  you 
see  red,  green,  yellow,  blue  or  something  else,  but  it  does  not  make  white  because  some  colors  are 
missing.  This  is  a  very  good  image.  The  distorted  milieu  cannot  perceive  the  whole,  it  perceives 
only  partially  -  not  partially  the  parts  of  a  complete  whole,  but  a  mixture  of  something  which 
escapes  it  in  its  entirety  because  the  milieu  is  unfit  to  manifest  or  express  or  even  perceive  the 
totality. 

This  color  metaphor  is  quite  adequate. 

Truth  is  like  a  white  light  recomposed,  for  it  contains  all  that  is,  but  the  milieu  is  unfit  to 
manifest  all  the  elements  or  all  the  colors  -  and  it  can  be  said  that  the  best  escape.  So,  instead  of 
seeing  a  white  light,  you  see  a  number  of  colors  of  something  from  which  they  derived. 

Sri  Aurobindo  put  it  as  vaguely  as  possible  on  purpose:  ‘so  much  of  the  truth  ...  as  the  mind 
arrives  at.’  It  must  be  put  in  as  vague  a  form  as  possible  -  all  precision  is  falsifying.  I  searched  for 
one  hour  and  didn’t  find  it.  I  put  ‘autant  de  la  verite  ...  que  le  mental  peut  saisir.’  ‘Autant’  is  not 
elegant,  it  is  scarcely  French,  but  I  think  it  is  the  only  way  to  put  it  which  is  not  false  (I  believe  so, 
unless  you  have  something  better  to  suggest).  But  in  any  event,  what  you  say  is  unacceptable;  you 
cannot  put  Ta  partie  ou  la  portion  de  la  verite’  [the  part  or  portion  of  truth]  -  it’s  not  a  portion,  it  is 
not  at  all  a  portion. 


Then  we  could  say  ‘ce  que  ‘La  Connaissance  est  ce  que,  de  la  verite  vue  dans  un  milieu 
deforme,  le  mental peut  saisir  ...  ’82 


(Mother  assents) 


82Final  translation:’  ...  La  Connaissance  est  ce  qu’en  tatonnant  le  mental  peut  saisir  de  la  Verite  vue  dans  un  milieu 
deforme;  la  Sagesse,  ce  que  l’oeil  de  la  vision  divine  voit  en  l’esprit.’ 


September  16, 1958 


I  would  very  much  like  to  have  a  ‘true  mantra.’ 

I  have  a  whole  stock  of  mantras;  they  have  all  come  spontaneously,  never  from  the  head.  They 
sprang  forth  spontaneously,  as  the  Veda  is  said  to  have  sprung  forth. 

I  don’t  know  when  it  began  -  a  very  long  time  ago,  before  I  came  here,  although  some  of  them 
came  while  I  was  here.  But  in  my  case,  they  were  always  very  short.  For  example,  when  Sri 
Aurobindo  was  here  in  his  body,  at  any  moment,  in  any  difficulty,  for  anything,  it  always  came  like 
this:  ‘My  Lord!’  -  simply  and  spontaneously  -  ‘My  Lord!’  And  instantly,  the  contact  was 
established.  But  since  He  left,  it  has  stopped.  I  can  no  longer  say  it,  for  it  would  be  like  saying  ‘My 
Lord,  My  Lord!’  to  myself. 

I  had  a  mantra  in  French  before  coming  to  Pondicherry.  It  was  Dieu  de  bonte  et  de 
misericorde  ...  [ God  of  kindness  and  mercy],  but  what  it  means  is  usually  not  understood  -  it  is  an 
entire  program,  a  universal  program.  I  have  been  repeating  this  mantra  since  the  beginning  of  the 
century;  it  was  the  mantra  of  ascension,  of  realization.  At  present,  it  no  longer  comes  in  the  same 
way,  it  comes  rather  as  a  memory.  But  it  was  deliberate,  you  see;  I  always  said  Dieu  de  bonte  et  de 
misericorde,  because  even  then  I  understood  that  everything  is  the  Divine  and  the  Divine  is  in  all 
things  and  that  it  is  only  we  who  make  a  distinction  between  what  is  or  what  is  not  the  Divine. 

My  experience  is  that,  individually,  we  are  in  relationship  with  that  aspect  of  the  Divine  which 
is  not  necessarily  the  most  in  confonnity  with  our  natures,  but  which  is  the  most  essential  for  our 
development  or  the  most  necessary  for  our  action.  For  me,  it  was  always  a  question  of  action 
because,  personally,  individually,  each  aspiration  for  personal  development  had  its  own  fonn,  its 
own  spontaneous  expression,  so  I  did  not  use  any  formula.  But  as  soon  as  there  was  the  least  little 
difficulty  in  action,  it  sprang  forth.  Only  long  afterwards  did  I  notice  that  it  was  formulated  in  a 
certain  way  -  I  would  utter  it  without  even  knowing  what  the  words  were.  But  it  came  like  this: 
Dieu  de  bonte  et  de  misericorde.  It  was  as  if  I  wanted  to  eliminate  from  action  all  aspects  that  were 
not  this  one.  And  it  lasted  for  ...  I  don’t  know,  more  than  twenty  or  twenty-five  years  of  my  life.  It 
came  spontaneously. 

Just  recently  one  day,  the  contact  became  entirely  physical,  the  whole  body  was  in  great 
exaltation,  and  I  noticed  that  other  lines  were  spontaneously  being  added  to  this  Dieu  de  bonte  et  de 
misericorde,  and  I  noted  them  down.  It  was  a  springing  forth  of  states  of  consciousness  -  not  words. 

Seigneur,  Dieu  de  bonte  et  de  misericorde 
Seigneur,  Dieu  d ’unite  souveraine 
Seigneur,  Dieu  de  beaute  et  d’harmonie 
Seigneur,  Dieu  de  puissance  et  de  realisation 
Seigneur,  Dieu  d’ amour  et  de  compassion 
Seigneur,  Dieu  du  silence  et  de  la  contemplation 
Seigneur,  Dieu  de  lumiere  et  de  connaissance 
Seigneur,  Dieu  de  vie  et  d’immortalite  Seigneur, 

Dieu  de  jeunesse  et  de  progres 
Seigneur,  Dieu  d’abondance  et  de  plenitude 
Seigneur,  Dieu  de  force  et  de  sante. 


Lord,  God  of  kindness  and  mercy 
Lord,  God  of  sovereign  oneness 
Lord,  God  of  beauty  and  harmony 
Lord,  God  of  power  and  realization 
Lord,  God  of  love  and  compassion 


Lord,  God  of  silence  and  contemplation 
Lord,  God  of  light  and  knowledge 
Lord,  God  of  life  and  immortality 
Lord,  God  of  youth  and  progress 
Lord,  God  of  abundance  and  plenitude 
Lord,  God  of  strength  and  health. 

The  words  came  afterwards,  as  if  they  had  been  superimposed  upon  the  states  of  consciousness, 
grafted  onto  them.  Some  of  the  associations  seem  unexpected,  but  they  were  the  exact  expression  of 
the  states  of  consciousness  in  their  order  of  unfolding.  They  came  one  after  another,  as  if  the  contact 
was  trying  to  become  more  complete.  And  the  last  was  like  a  triumph.  As  soon  as  I  finished  writing 
(in  writing,  all  this  becomes  rather  flat),  the  impetus  within  was  still  alive  and  it  gave  me  the  sense 
of  an  all-conquering  Truth.  And  the  last  mantra  sprang  forth: 

Seigneur,  Dieu  de  la  Verite  victorieuse! 

Lord,  God  of  victorious  Truth! 

Like  a  triumph.  But  I  didn’t  write  that  one  down  because  I  did  not  want  to  spoil  my  impression. 

Of  course,  these  things  should  not  be  published.  We  can  fde  them  in  this  Agenda  of  the 
Supr amenta!  Manifestation  for  later  on.  Later  on,  when  the  Victory  is  won,  we  shall  say,  ‘If  you 
want  to  see  the  curve  ...  ’ 

But  what  is  going  to  come  now?  I  constantly  hear  the  Sanskrit  mantra: 

OM  NAMO  BHA  GA  VA  TEH 83 

It  is  there,  all  around  me;  it  takes  hold  of  all  the  cells  and  at  once  they  spring  forth  in  an  ascension. 
And  Narada’s  mantra,  too: 


Narayana,  Narayana  ... 

(it  is  actually  a  Command  which  means:  now  you  shall  do  as  I  wish),  but  it  doesn’t  come  from  the 
heart. 

What  will  it  be? 

It  will  simply  spring  forth  in  a  flash,  all  of  a  sudden,  and  it  will  be  very  powerful.  Only  power 
can  do  something.  Love  vanishes  like  water  running  through  sand:  people  remain  beatific  ...  and 
nothing  moves!  No,  power  is  needed  -  like  Shiva,  stirring,  churning  ... 

When  I  have  this  mantra,  instead  of  saying  hello,  good-bye,  I  shall  say  that.  When  I  say  hello, 
good-bye,  it  means  ‘Hello:  the  Presence  is  here,  the  Light  is  here.’  ‘Good-bye:  I  am  not  going  away, 
I  am  staying  here.’ 

But  when  I  have  this  mantra,  I  believe  something  will  happen. 

( silence ) 

For  the  moment,  of  all  the  fonnulas  or  mantras,  the  one  that  acts  most  directly  on  this  body,  that 
seizes  all  the  cells  and  immediately  does  this  (vibrating  motion)  is  the  Sanskrit  mantra:  OM  NAMO 
BHAGAVATEH. 

As  soon  as  I  sit  for  meditation,  as  soon  as  I  have  a  quiet  minute  to  concentrate,  it  always  begins 
with  this  mantra,  and  there  is  a  response  in  the  body,  in  the  cells  of  the  body:  they  all  start  vibrating. 

This  is  how  it  happened:  Y  had  just  returned,  and  he  brought  back  a  trunk  full  of  things  which 


83The  first  syllable  of  NAMO  is  pronounced  with  a  short  ‘a,’  as  in  nahmo.  The  final  word  is  pronounced  BHA-GAH- 
VA-TEH. 


he  then  proceeded  to  show  me,  and  his  excitement  made  tight,  tight  little  waves  in  the  atmosphere, 
making  my  head  ache;  it  made  ...  anyway,  it  was  unpleasant.  When  I  left,  just  after  that  had 
happened,  I  sat  down  and  went  like  this  (gesture  of  sweeping  out)  to  make  it  stop,  and  immediately 
the  mantra  began. 

It  rose  up  from  here  (Mother  indicates  the  solar  plexus),  like  this:  Om  Namo  Bhagavateh  OM 
NAMO  BHAGAVATEH  OM  NAMO  BHAGAVATEH.  It  was  fonnidable.  For  the  entire  quarter 
of  an  hour  that  the  meditation  lasted,  everything  was  filled  with  Light!  In  the  deeper  tones  it  was  of 
golden  bronze  (at  the  throat  level  it  was  almost  red)  and  in  the  higher  tones  it  was  a  kind  of  opaline 
white  light:  OM  NAMO  BHAGAVATEH,  OM  NAMO  BHAGAVATEH,  OM  NAMO 
BHAGAVATEH. 

The  other  day  (I  was  in  my  bathroom  upstairs),  it  came;  it  took  hold  of  the  entire  body.  It  rose 
up  in  the  same  way,  and  all  the  cells  were  trembling.  And  with  such  a  power!  So  I  stopped 
everything,  all  movement,  and  I  let  the  thing  grow.  The  vibration  went  on  expanding,  ever 
widening,  as  the  sound  itself  was  expanding,  expanding,  and  all  the  cells  of  the  body  were  seized 
with  an  intensity  of  aspiration  ...  as  if  the  entire  body  were  swelling  -  it  became  overwhelming.  I 
felt  that  it  would  all  burst. 

I  understood  those  who  withdraw  from  everything  to  live  that  totally. 

And  it  has  such  a  transfonnative  power!  I  felt  that  if  it  continued,  something  would  happen, 
something  like  a  change  in  the  equilibrium  of  the  body’s  cells. 

Unfortunately,  I  was  unable  to  continue,  because  ...  I  don’t  have  the  time;  it  was  just  before  the 
balcony  darshan  and  I  was  going  to  be  late.  Something  told  me,  ‘That  is  for  people  who  have 
nothing  to  do.’  Then  I  said,  ‘I  belong  to  my  work,’  and  I  slowly  withdrew.  I  put  on  the  brakes,  and 
the  action  was  cut  short.  But  what  remains  is  that  whenever  I  repeat  this  mantra  ...  everything  starts 
vibrating. 

So  each  one  must  find  something  that  acts  on  himself,  individually.  I  am  only  speaking  of  the 
action  on  the  physical  plane,  because  mentally,  vitally,  in  all  the  inner  parts  of  the  being,  the 
aspiration  is  always,  always  spontaneous.  I  am  referring  only  to  the  physical  plane. 

The  physical  seems  to  be  more  open  to  something  that  is  repetitious  -  for  example,  the  music  we 
play  on  Sundays,  which  has  three  series  of  combined  mantras.  The  first  is  that  of  Chandi,  addressed 
to  the  universal  Mother: 

Ya  devi  sarvabhuteshu  matrirupena  sansthita 

Ya  devi  sarvabhuteshu  shaktirupena  sansthita 

Ya  devi  sarvabhuteshu  shantirupena  sansthita 

Namastasyai  namastasyai  namastasyai  namo  namah 

The  second  is  addressed  to  Sri  Aurobindo  (and  I  believe  they  have  put  my  name  at  the  end).  It 
incorporates  the  mantra  I  was  speaking  of: 

Om  namo  namah  shrimirambikayai 

Om  namo  bhagavateh  shriaravindaya 

Om  namo  namah  shrimirambikayai. 

And  the  third  is  addressed  to  Sri  Aurobindo:  ‘Thou  art  my  refuge.’ 

Shriaravindah  sharanam  mama. 

Each  time  this  music  is  played,  it  produces  exactly  the  same  effect  upon  the  body.  It  is  strange, 
as  if  all  the  cells  were  dilating,  with  a  feeling  that  the  body  is  growing  larger  ...  It  becomes  all 
dilated,  as  if  swollen  with  light  -  with  force,  a  lot  of  force.  And  this  music  seems  to  form  spirals, 
like  luminous  ribbons  of  incense  smoke,  white  (not  transparent,  literally  white)  and  they  rise  up  and 
up.  I  always  see  the  same  thing;  it  begins  in  the  form  of  a  vase,  then  swells  like  an  amphora  and 


converges  higher  up  to  blossom  forth  like  a  flower. 

So  for  these  mantras,  everything  depends  upon  what  you  want  to  do  with  them.  I  am  in  favor  of 
a  short  mantra,  especially  if  you  want  to  make  both  numerous  and  spontaneous  repetitions  -  one  or 
two  words,  three  at  most.  Because  you  must  be  able  to  use  them  in  all  cases,  when  an  accident  is 
about  to  happen,  for  example.  It  has  to  spring  up  without  thinking,  without  calling:  it  should  issue 
forth  from  the  being  spontaneously,  like  a  reflex,  exactly  like  a  reflex.  Then  the  mantra  has  its  full 
force. 

For  me,  on  the  days  when  I  have  no  special  preoccupations  or  difficulties  (days  I  could  call 
normal,  when  I  am  normal),  everything  I  do,  all  the  movements  of  this  body,  all,  all  the  words  I 
utter,  all  the  gestures  I  make,  are  accompanied  and  upheld  by  or  lined,  as  it  were,  with  this  mantra: 

OM  NAMO  BHAGAVATEH  ...  OM  NAMO  BHAGAVATEH  ... 
all,  all  the  time,  all  the  time,  all  the  time. 

That  is  the  nonnal  state.  It  creates  an  atmosphere  of  an  intensity  almost  more  material  than  the 
subtle  physical;  it’s  like  ...  almost  like  the  phosphorescent  radiations  from  a  medium.  And  it  has  a 
great  action,  a  very  great  action:  it  can  prevent  an  accident.  And  it  accompanies  you  all  the  time,  all 
the  time. 

But  it  is  up  to  you  to  know  what  you  want  to  do  with  it. 

To  sustain  the  aspiration  -  to  remember.  We  so  easily  lapse  into  forgetfulness.  To  create  a  kind 
of  automatism. 

You  have  no  mantras  that  have  come  to  you,  that  give  you  a  more  living  feeling?  ...  Are  their 
mantras  long? 

Yes,  they  are  long.  And  hem  has  not  given  me  any  mantra  of  the  Mother,  so  ...  They  exist,  but  he 
has  not  given  me  any  ...  I  don ’t  know,  they  don  ’t  have  much  effect  on  me.  It  is  something  very 
mental. 

That’s  why  it  should  spring  forth  from  you. 

(silence) 

This  one,  this  mantra,  OM  NAMO  BHAGAVATEFI,  came  to  me  after  some  time,  for  I  felt  ...  well, 
I  saw  that  I  needed  to  have  a  mantra  of  my  own,  that  is,  a  mantra  consonant  with  what  this  body  has 
to  do  in  the  world.  And  it  was  just  then  that  it  came.85  It  was  truly  an  answer  to  a  need  that  had  made 
itself  felt.  So  if  you  feel  the  need  -  not  there,  not  in  your  head,  but  here  (Mother  points  to  the  center 
of  her  heart),  it  will  come.  One  day,  either  you  will  hear  the  words,  or  they  will  spring  forth  from 
your  heart ...  And  when  that  happens,  you  must  hold  onto  it. 


84The  tantric  Swami. 


85The  different  mantras  or  prayers  that  came  to  Mother  and  which  She  grouped  under  the  heading  Prayers  of  the 
Consciousness  of  the  Cells,  are  included  as  an  addendum  to  the  Agenda  of  1959. 


September  19, 1958 


Something  the  modern  world  has  completely  lost  is  the  sense  of  the  sacred. 

‘Ever  since  my  childhood,  I  have  spent  my  time  veiling  myself:  one  veil  over  another  veil  over 
another  veil,  so  as  to  remain  invisible.  Because  to  see  me  without  the  true  attitude  is  the  arch-sin. 
Anyway,  ‘sin’  in  the  sense  Sri  Aurobindo  defines  it  -  meaning  that  things  are  no  longer  in  their 
place. 


October  1, 1958 


(Mother  speaks  of  an  experience  She  had  during,  the  Wednesday  class  at  the  playground:) 

It  was  so  strong,  so  strong  that  it  was  really  inexpressible.  The  negative  expel  fence  of  no  longer 
being  an  individual,  or  in  other  words,  the  dissolution  of  the  ego,  took  place  a  long  time  ago  and 
still  takes  place  quite  often:  the  ego  completely  vanishes.  But  this  was  a  positive  experience  of 
being  ...  not  just  the  universe  in  its  totality,  but  something  else  -  ineffable,  yet  concrete,  absolutely 
concrete!  Unutterable86  -  and  yet  utterly  concrete:  the  divine  Person  beyond  the  Impersonal. 

The  experience  lasted  for  only  a  few  minutes.  And  I  knew,  then,  that  all  our  words  ...  all  our 
words  are  empty.  But  circumstances  were  such  that  I  had  to  speak  ... 


October  4, 1958 


Do  all  our  vibrations  reach  you  or  must  they  have  a  special  intensity? 


86Later,  Mother  added:  ‘Because  I  do  not  say  everything;  when  I  am  in  that  state,  there  is  a  lethargy  of  expression! 


It  must  be  strong  enough  to  pull  me  from  my  concentration  or  my  activity.  If  I  knew  when  you 
concentrate  or  do  your  puja,%1  I  could  tune  into  you,  and  shell  I  would  know  more;  otherwise,  my 
inner  life  is  too  ...  I  am  not  at  all  passive  inwardly,  you  see,  I  am  very  active,  so  I  don’t  usually 
receive  your  vibrations  unless  they  impose  themselves  strongly  or  unless  I  have  decided  beforehand 
to  be  attentive  to  what  is  coming  from  someone  or  other.  If  I  know  that  at  a  given  moment 
something  is  going  to  happen,  then  I  open  a  door,  as  it  were.  But  it’s  difficult  to  speak  of  these 
things. 

When  you  left  on  your  journey,88  for  example,  I  made  a  specie!  concentration  for  all  to  go  well 
so  that  nothing  untoward  happen  to  you.  I  even  made  a  formation  and  asked  for  a  constant,  special 
help  over  you.  Then  I  renewed  my  concentration  every  day,  which  is  how  I  came  to  notice  that  you 
were  invoking  me  very  regulary.  I  Saw  you  everyday,  everyday,  with  a  very  regular  precision.  It 
was  something  that  imposed  itself  on  me,  but  it  imposed  itself  only  because  1  had  initially  made  a 
fonnation  to  follow  you. 

For  people  here  in  the  Ashram,  my  work  is  not  the  same.  It  is  more  like  a  kind  of  atmosphere 
that  extends  everywhere  -  a  very  conscious  atmosphere  -  which  I  let  work  for  each  one  according 
to  his  need.  I  don’t  have  a  special  action  for  each  person,  unless  something  requires  my  special 
attention.  When  I  would  tune  into  you  while  you  were  travelling,  I  clearly  saw  your  image  appear 
before  me,  as  though  you  were  looking  at  me,  but  now  that  you  have  returned  here,  I  no  longer  see 
it.  Rather,  I  receive  a  sensation  or  an  impression;  and  as  these  sensations  and  impressions  are 
innumerable,  it’s  rather  like  one  element  among  many.  It  no  longer  imposes  itself  in  such  an 
entirely  distinct  way  nor  does  it  appear  before  me  in  the  same  manner,  as  a  clear  image  of  yourself, 
as  though  you  wanted  to  know  something. 

As  soon  as  I  am  alone,  I  enter  into  a  very  deep  concentration,  -  a  state  of  consciousness,  a  kind 
of  universal  activity.  Is  it  deep?  What  is  it?  ...  It  is  far  beyond  all  the  mental  regions,  far,  far  beyond, 
and  it  is  constant.  As  soon  as  I  am  alone  or  resting  somewhere,  that’s  how  it  is. 

The  other  day  when  I  was  in  this  state  of  concentration,  I  had  the  vision  that  I  mentioned  to  you. 
I  felt  I  was  being  pulled,  that  something  was  pulling  me  and  trying  to  draw  my  attention.  I  felt  it 
very  strongly.  So  I  opened  my  eyes,  my  mental  eyes  (the  physical  eyes  may  remain  opened  or 
closed,  it  makes  no  difference  either  way;  when  I  am  concentrated,  things  on  the  physical  plane  no 
longer  exist),  I  deliberately  opened  the  mind’s  eyes,  for  that  is  where  I  felt  myself  being  pulled,  and 
then  I  had  this  vision  I  told  you  of.  Someone  was  trying  to  draw  my  attention,  to  tell  me  something. 
It  takes  someone  really  quite  powerful,  with  a  very  great  power  of  concentration,  to  do  that  -  there 
are  certainly  a  great  many  people  here  and  elsewhere  who  try  to  do  this,  yet  I  don’t  feel  a  thing.89 

In  the  outer,  practical  domain,  I  might  suddenly  think  of  someone,  so  I  know  that  this  person  is 
calling  or  thinking  of  me.  When  you  left  on  your  trip,  I  created  a  special  link-up  so  that  if  ever,  at 
any  moment,  you  called  me  for  anything,  I  would  know  it  instantly,  and  I  remained  attentive  and 
alert.  But  I  do  that  only  in  exceptional  cases.  Generally  speaking,  when  I  haven’t  made  this  special 
link-up,  things  keep  coming  in  and  coming  in  and  coming  in  and  coming  in,  and  the  answer  goes 
out  automatically,  here  or  there  or  there  or  there  -  hundreds  and  hundreds  of  things  that  I  don’t  keep 
in  my  memory  because  then  it  would  really  be  frightful.  I  don’t  keep  these  things  in  my 
consciousness;  it  is  rather  a  work  that  is  done  automatically. 

When  you  asked  me  if  X90  were  thinking  of  me,  I  consulted  my  atmosphere  and  saw  that  it  was 
true,  that  even  many  times  a  day  X’s  thoughts  were  coming.  So  I  know  that  he  is  concentrating  on 

87Puja:  ceremony  ,  invocation  or  evocation  of  a  god  (in  this  case,  a  tantric  ritual ). 


88When  the  disciple  became  a  Sannyasi  and  travelled  in  the  Himalayas  with  the  tantric  Swami 


89In  this  vision,  the  d.  ceased  tantric  guru  of  the  guru  who  initiated  Satprem  appeared  to  Mother  in  a  dark  blue  light  and 
‘imposed’  himself  on  her  to  tell  her  certain  things. 


me,  or  something:  it  simply  passes  through  me,  and  I  answer  automatically.  But  I  don’t  particularly 
pay  attention  to  X,  unless  you  ask  me  a  question  about  him,  in  which  case  I  deliberately  tune  into 
him,  then  observe  and  detennine  whether  it’s  like  this  or  like  that.  Whereas  this  vision  the  other  day 
was  something  that  thrust  itself  on  me;  I  was  in  another  region  altogether,  in  my  inner 
contemplation,  my  concentration  -  a  very  strong  concentration  -  when  I  was  forced  to  enter  into 
contact  with  this  being  whose  vision  I  had  and  who  was  obviously  a  very  powerful  being.  After 
telling  me  what  he  had  to  tell  me,  he  went  away  in  a  very  peculiar  way,  not  at  all  suddenly  as  most 
people  appear  and  disappear,  not  at  all  like  that.  When  I  first  saw  him,  there  was  a  living  form  -  the 
being  himself  was  there  -  but  upon  leaving  (probably  to  see  the  effect,  to  find  out  whether  he  had 
truly  succeeded  in  making  himself  understood),  he  left  behind  a  kind  of  image  of  himself. 
Afterwards,  this  image  blurred  and  it  left  only  a  silhouette,  an  outline,  then  it  disappeared  altogether 
leaving  only  an  impression.  That  was  the  last  thing  I  saw.  So  I  kept  the  impression  and  analyzed  it 
to  find  out  exactly  what  was  involved;  all  this  was  filed  away,  and  then  it  was  over.  I  began  my 
concentration  once  again. 

I  intentionally  carry  everybody  in  my  active  consciousness  for  the  work,  and  I  do  the  work 
consciously;  but  the  extent  to  which  people  in  the  world,  or  those  who  are  here  in  the  Ashram,  are 
conscious  of  this  or  receive  the  results  depends  upon  them,  though  not  exclusively. 

The  other  day,  for  example,  though  I  no  longer  recall  exactly  when  (I  forget  everything  on 
purpose)  -  but  it  was  in  the  last  part  of  the  night  -  I  had  a  rather  long  activity  concerning  the  whole 
realization  of  the  Ashram,  notably  in  the  fields  of  education  and  art.  I  was  apparently  inspecting  this 
area  to  see  how  things  were  there,  so  naturally  I  saw  a  certain  number  of  people,  their  work  and 
their  inner  states.  Some  saw  me  and,  at  that  moment,  had  a  vision  of  me.  It  is  likely  that  many  were 
asleep  and  didn’t  notice  anything,  but  some  actually  saw  me.  The  next  morning,  for  example, 
someone  who  works  at  the  theater  told  me  that  she  had  had  a  splendid  vision  of  me  in  which  I  had 
spoken  to  her,  blessed  her,  etc.  This  was  her  way  of  receiving  the  work  I  had  done.  And  this  kind  of 
thing  is  happening  more  and  more,  in  that  my  action  is  awakening  the  consciousness  in  others  more 
and  more  strongly. 

Naturally,  the  reception  is  always  incomplete  or  partially  modified;  when  it  passes  through  the 
individuality,  it  becomes  narrowed,  a  personal  thing.  It  seems  impossible  for  each  one  to  have  a 
consciousness  vast  enough  to  see  the  thing  in  its  entirety. 

You  said  that  our  way  of  receiving  your  work  or  becoming  conscious  of  it  does  not  ‘exclusively  ’ 

depend  upon  us.  What  do  you  mean? 

It  depends  upon  the  progress  in  the  consciousness.  The  more  the  action  is  supramentalized,  the 
more  its  reception  is  IMPOSED  upon  the  consciousness  of  each  one.  The  action’s  progress  makes  it 
more  and  more  perceptible  IN  SPITE  OF  each  one’s  condition.  The  milieu  obviously  limits  and 
alters  -  distorts  -  what  it  receives,  but  the  quality  of  the  Work  acts  upon  this  receptivity  and 
imposes  itself  on  it  in  a  more  and  more  efficient  and  imperious  way. 

There  is  an  interdependence  between  the  individual  progress  and  the  collective  progress, 
between  that  which  works  and  that  which  is  worked  upon.  It  proceeds  like  this  (gesture  of 
intermeshing),  and  as  one  progresses,  the  other  progresses.  The  progress  above  not  only  hastens  the 
progress  below  but  brings  the  two  nearer  together,  thus  changing  the  distance  in  the  relationship; 
that  is,  the  distance  will  not  remain  the  same,  the  ratio  between  the  progress  here  and  the  progress 
above  won’t  always  be  identical. 

The  progress  above  follows  a  certain  trajectory,  and  in  some  cases  the  distance  increases,  in 
others  it  decreases  (although  on  the  whole,  the  distance  remains  relatively  unchanged),  but  my 
feeling  is  that  the  collective  receptivity  will  increase  as  the  action  becomes  increasingly 
supramentalized.  And  the  need  for  an  individual  receptivity  -  with  all  its  distortions  and  alterations 


90The  disciple’s  tantric  guru. 


and  limitations  -  will  decrease  in  importance  as  the  supramental  influence  increasingly  imposes  its 
power.  This  influence  will  impose  itself  in  such  a  way  that  it  will  no  longer  be  subject  to  the  defects 
in  receptivity. 

(Shortly  afterwards,  concerning  the  experience  of  Wednesday,  October  1:  the  divine  Person  beyond 

the  Impersonal) 

Before,  I  always  had  the  negative  experience  of  the  disappearance  of  the  ego,  of  the  oneness  of 
Creation,  where  everything  implying  separation  disappeared  -  an  experience  that,  personally,  I 
would  call  negative.  Last  Wednesday,  while  I  was  speaking  (and  that’s  why  at  the  end  I  could  no 
longer  find  my  words),  I  seemed  suddenly  to  have  left  this  negative  phenomenon  and  entered  into 
the  positive  experience:  the  experience  of  BEING  the  Supreme  Lord,  the  experience  that  nothing 
exists  but  the  Supreme  Lord  -  all  is  the  Supreme  Lord,  there  is  nothing  else.  And  at  that  moment, 
the  feeling  of  this  infinite  power  that  has  no  limit,  that  nothing  can  limit,  was  so  overwhelming  that 
all  the  functions  of  the  body,  of  this  mental  machine  that  summons  up  words,  all  this  was  ...  I  could 
no  longer  speak  French.  Perhaps  the  words  could  have  come  to  me  in  English  -  probably,  because  it 
was  easier  for  Sri  Aurobindo  to  express  himself  in  English,  and  that’s  how  it  must  have  happened:  it 
was  the  part  embodied  in  Sri  Aurobindo  (the  part  of  the  Supreme  that  was  embodied  in  Sri 
Aurobindo  for  its  manifestation)  that  had  the  experience.  This  is  what  joined  back  with  the  Origin 
and  caused  the  experience  -  I  was  well  aware  of  it.  And  that  is  probably  why  its  transcription 
through  English  words  would  have  been  easier  than  through  French  words  (for  at  these  moments, 
such  activities  are  purely  mechanical,  rather  like  automatic  machines).  And  naturally  the  experience 
left  something  behind.  It  left  the  sense  of  a  power  that  can  no  longer  be  ‘qualified,’91  really.  And  it 
was  there  yesterday  evening. 

The  difficulty  -  it’s  not  even  a  difficulty,  it’s  just  a  kind  of  precaution  that  is  taken 
(automatically,  in  fact)  in  order  to  ...  For  example,  the  volume  of  Force  that  was  to  be  expressed  in 
the  voice  was  too  great  for  the  speech  organ.  So  I  had  to  be  a  little  attentive  -  that  is,  there  had  to  be 
a  kind  of  filtering  in  the  outermost  expression,  otherwise  the  voice  would  have  cracked.  But  this 
isn’t  done  through  the  will  and  reason,  it’s  automatic.  Yet  I  feel  that  ...  the  capacity  of  Matter  to 
contain  and  express  is  increasing  with  phenomenal  speed.  But  it’s  progressive,  it  can’t  be  done 
instantly.  There  have  often  been  people  whose  outer  fonn  broke  because  the  Force  was  too  strong; 
well,  I  clearly  see  that  it  is  being  dosed  out.  After  all,  this  is  exclusively  the  concern  of  the  Supreme 
Lord,  I  don’t  bother  about  it  -  it’s  not  my  concern  and  I  don’t  bother  about  it  -  He  makes  the 
necessary  adjustments.  Thus  it  comes  progressively,  little  by  little,  so  that  no  fundamental 
disequilibrium  occurs.  It  gives  the  impression  that  one’s  head  is  swelling  so  tremendously  it  will 
burst!  But  then  if  there  is  a  moment  of  stillness,  it  adapts;  gradually,  it  adapts. 

Only,  one  must  be  careful  to  keep  the  ‘sense  of  the  Unmanifest’  sufficiently  present  so  that  the 
various  things  -  the  elements,  the  cells  and  all  that  -  have  time  to  adapt.  The  sense  of  the 
Unmanifest,  or  in  other  words,  to  step  back  into  the  Unmanifest. 92  This  is  what  all  those  who  have 
had  experiences  have  done,  they  always  believed  that  there  was  no  possibility  of  adaptation,  so  they 
left  their  bodies  and  went  off. 


H=  *  * 


(Towards  the  end  of  the  conversation,  about  money:) 

Money  belongs  to  the  one  who  spends  it;  that  is  an  absolute  law.  You  may  pile  up  money,  but  it 
91  We  believe  that  Mother  used  the  word  ‘qualified’  in  the  sense  of  restrict,  limit  Or  modify  -  a  limitless  Power. 


92The  vastness  beyond  the  creation  or  the  cosmic  manifestation,  the  solid  base  upon  which  all  the  rest  can  unfold. 


doesn’t  belong  to  you  until  you  spend  it.  Then  you  have  the  merit,  the  glory,  the  joy,  the  pleasure  of 
spending  it! 

Money  is  meant  to  circulate.  What  should  remain  constant  is  the  progressive  movement  of  an 
increase  in  the  earth’s  production  -  an  ever-expanding  progressive  movement  to  increase  the  earth’s 
production  and  improve  existence  on  earth.  It  is  the  material  improvement  of  terrestrial  life  and  the 
growth  of  the  earth’s  production  that  must  go  on  expanding,  enlarging,  and  not  this  silly  paper  or 
this  inert  metal  that  is  amassed  and  lifeless. 

Money  is  not  meant  to  generate  money;  money  should  generate  an  increase  in  production,  an 
improvement  in  the  conditions  of  life  and  a  progress  in  human  consciousness.  This  is  its  true  use. 
What  I  call  an  improvement  in  consciousness,  a  progress  in  consciousness,  is  everything  that 
education  in  all  its  forms  can  provide  -  not  as  it’s  generally  understood,  but  as  we  understand  it 
here:  education  in  art,  education  in  ...  from  the  education  of  the  body,  from  the  most  material 
progress,  to  the  spiritual  education  and  progress  through  yoga;  the  whole  spectrum,  everything  that 
leads  humanity  towards  its  future  realization.  Money  should  serve  to  augment  that  and  to  augment 
the  material  base  for  the  earth’s  progress,  the  best  use  of  what  the  earth  can  give  -  its  intelligent 
utilization,  not  the  utilization  that  wastes  and  loses  energies.  The  use  that  allows  energies  to  be 
replenished. 

In  the  universe  there  is  an  inexhaustible  source  of  energy  that  asks  only  to  be  replenished;  if  you 
know  how  to  go  about  it,  it  is  replenished.  Instead  of  draining  life  and  the  energies  of  our  earth  and 
making  of  it  something  parched  and  inert,  we  must  know  the  practical  exercise  for  replenishing  the 
energy  constantly.  And  these  are  not  just  words;  I  know  how  it’s  to  be  done,  and  science  is  in  the 
process  of  thoroughly  finding  out  -  it  has  found  out  most  admirably.  But  instead  of  using  it  to 
satisfy  human  passions,  instead  of  using  what  science  has  found  so  that  men  may  destroy  each  other 
more  effectively  than  they  are  presently  doing,  it  must  be  used  to  enrich  the  earth:  to  enrich  the 
earth,  to  make  the  earth  richer  and  richer,  more  active,  generous,  productive  and  to  make  all  life 
grow  towards  its  maximum  efficiency.  This  is  the  true  use  of  money.  And  if  it’s  not  used  like  that, 
it’s  a  vice  -  a  ‘short  circuit’  and  a  vice. 

But  how  many  people  know  how  to  use  it  in  this  way?  Very  few,  which  is  why  they  have  to  be 
taught.  What  I  call  ‘teach’  is  to  show,  to  give  the  example.  We  want  to  be  the  example  of  true  living 
in  the  world.  It’s  a  challenge  I  am  placing  before  the  whole  financial  world:  I  am  telling  them  that 
they  are  in  the  process  of  withering  and  ruining  the  earth  with  their  idiotic  system;  and  with  even 
less  than  they  are  now  spending  for  useless  things  -  merely  for  inflating  something  that  has  no 
inherent  life,  that  should  be  only  an  instrument  at  the  service  of  life,  that  has  no  reality  in  itself,  that 
is  only  a  means  and  not  an  end  (they  make  an  end  of  something  that  is  only  a  means)  -  well  then, 
instead  of  making  of  it  an  end,  they  should  make  it  the  means.  With  what  they  have  at  their  disposal 
they  could  ...  oh,  transform  the  earth  so  quickly!  Transform  it,  put  it  into  contact,  truly  into  contact, 
with  the  supramental  forces  that  would  make  life  bountiful  and,  indeed,  constantly  renewed  - 
instead  of  becoming  withered,  stagnant,  shrivelled  up:  a  future  moon.  A  dead  moon. 

We  are  told  that  in  a  few  millions  or  billions  of  years,  the  earth  will  become  some  kind  of  moon. 
The  movement  should  be  the  opposite:  the  earth  should  become  more  and  more  a  resplendent  sun, 
but  a  sun  of  life.  Not  a  sun  that  burns,  but  a  sun  that  illumines  -  a  radiant  glory. 


Undated  1958 


(Concerning  Finances 93 ) 

Money  is  a  force  and  should  not  be  an  individual  possession,  no  more  than  air,  water  or  fire. 
To  begin  with,  the  abolishment  of  inheritance. 

*  *  * 


Financial  power  is  the  materialization  of  a  vital  force  turned  into  one  of  the  greatest  powers  of 
action:  the  power  to  attract  acquire,  and  utilize. 

Like  all  the  other  powers,  it  must  be  put  at  the  service  of  the  Divine. 


October  6, 1958 

When  I  am  not  in  my  body,  I  have  all  kinds  of  contacts  with  people,  contacts  of  different  types.  And 
it’s  not  a  thing  decided  in  advance,  it  is  not  willed,  it  is  not  even  thought  out;  it  is  simply  ... 
observed. 

Certain  relationships  are  entirely  within  me,  entirely.  It  is  not  a  relationship  between  individuals, 
but  a  relationship  between  states  of  being  -  which  means  that  with  the  same  individual  there  may  be 
many  different  relationships.  If  it  were  a  single  whole  ...  but  I  am  still  not  sure  if  there  is  a  single 
person  with  whom  the  relationship  is  global. 

So  there  are  parts  which  are  entirely  within  me,  entirely  -  there  is  no  difference;  they  are  myself. 
There  are  other  parts  with  which  I  am  conscious  of  an  exchange  -  a  very  familiar,  very  intimate 
exchange.  And  there  are  parts  outside  of  me  with  which  I  still  have  relationships,  not  exactly  as 
with  strangers  but  merely  as  acquaintances;  it  is  still  necessary  to  observe  their  reactions  in  order  to 
do  the  correct  thing.  And  the  ratio  between  these  different  parts  is  naturally  different  depending 
upon  the  different  individuals. 


*  *  * 


(The  disciple  complains  of  his  difficulties) 

Difficulties  are  sent  to  us  exclusively  to  make  the  realization  more  perfect. 

Each  time  we  try  to  realize  something  and  we  encounter  a  resistance  or  an  obstacle,  or  even  a 
failure  -  what  appears  to  be  a  failure  -  we  should  know,  we  should  NEVER  forget,  that  it  is 
exclusively,  absolutely,  to  make  the  realization  more  perfect. 


93Note  written  by  Mother  in  French.  The  heading  is  hers. 


So  this  habit  of  cringing,  of  being  discouraged  or  even  feeling  ill  at  ease  or  abusing  oneself, 
saying,  ‘There,  I’ve  done  it  again  All  this  is  absolute  foolishness. 

Rather,  simply  say,  ‘We  do  not  know  how  to  do  things  as  they  should  be  done,  well  then,  let 
them  be  done  for  us  and  come  what  may!’  If  we  could  only  see  how  everything  that  looks  like  a 
difficulty,  an  error,  a  failure  or  an  obstacle  is  simply  there  to  help  us  make  the  realization  more 
perfect. 

Once  we  know  this,  everything  becomes  easy. 


October  10, 1958 


(The  disciple  asks  to  know  what  he  must  do  and  what  his  place  is  in  the  universal  manifestation) 

In  all  religious  and  especially  occult  initiations,  the  ritual  of  the  different  ceremonies  is  prescribed 
in  every  detail;  all  the  words  pronounced,  all  the  gestures  made  have  their  importance,  and  the  least 
infraction  of  the  rule,  the  least  fault  committed  can  have  fatal  consequences.  It  is  the  same  in 
material  life  -  if  one  had  the  initiation  into  the  true  way  of  living,  one  could  transfonn  physical 
existence. 

If  we  consider  the  body  as  the  tabernacle  of  the  Lord,  then  medical  science,  for  example, 
becomes  the  initiatory  ritual  of  the  service  of  the  temple,  and  doctors  of  all  kinds  are  the  officiating 
priests  in  the  different  rituals  of  worship.  Thus,  medicine  is  really  a  priesthood  and  should  be  treated 
as  such. 

The  same  can  be  said  of  physical  culture  and  of  all  the  sciences  that  are  concerned  with  the  body 
and  its  workings.  If  the  material  universe  is  considered  as  the  outer  sheath  and  the  manifestation  of 
the  Supreme,  then  it  can  generally  be  said  that  all  the  physical  sciences  are  the  rituals  of  worship. 

We  always  come  back  to  the  same  thing:  the  absolute  necessity  for  perfect  sincerity,  perfect 
honesty  and  a  sense  of  the  dignity  of  all  we  do  so  that  we  may  do  it  as  it  should  be  done. 

If  we  could  truly,  perfectly  know  all  the  details  of  the  ceremony  of  life,  the  worship  of  the  Lord 
in  physical  life,  it  would  be  wonderful  -  to  know,  and  no  longer  to  err,  never  again  to  err.  To 
perfonn  the  ceremony  as  perfectly  as  an  initiation. 

To  know  life  utterly  ...  Oh,  there  is  a  very  interesting  thing  in  this  regard!  And  it’s  strange,  but 
this  particular  knowledge  reminds  me  of  one  of  my  Sutras94  (which  I  read  out,  but  no  one 
understood  or  understood  only  vaguely,  Tike  that’): 

‘It  is  the  Supreme  Lord  who  has  ineluctably  decreed  the  place  you  occupy  in  the  universal 

concert,  but  whatever  be  this  place,  you  have  equally  the  same  right  as  all  others  to  ascend  the 

supreme  summits  right  to  the  supramental  realization.  ’ 


94see  Agenda  1957,  p.  119. 


There  is  one’s  position  in  the  universal  hierarchy,  which  is  something  ineluctable  -  it  is  the  eternal 
law  -  and  there  is  the  development  in  the  manifestation,  which  is  an  education;  it  is  progressive  and 
done  from  within  the  being.  What  is  remarkable  is  that  to  become  a  perfect  being,  this  position  - 
whatever  it  is,  decreed  since  all  eternity,  a  part  of  the  eternal  Truth  -  must  manifest  with  the  greatest 
possible  perfection  as  a  result  of  evolutionary  growth.  It  is  the  junction,  the  union  of  the  two,  the 
eternal  position  and  the  evolutionary  realization,  that  will  make  the  total  and  perfect  being,  and  the 
manifestation  as  the  Lord  has  willed  it  since  the  beginning  of  all  eternity  (which  has  no  beginning  at 
all!  ). 

And  for  the  cycle  to  be  complete,  one  cannot  stop  on  the  way  at  any  plane,  not  even  the  highest 
spiritual  plane  nor  the  plane  closest  to  matter  (like  the  occult  plane  in  the  vital,  for  example).  One 
must  descend  right  into  matter,  and  this  perfection  in  manifestation  must  be  a  material  perfection,  or 
otherwise  the  cycle  is  not  complete  -  which  explains  why  those  who  want  to  flee  in  order  to  realize 
the  divine  Will  are  in  error.  What  must  be  done  is  exactly  the  opposite!  The  two  must  be  combined 
in  a  perfect  way.  This  is  why  all  the  honest  sciences,  the  sciences  that  are  practiced  sincerely, 
honestly,  exclusively  with  a  will  to  know,  are  difficult  paths  -  yet  such  sure  paths  for  the  total 
realization. 

It  brings  up  very  interesting  things.  (What  I  am  going  to  say  now  is  very  personal  and 
consequently  cannot  be  used,  but  it  may  be  kept  anyway:) 

There  are  two  parallel  things  that,  from  the  eternal  and  supreme  point  of  view,  are  of  identical 
importance,  in  that  both  are  equally  essential  for  the  realization  to  be  a  true  realization. 

On  the  one  hand,  there  is  what  Sri  Aurobindo  -  who,  as  the  Avatar,  represented  the  supreme 
Consciousness  and  Will  on  earth  -  declared  me  to  be,  that  is,  the  supreme  universal  Mother;  and  on 
the  other  hand,  there  is  what  I  am  realizing  in  my  body  through  the  integral  sadhana.95 1  could  be  the 
supreme  Mother  and  not  do  any  sadhana,  and  as  a  matter  of  fact,  as  long  as  Sri  Aurobindo  was  in 
his  body,  it  was  he  who  did  the  sadhana,  and  I  received  the  effects.  These  effects  were  automatically 
established  in  the  outer  being,  but  he  was  the  one  doing  it,  not  I  -  I  was  merely  the  bridge  between 
his  sadhana  and  the  world.  Only  when  he  left  his  body  was  I  forced  to  take  up  the  sadhana  myself; 
not  only  did  I  have  to  do  what  I  was  doing  before  -  being  a  bridge  between  his  sadhana  and  the 
world  -  but  I  had  to  carry  on  the  sadhana  myself.  When  he  left,  he  turned  over  to  me  the 
responsibility  for  what  he  himself  had  been  doing  in  his  body,  and  I  had  to  do  it.  So  there  are  both 
these  things.  Sometimes  one  predominates,  sometimes  the  other  (I  don’t  mean  successively  in  time, 
but  ...  it  depends  on  the  moment),  and  they  are  trying  to  combine  in  a  total  and  perfect  realization: 
the  eternal,  ineffable  and  immutable  Consciousness  of  the  Executrice  of  the  Supreme,  and  the 
consciousness  of  the  Sadhak  of  the  integral  Yoga  who  strives  in  an  ascending  effort  towards  an  ever 
increasing  progression. 

To  this  has  been  added  a  growing  initiation  into  the  supramental  realization  which  is  (I 
understand  it  well  now)  the  perfect  union  of  what  comes  from  above  and  what  comes  from  below, 
or  in  other  words,  the  eternal  position  and  the  evolutionary  realization. 

Then  -  and  this  becomes  rather  amusing  like  life’s  play  ...  Depending  upon  each  one’s  nature 
and  position  and  bias,  and  because  human  beings  are  very  limited,  very  partial  and  incapable  of  a 
global  vision,  there  are  those  who  believe,  who  have  faith,  or  to  whom  the  eternal  Mother  is 
revealed  through  Grace,  who  have  this  kind  of  relationship  with  the  eternal  Mother  -  and  there  are 
those  who  themselves  are  plunged  in  sadhana,  who  have  the  consciousness  of  a  developed  sadhak, 
and  thereby  have  the  same  relationship  with  me  as  one  has  with  what  they  generally  call  a  ‘realized 
soul.’  Such  persons  consider  me  the  prototype  of  the  Guru  teaching  a  new  way,  but  the  others  don’t 
have  this  relationship  of  sadhak  to  Guru  (I  am  taking  the  two  extremes,  but  of  course  there  are  all 
the  possibilities  in  between),  they  are  only  in  contact  with  the  eternal  Mother  and,  in  the  simplicity 
of  their  hearts,  they  expect  Her  to  do  everything  for  them.  If  they  were  perfect  in  this  attitude,  the 


95 Sadhana:  yogic  discipline.  Sadhak:  seeker. 


eternal  Mother  would  do  everything  for  them  -  as  a  matter  of  fact,  She  does  do  everything,  but  as 
they  aren’t  perfect,  they  cannot  receive  it  totally.  But  the  two  paths  are  very  different,  the  two  kinds 
of  relationships  are  very  different;  and  as  we  all  live  according  to  the  law  of  external  things,  in  a 
material  body,  there  is  a  kind  of  annoyance,  an  almost  irritated  misunderstanding,  between  those 
who  follow  this  path  (not  consciously  and  intentionally,  but  spontaneously),  who  have  this 
relationship  of  the  child  to  the  Mother,  and  those  who  have  this  other  relationship  of  the  sadhak  to 
the  Guru.  So  it  creates  a  whole  play,  with  an  infinite  diversity  of  shades. 

But  all  this  is  still  in  suspense,  on  the  way  to  realization,  moving  forward  progressively; 
therefore,  unless  we  are  able  to  see  the  outcome,  we  can’t  understand  a  thing.  We  get  confused. 
Only  when  we  see  the  outcome,  the  final  realization,  only  when  we  have  TOUCHED  there,  will 
everything  be  understood  -  then  it  will  be  as  clear  and  as  simple  as  can  be.  But  meanwhile,  my 
relationships  with  different  people  are  very  funny,  utterly  amusing! 

Those  who  have  what  I  would  call  the  more  ‘outer’  relationship  compared  to  the  other  (although 
it  is  not  really  so)  -  the  relationship  of  yoga,  of  sadhana  -  consider  the  others  superstitious;  and  the 
others,  who  have  faith  01  perception,  or  the  Grace  to  have  understood  what  Sri  Aurobindo  meant 
(perhaps  even  before  knowing  what  he  said,  but  in  any  event,  after  he  said  it),  discard  the  others  as 
ignorant  unbelievers!  And  there  are  all  the  gradations  in  between,  so  it  really  becomes  quite  funny! 

It  opens  up  extraordinary  horizons;  once  you  have  understood  this,  you  have  the  key  -  you  have 
the  key  to  many,  many  things:  the  different  positions  of  each  of  the  different  saints,  the  different 
realizations  and  ...  it  resolves  all  the  incoherencies  of  the  various  manifestations  on  earth. 

For  example,  this  question  of  Power  -  THE  Power  -  over  Matter.  Those  who  perceive  me  as  the 
eternal,  universal  Mother  and  Sri  Aurobindo  as  the  Avatar  are  surprised  that  our  power  is  not 
absolute.  They  are  surprised  that  we  have  not  merely  to  say,  ‘Let  it  be  thus’  for  it  to  be  ‘thus.’  This 
is  because,  in  the  integral  realization,  the  union  of  the  two  is  essential:  a  union  of  the  power  that 
proceeds  from  the  eternal  position  and  the  power  that  proceeds  from  the  sadhana  through 
evolutionary  growth.  Similarly,  how  is  it  that  those  who  have  reached  even  the  summits  of  yogic 
knowledge  (I  was  thinking  of  Swami)  need  to  resort  to  beings  like  gods  or  demigods  to  be  able  to 
realize  things?  -  Because  they  have  indeed  united  with  certain  higher  forces  and  entities,  but  it  was 
not  decreed  since  the  beginning  of  time  that  they  were  this  particular  being.  They  were  not  born  as 
this  or  that,  but  through  evolution  they  united  with  a  latent  possibility  in  themselves.  Each  one 
carries  the  Eternal  within  himself,  but  one  can  join  Him  only  when  one  has  realized  the  complete 
union  of  the  latent  Eternal  with  the  eternal  Eternal. 

And  ...  this  explains  everything,  absolutely  everything:  how  it  works,  how  it  functions  in  the 
world.96 1  was  saying  to  myself,  ‘But  I  have  no  powers,  I  have  no  powers!’  Several  days  ago,  I  said, 
‘But  after  all,  I  KNOW  WHO  is  there,  I  know,  yet  how  is  it  that ...  ?  There,  up  to  there  (the  level  of 
the  head),  it  is  all-powerful,  nothing  can  resist  -  but  here  ...  it  is  ineffective.’  So  those  who  have 
faith,  even  an  ignorant  but  real  faith  (it  can  be  ignorant  but  nevertheless  it  is  real),  say,  ‘What!  How 
can  you  have  no  powers?’  ...  Because  the  sadhana  is  not  yet  over. 

The  Lord  will  possess  his  universe  only  when  the  universe  will  have  consciously  become  the 
Lord. 


96Mother  added:  ‘The  most  beautiful  part  of  the  experience  is  missing  ...  When  I  try  to  fonnulate  something  in  too 
precise  a  way,  all  the  vastness  of  the  experience  evaporates.  The  entire  world  is  being  revealed  in  all  its  organization 
down  to  the  minutes”  details  -  but  everything  simultaneously  -  how  can  that  be  explained?  It’s  not  possible.’ 


October  17, 1958 


(Mother  brings  with  her  the  continuation  of  the  first  seven  Sutras  written  by  Her ,  probably  in 

1957 91 ) 


They  are  in  two  groups. 

The  first  group  ends  with  a  helping  hand  to  those  who  have  made  the  wrong  choice  (!): 

7)  But  even  in  the  event  you  have  not  made  the  irrevocable  decision  at  the  outset,  should  you 
have  the  good  fortune  to  live  during  one  of  these  unimaginable  hours  of  universal  history  when  the 
Grace  is  present,  embodied  upon  earth,  It  will  offer  you,  at  certain  exceptional  moments,  the 
renewed  possibility  of  making  a  final  choice  that  will  lead  you  straight  to  the  goal. 

That  was  the  message  of  hope. 

And  then  it  continues  (Mother  reads): 

8)  All  division  in  the  being  is  an  insincerity. 

9)  The  greatest  insincerity  is  to  carve  an  abyss  between  one’s  body  and  the  truth  of  one’s  being. 

10)  When  an  abyss  separates  the  true  being  from  the  physical  being,  Nature  immediately  fills  it 
with  all  the  hostile  suggestions,  of  which  the  most  deadly  is  fear  and  the  most  pernicious,  doubt. 

I  wrote  that  before  reading  Sri  Aurobindo’s  aphorism  on  ‘the  sentinels  of  Nature.’98  I  found  it 
very  interesting  and  I  said  to  myself,  ‘Well!  That’s  exactly  what  came  to  me!’ 

There  is  still  one  more  (but  it  is  not  the  last): 

11)  Allow  nothing,  nowhere,  to  deny  the  truth  of  your  being:  that  is  sincerity. 


October  25, 1958 


(Concerning  the  disciple ’s  tantric  guru) 

When  X  does  his  puja,  I  clearly  see  the  particular  form  of  the  Mother  he  is  invoking  -  I  see  her 
97Seep.  119. 


98‘If  mankind  only  caught  a  glimpse  of  what  infinite  enjoyments,  what  perfect  forces,  what  luminous  reaches  of 
spontaneous  knowledge,  what  wide  calms  of  our  being  lie  waiting  for  us  in  the  tracts  which  our  animal  evolution  has 
not  yet  conquered,  they  would  leave  all  and  never  rest  till  they  had  gained  these  treasures.  But  the  way  is  narrow,  the 
doors  are  hard  to  force,  and  fear,  distrust  and  scepticism  are  there,  sentinels  of  Nature  to  forbid  the  turning  away  of  our 
feet  from  less  ordinary  pastures.’  (Cent.  Ed.  Vol.  XVII,  p.  79) 


descending. 

Each  one  is  in  touch  with  the  universal  expression  of  an  aspect  or  a  will  or  a  mode  of  the 
Supreme,  and  if  one  aspires  for  this,  it  is  this  that  comes,  with  an  extraordinary  plasticity.  And  when 
that  happens,  I  even  become  the  Witness  (not  the  witness  in  the  way  of  the  Purusha99  :  a  witness  far 
more  ...  infinite  and  eternal  than  the  Purusha).  I  see  what  responds,  why  it  responds,  how  it 
responds.  This  is  how  I  know  what  people  want  (not  here  below,  nor  even  in  their  highest 
aspiration).  I  see  it  even  when  the  people  themselves  are  no  longer  conscious  -  or  rather,  not  yet 
conscious  (for  me,  it’s  ‘no  longer,’  but  anyway  ...  ),  when  they  are  not  yet  conscious  of  this 
identification  somewhere.  Even  then  I  see  it. 

It’s  interesting. 

They  do  pujas  to  all  these  forces  or  divinities,  but  it  is  not ...  it  is  not  the  highest  Truth.  What  Sri 
Aurobindo  called  the  true  ‘surrender,’  the  surrender  to  the  Supreme,  is  a  truth  higher  than  that  of 
relying  solely  upon  oneself. 

And  that  is  what  always  brings  in  complications,  conflicts.  I  was  surprised  that  the  atmosphere 
[of  the  Ashram]  is  filled  with  conflict  when  he  is  here  -  but  that  is  the  reason. 100 

Why  aren’t  people  conscious  of  this  identification  while  having  it  in  a  part  of  their  being? 

Between  the  outer  consciousness  and  the  deepest  consciousness  there  are  truly  holes  -  which  are 
‘missing  links’  between  states  of  being  and  which  have  to  be  built,  but  they  don’t  know  how  to  do 
it.  So  their  first  reaction  when  they  go  within  is  panic!  They  feel  they  are  falling  into  night,  into 
nothingness,  into  non-being! 

I  had  a  Danish  friend,  an  artist,  to  whom  this  happened.  He  wanted  me  to  teach  him  how  to  go 
out  of  his  body.  He  had  interesting  dreams  so  he  thought  it  might  be  worthwhile  to  go  there 
consciously.  I  helped  him  to  ‘go  out’  -  but  it  was  frightful!  ...  When  he  dreamed,  a  part  of  his  mind 
indeed  remained  conscious,  active,  and  a  kind  of  link  remained  between  this  active  part  and  his 
outer  being,  so  he  remembered  some  of  his  dreams,  but  it  was  only  a  very  partial  phenomenon.  To 
go  out  of  your  body  means  that  you  must  gradually  pass  through  ALL  the  states  of  being,  if  you  are 
to  do  it  systematically.  But  already  in  the  subtle  physical  it  was  almost  non-individualized,  and  as 
soon  as  he  went  a  bit  further,  there  was  no  longer  anything!  It  was  unfonned,  nonexistent. 

So  they  sit  down  (they  are  told  to  interiorize,  to  go  within  themselves),  and  they  panic!  - 
Naturally  they  feel  that  they  ...  that  they  are  disappearing:  there  is  nothing!  There  is  no 
consciousness! 


November  2, 1958 


99 Purusha:  the  Being  or  the  Self  that  witnesses  and  supports  the  Becoming. 


lOOThe  occult  atmosphere  of  tantric  pujas  invokes  forces  that  do  not  coincide  with  the  completely  different  atmosphere 
and  the  completely  different  attitude  of  the  supramental  yoga. 


Last  night,  I  thought,  ‘My  god!  If  I  have  to  Individually,  with  this  one  or  that  one,  by  selecting 
the  best,  I  could  get  somewhere,  but  this  ...  this  mass.101  Swami  had  told  me  so  -  he  told  me 
immediately  after  his  first  meditation  (collective  meditation  at  the  Ashram  playground ),  he  told  me, 
‘The  stuff  is  not  good!  ’  (Mother  laughs) 

I  didn’t  press  the  matter. 

All  this  together  constitutes  one  collective  entity,  and  the  individual  is  lost  in  it.  If  I  had  to  deal 
with  this  person  or  that  person  individually,  it  would  be  different.  But  all  together,  taking  them  all 
together  as  a  collective  entity,  well,  it’s  not  brilliant. 


November  4, 1958 


(Concerning;  the  Agenda  of  August  9,  1958,  on  the  gods  of the  Pur  anas) 

The  gods  of  the  Puranas  are  merciless  gods  who  respect  only  power  and  have  nothing  of  the  true 
love,  charity  or  profound  goodness  that  the  Divine  has  put  into  the  human  consciousness  -  and 
which  compensate  psychically  for  all  the  outer  defects.  They  themselves  have  nothing  of  this,  they 
have  no  psychic.102  The  Puranic  gods  have  no  psychic,  so  they  act  according  to  their  power.  They 
are  restrained  only  when  their  power  is  not  all-powerful,  that’s  all. 

But  what  does  Anusuya  represent?103 

She  is  a  portrait  of  the  ideal  woman  according  to  the  Hindu  conception,  the  woman  who  worships 
her  husband  as  a  god,  which  means  that  she  sees  the  Supreme  in  her  husband.  And  so  this  woman 
was  much  more  powerful  than  all  the  gods  of  the  Puranas  precisely  because  she  had  this  psychic 
capacity  for  total  self-giving;  and  her  faith  in  the  Supreme’s  presence  in  her  husband  gave  her  a 
much  greater  power  than  that  of  all  the  gods. 

The  story  narrated  in  the  film  went  like  this:  Narada,  as  usual,  was  having  fun.  (Narada  is  a 
demigod  with  a  divine  position  -  that  is,  he  can  communicate  with  man  and  with  the  gods  as  he 
pleases,  and  he  serves  as  an  intermediary,  but  then  he  likes  to  have  fun!)  So  he  was  quarrelling  with 
one  of  the  goddesses,  I  no  longer  recall  which  one,  and  he  told  her  ...  (Ah,  yes!  The  quarrel  was 
with  Saraswati.)  Saraswati  was  telling  him  that  knowledge  is  much  greater  than  love  (much  greater 


lOlMother  is  referring  to  the  Ashram  as  a  collectivity. 


102In  Sri  Aurobindo’s  and  Mother’s  tenninology,  ‘psychic’  or  ‘psychic  being’  means  the  soul  or  the  portion  of  the 
Supreme  in  man  which  evolves  from  life  to  life  until  it  becomes  a  fully  self-conscious  being.  The  soul  is  a  special 
capacity  or  grace  of  human  beings  on  earth. 


103The  film  on  August  5. 


in  that  it  is  much  more  powerful  than  love),  and  he  replied  to  her,  ‘You  don’t  know  what  you’re 
talking  about!  (Mother  laughs)  Love  is  much  more  powerful  than  knowledge.’  So  she  challenged 
him,  saying,  ‘Well  then,  prove  it  to  me.’  -  ‘I  shall  prove  it  to  you,’  he  replied.  And  the  whole  story 
starts  there.  He  began  creating  a  whole  imbroglio  on  earth  just  to  prove  his  point. 

It  was  only  a  film  story,  but  anyway,  the  goddesses,  the  three  wives  of  the  Trimurti  -  that  is,  the 
consort  of  Brahma,  the  consort  of  Vishnu  and  the  consort  of  Shiva  -  joined  forces  (!)  and  tried  all 
kinds  of  things  to  foil  Narada.  I  no  longer  recall  the  details  of  the  story  ...  Oh  yes,  the  story  begins 
like  this:  one  of  the  three  -  I  believe  it  was  Shiva’s  consort,  Parvati  (she  was  the  worst  one,  by  the 
way!)  -  was  doing  her  puja.  Shiva  was  in  meditation,  and  she  began  doing  her  puja  in  front  of  him; 
she  was  using  an  oil  lamp  for  the  puja,  and  the  lamp  fell  down  and  burned  her  foot.  She  cried  out 
because  she  had  burned  her  foot.  So  Shiva  at  once  came  out  of  his  meditation  and  said  to  her,  ‘What 
is  it,  Devi?’  (laughter)  She  answered,  ‘I  burned  my  foot!’  Then  Narada  said,  ‘Aren’t  you  ashamed 
of  what  you  have  done?  -  to  make  Shiva  come  out  of  his  meditation  simply  because  you  have  a 
little  burn  on  your  foot,  which  cannot  even  hurt  you  since  you  are  immortal!’  She  became  furious 
and  snapped  at  him,  ‘Show  me  that  it  can  be  otherwise!’  Narada  replied,  ‘I  am  going  to  show  you 
what  it  is  to  really  love  one’s  husband  -  you  don’t  know  anything  about  it!  ’ 

Then  comes  the  story  of  Anusuya  and  her  husband  (who  is  truly  a  husband  ...  a  very  good  man, 
but  well,  not  a  god,  after  all!),  who  was  sleeping  with  his  head  resting  upon  Anusuya’s  knees.  They 
had  finished  their  puja  (both  of  them  were  worshippers  of  Shiva),  and  after  their  puja  he  was 
resting,  sleeping,  with  his  head  on  Anusuya’s  knees.  Meanwhile,  the  gods  had  descended  upon 
earth,  particularly  this  Parvati,  and  they  saw  Anusuya  like  that.  Then  Parvati  exclaimed,  ‘This  is  a 
good  occasion!’  Not  very  far  away  a  cooking  fire  was  burning.  With  her  power,  she  sent  the  fire 
rolling  down  onto  Anusuya’s  feet  -  which  startled  her  because  it  hurt.  It  began  to  bum;  not  one  cry, 
not  one  movement,  nothing  ...  because  she  didn’t  want  to  awaken  her  husband.  But  she  began 
invoking  Shiva  (Shiva  was  there).  And  because  she  invoked  Shiva  (it  is  lovely  in  the  story),  because 
she  invoked  Shiva,  Shiva’s  foot  began  burning!  (Mother  laughs)  Then  Narada  showed  Shiva  to 
Parvati:  ‘Look  what  you  are  doing;  you  are  burning  your  husband’s  foot!’  So  Parvati  made  the 
opposite  gesture  and  the  fire  was  put  out. 

That’s  how  it  went. 

Lovely. 

Oh,  the  story  was  very  lovely  all  along.  There  was  one  thing  after  another,  one  thing  after  another, 
and  always  the  power  of  Anusuya  was  greater  than  the  power  of  the  gods.  I  liked  that  story  very 
much. 

It  ended  in  a  ...  (Oh,  the  story  was  very  long;  it  lasted  three  hours!)  But  really,  it  was  lovely 
throughout.  Lovely  in  the  way  it  showed  that  the  sincerity  of  love  is  much  more  powerful  than 
anything  else. 

If  I  were  to  narrate  the  whole  thing  to  you,  there  would  be  no  end  to  it,  but  anyway,  you  get  the 
idea. 


*  * 


(Shortly  afterwards,  the  disciple  again  brings  up  the  topic  of  August  9,  where  Mother  had  said  that 

the  gods  are  ‘a  good  deal  worse  than  human  beings  ) 


It  should  be  said  that  we  are  speaking  of  the  Puranic  gods,  because  the  Christians,  for  example,  do 
not  understand  what  this  can  mean.  They  have  an  entirely  different  conception  of  the  gods.  It  could 
apply  to  the  old  Greek  mythology,  though. 


No,  not  uniquely.  It  could  apply  in  many  other  eases.  Even  if  the  Christians  don  7  understand, 

there  are  many  others  who  will! 

Those  who  have  read  a  little  and  who  know  something  other  than  their  little  rut  will  understand. 

There  is  something  similar  between  the  Puranic  gods  and  the  gods  of  Greek  or  Egyptian 
mythology.  The  gods  of  Egyptian  mythology  are  terrible  beings  ...  They  cut  off  people’s  heads,  tear 
their  enemies  to  pieces!  ... 

The  Greeks  were  not  always  tender  either! 

In  Europe  and  in  the  modem  Western  world,  it  is  thought  that  all  these  gods  -  the  Greek  gods  and 
the  ‘pagan’  gods,  as  they  are  called  -  are  human  fancies,  that  they  are  not  real  beings.  To 
understand,  one  must  know  that  they  are  real  beings.  That  is  the  difference.  For  Westerners,  they  are 
only  a  figment  of  the  human  imagination  and  don’t  correspond  to  anything  real  in  the  universe.  But 
that  is  a  gross  mistake. 

To  understand  the  workings  of  universal  life,  and  even  those  of  terrestrial  life,  one  must  know 
that  in  their  own  realms  these  are  all  living  beings,  each  with  his  own  independent  reality.  They 
would  exist  even  if  men  did  not  exist!  Most  of  these  gods  existed  before  man. 

They  are  beings  who  belong  to  the  progressive  creation  of  the  universe  and  who  have 
themselves  presided  over  its  formation  from  the  most  etheric  or  subtle  regions  to  the  most  material 
regions.  They  are  a  descent  of  the  divine  creative  Spirit  that  came  to  repair  the  mischief ...  in  short, 
to  repair  what  the  Asuras  had  done.  The  first  makers  created  disorder  and  darkness,  an 
unconsciousness,  and  then  it  is  said  that  there  was  a  second  ‘lineage’  of  makers  to  repair  that  evil, 
and  the  gods  gradually  descended  through  realities  that  were  ever  more  -  one  can’t  say  dense 
because  it  isn’t  really  dense,  nor  can  one  even  say  material,  since  matter  as  we  know  it  does  not 
exist  on  these  planes  -  through  more  and  more  concrete  substances. 

All  these  zones,  these  planes  of  reality,  received  different  names  and  were  classified  in  different 
ways  according  to  the  occult  schools,  according  to  the  different  traditions,  but  there  is  an  essential 
similarity,  and  if  we  go  back  far  enough  into  the  various  traditions,  hardly  anything  but  words 
differ,  depending  upon  the  country  and  the  language.  The  descriptions  are  quite  similar.  Moreover, 
those  who  climb  back  up  the  ladder  -  or  in  other  words,  a  human  being  who,  through  his  occult 
knowledge,  goes  out  of  one  of  his  ‘bodies’  (they  are  called  sheaths  in  English)  and  enters  into  a 
more  subtle  body  -  in  order  to  ACT  in  a  more  subtle  body  -  and  so  forth,  twelve  times  (you  make 
each  body  come  out  from  a  more  material  body,  leaving  the  more  material  body  in  its 
corresponding  zone,  and  then  go  off  through  successive  exteriorizations),  what  they  have  seen,  what 
they  have  discovered  and  seen  through  their  ascension  -  whether  they  are  occultists  from  the 
Occident  or  occultists  from  the  Orient  -  is  for  the  most  part  analogous  in  description.  They  have  put 
different  words  on  it,  but  the  experience  is  very  analogous. 

There  is  the  whole  Chaldean  tradition,  and  there  is  also  the  Vedic  tradition,  and  there  was  very 
certainly  a  tradition  anterior  to  both  that  split  into  two  branches.  Well,  all  these  occult  experiences 
have  been  the  same.  Only  the  description  differs  depending  upon  the  country  and  the  language.  The 
story  of  creation  is  not  told  from  a  metaphysical  or  psychological  point  of  view,  but  from  an 
objective  point  of  view,  and  this  story  is  as  real  as  our  stories  of  historical  periods.  Of  course,  it’s 
not  the  only  way  of  seeing,  but  it  is  just  as  legitimate  a  way  as  the  others,  and  in  any  event,  it 
recognizes  the  concrete  reality  of  all  these  divine  beings.  Even  now,  the  experiences  of  Western 
occultists  and  those  of  Eastern  occultists  exhibit  great  similarities.  The  only  difference  is  in  the  way 
they  are  expressed,  but  the  manipulation  of  the  forces  is  the  same. 

I  learned  all  this  through  Theon.  Probably,  he  was  ..  I  don’t  know  if  he  was  Russian  or  Polish  (a 
Russian  or  Polish  Jew),  he  never  said  who  he  really  was  or  where  he  was  born,  nor  his  age  nor 
anything. 


He  had  assumed  two  names:  one  was  an  Arab  name  he  had  adopted  when  he  took  refuge  in 
Algeria  (I  don’t  know  for  what  reason).  After  having  worked  with  Blavatsky  and  having  founded  an 
occult  society  in  Egypt,  he  went  to  Algeria,  and  there  he  first  called  himself  ‘Aia  Aziz’  (a  word  of 
Arabic  origin  meaning  ‘the  beloved’).  Then,  when  he  began  setting  up  his  Cosmic  Review  and  his 
‘cosmic  group,’  he  called  himself  Max  Theon,  meaning  the  supreme  God  (!),  the  greatest  God!  And 
no  one  knew  him  by  any  other  name  than  these  two  -  Aia  Aziz  or  Max  Theon. 

He  had  an  English  wife. 

He  said  he  had  received  initiation  in  India  (he  knew  a  little  Sanskrit  and  the  Rig- Veda 
thoroughly),  and  then  he  formulated  a  tradition  which  he  called  the  ‘cosmic  tradition’  and  which  he 
claimed  to  have  received  -  I  don’t  know  how  -  from  a  tradition  anterior  to  that  of  the  Cabala  and 
the  Vedas.  But  there  were  many  things  (Madame  Theon  was  the  clairvoyant  one,  and  she  received 
visions;  oh,  she  was  wonderful!),  many  things  that  I  myself  had  seen  and  known  before  knowing 
them  which  were  then  substantiated. 

So  personally,  I  am  convinced  that  there  was  indeed  a  tradition  anterior  to  both  these  traditions 
containing  a  knowledge  very  close  to  an  integral  knowledge.  Certainly,  there  is  a  similarity  in  the 
experiences.  When  I  came  here  and  told  Sri  Aurobindo  certain  things  I  knew  from  the  occult 
standpoint,  he  always  said  that  it  conformed  to  the  Vedic  tradition.  And  as  for  certain  occult 
practices,  he  told  me  that  they  were  entirely  tantric  -  and  I  knew  nothing  at  that  time,  absolutely 
nothing,  neither  the  Vedas  nor  the  Tantras. 

So  very  probably  there  was  a  tradition  anterior  to  both.  I  have  recollections  (for  me,  these  are 
always  things  I  have  LIVED),  very  clear,  very  distinct  recollections  of  a  time  that  was  certainly 
VERY  anterior  to  the  Vedic  times  and  to  the  Cabala,  to  the  Chaldean  tradition. 

But  now,  there  is  only  a  very  small  number  of  people  in  the  West  who  know  that  it  isn’t  merely 
subjective  or  imaginative  (the  result  of  a  more  or  less  unbridled  imagination),  and  that  it 
corresponds  to  a  universal  truth. 

All  these  regions,  all  these  realms  are  filled  with  beings  who  exist  separately  in  their  own 
realms,  and  if  you  are  awake  and  conscious  on  a  given  plane  -  for  example,  if  while  going  out  of  a 
more  material  body  you  awaken  on  some  higher  plane  -  you  can  have  the  same  relationship  with 
the  things  and  people  of  that  plane  as  with  the  things  and  people  of  the  material  world.  In  other 
words,  there  exists  an  entirely  objective  relationship  that  has  nothing  to  do  with  your  own  idea  of 
things.  Naturally,  the  resemblance  becomes  greater  and  greater  as  you  draw  nearer  the  physical 
world,  the  material  world,  and  there  is  even  a  moment  when  one  region  can  act  directly  upon  the 
other.  In  any  case,  in  what  Sri  Aurobindo  calls  the  ‘kingdoms  of  the  overmind,’  you  find  a  concrete 
reality  entirely  independent  of  your  personal  experience;  whenever  you  come  back  to  it,  you  again 
find  the  same  things,  with  some  differences  that  may  have  occurred  DURING  YOUR  ABSENCE. 
And  your  relationships  with  the  beings  there  are  identical  to  those  you  have  with  physical  beings, 
except  that  they  are  more  flexible,  more  supple  and  more  direct  (for  example,  there  is  a  capacity  to 
change  the  outer  form,  the  visible  fonn,  according  to  your  inner  state),  but  you  can  make  an 
appointment  with  someone,  come  to  the  meeting  and  again  find  the  same  being,  with  only  certain 
differences  that  may  have  occurred  during  your  absence  -  but  it  is  absolutely  concrete,  with 
absolutely  concrete  results. 

However,  you  must  have  at  least  a  little  experience  of  these  things  to  understand  them. 
Otherwise,  if  you  are  convinced  that  all  this  is  just  human  fancy  or  mental  formations,  if  you 
believe  that  these  gods  have  such  and  such  a  form  because  men  have  imagined  them  to  be  like  that, 
or  that  they  have  such  and  such  defects  or  qualities  because  men  have  envisioned  it  that  way  -  as 
with  all  those  who  say  God  is  created  in  the  image  of  man  and  exists  only  in  human  thought  -  all 
such  people  won’t  understand,  it  will  seem  absolutely  ridiculous  to  them,  a  kind  of  madness.  You 
must  live  a  little,  touch  the  subject  a  little  to  know  how  concrete  it  is. 

Naturally,  children  know  a  great  deal  -  if  they  have  not  been  spoiled.  There  are  many  children 
who  return  to  the  same  place  night  after  night  and  continue  living  a  life  they  have  begun  there. 


When  these  faculties  are  not  spoiled  with  age,  they  can  be  preserved  within  one.  There  was  a  time 
when  I  was  especially  interested  in  dreams,  and  I  could  return  exactly  to  the  same  place  and 
continue  some  work  I  had  begun  there,  visit  something,  for  example,  or  see  to  something,  some 
work  of  organization  or  some  discovery  or  exploration;  you  go  to  a  certain  place,  just  as  you  go 
somewhere  in  life,  then  you  rest  a  while,  then  you  go  back  and  begin  again  -  you  take  up  your  work 
just  where  you  left  it,  and  you  continue.  You  also  notice  that  there  are  things  entirely  independent  of 
you,  certain  variations  which  were  not  at  all  created  by  you  and  which  occurred  automatically 
during  your  absence. 

But  then,  you  must  LIVE  these  experiences  yourself;  you  yourself  must  see,  you  must  live  them 
with  enough  sincerity  to  see  (by  being  sincere  and  spontaneous)  that  they  are  independent  of  any 
mental  formations.  Because  one  can  take  the  opposite  line  and  make  an  intensive  study  of  the  way 
mental  formations  act  upon  events  -  which  is  very  interesting.  But  that’s  another  field.  And  this 
study  makes  you  very  careful,  very  prudent,  because  you  start  noticing  to  what  extent  you  can 
delude  yourself.  Therefore,  both  one  and  the  other,  the  mental  formation  and  the  occult  reality,  must 
be  studied  to  see  what  the  ESSENTIAL  difference  is  between  them.  The  one  exists  in  itself,  entirely 
independent  of  what  we  think  about  it,  and  the  other  ... 

That  was  a  grace.  I  was  given  every  experience  without  knowing  ANYTHING  of  what  it  was  all 
about  -  my  mind  was  absolutely  ...  blank.  There  was  no  active  correspondence  in  the  fonnative 
mind.  I  only  knew  about  what  had  happened  or  the  laws  governing  these  happenings 
AFTERWARDS,  when  I  was  curious  and  inquired  to  find  out  what  it  related  to.  Then  I  found  out. 
But  otherwise,  I  didn’t  know.  So  that  was  the  clear  proof  that  these  things  existed  entirely  outside  of 
my  imagination  or  thought. 

It  doesn’t  happen  very  frequently  in  this  world.  And  that’s  why  these  experiences,  which 
otherwise  seem  quite  natural,  quite  obvious,  appear  to  be  ...  extravagant  fancies  to  people  who  know 
nothing. 

But  if  you  transposed  this  to  France,  to  the  West,  unless  you  frequent  occult  circles,  people 
would  look  at  you  with  ...  And  behind  your  back,  they  would  say,  ‘That  person  is  cracked!  ’ 

* 


(Later,  the  disciple  asks  Mother  for  some  clarification  on  the  “essential  difference  ”  between  the 

occult  reality  and  mental  formations) 

Once  you  have  worked  in  this  field,  you  realize  that  when  you  have  studied  a  subject,  when  you 
have  mentally  understood  something,  it  gives  a  special  tonality  to  the  experience.  The  experience 
may  be  quite  spontaneous  and  sincere,  but  the  simple  fact  of  having  known  this  subject  and  of 
having  studied  it  gives  a  particular  tonality;  on  the  other  hand,  if  you  have  learned  nothing  of  the 
subject,  if  you  know  nothing  at  all,  well,  when  the  experience  comes,  the  notation  of  it  is  entirely 
spontaneous  and  sincere.  It  can  be  more  or  less  adequate,  but  it  is  not  the  result  of  a  former  mental 
fonnation. 

What  happened  in  my  life  is  that  I  never  studied  or  knew  things  until  AFTER  having  the 
experience  -  only  BECAUSE  OF  the  experience  and  because  I  wanted  to  understand  it  would  I 
study  things  related  to  it. 

It  was  the  same  thing  for  visions  of  past  lives.  I  knew  NOTHING  when  I  would  have  the 
experience,  not  even  the  possibility  of  past  lives,  and  only  after  having  had  the  experience  would  I 
study  the  question  and,  for  example,  even  verify  certain  historical  facts  that  had  occurred  in  my 
vision  but  about  which  I  had  no  prior  knowledge. 


(Then  the  disciple  asks  for  details  on  going  out  of  each  successive  body  into  the  next,  more  subtle 

one) 

There  are  subtle  bodies  and  subtle  worlds  that  correspond  to  these  bodies;  it  is  what  the 
psychological  method  calls  ‘states  of  consciousness,’  but  these  states  of  consciousness  really 
correspond  to  worlds.  The  occult  process  consists  in  becoming  aware  of  these  various  inner  states  of 
being,  or  subtle  bodies,  and  of  mastering  them  sufficiently  to  be  able  to  make  one  come  out  of  the 
other,  successively.  For  there  is  a  whole  hierarchy  of  increasing  subtleties  -  or  decreasing, 
depending  upon  the  direction  -  and  the  occult  process  consists  in  making  a  more  subtle  body  come 
out  from  a  denser  body,  and  so  forth,  right  to  the  most  ethereal  regions.  You  go  out  through 
successive  exteriorizations  into  more  and  more  subtle  bodies  or  worlds.  Each  time  it  is  rather  like 
passing  into  another  dimension.  In  fact,  the  fourth  dimension  of  the  physicists  is  only  the  scientific 
transcription  of  an  occult  knowledge. 

To  give  another  comparison,  it  could  be  said  that  the  physical  body  is  at  the  center  -  it  is  the 
most  material  and  the  most  condensed,  as  well  as  the  smallest  -  and  the  more  subtle  inner  bodies 
increasingly  overlap  the  limits  of  this  central  physical  body;  they  pass  through  it  and  extend  further 
and  further  out,  like  water  evaporating  from  a  porous  vase  which  creates  a  kind  of  steam  all  around 
it.  And  the  more  subtle  it  is,  the  more  its  extension  tends  to  fuse  with  that  of  the  universe:  you 
finally  become  universal.  It  is  an  entirely  concrete  process  that  makes  the  invisible  worlds  an 
objective  experience  and  even  allows  you  to  act  in  those  worlds. 


Undated  1958 

When  you  are  exteriorized  during  sleep  and  conscious  in  the  vital  world,  you  can  live  a  vital  life  as 
conscious  as  the  physical  life.  I  have  known  people  who  had  this  capacity  and  who  were  so 
intensely  interested  in  their  experiences  in  the  vital  world  that  they  returned  only  with  regret  to  their 
bodies.  If  you  are  conscious  and  master  of  yourself  in  the  vital  world  and  if  you  possess  a  certain 
power  there,  the  circumstances  are  marvelous,  infinitely  more  varied  and  more  beautiful  than  in  the 
physical  world. 

Suppose,  for  example,  that  you  are  very  tired  and  need  to  rest.  If  you  know  how  to  exteriorize 
yourself  and  consciously  enter  into  the  vital  world,  you  will  find  there  a  region  like  a  miraculous 
virgin  forest  with  all  the  splendors  of  a  rich  and  harmonious  vegetation,  magnificent  mirrors  of 
water  and  an  atmosphere  so  filled  with  this  living,  vibrant  vitality  of  the  plants! 

There  is  such  a  life  there,  such  a  beauty,  so  much  richness  and  plenitude  that  you  awaken  full  of 
force  and  with  an  absolutely  wonderful  feeling  of  energy,  even  if  you  remain  there  but  a  minute. 

And  it  is  so  objective,  so  concrete!  I  have  taken  people  there,  without  telling  them  what  it  was 
all  about,  and  they  were  able  to  describe  the  place  exactly  as  I  myself  would. 

There  are  regions  like  that  -  not  very  many,  but  some. 

On  the  other  hand,  there  are  many  unpleasant  places  in  the  vital  world  where  it  is  better  not  to 
go.  Those  who  can  easily  learn  to  go  out  of  their  bodies  should  do  so  with  a  great  deal  of  caution.  I 


could  never  teach  this  to  many  people,  for  were  they  to  do  it  alone,  it  would  mean  abandoning  them, 
sometimes  without  protection,  to  experiences  that  can  be  extremely  harmful. 

The  vital  world  is  a  world  of  extremes.  If,  for  example,  you  eat  a  bunch  of  grapes  in  the  vital 
world,  you  feel  so  nourished  that  you  can  remain  without  hunger  for  thirty-six  hours.  But  you  can 
also  run  into  things  and  enter  places  that  will  wrest  all  the  energy  from  you  in  a  minute  and  at  times 
leave  you  ill  or  even  disabled. 

I  knew  an  absolutely  exceptional  woman104  from  the  occult  point  of  view  who  had  just  such  an 
accident  in  the  vital  world.  While  trying  to  wrest  someone  she  valued  from  the  beings  of  the  vital 
world,  she  received  such  a  blow  to  one  eye  that  she  lost  it. 

Without  going  that  far,  it  may  happen  that  you  meet  with  accidents  in  the  vital  world  that  leave 
their  trace  for  hours  after  awakening. 


November  8, 1958 

I  found  my  message  for  the  1st  of  January  ...  It  was  quite  unforeseen.  Yesterday  morning,  I  thought, 
‘All  the  same,  I  have  to  find  my  message,  but  what?’  I  was  absolutely  ...  like  that,  neutral,  nothing. 
Then  yesterday  evening  at  the  class  (of  Friday,  November  7)  I  noticed  that  these  children  who  had 
had  a  whole  week  to  prepare  their  questions  on  the  text  had  not  found  a  single  one!  A  terrible 
lethargy!  A  total  lack  of  interest.  And  when  I  had  finished  speaking,  I  thought  to  myself,  ‘But  what 
IS  there  in  these  people  who  are  interested  in  nothing  but  their  personal  little  affairs?’  So  I  began 
descending  into  their  mental  atmosphere,  in  search  of  the  little  light,  of  that  which  responds  ...  And 
it  literally  pulled  me  downwards  as  into  a  hole,  but  in  such  a  material  way;  my  hand,  which  was  on 
the  arm  of  the  chair,  began  slipping  down,  my  other  hand  went  like  this  (to  the  ground),  my  head, 
too!  I  thought  it  was  going  to  touch  my  knees! 

And  I  had  the  impression  ...  It  was  not  an  impression  -  I  saw  it.  I  was  descending  into  a  crevasse 
between  two  steep  rocks,  rocks  that  appeared  to  be  made  of  something  harder  than  basalt,  BLACK, 
but  metallic  at  the  same  time,  with  such  sharp  edges  -  it  seemed  that  a  mere  touch  would  lacerate 
you.  It  appeared  endless  and  bottomless,  and  it  kept  getting  narrower,  narrower  and  narrower, 
narrower  and  narrower,  like  a  funnel,  so  narrow  that  there  was  almost  no  more  room  -  not  even  for 
the  consciousness  -  to  pass  through.  And  the  bottom  was  invisible,  a  black  hole.  And  it  went  down, 
down,  down,  like  that,  without  air,  without  light,  except  for  a  sort  of  glimmer  that  enabled  me  to 
make  out  the  rock  edges.  They  seemed  to  be  cut  so  steeply,  so  sharply  ...  Finally,  when  my  head 
began  touching  my  knees,  I  asked  myself,  ‘But  what  is  there  at  the  bottom  of  this  ...  this  hole?’ 

And  as  soon  as  I  had  uttered,  ‘What  is  there  at  the  bottom  of  this  hole?’  I  seemed  to  touch  a 
spring  that  was  in  the  very  depths  -  a  spring  I  didn’t  see  but  that  acted  instantly  with  a  tremendous 
power  -  and  it  cast  me  up  forthwith,  hurled  me  out  of  this  crevasse  into  ...  (arms  extended, 
motionless)  a  formless,  limitless  vast  which  was  infinitely  comfortable  -  not  exactly  warm,  but  it 
gave  a  feeling  of  ease  and  of  an  intimate  warmth. 


104Madame  Theon. 


And  it  was  all-powerful,  with  an  infinite  richness.  It  did  not  have  ...  no,  it  didn’t  have  any  kind 
of  fonn,  and  it  had  no  limits  (naturally,  as  I  was  identified  with  it  I  knew  there  was  neither  limit  nor 
fonn).  It  was  as  if  (because  it  was  not  visible),  as  if  this  vast  were  made  of  countless,  imperceptible 
points  -  points  that  occupied  no  place  in  space  (there  was  no  sense  of  space),  that  were  of  a  deep 
warm  gold  -  but  this  is  only  a  feeling,  a  transcription.  And  all  this  was  absolutely  LIVING,  living 
with  a  power  that  seemed  infinite.  And  yet  motionless. 

It  lasted  for  quite  some  time,  for  the  rest  of  the  meditation. 

It  seemed  to  contain  a  whole  wealth  of  possibilities,  and  all  this  that  was  formless  had  the  power 
to  become  form. 

At  the  time,  I  wondered  what  it  meant.  Later,  of  course,  I  found  out,  and  finally  this  morning,  I 
said  to  myself,  ‘Ah,  so  that’s  it!  It  came  to  give  me  my  message  for  the  new  year!’  Then  I 
transcribed  the  experience  -  it  can’t  be  described,  of  course,  for  it  was  indescribable;  it  was  a 
psychological  phenomenon  and  the  fonn  it  took  was  only  a  way  of  describing  the  psychological 
state  to  oneself.  Here  is  what  I  wrote  down,  obviously  in  a  mental  way,  and  I  am  thinking  of  using  it 
as  my  message. 

There  was  a  hesitation  in  the  expression,  so  I  brought  the  paper  and  I  want  us  to  decide  upon  the 
final  text  together. 

I  have  not  described  anything.  I  have  only  stated  a  fact  (Mother  reads): 

‘At  the  very  bottom  of  the  inconscience  most  hard  and  rigid  and  narrow  and  stifling,  I  struck 

upon  an  almighty  spring  that  cast  me  up  forthwith  into  a  fonnless,  limitless  Vast,  generator  of 

all  creation.’ 

And  it  is  again  one  more  proof.  The  experience  was  absolutely  ...  the  English  word  genuine  says 
it. 


Genuine  and  spontaneous? 

Yes,  it  was  not  a  willed  experience,  for  I  had  not  decided  I  would  do  this.  It  did  not  correspond  to  an 
inner  attitude.  In  a  meditation,  one  can  decide,  ‘I  will  meditate  on  this  or  on  that  or  on  something 
else  -  I  will  do  this  or  that.’  For  meditations,  I  usually  have  a  kind  of  inner  (or  higher)  perception  of 
what  has  to  be  done,  and  I  do  it.  But  it  was  not  that  way.  I  had  decided:  nothing,  to  decide  nothing, 
to  be  Tike  that’  (gesture  of  turning  upwards). 

And  then  it  happened. 

Suddenly,  while  I  was  speaking  (it  was  while  I  was  speaking),  I  felt,  ‘Well  really,  can  anything 
be  done  with  such  material?’  Then,  quite  naturally,  when  I  stopped  speaking,  oh!  -  I  felt  that  I  was 
being  pulled!  Then  I  understood.  Because  I  had  asked  myself  the  question,  ‘But  what  is 
HAPPENING  in  there  behind  all  those  forms?  ...’  I  can’t  say  that  I  was  annoyed,  but  I  said  to 
myself,  ‘Well  really,  this  has  to  be  shaken  up  a  bit!  ’  And  just  as  I  had  finished,  something  pulled  me 
-  it  pulled  me  out  of  my  body,  I  was  literally  pulled  out  of  my  body. 

And  then,  down  into  this  hole  ...  I  still  see  what  I  saw  then,  this  crevasse  between  two  rocks.  The 
sky  was  not  visible,  but  on  the  rock  summits  I  saw  ...  something  like  the  reflection  of  a  glimmer  -  a 
glimmer  -  coming  from  ‘something’  beyond,  which  (laughing)  must  have  been  the  sky!  But  it  was 
invisible.  And  as  I  descended,  as  if  I  were  sliding  down  the  face  of  this  crevasse,  I  saw  the  rock 
edges;  and  they  were  really  black  rocks,  as  if  cut  with  a  chisel,  cuts  so  fresh  that  they  glistened,  with 
edges  as  sharp  as  knives.  There  was  one  here,  one  there,  another  there,  everywhere,  all  around.  And 
I  was  being  pulled,  pulled,  pulled,  I  went  down  and  down  and  down  -  there  was  no  end  to  it,  and  it 
was  becoming  more  and  more  compressing.105  It  went  down  and  down  ... 


105Later  Mother  added,  ‘stifling,  suffocating.’ 


And  so,  physically,  the  body  followed.  My  body  has  been  taught  to  express  the  inner  experience 
to  a  certain  extent.  In  the  body  there  is  the  body-force  or  the  body-form  or  the  body-spirit 
(according  to  the  different  schools,  it  bears  a  different  name),  and  this  is  what  leaves  the  body  last 
when  one  dies,  usually  taking  a  period  of  seven  days  to  leave.106  With  special  training,  it  can  acquire 
a  conscious  life  -  independent  and  conscious  -  to  such  a  degree  that  not  only  in  a  state  of  trance  (in 
trance,  it  frequently  happens  that  one  can  speak  and  move  if  one  is  slightly  trained  or  educated),  but 
even  in  a  cataleptic  state  it  can  produce  sounds  and  even  make  the  body  move.  Thus,  through 
training,  the  body  begins  to  have  somnambulistic  capacities  -  not  an  ordinary  somnambulism,  but  it 
can  live  an  autonomous  life.107  This  is  what  took  place,  yesterday  evening  it  was  like  that  -  I  had 
gone  out  of  my  body,  but  my  body  was  participating.  And  then  I  was  pulled  downwards:  my  hand, 
which  had  been  on  the  ann  of  the  chair,  slipped  down,  then  the  other  hand,  then  my  head  was 
almost  touching  my  knees!  (The  consciousness  was  elsewhere,  I  saw  it  from  outside  -  it  was  not 
that  I  didn’t  know  what  I  was  doing,  I  saw  it  from  outside.)  So  I  said,  ‘In  any  case,  this  has  to  stop 
somewhere  because  if  it  continues,  my  head  (laughing)  is  going  to  be  on  the  ground!’  And  I 
thought,  ‘But  what  is  there  at  the  bottom  of  this  hole?  ...’ 

Scarcely  had  these  words  been  formulated  when  there  I  was,  at  the  bottom  of  the  hole!  And  it 
was  absolutely  as  if  a  tremendous,  almighty  spring  were  there,  and  then  ...  (Mother  hits  the  table) 
vrrrm!  I  was  cast  out  of  the  abyss  into  a  vastness.  My  body  immediately  sat  straight  up,  head  on 
high,  following  the  movement.  If  someone  had  been  watching,  this  is  what  he  would  have  seen:  in  a 
single  bound,  vrrrm!  Straight  up,  to  the  maximum,  my  head  on  high. 

And  I  followed  all  this  without  objectifying  it  in  the  least;  I  was  not  aware  of  what  it  was  nor  of 
what  was  happening,  nor  of  any  explanation  at  all,  nothing:  it  was  Tike  that.’  I  was  living  it,  that’s 
all.  The  experience  was  absolutely  spontaneous.  And  after  this  rather  ...  painful  descent,  phew!  - 
there  was  a  kind  of  super-comfort.  I  can’t  explain  it  otherwise,  an  ease,m  but  an  ease  ...  to  the 
utmost.  A  perfect  immobility  in  a  sense  of  eternity  -  but  with  an  extraordinary  INTENSITY  of 
movement  and  life!  An  inner  intensity,  unmanifested;  it  was  within,  self-contained.  And  motionless 
(had  there  been  an  outside,  it  would  have  been  motionless  in  relation  to  that)  and  it  was  in  a  ...  life 
so  immeasurable  that  it  can  only  be  expressed  metaphorically  as  infinite.  And  with  an  intensity,  a 
POWER,  a  force  ...  and  a  peace  -  the  peace  of  eternity.  A  silence,  a  calm.  A  POWER  capable  of ... 
of  EVERYTHING.  Everything. 

And  I  was  not  imagining  nor  objectifying  it;  I  was  living  it  with  ease  -  with  a  great  ease.  And  it 
lasted  until  the  end  of  the  meditation.  When  it  gradually  began  fading,  I  stopped  the  meditation  and 
left. 

Later,  after  I  returned  (to  the  Ashram),  I  wondered,  ‘What  was  that?  What  does  it  signify?’  Then 
I  understood. 

That’s  all. 

Now  I  am  going  to  write  it  down  clearly.  Hand  me  a  piece  of  paper. 

(Mother  begins  recopying  her  message) 

‘At  the  very  bottom  of  the  inconscience  most  hard  and  rigid  ...’  Because  generally,  the  inconscience 

106Later  Mother  further  explained:  'When  one  is  exteriorized,  this  body-spirit  retains  a  connection  with  the  being  that 
has  gone  out,  and  what  has  gone  out  has  a  power  over  it  -  which  is  precisely  why  one  isn’t  completely  dead!  The  being 
that  has  gone  out  also  has  the  power  to  make  the  body  move.’ 


107Later,  Mother  explained:  T  don’t  mean  an  autonomous  will  (it  is  the  being  that  has  gone  out  which  has  the  power  to 
make  the  body  move),  it  has  only  acquired,  through  training,  the  capacity  to  express  the  will  of  the  being  with  which  it 
has  kept  a  relationship  through  this  link  of  the  body-spirit  which  is  broken  only  at  death.’ 


108Original  English. 


gives  the  impression,  precisely,  of  something  amorphous,  inert,  fonnless,  drab  and  gray  (when 
fonnerly  I  entered  the  zones  of  the  inconscient,  that  was  the  first  thing  I  encountered).  But  this  was 
an  inconscience  ...  it  was  hard,  rigid,  COAGULATED,  as  if  coagulated  to  resist:  all  effort  slides  off 
it,  doesn’t  touch  it,  cannot  penetrate  it.  So  I  am  putting,’  ...  most  hard  and  rigid  and  narrow’  (the 
idea  of  something  that  compresses,  compresses,  compresses  you)  ‘and  stifling’  -  yes,  stifling  is  the 
word. 

‘  ...  I  struck  upon  an  almighty  spring  that  cast  me  up  forthwith  into  a  formless,  limitless  vast, 
generator  of  all  creation.’  It  was  ...  yes,  I  have  the  feeling  that  it  was  not  the  ordinary  creation,  the 
primordial  creation,  but  the  SUPRAMENTAL  creation,  for  it  bore  no  similarity  to  the  experience  of 
returning  to  the  Supreme,  the  origin  of  everything.  I  had  utterly  the  feeling  of  being  cast  into  the 
origin  of  the  supramental  creation  -  something  that  is  already  (how  can  it  be  expressed?)  objectified 
from  the  Supreme,  with  the  explicit  goal  of  the  supramental  creation. 

That  was  my  feeling. 

I  don’t  think  I  am  mistaken,  for  there  was  such  a  superabundant  feeling  of  power,  of  warmth,  of 
gold  ...  It  was  not  fluid,  it  was  like  a  powdering.  And  each  of  these  things  (they  cannot  be  called 
specks  or  fragments,  nor  even  points,  unless  you  understand  it  in  the  mathematical  sense,  a  point 
that  occupies  no  space)  was  something  equivalent  to  a  mathematical  point,  but  like  living  gold,  a 
powdering  of  warm  gold.  I  cannot  say  it  was  sparkling,  I  cannot  say  it  was  dark,  nor  was  it  made  of 
light,  either:  a  multitude  of  tiny  points  of  gold,  nothing  but  that.  They  seemed  to  be  touching  my 
eyes,  my  face  ...  and  with  such  an  inherent  power  and  warmth  -  it  was  a  splendor!  And  then,  at  the 
same  time,  the  feeling  of  a  plenitude,  the  PEACE  of  omnipotence  ...  It  was  rich,  it  was  full.  It  was 
movement  at  its  ultimate,  infinitely  swifter  than  all  one  can  imagine,  and  at  the  same  time  it  was 
absolute  peace,  perfect  tranquillity. 

(Mother  resumes  her  message) 

I  do  not  want  to  put  the  word  ...  Unless,  instead  of  putting  generator  of  all  creation,’  I  put  ‘of  the 
new  creation  ...’  Oh,  but  then  it  becomes  absolutely  overwhelming!  It  is  THAT,  in  fact.  It  is  that. 
But  is  it  time  to  say  so?  I  don’t  know  ...  Generator  of  the  new  creation  ... 


November  11, 1958 


(Mother  arrives  with  a  new  change  in  her  message  for  January  1,  1959:  instead  of  ‘an  almighty 
spring  that  cast  me  up  forthwith  into  a  formless,  limitless  Vast,  generator  of  the  new  world,  ’  Mother 
puts  ‘a  formless,  limitless  Vast  vibrating  with  the  seeds  of  a  new  world) 

The  objectification  of  the  experience  came  progressively,  as  always  happens  to  me.  When  I  have 
the  experience,  I  am  absolutely  ‘blank,’  like  a  newborn  baby  to  whom  things  come  just  Tike  that.’  I 
don’t  know  what  is  happening,  and  I  expect  nothing.  How  much  time  it  has  taken  me  to  learn  this! 

There  is  no  preliminary  thought,  preliminary  knowledge,  preliminary  will:  all  those  things  do 
not  exist.  I  am  only  like  a  mirror  receiving  the  experience,  the  simplicity  of  a  little  child  learning 


life.  It  is  like  that.  And  it  is  the  gift  of  the  Grace,  truly  the  Grace:  in  the  face  of  the  experience,  the 
simplicity  of  a  little  child  just  bom.  And  it  is  spontaneously  so,  but  deliberately  too;  in  other  words, 
during  the  experience  I  am  very  careful  not  to  watch  myself  having  the  experience  so  that  no 
previous  knowledge  intervenes.  Only  afterwards  do  I  see.  It  is  not  a  mental  construction,  nor  does  it 
come  from  something  higher  than  the  mind  (it  is  not  even  a  knowledge  by  identity  that  makes  me 
see  things);  no,  the  body  (when  the  experience  is  in  the  body)  is  ...  like  that,  what  in  English  is 
called  blank.  As  if  it  had  just  been  bom,  as  if  just  then  it  were  being  born  with  the  experience. 

And  only  little  by  little,  little  by  little,  is  this  experience  put  in  the  presence  of  any  previous 
knowledge.  Thus,  its  explanation  and  its  evaluation  come  about  progressively. 

It  is  indispensable  if  one  doesn’t  want  to  be  arbitrary. 

So  in  fact,  only  the  final  wording  is  correct,  but  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  ‘historical’ 
unfolding,  it  is  interesting  to  observe  the  passage.  It  was  exactly  the  same  phenomenon  for  the 
experience  of  the  Supramental  Manifestation.  Both  these  things,  the  experience  of  November  7  and 
of  the  Supramental,  occurred  in  the  same  way,  identically:  I  WAS  the  experience,  and  nothing  else. 
Nothing  but  the  experience  at  the  time  it  was  occurring.  And  only  slowly,  while  coming  out  of  it, 
did  the  previous  knowledge,  the  previous  experiences,  all  the  accumulation  of  what  had  come 
before,  examine  it  and  put  it  in  its  place. 

This  is  why  I  arrive  at  a  verbal  expression  progressively,  gropingly;  these  are  not  literary 
gropings  -  it  is  aimed  at  being  precise,  specific  and  concise  at  the  same  time. 

When  I  write  something,  I  don’t  expect  people  to  understand  it,  but  I  try  to  avoid  the  least 
possible  distortion  of  the  experience  or  the  image  in  this  kind  of ‘shrinking’  towards  expression. 

What  is  this  spring? 

The  spring?  It  means  exactly  this:  in  the  deepest  depths  of  the  Inconscient  is  the  supreme  spring  that 
makes  us  touch  the  Supreme.  It  is  like  the  Supreme  making  us  touch  the  Supreme:  that  is  the 
almighty  spring.  When  you  arrive  at  the  very  bottom  of  the  Inconscient,  you  touch  the  Supreme. 

So  that  is  the  shortest  path! 

Not  the  shortest  path!  Already  for  me,  it  was  hard  to  touch  the  bottom  of  the  Inconscient,  but  for 
others  it  would  take  an  eternity. 

It  is  something  similar  to  what  Sri  Aurobindo  has  written  in  ‘A  God’s  Labour.’ 

Was  it  the  Supreme  at  the  very  bottom  of  the  Inconscient  who  cast  you  up  directly  to  the 

Supreme? 

Yes.  Because  at  the  very  bottom  of  the  Inconscient  is  the  Supreme.  It  is  the  same  idea  as  the  highest 
height  touching  the  deepest  depth.  The  universe  is  like  a  circle  -  it  is  represented  by  the  serpent 
biting  its  tail,  its  head  touching  its  tail.  It  means  that  the  supreme  height  touches  the  most  material 
matter,  without  any  intennediary.  I  have  already  said  this  several  times.  But  that  was  the 
experience.  I  didn’t  know  what  was  happening.  I  expected  nothing  and  ...  it  was  stupendous  -  in  a 
single  bound,  I  sprang  up!  If  someone  had  had  his  eyes  open,  I  assure  you  he  would  have  had  to 
laugh:  I  was  bent  over,  like  this,  more  and  more,  more  and  more,  more  and  more,  my  head  was  just 
about  to  touch  my  knees  when  suddenly  -  vrrnn!  Straight,  straight  up,  my  head  upright  in  a  single 
bound! 

But  as  soon  as  you  want  to  express  it,  it  escapes  like  water  running  through  your  fingers;  all  the 
fluidity  is  lost,  it  evaporates.  A  rather  vague,  poetic  or  artistic  expression  is  much  truer,  much  nearer 
to  the  truth  -  something  hazy,  nebulous,  undefined.  Something  not  concretized  like  a  rigid  mental 
expression  -  this  rigidity  that  the  mind  has  introduced  right  down  into  the  Inconscient. 


This  vision  of  the  Inconscient  ...  (Mother  remains  gazing  for  a  moment)  it  was  the  MENTAL 
Inconscient.  Because  the  starting  point  was  mental.  A  special  Inconscient  -  rigid,  hard,  resistant  - 
with  all  that  the  mind  has  brought  into  our  consciousness.  But  it  was  far  worse,  far  worse  than  a 
purely  material  Inconscient!  A  ‘mentalized’  Inconscient,  as  it  were.  All  this  rigidity,  this  hardness, 
this  narrowness,  this  fixity  -  a  FIXITY  -  comes  from  the  presence  of  the  mind  in  creation.  When 
the  mind  was  not  manifested,  the  Inconscient  was  not  like  that!  It  was  formless  and  had  the 
plasticity  of  something  that  is  fonnless  -  the  plasticity  has  gone. 

It  is  a  terrible  image  of  the  Mind’s  action  in  the  Inconscient. 

It  has  made  the  Inconscient  aggressive  -  it  was  not  so  before.  Aggressive,  resistant, 
OBSTINATE.  That  was  not  there  before. 

Yes,  that’s  it.  It  was  not  an  ‘original’  Inconscient.  It  was  a  mentalized  Inconscient.  With  all  that 
the  mind  has  brought  in  in  the  way  of  OPPOSITION  -  of  resistance,  hardness,  rigidity. 

It  would  be  interesting  to  mention  this. 

Because  the  starting  point,  precisely,  was  to  look  into  the  mental  unconsciousness  of  these 
people.  It  was  the  mental  Inconscient.  Well,  the  mental  Inconscient  REFUSES  to  change  -  which  is 
not  true  of  the  other  one;  the  other  is  nothing,  it  doesn’t  exist,  it  is  not  organized  in  any  way,  it  has 
no  way  of  being,  whereas  this  one  is  an  ORGANIZED  Inconscient  -  organized  by  a  beginning 
mental  influence.  A  hundred  times  worse! 

This  is  a  very  interesting  point  to  note. 

It  is  not  the  experience,  which  I  had  once  before,  of  the  original  Inconscient.  The  experience  I 
had  this  time  is  of  the  Inconscient  that  has  undergone  the  influence  of  the  Mind  in  creation.  It  has 
become  ...  It  has  become  a  FAR  greater  obstacle  than  before.  Before,  it  did  not  even  have  the  power 
to  resist,  it  had  nothing,  it  was  truly  unconscious.  Now  it  is  an  Inconscient  organized  in  its  refusal  to 
change! 

It  was  a  very  new  experience. 

That’s  where  we  are. 

And  this  almighty  spring  is  the  perfect  image  of  what  is  happening  -  what  must  happen,  what 
will  happen  -  FOR  EVERYONE:  suddenly,  one  is  cast  forth  into  the  vast. 


November  14, 1958 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Pondicherry ,  November  14,  1958 


Mother, 


I  feel  disguised.109  And  I  detest  hypocrisy  -  I  have  many  faults,  but  not  that  one. 

So  I  believe  it  would  be  better  for  me  to  leave. 

Through  my  friends  in  Hyderabad,  I  can  contact  some  people  who  are  doing  business  in  the 
forests  of  the  Belgian  Congo.  I  want  to  go  there,  alone  and  far  away  from  everything. 

But  there  is  always  this  wretched  question  of  money.  I  need  it  to  leave  and  to  pay  for  the 
journey.  Afterwards,  I  will  manage.  Anyway,  it  is  all  the  same  to  me;  I  am  not  afraid  of  anything 
any  longer. 

It  seems  to  me  that  the  sooner  I  leave  the  better,  because  of  this  hypocrisy  I  detest.110 

Signed:  Satprem 


(Mother ’s  reply) 


Friday  evening,  November  14,  1958 


Satprem, 

One  does  not  cure  hypocrisy  by  pulling  down  below  what  is  already  above  -  but  by  lifting 
upwards  what  is  still  down  below.  To  yield  to  an  impulse  of  revolt  is  a  defeat  and  a  cowardice 
unworthy  of  a  soul  like  yours. 

Do  not  flee  the  difficulty,  face  it  courageously  and  carry  home  the  victory. 

My  love  is  with  you. 

Signed:  Mother 


November  15, 1958 


(Concerning  an  experience  Mother  had  on  November  13  in  regard  to  the  disciple ’s  difficulties) 

Truly  speaking,  perhaps  one  is  never  rid  of  the  hostile  forces  as  long  as  one  has  not  permanently 
emerged  into  the  Light,  above  the  lower  hemisphere.  There,  the  term  ‘hostile  forces’  loses  its 
meaning;  they  become  only  forces  of  progress,  they  force  you  to  progress.  But  to  see  things  in  this 
way,  you  have  to  get  out  of  the  lower  hemisphere,  for  below,  they  are  very  real  in  their  opposition 
to  the  divine  plan. 

It  was  said  in  the  ancient  traditions  that  one  could  not  live  for  more  than  twenty  days  in  this 
higher  state  without  leaving  one’s  body  and  returning  to  the  supreme  Origin.  Now  this  is  no  longer 

109Due  to  the  orange  robes  of  the  sannyasi. 


1  lOShortly  afterwards,  in  the  last  days  of  November,  Satprem  would  leave  the  Ashram  once  again. 


true. 

It  is  precisely  this  state  of  perfect  Harmony  beyond  all  attacks  that  will  become  possible  with  the 
supramental  realization.  It  is  what  all  those  who  are  destined  for  the  supramental  transformation 
will  realize.  The  hostile  forces  know  it  well;  in  the  supramental  world,  they  will  automatically 
disappear.  Having  no  more  utility,  they  will  be  dissolved  without  our  having  to  do  anything,  simply 
through  the  presence  of  the  supramental  force.  So  now  they  are  being  unleashed  with  a  fury  in  a 
negation  of  everything,  everything. 

The  link  between  the  two  worlds  has  not  yet  been  built,  but  it  is  in  the  process  of  being  built; 
this  was  the  meaning  of  the  experience  of  February  3,  1958 111  :  to  build  a  link  between  the  two 
worlds.  For  both  worlds  are  indeed  there  -  not  one  above  the  other,  but  within  each  other,  in  two 
different  dimensions.  Only,  there  is  no  communication  between  them;  they  overlap,  as  it  were, 
without  being  connected.  In  the  experience  of  February  3, 1  saw  certain  people  from  here  (and  from 
elsewhere)  who  already  belong  to  the  supramental  world  in  a  part  of  their  being,  but  there  is  no 
connection,  no  link.  But  now  the  hour  has  come  in  universal  history  for  this  link  to  be  built. 

What  is  the  relationship  between  this  experience  of  February  3  and  that  of  November  7  ( the 

almighty  spring)?  Is  what  you  found  in  the  depths  of  the  Inconscient  this  same  Supramental? 

The  experience  of  November  7  was  a  further  step  in  the  building  of  the  link  between  the  two 
worlds.  Where  I  was  cast  was  clearly  into  the  origin  of  the  supramental  creation  -  all  this  warm 
gold,  this  tremendous  living  power,  this  sovereign  peace.  And  once  again  I  saw  that  the  values 
governing  the  supramental  world  have  nothing  to  do  with  our  values  here,  even  the  values  of  our 
highest  wisdom,  even  those  we  consider  the  most  divine  when  we  live  constantly  in  a  divine 
Presence:  it  is  utterly  different. 

Not  only  in  our  state  of  adoration  and  surrender  to  the  Supreme,  but  even  in  our  state  of 
identification,  the  QUALITY  of  the  identification  is  different  depending  upon  whether  we  are  on 
this  side,  progressing  in  this  hemisphere,  or  have  passed  to  the  other  side  and  have  emerged  into  the 
other  world,  the  other  hemisphere,  the  higher  hemisphere. 

The  quality  or  the  kind  of  relationship  I  had  with  the  Supreme  at  that  moment  was  entirely 
different  from  the  one  we  have  here  -  even  the  identification  had  a  different  quality.  One  can  very 
well  understand  that  all  the  lower  movements  are  different  but  this  identification  by  which  the 
Supreme  governs  and  lives  in  us  was  the  summit  of  our  experience  here  -  well,  the  way  He  governs 
and  lives  is  different  depending  on  whether  we  are  in  this  hemisphere  here  or  in  the  supramental 
life.  And  at  that  moment  (the  experience  of  November  13),  what  made  the  experience  so  intense  was 
that  I  came  to  perceive  vaguely  both  these  states  of  consciousness  at  once.  It  was  almost  as  if  the 
Supreme  Himself  were  different,  or  our  experience  of  Him.  And  yet,  in  both  cases,  it  was  a  contact 
with  the  Supreme.  It  is  probably  how  we  perceive  Him  or  the  way  in  which  we  translate  it  that 
differs,  but  the  fact  is  that  the  quality  of  the  experience  is  different. 

In  the  other  hemisphere,  there  is  an  intensity  and  a  plenitude  which  are  translated  by  a  power 
different  from  the  one  here.  How  can  I  formulate  it?  -  I  cannot. 

The  quality  of  the  consciousness  itself  seems  to  change.  It  is  not  something  higher  than  the 
summit  we  can  attain  here,  it  is  not  one  MORE  rung,  not  that.  Here,  we  have  reached  the  end,  the 
summit,  but ...  it’s  the  quality  that  is  different.  The  quality,  in  the  sense  that  a  fullness,  a  richness,  a 
power  is  there  (this  is  a  translation,  you  see,  in  our  way),  but  there  is  a  ‘something’  that  ...  that 
eludes  us.  It  is  truly  a  new  reversal  of  consciousness. 

When  we  begin  living  the  spiritual  life,  a  reversal  of  consciousness  takes  place  which  for  us  is 
the  proof  that  we  have  entered  the  spiritual  life;  well,  yet  another  occurs  when  we  enter  the 
supramental  world. 


1 1  IThe  Supramental  Ship. 


And  probably  each  time  a  new  world  opens  up,  there  will  again  be  a  new  reversal.  This  is  why 
even  our  spiritual  life,  which  is  such  a  total  reversal  compared  to  ordinary  life,  seems  something 
still  so  ...  so  totally  different  when  compared  to  this  supramental  consciousness  that  the  values  are 
almost  opposite. 

It  can  be  expressed  in  this  way  (but  it’s  quite  approximate,  more  than  diminished  or  deformed): 
it’s  as  if  our  entire  spiritual  life  were  made  of  silver,  whereas  the  supramental  life  is  made  of  gold  - 
as  if  our  entire  spiritual  life  here  were  a  vibration  of  silver,  not  cold  but  simply  a  light,  a  light  that 
goes  right  to  the  summit,  an  absolutely  pure  light,  pure  and  intense;  but  in  the  other,  in  the 
supramental  world,  there  is  a  richness  and  a  power  that  make  all  the  difference.  This  whole  spiritual 
life  of  the  psychic  being  and  of  all  our  present  consciousness  that  appears  so  warm,  so  full,  so 
wonderful,  so  luminous  to  the  ordinary  consciousness,  well,  all  this  splendor  seems  poor  in 
comparison  to  the  splendor  of  the  new  world. 

I  can  explain  the  phenomenon  like  this:  successive  reversals  such  that  an  EVER  NEW  richness 
of  creation  will  take  place  from  stage  to  stage,  making  whatever  came  before  seem  so  poor  in 
comparison.  What  to  us  seems  supremely  rich  compared  to  our  ordinary  life,  appears  so  poor 
compared  to  this  new  reversal  of  consciousness.  Such  was  my  experience. 

Last  night,  my  effort  to  understand  what  was  missing  in  order  to  help  you  completely  and  truly 
come  out  of  the  difficulty  reminded  me  of  what  I  said  the  other  day  about  Power,  the  transforming 
power,  the  true  realizing  power,  the  supramental  power.  When  you  enter  that,  when  you  suddenly 
surge  into  that  Thing,  then  you  see  -  you  see  that  it  is  truly  almighty  in  comparison  to  what  we  are 
here.  So  once  again,  I  touched  it,  I  experienced  both  states  simultaneously. 

But  as  long  as  this  is  not  an  accomplished  fact,  it  will  still  be  a  progression  -  a  progression,  an 
ascension;  you  gain  a  little,  you  gain  some  ground,  you  rise  higher  and  higher.  But  as  long  as  the 
new  reversal  has  not  taken  place,  it’s  as  if  everything  had  still  to  be  done.  It  is  a  repetition  of  the 
experience  below,  reproduced  above. 

(silence) 

And  each  time,  you  have  the  feeling  of  having  lived  on  the  surface  of  things.  It’s  a  feeling  that  is 
repeated  over  and  over  again.  With  each  new  conquest,  you  feel  that  until  then  you  had  lived  only 
on  the  surface  of  things  -  on  the  surface  of  the  realization,  on  the  surface  of  ‘surrender,’  on  the 
surface  of  power.  It  was  only  the  surface  of  things,  the  surface  of  the  experience.  Behind  the 
surface,  there  is  a  depth,  and  only  when  one  enters  into  this  depth  does  one  touch  the  True  Thing. 
And  it  is  the  same  experience  each  time:  what  seemed  a  depth  becomes  the  surface.  A  surface,  with 
all  that  it  entails  of  inaccuracy,  yes,  of  artificiality  -  artificial  -  an  artificial  transcription.  It  feels 
like  something  not  really  alive,  a  copy,  an  imitation:  it’s  an  image,  a  reflection,  but  not  THE  Thing 
itself.  You  step  into  another  zone  and  you  feel  you  have  uncovered  the  Source  and  the  Power  and 
the  Truth  of  things;  then  this  source  and  power  and  truth  in  turn  become  an  appearance,  an 
imitation,  a  mere  transcription  in  comparison  to  something  concrete:  the  new  realization. 

(silence) 

Meanwhile,  we  should  acknowledge  that  we  don’t  have  the  key,  it  is  not  yet  in  our  hands.  Or  rather, 
we  know  quite  well  where  it  is,  and  there  is  only  one  thing  to  do:  the  perfect  ‘surrender’  Sri 
Aurobindo  speaks  of,  the  total  surrender  to  the  divine  Will  whatever  happens,  even  in  the  dark  of 
night. 

There  is  night  and  sun,  night  and  sun,  and  night  again,  many  nights,  but  one  must  cling  to  this 
will  for  ‘surrender,’  cling  as  through  a  stonn,  and  put  everything  into  the  hands  of  the  Supreme 
Lord.  Until  the  day  when  the  Sun  shall  shine  forever,  the  day  of  total  Victory. 


November  20, 1958 


(Mother  tries  to  find  the  origin  of  the  disciple ’s  difficulties) 

I  don’t  have  all  the  information,  otherwise  certainly  ...  Two  things  made  me  see  ...  I  saw  them  the 
other  day.  First  of  all,  when  you  didn’t  understand  my  letter,  for  I  wrote  it  to  a  part  of  you  that 
without  any  doubt  should  have  understood;  I  was  referring  to  something  other  than  what  is  seen  and 
known  by  this  part  of  you  which  is  ...  this  center,  this  knot  of  revolt  that  seems  to  resist  everything, 
that  really  remains  knotted,  in  spite  of  your  experiences  and  the  strides  you  have  made,  as  well  as 
your  openings.  And  what  made  me  see  is  especially  the  fact  that  it  resists  experiences,  it  is  not 
touched  by  experiences;  this  was  the  point  that  did  not  understand  what  I  wrote.  Because  the  part  of 
you  that  had  the  experience  must  necessarily  understand  what  I  wrote,  without  the  shadow  of  a 
doubt. 

Time  is  needed  ... 

I  had  two  visions  which  are  certainly  related  to  this.  The  most  recent  one  was  yesterday,  and  it 
concerned  a  past  life  in  India.  It  is  something  that  took  place  in  India  about  one  thousand  years  ago, 
perhaps  a  little  more  (I  am  not  yet  sure  about  this).  And  it  contains  both  things.  It’s  strange,  both 
things  together  -  the  origin  of  the  power  of  realization  in  this  life  and  the  obstacle  to  be  conquered. 

I  had  the  last  vision  yesterday  evening.  You  were  much  taller  than  you  are  now;  you  were 
wearing  the  orange  robe,  and  you  were  backed  up  against  a  door  of  bronze,  a  bronze  door  like  the 
door  of  a  temple  or  a  palace  ...  but  at  the  same  time  it  was  symbolic  (it  was  a  fact,  it  actually  took 
place  like  this,  but  at  the  same  time  it  was  symbolic).  And  ...  unfortunately,  it  didn’t  last  because  I 
was  disturbed.  But  it  contained  the  key. 

I  was  VERY  HAPPY  with  the  vision,  for  there  was  a  great  POWER,  though  it  was  rather  ... 
terrible.  But  it  was  magnificent.  When  I  saw  that,  I  ...  This  vision  was  given  to  me  because  I  had 
concentrated  with  a  will  to  find  the  solution,  a  true  solution,  an  enduring  and  pennanent  solution  - 
that  is,  I  had  this  spontaneous  gratitude  which  goes  out  to  the  Grace  when  it  brings  some  effective 
help.  Only,  what  followed  was  interrupted  by  someone  who  came  to  call  me  and  that  cut  it  short, 
but  it  will  return. 

But  now  I  KNOW  -  before  I  did  not  know.  The  other  morning  I  saw,  and  I  was  told  very  clearly 
that  it  was  a  karma112  to  be  worked  out;  so  then  I  told  you,  but  at  the  time  I  didn’t  know  what  it  was. 

And  I  saw  that  with  the  new  Power,  the  supramental  power  ...  That  is  something  absolutely 
new  ...  It  used  to  be  thought  that  nothing  had  the  power  to  eliminate  the  consequences  of  karma  and 
that  only  by  exhausting  it  through  a  series  of  actions  could  its  consequences  be  transformed  ... 
exhausted,  eliminated.  But  I  KNOW  that  with  the  supramental  power  it  can  be  done  without 
following  all  the  steps  of  the  process. 

In  any  event,  one  point  is  clear:  it  is  something  that  happened  in  India,  and  the  origin  of  the 
karma  and  the  remedy  of  the  karma  go  together.  And  it  has  to  do  with  this  initiation  you  received  in 


1 12 Karma:  positive  (or  negative)  consequences  of  actions  performed  in  past  lives  (every  action  is  endowed  with  a  self- 
perpetuating  dynamism). 


Rameswaram.113 

So  the  difficulty  and  the  victory  go  together.  It’s  very  interesting. 

But  what  had  I  done  in  that  life?  ...  What  did  I  do?  WHAT?!? 

Yes,  that’s  the  point.  I  think  I  know,  but  I  don’t  want  to  say  anything  without  being  sure. 

(silence) 


It  is  good  that  it  comes  in  stages. 

(silence) 

What  is  needed  -  what  is  needed  is  simply  endurance,  the  capacity  to  hold  on,  which  means  to  stay 
still  within.  Not  to  yield  to  ...  not  to  yield  when  you  feel  within  yourself,  ‘I  can’t  bear  it.’ 

And  it  seems  to  me  that  it’s  relatively  easier  than  when  you  have  to  confront  the  thing  all  alone. 

If  you  can  ...  when  the  attack  comes,  if  you  can  cling  to  something  that  knows,  or  to  something 
in  you  that  has  had  the  experience,  and  if  you  can  hold  onto  that  memory,  even  if  it  is  only  a 
memory,  and  cling  to  that  in  spite  of  all  that  denies  and  revolts  ...  Above  all  not  ...  To  keep  your 
head  as  still  as  possible.  And  not  follow  the  movement,  not  succumb  to  the  vibration. 

Because  from  what  I  have  seen  and  from  what  I  was  told,  I  am  sure  that  it  is  decisive,  that  what 
is  offered  to  you  is  the  possibility  of  a  decisive  victory,  which  means  that  it  will  no  longer  recur  in 
the  same  way. 

There  is  such  an  abyss  between  what  one  truly  is  and  what  we  are  that  at  times  it  is  dizzying. 
But  one  must  not  let  oneself  become  dizzy.  One  must  not  yield.  One  must  remain  like  a  rock  until  it 
passes. 


November  22, 1958 

Even  at  a  very  young  age,  I  had  a  kind  of  intuition  of  my  destiny.  I  felt  that  something  in  me  had 
to  be  exhausted,  or  that  I  had  to  exhaust  myself.  I  don ’t  know,  as  though  I  had  to  descend  into 
the  depths  of  the  night  to  find  the  thing.  I  thought  it  was  the  concentration  camps.  Perhaps  this 
was  still  not  deep  enough  ...  Do  you  see  any  meaning  in  all  this? 

It  can  hardly  be  formulated;  these  are  merely  impressions  that  follow  one  another.  I  know  that  when 
you  thought  of  leaving  with  Swami,114 1  saw  that  a  door  was  opening,  that  it  was  the  truth,  that  this 
was  IT. 

My  immediate  impression  was  that  you  were  being  put  in  direct  contact  with  this  ...  this  sort  of 
1 13A  temple-island  in  southern  India  where  Satprem  became  a  sannyasi. 


1 14The  first  tantric  guru  whom  the  disciple  joined  in  Ceylon  and  with  whom  he  travelled  in  the  Himalayas. 


Fatality  that  here  they  call  karma,  which  is  the  consequence  ...  yes,  something  that  must  be 
exhausted,  something  that  remains  in  the  consciousness. 

This  is  how  it  works:  the  psychic  being  passes  from  one  life  to  another,  but  there  are  cases  in 
which  the  psychic  incarnates  in  order  to  ...  to  work  out115 ...  to  pass  through  a  certain  experience,  to 
learn  a  certain  thing,  to  develop  a  certain  thing  through  a  certain  experience.  And  so  in  this  life,  in 
the  life  where  the  experience  is  to  be  made,  it  can  happen  (there  may  be  more  than  one  reason)  that 
the  soul  does  not  come  down  accurately  in  the  place  it  should  have,  some  shift  or  other  may  occur,  a 
set  of  contrary  circumstances  -  this  happens  sometimes  -  and  then  the  incarnation  miscarries 
entirely  and  the  soul  leaves.  But  in  other  cases,  the  soul  is  simply  placed  in  the  impossibility  of 
doing  exactly  what  it  wants  and  it  finds  itself  swept  away  by  ...  unfortunate  circumstances.  Not  only 
unfortunate  from  an  objective  standpoint,  but  unfortunate  for  its  own  development,  and  then  that 
creates  in  it  the  necessity  to  begin  the  experience  all  over  again,  and  in  much  more  difficult 
conditions. 

And  if  -  it  can  happen  -  if  the  second  attempt  also  miscarries,  if  the  conditions  make  the 
experience  the  soul  is  seeking  still  more  difficult  ...  for  example,  if  one  is  in  a  body  with  an 
inadequate  will  or  some  distortion  in  the  thought,  or  an  egoism  too  ...  too  hardened,  and  it  ends  in 
suicide,  it  is  dreadful.  I  have  seen  this  many  times,  it  creates  a  dreadful  karma  that  can  be  repeated 
for  lifetimes  on  end  before  the  soul  can  conquer  it  and  manage  to  do  what  it  wants.  And  each  time, 
the  conditions  become  more  difficult,  each  time  it  requires  a  still  greater  effort.  And  people  who 
know  this  say,  ‘You  cannot  get  out!  ’  In  fact,  it  is  this  kind  of  desire  to  escape  which  pushes  you  into 
more  foolish  things116  that  result  in  a  still  greater  accumulation  of  difficulty.  There  are  moments  - 
moments  and  circumstances  -  when  no  one  is  there  to  help  you,  and  then  things  become  so  ... 
horrible,  the  circumstances  become  so  abominable. 

But  if  the  soul  has  had  but  ONE  call,  but  ONE  contact  with  the  Grace,  then  in  your  next  life  you 
are  put  in  the  conditions,  once,  whereby  EVERYTHING  can  be  swept  away  at  one  stroke.  And  at 
this  present  moment  on  earth,  you  cannot  imagine  the  number  of  people  I  have  met  -  that  is,  the 
number  of  souls  -  who  had  reached  out  towards  this  possibility  with  such  an  intensity  -  and  they 
have  all  found  themselves  on  my  path. 

At  that  point,  sometimes  a  great  courage  is  needed,  sometimes  a  great  endurance  is  needed, 
sometimes  a  true  love  is  enough,  sometimes,  oh!  if  only  faith  were  there,  one  thing,  one  tiny  little 
thing  is  enough,  and  ...  everything  can  be  swept  away.  I  have  done  it  often;  there  are  times  when  I 
have  failed.  But  more  often  than  not  I  have  been  able  to  remove  it.  But  then,  what  is  needed  is  a 
great,  stoical  courage  or  a  capacity  to  endure  and  to  SEE  IT  THROUGH.  The  resistance  (especially 
in  cases  of  former  suicide),  the  resistance  to  the  temptation  of  renewing  this  stupidity  creates  a 
terrible  formation.  Or  else  this  habit  of  fleeing  when  suffering  comes:  flee,  flee,  instead  of  ... 
absorbing  the  difficulty,  holding  on. 

But  just  this,  a  faith  in  the  Grace,  or  an  awareness  of  the  Grace,  or  the  intensity  of  the  call,  or 
else  naturally  the  response  -  the  response,  the  thing  that  opens,  that  breaks  -  the  response  to  this 
marvelous  love  of  the  Grace. 

It  is  difficult  without  a  strong  will;  and  above  all,  above  all  the  capacity  to  resist  the  temptation, 
which  was  the  fatal  temptation  throughout  all  one’s  lives  -  because  its  power  builds  up.  Each  defeat 
gives  it  renewed  force.  But  a  tiny  victory  can  dissolve  it. 

Oh,  the  most  terrible  of  all  is  when  one  does  not  have  the  strength,  the  courage,  something 
indomitable!  How  many  times  do  they  come  to  tell  me,  ‘I  want  to  die,  I  want  to  flee,  I  want  to  die.’ 
-  I  say,  ‘But  die,  then,  die  to  yourself!  No  one  is  asking  you  to  let  your  ego  survive!  Die  to  yourself 

1 150riginal  English. 


1 16Mother  specified:  ‘The  subconscious  memory  of  the  past  creates  a  kind  of  irresistible  desire  to  escape  from  the 
difficulty,  and  you  recommence  the  same  foolishness,  or  an  even  greater  foolishness.’ 


since  you  want  to  die!  Have  that  courage,  the  true  courage,  to  die  to  your  egoism.’ 

But  because  it  is  karma,  one  must,  one  must  DO  something  oneself.  Kanna  is  the  construction  of 
the  ego;  the  ego  MUST  DO  something,  everything  cannot  be  done  for  it.  This  is  it,  THIS  is  the 
thing:  karma  is  the  result  of  the  ego’s  actions,  and  only  when  the  ego  abdicates  is  the  karma 
dissolved.  One  can  help  it  along,  one  can  assist  it,  give  it  strength,  bestow  courage  upon  it,  but  the 
ego  must  then  make  use  of  it. 

(silence) 

So  this  is  what  I  saw  for  you:  that  the  crystallization  of  this  karma  occurred  during  a  life  in  India  in 
which  you  were  put  in  the  presence  of  the  possibility  of  liberation  and  ...  I  don’t  know  the  details;  I 
don’t  know  the  material  facts  at  all.  So  far,  I  know  nothing,  I  have  only  had  a  vision.  I  saw  you 
there,  as  I  told  you,  taller  than  you  are  now,  in  an  Indian  body,  north  Indian,  for  it  was  not  dark  but 
fair.  But  there  was  a  HARDNESS  in  the  being,  the  hardness  born  of  a  kind  of  despair  mixed  with 
rebellion,  incomprehension  and  an  ego  that  resists.  That  is  all  I  know.  The  image  was  of  you  backed 
up  against  a  bronze  door:  BACKED  UP  against  it.  I  didn’t  see  what  had  caused  it.  As  I  told  you, 
something  interrupted  me,  so  I  was  unable  to  follow  it. 

The  other  indication  is  what  I  told  you  the  other  day.  When  you  thought  of  leaving  to  join 
Swami,  I  immediately  saw  a  stream  of  light:  Ah,  the  road  is  opening  up!  So  I  said,  ‘It  is  good.’  And 
while  you  were  away  in  Ceylon,  I  followed  you  from  day  to  day.  You  called  much  more  than  the 
second  time,  when  you  were  in  the  Himalayas;  and  with  the  physical  hardships  you  were 
undergoing,  I  was  very,  very  close  to  you  -  I  constantly  felt  what  was  happening. 

And  then  I  saw  a  GREAT  light,  like  a  glory,  when  you  were  at  Rameswaram.  A  great  light.  And 
when  you  returned  here,  this  light  was  upon  you,  very  strong  and  imposing.  But  at  the  same  time,  I 
felt  that  it  needed  protecting  -  to  be  shielded,  protected  -  that  it  was  not  yet  established. 
Established,  ready  to  resist  all  that  decomposes  an  experience.  I  would  have  liked  to  have  kept  you 
apart,  under  a  glass  case,  but  then  I  saw  that  this  would  have  drawbacks  as  well  as  advantages.  Also, 
I  liked  the  way  you  wanted  to  fight  against  an  uncomprehending  reception  due  to  your  orange  robes 
and  your  shaved  head.  Of  course,  it  was  a  much  shorter  path  than  the  other,  but  it  was  more 
difficult. 

And  then,  more  and  more,  I  felt  that  if  what  I  saw,  as  I  saw  it,  could  be  realized  ...  I  saw  two 
things:  a  journey  -  not  at  all  a  pilgrimage  as  it  is  commonly  understood  -  a  journey  towards  solitude 
in  arduous  conditions,  and  a  sojourn  in  a  very  severe  solitude,  facing  the  mountains,  in  arduous 
physical  conditions.  The  contact  with  this  majesty  of  Nature  has  a  great  influence  upon  the  ego  at 
certain  moments:  it  has  the  power  to  dissolve  it.  But  all  this  complication,  all  these  organized 
pilgrimages,  all  that ...  it  brings  in  the  whole  petty  side  of  human  life  which  spoils  everything  ... 

Yes,  that  whole  journey  was  odious  ... 

...  which  spoils  everything. 

The  other  thing  was  the  tantric  initiation.  But  I  wanted  the  conditions  of  this  initiation  to  be  at 
least  as  favorable  as  those  in  Rameswaram,  by  which  I  mean  conducted  by  someone  very  capable 
and  as  far  as  possible  free  from  the  whole  fonnalistic  and  external  side.  A  TRUE  initiation  - 
someone  who  would  be  capable  of  pulling  down  the  Power  and  putting  you  in  conditions  rigorous 
enough  for  you  to  be  able  to  hold  this  Power,  to  receive  it  and  hold  it. 

As  soon  as  you  had  left,  and  since  I  was  following  you,  I  saw  that  nothing  of  the  kind  was  going 
to  happen,  but  rather  something  very  superficial  which  would  not  be  of  much  use.  And  when  I 
received  your  letters  and  saw  that  you  were  in  difficulty,  I  did  something.  There  are  places  that  are 
favorable  for  occult  experiences.  Benares  is  one  of  these  places,  the  atmosphere  there  is  filled  with 
vibrations  of  occult  forces,  and  if  one  has  the  slightest  capacity,  it  spontaneously  develops  there,  in 
the  same  way  that  a  spiritual  aspiration  develops  very  strongly  and  spontaneously  as  soon  as  one 


lands  in  India.  These  are  Graces.  Graces,  because  it  is  the  destiny  of  the  country,  it  has  been  so 
throughout  its  history,  and  because  India  has  always  been  turned  much  more  towards  the  heights 
and  the  inner  depths  than  towards  the  outer  world.  Now,  it  is  in  the  process  of  losing  all  that  and 
wallowing  in  the  mud,  but  that’s  another  story  ...  it  was  like  that  and  it  is  still  like  that.  And  in  fact, 
when  you  returned  from  Rameswaram  with  your  robes,  I  saw  with  much  satisfaction  that  there  was 
still  a  GREAT  dignity  and  a  GREAT  sincerity  in  this  endeavor  of  the  Sannyasis  towards  the  higher 
life  and  in  the  self-giving  of  a  certain  number  of  people  to  realize  this  higher  life.  When  you 
returned,  it  had  become  a  very  concrete  and  a  very  real  thing  that  immediately  commanded  respect. 
Before,  I  had  seen  only  a  copy,  an  imitation,  an  hypocrisy,  a  pretention  -  nothing  that  was  really 
lived.  But  then,  I  saw  that  it  was  true,  that  it  was  lived,  that  it  was  real  and  that  it  was  still  India’s 
great  heritage.  I  don’t  believe  it  is  very  prevalent  now,  but  in  any  case,  it  is  still  there,  and  as  I  told 
you,  it  commands  respect.  And  then,  as  I  felt  you  in  difficulty  and  as  the  outer  conditions  were  not 
only  veiling  but  spoiling  the  inner,  well,  on  that  day  I  wrote  you  a  short  note  -  I  no  longer  recall 
when  it  was  exactly,  but  I  wrote  you  just  a  word  or  two,  which  I  put  in  an  envelope  and  sent  you  -  I 
concentrated  very  strongly  upon  those  few  words  and  sent  you  something.  I  didn’t  note  the  date,  I 
don’t  remember  when  it  was,  but  it’s  likely  that  it  happened  as  I  wished  when  you  were  in  Benares; 
and  then  you  had  this  experience. 

But  when  you  returned  the  second  time,  from  the  Himalayas,  you  didn’t  have  the  same  flame  as 
when  you  returned  the  first  time.  And  I  understood  that  this  kind  of  difficult  karma  still  clung  to 
you,  that  it  had  not  been  dissolved.  I  had  hoped  that  your  contact  with  the  mountains  -  but  in  a  true 
solitude  (I  don’t  mean  that  your  body  had  to  be  all  alone,  but  there  should  not  have  been  all  kinds  of 
outer,  superficial  things)  ...  Anyway,  it  didn’t  happen.  So  it  means  that  the  time  had  not  come. 

But  when  here  the  difficulties  returned  -  and  because  of  their  obstinacy,  their  appearance  of  an 
inevitable  fatality  - 1  concluded  that  it  was  a  karma,  although  I  knew  it  with  certainty  only  now. 

But  I  always  had  a  presentiment  of  the  true  thing:  that  only  a  VERY  COURAGEOUS  act  of 
self-giving  could  efface  the  thing  -  not  courageous  or  difficult  from  the  material  point  of  view,  not 
that ...  There  is  a  certain  zone  of  the  vital  in  you,  a  mentalized  vital  but  still  very  material,  which  is 
very  much  under  the  influence  of  circumstances  and  which  very  much  believes  in  the  effectiveness 
of  outer  measures  -  this  is  what  is  resisting. 

That  is  all  I  know. 

Generally,  when  the  hour  has  come  for  a  karma  to  be  overcome  and  absorbed  in  the  Grace,  the 
image  or  the  knowledge  or  the  experience  of  the  exact  facts  that  are  the  origin  of  the  karma  come  to 
me,  and  I  can  then  perform  ...  the  cleansing  action. 

For  the  time  being,  it  is  not  yet  there. 

Only,  and  this  is  what  I  wrote  to  you  the  other  day  which  you  did  not  understand:  it  is  precisely 
at  the  most  painful  point,  at  the  time  when  the  suggestions  are  strongest,  that  one  must  hold  on. 
Otherwise,  it  has  always  to  be  done  all  over  again,  always  to  be  reconfronted.  There  comes  a  day,  a 
moment,  when  it  has  to  be  done.  And  now,  there  is  truly  an  opportunity  on  earth  that  is  offered  only 
once  in  thousands  of  years,  a  conscious  help,  with  the  necessary  Power  ... 

But  that’s  about  all  I  know. 

Still,  I feel  the  need  to  do  something  -  to  do  something. 

TO  DO  something,  yes,  that’s  what  has  a  hold  on  you. 

I’m  rotting  on  the  spot. 

Eh? 


I’m  ...  I  feel  like  I’m  rotting  ... 


Rotting? 


Falling  apart.  Everything  is  falling  apart. 

Yes,  that’s  it ...  (silence)  That  is  the  knot  of  karma:  that  sensation,  that  perception,  that  is  the  knot  of 
karma. 

My  perception  is  that  I  have  something  to  do,  I  don ’t  know  what,  and  only  afterwards  ... 

But  do  you  feel  it  as  something  to  do  physically? 

Yes,  I  don ’t  know,  this  project  of  the  Belgian  Congo,111  for  example,  it  seemed  to  me  ... 

Pardon  me,  but  that  is  childishness!  ... 

I  don’t  know.  That’s  not  how  I  see  it,  in  any  case  ...  To  live  in  the  forest  physically,  an  intense 
physical  life  where  one  is  free,  where  one  is  pure,  where  one  is  far  away  ...  Above  all,  to  stop  this 
thing  from  grinding  on,  finished  with  the  head,  and  finished  with  thinking  whatever  it  might  be.  If 
there  is  a  yoga,  it  would  be  done  spontaneously,  naturally,  physically,  and  without  the  least 
questioning  from  up  there  -  above  all,  a  complete  cessation  of  that  (the  head). 


November  26, 1958 


(Extract  from  the  last  Wednesday  class) 

Basically,  the  vast  majority  of  men  are  like  prisoners  with  all  the  doors  and  all  the  windows  shut,  so 
they  suffocate  (which  is  quite  natural),  but  they  have  with  them  the  key  that  opens  the  doors  and  the 
windows,  and  they  don’t  use  it  ...  Certainly,  there  is  a  period  when  they  don’t  know  that  they  have 
the  key,  but  even  long  after  they  do  know  it,  long  after  they  have  been  told,  they  hesitate  to  use  it 
and  doubt  that  it  has  the  power  to  open  the  doors  and  windows,  or  even  that  it  may  be  advisable  to 
open  them.  And  even  once  they  feel  that  ‘After  all,  it  might  be  a  good  thing,’  a  fear  pursues  them: 
‘What  is  going  to  happen  once  all  these  doors  and  these  windows  open?  ...’  They  become  afraid  - 
afraid  of  losing  themselves  in  this  light  and  in  this  freedom.  They  want  to  remain  what  they  call 
‘themselves.’  They  love  their  falsehood  and  their  slavery.  Something  in  them  loves  it  and  remains 
clinging  to  it.  They  feel  that  without  their  limits,  they  would  no  longer  exist. 

That  is  why  the  journey  is  so  long,  so  difficult.  For  if  one  would  truly  consent  no  longer  to  be, 
everything  would  become  so  easy,  so  swift,  so  luminous,  so  joyous  -  though  perhaps  not  in  the  way 
men  conceive  of  joy  and  ease.  At  heart,  there  are  very  few  beings  who  are  not  enamored  of  struggle. 
There  are  very  few  who  would  consent  to  having  no  darkness  or  who  can  conceive  of  light  as 
anything  other  than  the  opposite  of  obscurity:  ‘Without  shadow,  there  would  be  no  painting. 


1 17The  disciple  wanted  to  leave  for  the  forest,  the  Congo,  to  do  the  most  unlikely  things  there. 


Without  struggle,  there  would  be  no  victory.  Without  suffering,  there  would  be  no  joy.’  That  is  what 
they  think,  and  as  long  as  they  think  like  that,  they  are  not  yet  born  to  the  spirit. 


November  27, 1958 


(Concerning  the  disciple ’s  karma  and  the  tantric  discipline  that  he  is  following  to  dissolve  this 
karma,  Mother  wonders  why  She  herself  had  not  been  able  to  dissolve  it  directly  and  why  it  was 

necessary  to  resort  to  intermediaries) 

I  am  used  to  seeing  the  process  or  the  working  of  things  more  from  a  spiritual  point  of  view, 
something  more  universal,  whereas  this  needs  to  be  seen  from  a  detailed,  occult  point  of  view. 

For  example,  one  thing  had  always  appeared  unimportant  to  me  in  action  -  intermediaries 
between  the  spiritualized  individual  being,  the  conscious  soul,  and  the  Supreme.  According  to  my 
personal  experience,  it  had  always  seemed  to  me  that  if  one  is  exclusively  turned  towards  the 
Supreme  in  all  one’s  actions  and  expresses  Him  directly,  whatever  is  to  be  done  is  done 
automatically.  For  example,  if  you  are  always  open  and  if  at  each  second  you  consciously  want  to 
express  only  what  the  Supreme  Lord  wants  to  be  expressed,  it  is  done  automatically.  But  with  all 
that  I  have  learned  about  pujas,  about  certain  scriptures  and  certain  rituals  as  well,  the  necessity  for 
a  ‘process’  has  become  very  clear  to  me.  It’s  the  same  as  in  physical  life;  in  physical  life,  everything 
needs  a  process,  as  we  know,  and  it  is  the  knowledge  of  processes  that  constitutes  physical  science. 
Similarly,  in  a  more  occult  working,  the  knowledge  and  especially  the  RESPECT  for  the  process 
seem  to  be  much  more  important  than  I  had  first  thought. 

And  when  I  studied  this,  when  I  looked  at  this  science  of  processes,  of  intermediaries,  suddenly 
I  clearly  understood  the  working  of  karma,  which  I  had  not  understood  before.  I  had  worked  and 
intervened  quite  often  to  change  someone’s  karma,  but  sometimes  I  had  to  wait,  without  exactly 
knowing  why  -  the  result  was  not  immediate.  I  simply  used  to  wait  without  worrying  about  the 
reasons  for  this  slowness  or  delay.  That’s  how  it  was.  And  generally  it  ended,  as  I  said,  with  the 
exact  vision  of  the  karma’s  source,  its  initial  cause;  and  scarcely  would  I  have  this  vision  when  the 
Power  would  come,  and  the  thing  would  be  dissolved.  But  I  didn’t  bother  about  finding  out  why  it 
was  like  that. 

One  day  I  had  mentioned  this  to  X118  when  he  was  showing  me  or  describing  to  me  the  different 
movements  of  the  pujas,  the  procedure,  the  process  of  the  puja.  I  said  to  him,  ‘Oh,  I  see!  For  the 
action  to  be  immediate,  for  the  result  to  be  immediate,  one  must  acknowledge,  for  example,  the  role 
or  the  participation  of  certain  spirits  or  certain  forces  and  enter  into  a  friendly  relationship  or 
collaboration  with  these  forces  in  order  to  obtain  an  immediate  result,  is  it  not  so?’  Then  he  told  me, 
‘Yes,  otherwise  it  leaves  an  indefinite  time  to  the  play  of  the  forces,  and  you  don’t  know  when  you 
will  get  the  result  of  your  puja.’ 

That  interested  me  very  much.  Because  one  of  the  obstacles  I  had  felt  was  that  although  the 


1 18The  disciple’s  tantric  guru. 


Force  was  acting  well,  there  was  a  time  lag  that  appeared  inevitable,  a  time  element  in  the  work 
which  seemed  unavoidable  -  a  play  left  to  the  forces  of  Nature.  But  with  their  knowledge  of  the 
processes,  the  tantrics  can  dispense  with  all  that.  So  I  understood  why  those  who  have  studied,  who 
are  initiated  and  follow  the  prescribed  methods  are  apparently  more  powerful  -  more  powerful  even 
than  those  who  are  conscious  in  the  highest  consciousness. 

What  interested  me  is  that  in  their  case  (those  who  follow  tantric  or  other  initiations),  what  is 
doubtful  is  whether  or  not  they  can  succeed  in  receiving  the  response  of  the  true  Power,  the  divine 
power,  the  supreme  power;  they  do  everything  they  can,  but  this  question  still  remains.  Whereas  for 
me,  it  is  the  opposite  situation:  the  Power  is  there,  I  have  it,  but  how  can  I  make  it  act  here  in 
matter?  The  process  for  making  it  act  immediately  was  missing  -  though  not  totally;  I  know  from 
the  psychological  standpoint,  but  there  is  something  other  than  the  psychological  power,  there  is  the 
whole  play  of  conscious,  individualized  forces  that  are  everywhere  in  Nature  and  that  have  the  right 
to  exist.  Since  it  was  created  this  way,  it  must  express  something  of  the  supreme  Will,  otherwise  He 
wouldn’t  have  made  use  of  intennediaries  -  but  in  His  plan,  it  is  obvious  that  the  intermediary  has  a 
legitimate  place. 

It  is  like  the  story  X  told  me  of  his  guru119  who  could  command  the  coming  of  Kali  (something 
which  seems  quite  natural  to  me  when  one  is  sufficiently  developed);  well,  not  only  could  he 
commend  the  coming  of  Kali,  but  Kali  with  I  don’t  know  how  many  crores  of  her  warriors!  ...  For 
me,  Kali  was  Kali,  after  all,  and  she  did  her  work;  but  in  the  universal  organization,  her  action,  the 
innumerable  multiplicity  of  her  action,  is  expressed  by  an  innumerable  multitude  of  conscious 
entities  at  work.  It  is  this  individualization,  as  it  were,  that  gives  to  these  forces  a  consciousness  and 
a  certain  play  of  freedom,  and  this  is  what  makes  all  the  difference  in  action.  It  is  in  this  respect  that 
the  occult  system  is  an  absolutely  indispensable  complement  to  spiritual  action. 

The  spiritual  action  is  direct,  but  it  may  not  be  immediate  (anyway,  that’s  my  experience).  Sri 
Aurobindo  said  that  with  the  supramental  presence,  it  becomes  immediate  -  and  I  have  experienced 
this.  But  this  would  then  mean  that  the  supramental  Power  automatically  commands  all  these 
intermediaries,  whereas  if  it’s  not  present,  even  the  highest  spiritual  power  would  need  a  specialized 
knowledge  to  act  in  this  realm,  a  knowledge  equivalent  to  an  occult  or  initiatory  knowledge  of  all 
these  realms.  This  is  why  I  told  X,  ‘Well,  you  taught  me  many  things  while  you  were  here.’  There  is 
always  something  to  leam. 

Of  course,  when  the  Supramental  is  here,  it  will  be  very  different.  I  see  it  clearly:  in  moments 
when  it  is  there,  everything  is  turned  inside  out,  and  all  this  belongs  to  a  world  ...  to  the  world  of 
preparation.  It  is  like  a  preparation,  a  long  preparation. 

It  remains  to  be  seen  if  all  this  has  first  to  be  mastered  before  there  is  even  the  possibility  of 
holding  the  Supramental,  of  FIXING  it  in  the  manifestation.  That  is  the  great  difference.  For 
example,  those  with  the  power  to  materialize  forces  or  beings  lack  the  capacity  to  fix  them,  for 
these  are  fluid  things  which  act  and  are  then  dissolved.  That  is  the  difference  with  the  physical 
world  where  it  is  this  condensation  of  energy  that  makes  things  ...  (Mother  strikes  the  arms  of  her 
chair)  stable.  All  the  things  in  the  extraphysical  realms  are  not  stable,  they  are  fluid  -  fluid  and 
consequently  uncertain.120 


1 19The  deceased  gum  of  the  disciple’s  gum. 


120A  few  days  later,  the  disciple  left  on  a  journey,  then  Mother  fell  ‘ill.’  It  was  to  be  the  first  great  turning  in  her  yoga: 
the  beginning  of  the  yoga  of  the  cells. 


November  28, 1958 


(Extract  from  the  last  Friday  class) 

As  it  is,  the  physical  body  is  really  only  a  very  disfigured  shadow  of  the  eternal  life  of  the  Self,  but 
this  physical  body  is  capable  of  a  progressive  development;  the  physical  substance  progresses 
through  each  individual  formation,  and  one  day  it  will  be  able  to  build  a  bridge  between  physical 
life  as  we  know  it  and  the  supramental  life  that  is  to  manifest. 


November  30, 1958 


(Letter  from  Mother  to  Satprem) 


Sunday  morning 


Satprem, 

Here  is  the  wherewithal  to  go  to  Hyderabad.  Whatever  you  may  decide,  I  will  always  be  with 
you,  invariably,  in  the  truth  of  your  being. 

Signed:  Mother 


December  1958 


(This  note  was  written  by  Mother  in  English.  It  concerns  an  attack  of  black  magic  that  threatened 
her  life  and  in  the  end  completely  changed  her  outer  existence.  A  new  stage  begins.) 

Two  or  three  days  after  I  retired  to  my  room  upstairs,121  early  in  the  night  I  fell  into  a  very  heavy 
sleep  and  found  myself  out  of  the  body  much  more  materially  than  I  do  usually.  This  degree  of 
density  in  which  you  can  see  the  material  surroundings  exactly  as  they  are.  The  part  that  was  out 
seemed  to  be  under  a  spell  and  only  half  conscious.  When  I  found  myself  at  the  first  floor  where 
everything  was  absolutely  black,  I  wanted  to  go  up  again,  but  then  I  discovered  that  my  hand  was 
held  by  a  young  girl  whom  I  could  not  see  in  the  darkness  but  whose  contact  was  very  familiar.  She 
pulled  me  by  the  hand  telling  me  laughingly,  ‘No,  come,  come  down  with  me,  we  shall  kill  the 
young  princess.’  I  could  not  understand  what  she  meant  by  this  ‘young  princess’  and,  rather 
unwillingly,  I  followed  her  to  see  what  it  was.  Arriving  in  the  anteroom  which  is  at  the  top  of  the 
staircase  leading  to  the  ground  floor,  my  attention  was  drawn  in  the  midst  of  all  this  total  obscurity 
to  the  white  figure  of  Kamala  (A  disciple)  standing  in  the  middle  of  the  passage  between  the  hall 
and  Sri  Aurobindo’s  room.  She  was  as  it  were  in  full  light  while  everything  else  was  black.  Then  I 
saw  on  her  face  such  an  expression  of  intense  anxiety  that  to  comfort  her  I  said,  ‘I  am  coming 
back.’  The  sound  of  my  voice  shook  off  from  me  the  semi-trance  in  which  I  was  before  and 
suddenly  I  thought,  ‘Where  am  I  going?’  and  I  pushed  away  from  me  the  dark  figure  who  was 
pulling  me  and  in  whom,  while  she  was  running  down  the  steps,  I  recognized  a  young  girl  who 
lived  with  Sri  Aurobindo  and  me  for  many  years  and  died  five  years  back.  This  girl  during  her  life 
was  under  the  most  diabolical  influence.  And  then  I  saw  very  distinctly  (as  through  the  walls  of  the 
staircase)  down  below  a  small  black  tent  which  could  scarcely  be  perceived  in  the  surrounding 
darkness  and  standing  in  the  middle  of  the  tent  the  figure  of  a  man,  head  and  face  shaved  (like  the 
sannyasin  or  the  Buddhist  monks)  covered  from  head  to  foot  with  a  knitted  outfit  following  tightly 
the  form  of  his  body  which  was  tall  and  slim.  No  other  cloth  or  garment  could  give  an  indication  as 
to  who  he  could  be.  He  was  standing  in  front  of  a  black  pot  placed  on  a  dark  red  fire  which  was 
throwing  its  reddish  glow  on  him.  He  had  his  right  arm  stretched  over  the  pot,  holding  between  two 
fingers  a  thin  gold  chain  which  looked  like  one  of  mine  and  was  unnaturally  visible  and  bright. 
Shaking  gently  the  chain  he  was  chanting  some  words  which  translated  in  my  mind,  ‘She  must  die 
the  young  princess,  she  must  pay  for  all  she  has  done,  she  must  die  the  young  princess’. 

Then  I  suddenly  realized  that  it  was  I  the  young  Princess  and  as  I  burst  into  laughter,  I  found 
myself  awake  in  my  bed. 

I  did  not  like  the  idea  of  something  or  somebody  having  the  power  to  pull  me  like  that  so 
materially  out  of  my  body  without  my  previous  consent.  That  is  why  I  gave  some  importance  to  the 
experience. 


121Mother  withdrew  on  December  9.  In  fact,  She  had  been  unwell  for  already  more  than  a  month  before  withdrawing. 
On  November  26,  the  last  'Wednesday  class'  took  place  at  the  playground;  on  November  28  the  last  'Friday  class',  on 
December  6,  the  last  'Translation  class';  on  December  1,  the  end  of  Mother's  tennis  and  the  last  visit  to  the  playground. 
On  December  9,  She  again  went  down  for  the  meditation  around  the  Samadhi.  From  December  10,  Mother  remained  in 
her  room  for  one  month.  A  great  period  had  come  to  an  end.  Henceforth,  She  would  only  go  out  of  the  Ashram  building 


on  rare  occasions. 


December  4, 1958 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Hyderabad,  December  1958 


Sweet  Mother, 

I  had  come  to  Hyderabad  intending  to  prepare  for  a  trip  to  Africa,  but  when  it  came  to  actually 
doing  it,  I  simply  could  not.  It  is  stronger  than  I;  I  cannot  leave  India,  I  cannot  live  without  my  soul. 

Until  these  last  days,  I  still  thought  I  could  count  on  some  outer  solution  to  resolve  my  problem, 
but  now  I  am  up  against  a  wall;  I  see  that  nothing  can  be  DONE  and  the  only  solution  is  what  you 
said  one  day:  ‘Consent  no  longer  to  be.’ 

Mother,  I  have  made  many  mistakes,  I  have  often  been  rebellious  and  fallen  into  many  holes. 
Help  me  to  pick  myself  up,  give  me  nonetheless  a  little  of  your  Love.  This  has  to  change. 

I  do  not  want  to  remain  in  Hyderabad.  This  is  not  the  atmosphere  I  need,  although  everything  is 
very  quiet  here. 

If  you  want,  I  can  return  to  the  Ashram  and  throw  myself  headlong  into  the  work  in  order  to 
forget  all  this.  There  is  a  lot  of  work  with  Herbert’s  things  to  correct,  the  revision  of  The  Synthesis 
of  Yoga,  your  old  Questions  and  Answers  and  the  Dhammapada,  and  perhaps  you  would  accept  to 
take  up  our  work  together  again? 

Otherwise,  if  you  consider  it  preferable  to  wait,  I  could  go  join  Swami  in  Rameswaram, 
discarding  all  my  little  personal  reactions  towards  him.  And  I  would  try  my  best  to  find  again  the 
Light  of  the  first  time  and  return  to  you  stronger.  I  don’t  know.  I  will  do  what  you  say.  All  this 
really  has  to  change.  I  don’t  know,  moreover,  whether  Swami  wishes  to  have  me. 

Mother,  I  need  you,  I  need  you.  Forgive  me  and  tell  me  what  I  should  do. 

Your  child, 
Signed:  Satprem 


(Mother’s  reply) 


12.8.58 


My  dear  child, 

I  have  just  received  your  letter  which  I  read  with  all  my  love,  the  love  that  understands  and 
effaces.  When  you  return  here,  you  will  always  be  very  welcome,  and  we  shall  certainly  take  up  our 
work  together  again.  I  shall  be  happy,  and  it  is  very  much  needed.  But  first  of  all,  it  will  be  good  for 
you  to  go  to  Rameswaram.  I  know  that  you  will  be  welcome  there.  Stay  there  as  long  as  necessary  to 
find  and  consolidate  your  experience.  Afterwards,  come  back  here,  stronger  and  better  armed,  to 
face  a  new  period  of  outer  and  inner  work.  At  the  end  of  the  labor  is  the  Victory. 

With  all  my  confident  love. 


Signed:  Mother 


December  15, 1958 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Rameswaram,  Monday  12.15.58 


Sweet  Mother, 

I  have  only  now  received  your  first  letter  which  you  had  sent  to  Hyderabad.  It  arrived  in  time  to 
do  me  some  good,  for  I  am  living  through  critical  moments. 

Swami  received  me  warmly  and  is  doing  all  he  can  with  all  his  heart.  I  am  following  his 
instructions  to  the  letter  for  I  believe  that  your  grace  is  acting  through  him.  Furthermore,  he  is 
totally  devoted  to  you  and  spoke  of  you  as  no  one  ever  has  -  he  understands  many  things.  I  was 
unfair  in  my  reactions  towards  him. 

At  the  new  moon,  when  I  felt  very  down,  he  gave  me  the  first  tantric  mantra  -  a  mantra  to 
Durga.  For  a  period  of  41  days,  I  must  repeat  it  125,000  times  and  go  every  morning  to  the  Temple, 
stand  before  Parvati  and  recite  this  mantra  within  me  for  at  least  one  hour.  Then  I  must  go  to  the 
sanctuary  of  Shiva  and  recite  another  mantra  for  half  an  hour.  Practically  speaking,  I  have  to  repeat 
constantly  within  me  the  mantra  to  Durga  in  a  silent  concentration,  whatever  I  may  be  doing  on  the 
outside.  In  these  conditions,  it  is  difficult  to  think  of  you  and  this  has  created  a  slight  conflict  in  me, 
but  I  believe  that  your  Grace  is  acting  through  Swami  and  through  Durga,  whom  I  am  invoking  all 
the  time  -  I  remember  what  you  told  me  about  the  necessity  for  ‘intermediaries’  and  I  am  obeying 
Swami  unreservedly. 

Mother,  things  are  far  from  being  what  they  were  the  first  time  in  Rameswaram,  and  I  am  living 
through  certain  moments  that  are  hell  -  the  enemy  seems  to  have  been  unleashed  with  an 
extraordinary  violence.  It  comes  in  waves,  and  after  it  recedes,  I  am  literally  SHATTERED  - 
physically,  mentally  and  vitally  drained.  This  morning,  while  going  to  the  temple,  I  lived  through 
one  of  these  moments.  All  this  suffering  that  suddenly  sweeps  down  upon  me  is  horrible.  Yes,  I  had 
the  feeling  of  being  BACKED  UP  AGAINST  A  WALL,  exactly  as  in  your  vision  -  I  was  up 
against  a  wall.  I  was  walking  among  these  immense  arcades  of  sculptured  granite  and  I  could  see 
myself  walking,  very  small,  all  alone,  alone,  ravaged  with  pain,  filled  with  a  nameless  despair,  for 
nowhere  was  there  a  way  out.  The  sea  was  nearby  and  I  could  have  thrown  myself  into  it; 
otherwise,  there  was  only  the  sanctuary  of  Parvati  -  but  there  was  no  more  Africa  to  flee  to, 
everything  closed  in  all  around  me,  and  I  kept  repeating,  ‘Why?  Why?  ’  This  much  suffering  was 
truly  inhuman,  as  if  my  last  twenty  years  of  nightmare  were  crashing  down  upon  me.  I  gritted  my 
teeth  and  went  to  the  sanctuary  to  say  my  mantra.  The  pain  in  me  was  so  strong  that  I  broke  into  a 
cold  sweat  and  almost  fainted.  Then  it  subsided.  Yet  even  now  I  feel  completely  battered. 

I  clearly  see  that  the  hour  has  come:  either  I  will  perish  right  here,  or  else  I  will  emerge  from  this 
COMPLETELY  changed.  But  something  has  to  change.  Mother,  you  are  with  me,  I  know,  and  you 
are  protecting  me,  you  love  me  -  I  have  only  you,  only  you,  you  are  my  Mother.  If  these  moments 
of  utter  darkness  return  -  and  they  are  bound  to  return  for  everything  to  be  exorcised  and  conquered 
-  protect  me  in  spite  of  myself.  Mother,  may  your  Grace  not  abandon  me.  I  want  to  be  done  with  all 
these  old  phantoms,  I  want  to  be  born  anew  in  your  Light;  it  has  to  be  -  otherwise  I  can  no  longer 
go  on. 

Mother,  I  believe  I  understand  something  of  all  that  you  yourself  are  suffering,  and  the 
crucifixion  of  the  Divine  in  Matter  is  a  real  crucifixion.  In  this  moment  of  consciousness,  I  offer 
you  all  my  trials  and  little  sufferings.  I  would  like  to  triumph  so  that  it  be  your  triumph,  one  weight 
less  upon  your  heart. 


Forgive  me,  Mother,  for  all  the  pain  I  may  have  thrown  on  you,  but  I  am  confident  that  with 
your  Grace  I  will  emerge  from  this  victorious,  your  child  unobscured,  in  all  the  fibers  of  my  being. 
Oh  Mother,  how  alone  you  are  to  bear  all  our  suffering  ...  if  only  I  could  remember  this  in  my 
moments  of  darkness. 

I  am  at  your  feet.  You  are  my  Mother,  my  only  support. 

Signed:  Satprem 

Mother,  may  I  not  be  swept  away  by  one  of  these  waves.  Protect  me.  Love  me!  But  EVERYTHING 
has  to  be  faced  NOW.  I  want  to  fight.  I  do  not  ask  you  to  spare  me,  therefore,  but  to  help  me 
withstand  the  blow. 


(Mother’s  reply) 


12.17.58 


My  very  dear  child, 

I  have  just  received  your  letter  of  the  15th.  Yes,  I  know  that  the  hour  is  critical.  It  has  been  grave 
here  as  well.  I  had  to  stop  everything,  for  the  attack  upon  my  body  was  too  violent.  Now  it  is  better 
-  but  I  have  not  yet  resumed  any  of  my  outer  activities,  and  I  remain  in  my  room  upstairs.  The 
battle  continues  in  the  invisible  and  I  consider  it  decisive.  You  are  a  very  intimate  part  of  this  battle. 
This  is  to  tell  you  that  I  am  with  you  in  the  most  integral  sense  of  these  words.  I  know  what  you  are 
suffering,  I  feel  it  -  but  you  must  hold  on.  The  Grace  is  there,  all-powerful.  As  soon  as  it  is  possible 
and  without  going  through  one  minute  more  than  needed  to  transform  that  which  has  to  be 
transformed,  the  trial  will  reach  its  end  and  we  shall  emerge  into  the  light  and  joy.  So  never  forget 
that  I  am  with  you  -  in  you  -  and  that  WE  SHALL  TRIUMPH: 

With  all  that  love  can  bring  of  solace  and  endurance, 

Signed:  Mother 


Do  not  be  troubled  about  my  body  -  it  is  well  on  the  way  to  recovery. 

*  *  * 


Thursday  1 7  th 

My  very  dear  child,  I  am  adding  on  to  what  I  wrote  you  this  morning  to  ask  you  to  follow  very 
scrupulously  the  indications  given  by  Swami  -  he  knows  these  things  and  has  offered  himself  very 
sincerely  as  an  instrument  of  action  for  my  Grace. 

When  you  invoke  Durga,  it  is  I  you  invoke  through  her,  when  you  invoke  Shiva,  it  is  I  you 
invoke  through  him  -  and  in  the  final  analysis,  to  the  Supreme  Lord  go  all  prayers. 

With  all  my  love. 


Signed:  Mother 


December  24, 1958 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 

Rameswaram,  December  24,  1958 


Sweet  Mother, 

Your  last  letter  was  a  great  comfort  to  me.  If  you  were  not  there,  with  me,  everything  would  be 
so  absurd  and  impossible.  I  am  again  disturbing  you  because  Swami  tells  me  that  you  are  worried 
and  that  I  should  write  to  you.  Not  much  has  changed,  except  that  I  am  holding  on  and  am 
confident.  Yesterday,  I  again  suffered  an  agonizing  wave,  in  the  temple,  and  I  found  just  enough 
strength  to  repeat  your  name  with  each  beat  of  my  heart,  like  someone  drowning.  I  remained  as 
motionless  as  a  pillar  of  stone  before  the  sanctuary,  with  only  your  name  (my  mantra  would  not 
come  out),  then  it  cleared.  It  was  brutal.  I  am  confident  that  with  each  wave  I  am  gaining  in 
strength,  and  I  know  you  are  there.  But  I  am  aware  that  if  the  enemy  is  so  violent  it  is  because 
something  in  me  responds,  or  has  responded,  something  that  has  not  made  its  ‘surrender’  -  that  is 
the  critical  point.  Mother,  may  your  grace  help  me  to  place  everything  in  your  hands,  everything, 
without  any  shadow.  I  want  so  much  to  emerge  into  the  Light,  to  be  rid  of  all  this  once  and  for  all. 

I  am  following  Swami’ s  instructions  to  the  letter.  Sometimes  it  all  seems  to  lack  warmth  and 
spontaneity,  but  I  am  holding  on.  I  might  add  that  we  are  living  right  next  to  the  bazaar,  amidst  a 
great  racket  20  hours  a  day,  which  does  not  make  things  easier.  So  I  repeat  my  mantra  as  one 
pounds  his  fists  against  the  walls  of  a  prison.  Sometimes  it  opens  a  little,  you  send  me  a  little  joy, 
and  then  everything  becomes  better  again. 

Swami  told  me  that  the  mantra  to  Durga  is  intended  to  pierce  through  into  the  subconscient.  To 
complement  this  work,  he  does  his  pujas  to  Kali,  and  finally  one  of  his  friends,  X,  the  ‘High  Priest’ 
of  the  temple  in  Rameswaram  (who  presided  over  my  initiation  and  has  great  occult  powers),  has 
undertaken  to  say  a  ‘very  powerful’  mantra  over  me  daily,  for  a  period  of  eight  days,  to  extirpate  the 
dark  forces  from  my  subconscious.  The  operation  already  began  four  days  ago.  While  reciting  his 
mantra,  he  holds  a  glass  of  water  in  his  hand,  then  he  makes  me  drink  it.  It  seems  that  on  the  eighth 
day,  if  the  enemy  has  been  trapped,  this  water  turns  yellow  -  then  the  operation  is  over  and  the 
poisoned  water  is  thrown  out.  (I  tell  you  all  this  because  I  prefer  that  you  know.)  In  any  event,  I  like 
X  very  much,  he  is  a  very  luminous,  very  good  man.  If  I  am  not  delivered  after  all  this!  ... 

In  truth,  I  believe  only  in  the  Grace.  My  mantra  and  all  the  rest  seem  to  me  only  little  tricks  to 
try  to  win  over  your  Grace. 

Mother,  love  me.  I  have  only  you,  I  want  to  belong  to  you  alone. 

I  am  at  your  feet. 

Your  child, 
Signed:  Satprem 


Have  you  recovered? 

Happy  New  Year,  Sweet  Mother. 


(Mother ’s  reply) 

Sri  Aurobindo  Ashram  Pondicherry,  12.26.58 


Happy  New  Year! 


My  dear  child, 

I  have  received  your  letter  of  the  24th.  You  did  well  to  write,  not  because  I  was  worried,  but  I 
like  to  receive  news  for  it  fixes  my  work  by  giving  me  useful  material  details.  I  am  glad  that  X  is 
doing  something  for  you.  I  like  this  man  and  I  was  counting  upon  him.  I  hope  he  will  succeed. 
Perhaps  his  work  will  be  useful  here,  too  -  for  I  have  serious  reasons  to  believe  that  this  time  occult 
and  even  definite  magic  practices  aimed  directly  against  my  body  have  been  mixed  in  with  the 
attacks.  This  has  complicated  things  somewhat,  so  as  yet  I  have  not  resumed  any  of  my  usual 
activities  -  I  am  still  upstairs  ‘resting,’  but  in  reality  fighting.  Yesterday,  the  Christmas  distribution 
took  place  without  me,  and  it  is  likely  that  it  will  be  the  same  for  January  1st.  The  work,  too,  has 
been  completely  interrupted.  And  I  do  not  yet  know  how  long  this  will  last. 

Keep  me  posted  on  the  result  of  X’s  action;  it  interests  me  very  much  ... 

I  love  you,  my  child,  and  I  am  near  you  with  confidence  and  tenderness. 

Doubt  not  of  the  Victory,  it  is  certain. 

Signed:  Mother 


December  28, 1958 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 

Rameswaram,  December  28,  1958 


Sweet  Mother, 

One  sentence  in  your  letter  prompted  much  reflection;  you  write  that  X’s  action  might  ‘be  useful 
here,  too.’  After  hesitating,  I  told  Swami  of  the  magic  attack  aimed  directly  against  you. 

If  you  wish,  two  things  can  be  done  to  help  your  action:  either  X  can  undertake  certain  mantric 
operations  upon  you  here  in  Rameswaram,  or  better  still,  he  can  immediately  come  to  Pondicherry 
with  Swami  and  do  what  is  needed  in  front  of  you. 

Sweet  Mother,  I  indeed  suspect  that  you  want  to  endure,  to  bear  this  struggle  all  alone.  Oh,  I 
think  I  understand  a  number  of  things  about  the  mechanism  of  these  attacks  and  their  connection 
with  me,  about  the  Divine  Love  that  embraces  all  and  takes  into  itself  the  suffering  and  the  evil  of 
men  -  all  this  overwhelms  me  with  a  sudden  understanding.  It  seems  to  me  that  I  am  seeing  and 
feeling  all  that  you  are  facing,  all  that  you  are  taking  upon  yourself  for  us.  The  suffering  of  the 
Divine  in  Matter  has  been  an  overwhelming  revelation  to  me  -  Ah!  I  see,  I  want  to  fight,  I  want  to 
be  totally  on  your  side;  I  am  now  and  forever  determined. 

But  you  have  enough  to  do  with  the  higher  beasts  of  prey  without  still  having  to  fight  the  little 
scorpions.  I  beg  of  you,  Sweet  Mother,  accept  the  help  that  is  being  offered  to  you,  preserve  your 
strength  for  the  higher  struggle.  I  quite  understand  that  your  Love  can  even  go  to  the  scorpions  that 
are  attacking  you,  but  it  is  not  forbidden  to  protect  yourself  from  their  venom.  You  have  enough  to 


do  on  other  planes. 

X  is  at  the  summit  of  tantric  initiation,  and  his  power  is  not  the  fruit  of  a  simple  knowledge.  He 
holds  it  directly  from  the  Divine,  and  these  things  have  been  in  his  family  traditionally  from  ten 
generations.  No  black  magic  can  resist  his  power.  His  action  is  not  brutal,  he  does  not  mechanically 
apply  formulas,  he  holds  this  Science  and  knows  how  to  apply  it  like  an  expert  chemist,  always  in 
Light,  Love  and  sweetness.  If  you  agree  that  he  come  to  see  you,  he  will  immediately  know  the 
source  of  these  attacks  upon  you  and  will  even  be  able  to  make  the  attacking  force  speak.  He  has 
this  power.  Of  course,  neither  X  nor  Swami  will  divulge  this  to  anyone,  and  everything  will  be  kept 
secret.  You  have  only  to  send  word,  or  a  telegram:  ‘No  objection.’ 

The  work  can  be  done  from  here  also,  but  naturally  it  will  not  be  quite  as  effective.  In  that  case, 
you  would  have  to  set  a  specific  time  to  synchronize  the  action  in  Rameswaram  and  Pondicherry. 
Swami  can  also  do  something  in  his  pujas.  It  is  for  you  to  decide,  but  I  hope  you  will  not  want  to 
prolong  this  battle  unnecessarily. 

On  my  side,  within  my  little  field,  I  am  taking  the  bull  by  the  horns  and  henceforth  the  enemy 
will  no  longer  have  my  complicity.  May  all  my  being  be  turned  solely  towards  your  Light  -  and  be 
your  help,  your  instrument,  your  knight. 

X  has  decided  to  continue  his  action  upon  me  beyond  the  eight  days  foreseen,  which  doubtlessly 
corresponds  to  dosages  that  exceed  my  understanding. 

Mother,  I  am  fighting  beside  you,  for  you,  for  your  Victory. 

With  all  my  Love,  I  am  at  your  feet. 

Signed:  Satprem 

It  seems  to  me  that  everything  has  changed  since  I  have  understood  that  it  is  not  a  personal  battle, 
and  that  I  can  serve.  Your  grace  is  everywhere,  everywhere. 

(Mother ’s  reply) 


Sri  Aurobindo  Ashram ,  12.30.58 


My  dear  child, 

I  have  just  now  received  your  letter  of  the  28th.  On  that  day  I  definitely  felt  that  there  was  a 
decisive  change  in  the  situation  and  I  understood  right  away  that  you  had  spoken  to  Swami  and  also 
that  what  I  had  written  to  you  gave  you  the  opportunity  to  take  a  great  step.  I  am  very  happy  and 
can  say  with  certitude  that  the  worst  is  over.  However,  from  several  points  of  view,  I  infinitely 
appreciate  X’s  offer.  And  although  I  do  not  think  it  necessary,  or  even  desirable,  that  they  both 
come  here  (it  would  create  a  veritable  revolution  and  perhaps  even  a  panic  among  the  ashramites),  I 
am  sure  that  their  intervention  in  Rameswaram  itself  would  not  only  be  useful  but  most  effective  ... 

Yes,  everything  has  changed  since  you  now  understand  that  your  battle  is  not  only  a  personal 
battle  and  that  by  winning  it,  it  is  a  real  service  you  are  rendering  to  the  Divine  Work. 

Happy  New  Year,  my  dear  child!  I  am  sure  it  will  bring  us  a  decisive  victory. 

I  am  near  you  with  all  my  love. 

Signed:  Mother 

P.S.  I  shall  propose  to  Swami  to  enter  into  contact  with  them  at  8:45  p.m.,  if  this  time  suits  them. 


January  6, 1959 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Rameswaram,  January  6,  1959 

Sweet  Mother, 

This  is  to  tell  you  that  a  knot  has  very  perceptibly  come  undone  in  me,  for  no  apparent  reason; 
suddenly,  I  was  breathing  easily. 

And  it  happened  just  as  I  was  despairing  of  ever  getting  out  of  it.  I  seemed  to  be  touching  a  kind 
of  fundamental  bedrock,  so  painful,  so  suffering,  and  full  of  revolt  because  of  too  much  suffering. 
And  I  saw  that  all  my  efforts,  all  the  meditations,  aspirations,  mantras,  were  only  covering  up  this 
suffering  bedrock  without  touching  it.  I  saw  this  fundamental  thing  in  me  very  clearly,  a  poignant 
knot,  ever  ready  for  an  absolute  negation.  I  saw  it  and  I  said  to  you,  ‘Mother,  only  your  grace  can 
remove  this.’  I  said  this  to  you  in  the  temple  that  morning,  in  total  despair.  And  then,  the  knot  was 
undone.  X’s  action  contributed  a  lot,  with  your  grace  acting  through  him.  But  truly,  I  have  traversed 
a  veritable  hell  this  last  while. 

X  continues  his  work  on  me  daily;  it  is  to  last  41  days  in  all.  He  told  me  that  he  wants  to  undo 
the  things  of  several  births.  When  it  is  over,  he  will  explain  it  all  to  me.  I  do  not  know  how  to  tell 
you  how  luminous  and  good  this  man  is,  he  is  a  very  great  soul.  He  is  also  giving  me  Sanskrit 
lessons,  and  little  by  little,  each  evening,  speaks  to  me  of  the  Tantra. 

His  action  upon  you  is  to  continue  for  another  five  days,  after  which  he  is  positive  that  you  will 
be  entirely  saved.  According  to  him,  it  is  indeed  a  magic  attack  originating  in  Pondicherry,  and 
perhaps  even  from  someone  in  the  Ashram!!  He  told  me  that  this  evil  person  would  finally  be 
forced  to  appear  before  you  ...  I  am  learning  many  interesting  things  from  him. 

Mother,  by  way  of  expressing  to  you  my  gratitude,  I  want  to  work  now  to  open  myself  totally  to 
your  Light  and  become  truly  an  egoless  instrument,  your  conscious  instrument.  Mother,  you  are  the 
sole  Reality. 

With  love  and  gratitude,  I  am  your  child. 

Signed:  Satprem 


(Mother ’s  reply) 

Sri  Aurobindo  Ashram  Pondicherry,  1.8.59 


My  dear  child, 

I  was  awaiting  your  letter  impatiently  and  am  very  happy  about  what  you  write! 

I  have  followed  the  vicissitudes  of  your  struggle  step  by  step  and  I  know  that  it  has  been  terrible, 
but  my  confidence  in  the  outcome  has  not  wavered  -  for  I  know  you  are  in  good  hands.  I  am  so 
happy  that  X  is  taking  good  care  of  you,  teaching  you  Sanskrit,  speaking  to  you  of  the  Tantra.  It  is 
just  what  I  wanted. 

His  action  here  has  been  very  effective  and  really  very  interesting.  I  still  do  not  know  whether 
someone  has  really  done  black  magic,  and  the  ‘villain’  has  yet  to  appear  before  me.  But  already 
several  days  ago  the  malefic  influence  completely  disappeared  without  leaving  any  trace  in  the 
atmosphere.  Also  their  mantric  intervention  did  not  stop  at  that,  for  it  has  had  another  most 
interesting  result.  I  am  preparing  a  long  letter  for  Swami  to  explain  all  this  to  him  ... 

The  pain  on  the  left  side  has  not  entirely  gone  and  there  have  been  some  complications  which 
have  delayed  things.  But  I  feel  much  better.  In  fact,  I  am  rebuilding  my  health,  and  I  am  in  no  hurry 


to  resume  the  exhausting  days  as  before.  It  is  quiet  upstairs  for  working,  and  I  am  going  to  take 
advantage  of  this  to  prepare  the  Bulletin'22  at  leisure.  As  I  had  not  read  over  the  pages  on  the 
message  that  we  had  prepared  for  the  315’,  I  have  revised  and  transformed  them  into  an  article.  It 
will  be  the  first  one  in  the  February  issue.  I  am  now  going  to  choose  the  others.  I  will  tell  you  which 
ones  I  have  chosen  and  in  what  order  I  will  put  them. 

Satprem,  my  child,  I  am  truly  with  you  and  I  love  you. 

Signed:  Mother 


January  14, 1959 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Rameswaram,  January  14,  1959 


Sweet  Mother, 

This  morning,  X  told  me  that  he  would  be  most  happy  to  continue  his  action  upon  you  if  it 
would  help  your  work;  he  has  continued  it  anyway,  even  after  knowing  that  the  malefic  influence 
was  expelled  from  the  Ashram.  By  the  way,  X  told  me  that  this  evil  spirit  is  continuing  to  circle 
around  the  Ashram,  but  beyond  its  ‘borders.’  Therefore,  if  you  agree,  it  would  be  necessary  for  him 
to  come  to  Pondicherry  one  of  these  days  to  come  to  grips  directly  with  the  ‘evil  one’  and  finish 
him  off  in  such  a  way  that  he  can  no  longer  come  to  disturb  the  sadhaks,  or  your  work,  upon  the 
slightest  pretext.  Then  X  could  force  this  spirit  to  appear  before  him,  and  thereby  free  the 
atmosphere  from  its  influence.  Anyway,  this  trip  to  Pondicherry  would  not  take  place  in  the  near 
future,  and  it  would  be  easy  to  give  him  an  official  excuse:  seminars  on  the  Tantra  Shastra  that  will 
interest  all  the  Sanskritists  at  the  Ashram.  Moreover,  X’s  work  would  be  done  quietly  in  his  room 
when  he  does  his  daily  puja.  From  here,  from  Rameswaram,  it  is  rather  difficult  to  attract 
Pondicherry’s  atmosphere  and  do  the  work  with  precision.  Of  course,  nothing  will  be  done  without 
your  express  consent.  Swami  is  writing  you  on  his  own  to  tell  you  of  the  revelation  that  X  received 
from  his  [deceased]  guru  concerning  your  experience  and  the  schemings  of  certain  Ashram 
members. 

In  this  regard,  perhaps  you  know  that  X  is  the  tenth  in  the  line  of  Bhaskaraya  (my  spelling  of 
this  name  is  perhaps  not  correct),  the  great  Tantric  of  whom  you  had  a  vision,  who  could  command 
the  coming  of  Kali  along  with  all  her  warriors.  It  is  from  X  that  Swami  received  his  initiation. 

Your  last  letter  gave  us  great  pleasure,  knowing  that  you  have  finally  recovered  physically.  But 
we  deeply  hope  that  you  will  not  again  take  up  the  countless  activities  that  formerly  consumed  all 
your  time  -  so  many  people  come  to  you  egoistically,  for  prestige,  to  be  able  to  say  that  they  are  on 
familiar  terms  with  you.  You  know  this,  of  course  ... 


\22The  Bulletin  of  Physical  Education,  which  appeared  quarterly. 


As  for  myself,  a  step  has  definitely  been  taken,  and  I  am  no  longer  swept  away  by  this  painful 
torrent.  Depressions  and  attacks  still  come,  but  no  longer  with  the  same  violence  as  before.  X  told 
me  that  2/3  of  the  work  has  been  done  and  that  everything  would  be  purged  in  twelve  days  or  so, 
then  the  ‘thing’  will  be  enclosed  in  ajar  and  buried  somewhere  or  thrown  into  the  sea,  and  he  will 
explain  it  all  to  me.  I  will  write  and  tell  you  about  it. 

As  for  the  true  tantric  initiation,  this  is  what  X  told  me:  7  will  give  you  initiation.  You  are  fit. 
You  belong  to  that  line.  It  will  come  soon,  some  months  or  some  years.  Shortly  you  shall  reach  the 
junction.  When  the  time  has  come,  you  yourself  will  come  and  open  a  door  in  me  and  I  shall  give 
you  initiation.  ”  And  he  made  me  understand  that  an  important  divine  work  was  reserved  for  me  in 
the  future,  a  work  for  the  Mother.  The  important  practical  point  is  that  I  have  rapidly  to  develop  my 
knowledge  of  Sanskrit.  The  mantra  given  to  me  seems  to  grow  in  power  as  I  repeat  it. 

Sweet  Mother,  by  what  Grace  have  you  guided  and  protected  me  through  all  these  years?  There 
are  moments  when  I  have  the  vision  of  this  Grace,  bringing  me  to  the  verge  of  tears.  I  see  so  clearly 
that  you  are  doing  everything,  that  you  are  all  that  is  good  in  me,  my  aspiration  and  my  strength. 
‘Me’  is  all  that  is  bad,  all  that  resists,  ‘me’  is  horribly  false  and  falsifying.  If  your  Grace  withdraws 
for  one  second,  I  collapse,  I  am  helpless.123  You  alone  are  my  strength,  the  source  of  my  life,  the  joy 
and  fulfillment  to  which  I  aspire. 

I  am  at  your  feet,  your  child  eternally. 

Signed:  Satprem 


(Mother ’s  reply) 


1.1  6.59 


My  dear  child, 

This  morning,  I  received  your  letter  ...  I  am  very  happy  about  all  that  X  is  telling  you  and  that  he 
has  found  you  fit  to  receive  the  tantric  initiation.  It  was  my  feeling,  I  could  say  my  conviction,  to 
which  he  gives  an  enlightened  confirmation.  So  all  is  well. 

As  for  my  health  and  the  Ashram,  I  infinitely  appreciate  what  he  has  done  and  what  he  would 
like  to  continue  to  do.  His  visit  will  make  me  very  happy,  and  if  he  comes  in  about  one  month,  a 
few  days  before  the  ‘darshan,’  there  will  be  no  need  to  find  any  excuse  for  his  visit,  for  it  will 
appear  quite  natural. 

My  health  is  progressing  well,  but  I  intend  to  be  very  prudent  and  not  burden  myself  with 
occupations.  Yesterday,  I  began  the  balcony  darshan  again,  and  it  is  all  right.  That  is  all  for  the 
moment. 

I  am  taking  advantage  of  this  situation  to  work.  I  have  chosen  the  articles  for  the  Bulletin.  They 
are  as  follows:  1)  Message.  2)  To  keep  silent.  3)  Can  there  be  intermediary  states  between  man  and 
super-man?  4)  The  Anti-Divine.  5)  What  is  the  role  of  the  spirit?  6)  Karma  (I  have  touched  this  one 
up  to  make  it  less  personal).  7)  The  Worship  of  the  Supreme  in  Matter.  Now  I  would  like  to  prepare 
the  first  twelve  Aphorisms124  for  printing.  But  as  you  have  not  yet  revised  the  last  two,  I  am  sending 
them  to  you.  Could  you  do  them  when  you  have  finished  what  you  are  doing  for  the  Bulletin?  It  is 
not  urgent,  take  your  time.  Do  not  disturb  your  real  work  for  this  in  any  way.  For,  in  my  eyes,  this 
work  of  inner  liberation  is  much  more  important. 

You  will  find  in  this  letter  a  little  money.  I  thought  you  might  need  it  for  your  stamps,  etc. 


1230riginal  English. 


124The  French  translation  of  Sri  Aurobindo’s  Thoughts  and  Aphorisms. 


I  never  leave  you,  and  my  love  too  is  always  with  you. 


Signed:  Mother 


January  21, 1959 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Rameswaram,  January  21,  1959 


Sweet  Mother, 

Here  is  what  X  told  me:  ‘I  have  received  a  message  from  my  guru. 125  In  my  vision,  the  Mother 
was  there,  next  to  my  guru,  and  she  was  smiling.  My  guru  told  me  that  your  present  difficulties  are 
a  period  of  testing,  but  I  could  already  give  you  the  first  stage  of  tantric  initiation  and  that  for  you, 
the  three  stages  of  initiation  could  be  done  in  an  accelerated  way. 

I  will  therefore  give  you  initiation  this  Friday  or  Saturday,  on  the  day  of  the  full  moon  or  the  day 
before.  This  first  stage  will  last  three  months  during  which  you  will  have  to  repeat  1  lakh126  times 
the  mantra  that  I  will  give  you.  At  the  end  of  three  months,  I  will  come  to  see  you  in  Pondicherry  - 
or  you  will  come  here  for  a  fortnight,  and  as  soon  as  I  have  received  the  message  from  my  guru,  I 
will  give  you  the  second  stage  that  will  last  three  months  as  well.  At  the  end  of  these  three  months, 
you  will  receive  the  full  initiation.’  X  warned  me  that  the  first  stage  I  am  to  receive  provokes 
attacks  and  tests  but  that  all  this  disappears  with  the  second  stage.  Forewarned  is  forearmed.  For 
what  reason  I  do  not  know,  but  X  told  me  that  the  particular  nature  of  my  initiation  should  remain 
secret  and  that  he  will  say  nothing  about  it  to  Swami,  and  he  added  (in  speaking  of  the  speed  of  the 
process),  ‘But  you  will  not  be  less  than  the  Swami.  ’  (l!)  There,  I  wanted  you  to  know  -  besides,  you 
were  present  in  X’s  vision.  All  this  happened  at  a  time  when  I  was  in  the  most  desperate  crisis  I 
have  ever  known.  Sweet  Mother,  there  is  no  end  to  expressing  my  gratitude  to  you,  and  yet  with  the 
least  trial,  I  am  reduced  to  nothing.  Why  have  you  so  much  grace  for  me? 

I  would  like  very  much  to  return  to  Pondicherry  for  the  February  Darshan  and  once  again  begin 
working  for  you.  Today  I  am  sending  a  second  lot  to  Pavitra  and  tomorrow  I  will  start  on  the 
Aphorisms,  for  I  do  not  want  to  make  you  wait  any  longer.  I  will  send  a  third  and  final  lot  to  Pavitra 
by  the  end  of  the  month,  in  time  for  printing.  I  am  very  touched,  sweet  Mother,  by  your  attention 
and  the  money  you  are  sending  me. 

Sweet  Mother,  may  my  entire  life  be  at  your  service,  may  my  entire  being  belong  to  you.  I  owe 
you  everything. 


125X’s  deceased  guru. 


1260ne  lakh  =  one  hundred  thousand. 


With  love  and  gratitude,  I  am  your  child. 


Signed:  Satprem 

Sweet  Mother,  do  not  waste  time  writing  to  me;  you  have  so  many  things  to  do  and  I  feel  a  little 
awkward  disturbing  you  so  often. 


(Mother’s  reply) 

Sri  A  urobindo  Ashram  Pondicherry,  1.27.59 


My  dear  child, 

I  was  waiting  to  answer  your  letter  of  the  21st  until  the  Friday  and  Saturday  you  mentioned  had 
gone  by.  And  then  I  felt  that  you  were  returning  the  Aphorisms,  so  I  waited  a  bit  more.  I  have  just 
received  them  along  with  your  letter  of  the  23rd,  but  I  have  not  yet  looked  at  them.  Besides,  if  you 
intend  returning  for  the  February  ‘darshan,’  I  think  it  would  be  preferable  for  us  to  revise  the  whole 
book  together.  There  will  not  be  very  much  work  on  my  side  since  the  Wednesday  and  Friday 
classes  were  discontinued  in  the  beginning  of  December,  and  I  still  do  not  know  when  they  will 
resume.127  Right  now,  I  am  translating  the  Aphorisms  all  alone  and  it  seems  to  go  quickly  and  well. 
This  could  also  be  revised  and  the  book  on  the  Dhammapada  prepared  for  publication. 

For  the  time  being,  I  am  going  downstairs  only  in  the  mornings  at  6  for  the  balcony  darshan  and 
I  immediately  come  back  up  without  seeing  anyone  -  then  in  the  afternoons,  I  go  down  once  more 
at  about  3  to  take  my  bath  and  at  4:30  I  come  back  up  again.  I  do  not  yet  know  what  will  happen 
next  month.  I  shall  have  to  find  some  way  to  meet  you  so  that  we  can  work  together  -  I  am  going  to 
think  it  over. 

I  do  not  ask  you  to  write  me  your  news, 128  because  I  know  that  these  are  things  it  is  better  not  to 
write  about.  But  you  know  that  it  keenly  interests  me. 

My  love  is  always  with  you,  enfolding  and  upholding  you. 

The  blessings  of  the  Grace  are  upon  you. 

Signed:  Mother 


January  27,  1959 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


127They  would  never  resume. 


128About  the  tantric  initiation. 


Rameswaram,  January  27,  1959 


Sweet  Mother, 

So  X  will  to  do  a  special  work  for  you  for  eleven  days,  and  if  at  the  end  of  this  period  the 
suffering  still  persists,  he  will  send  me  to  Pondicherry  to  deliver  something  directly  into  your  hands. 
I,  too,  would  like  very  much  to  do  something  to  alleviate  your  suffering. 

By  a  special  grace,  X  gave  me  both  stages  of  the  tantric  initiation  at  the  same  time,  although 
they  are  normally  separated  by  several  years;  then  if  all  goes  well,  he  will  give  me  the  full  initiation 
in  6  months.  I  have  thus  received  a  mantra,  along  with  the  power  of  realizing  it.  X  told  me  that  a 
realization  should  come  at  the  beginning  of  the  fifth  month  if  I  repeat  the  mantra  strictly  according 
to  his  instructions,  but  he  again  told  me  that  the  hostile  forces  would  do  all  they  could  to  prevent  me 
from  saying  my  mantra:  mental  suggestions  and  even  illness.  X  has  understood  that  I  have  work  at 
the  Ashram,  and  he  has  exempted  me  from  the  outer  forms  (pujas  and  other  rituals),  but 
nevertheless  I  must  repeat  my  mantra  very  accurately  every  day  (3,333  times,  that  is,  a  little  more 
than  3  hours  uninterrupted  in  the  mornings,  and  more  than  2  hours  in  the  evening).  I  must  therefore 
organize  myself  in  such  a  way  as  to  get  up  very  early  in  the  morning  in  Pondicherry,  for  in  no  case 
will  your  work  suffer. 

Apart  from  this,  he  has  not  yet  entirely  finished  the  work  of  ‘purging’  that  he  has  been  doing  on 
me  for  over  a  month,  but  I  believe  that  everything  will  be  completed  in  a  short  time  from  now. 

Sweet  Mother,  I  have  a  kind  of  fear  that  all  these  mantras  are  not  bringing  me  nearer  to  you  -  I 
mean  you  in  your  physical  body,  for  it  is  not  upon  you  physically  that  I  was  told  to  concentrate. 
Also,  I  almost  never  see  you  in  my  dreams  any  longer,  or  else  only  very  vaguely.  Last  night,  I 
dreamed  that  I  was  offering  you  flowers  (not  very  pretty  ones),  one  of  which  was  called  ‘mantra,’ 
but  I  did  not  see  you  in  my  dream.  Mother,  I  would  like  to  be  true,  to  do  the  right  thing,  to  be  as  you 
want  me  to  be. 

I  am  your  child.  I  belong  to  you  alone. 

Signed:  Satprem 


(Mother ’s  reply) 


Sri  Aurobindo  Ashram 
Pondicherry,  1.29.59 


My  dear  child, 

Your  very  interesting  letter  of  the  27th  has  just  arrived. 

All  is  well  -  I  am  enthusiastic  and  you  can  count  on  my  conscious  help  to  overcome  all  the 
obstacles  and  all  the  bad  will  that  may  try  to  stop  or  delay  your  progress.  It  is  a  matter  of  being 
more  obstinate,  much  more  obstinate  than  the  enemy,  and  whatever  the  cost,  to  reach  the  goal  in 
time. 

Since  my  last  letter,  I  have  thought  about  it  and  I  see  that  I  will  be  able  to  go  down  in  the 
morning  three  times  a  week  for  one  hour,  from  10  to  1 1,  to  work  with  you,  but  you  will  have  to  do 
only  the  strict  minimum  in  order  to  have  as  much  free  time  as  you  need  for  the  other  things.129 

As  I  told  you,  I  have  resumed  neither  classes  nor  translations,  and  I  still  do  not  know  when  I  will 
do  so.  So  there  is  only  the  old  work  to  finish  up,  but  it  will  not  take  very  long. 

My  body  would  also  like  to  have  a  mantra  to  repeat.  Those  it  has  are  not  enough  for  it  anymore. 
It  would  like  to  have  one  to  hasten  its  transfonnation.  It  is  ready  to  repeat  it  as  many  times  as 
needed,  provided  that  it  does  not  have  to  be  out  loud,  for  it  is  very  rarely  alone  and  does  not  want  to 


129The  tantric  work. 


speak  of  this  to  anyone.  Truly,  the  Ashram  atmosphere  is  not  very  favorable  for  this  kind  of  thing. 
You  will  have  to  take  precautions  so  as  not  to  be  disturbed  or  interrupted  in  an  inopportune  way. 
Domestic  servants,  curious  people,  so-called  friends  can  all  serve  as  instruments  of  the  hostile 
forces  to  put  a  spoke  in  the  wheels.  I  will  do  my  best  to  protect  you,  but  you  will  have  a  lot  to  do 
yourself  and  will  have  to  be  as  firm  as  an  iron  rod. 

I  am  not  writing  you  all  this  to  discourage  you  from  coming.  But  I  want  you  to  succeed;  for  me 
that  is  more  important  than  anything  else,  no  matter  what  the  price.  So,  know  for  certain  that  I  am 
with  you  all  the  time  and  more  so  especially  when  you  repeat  your  mantra  ... 

In  constant  communion  in  the  effort  towards  victory;  my  love  and  my  force  never  leave  you. 

Signed:  Mother 


January  31, 1959 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Rameswaram,  January  31,  1959 


Sweet  Mother, 

I  have  reflected  for  a  long  time  on  that  passage  in  your  letter  where  you  say  that  your  body 
needs  a  mantra  to  hasten  its  transfonnation.  Certainly  X  can  do  something  in  this  realm,  but  I  have 
not  yet  spoken  to  him  (and  I  shall  not  speak  of  this  to  Swami). 

X  knows  very  little  about  your  true  work  and  what  Swami  has  been  able  to  explain  to  him  is 
rather  inadequate,  for  I  do  not  believe  that  he  himself  understands  it  very  well.  So  I  shall  have  to  try 
to  make  myself  understood  quite  clearly  to  X  and  tell  him  exactly  and  simply  what  it  is  you  need. 
The  word  ‘transformation’  is  too  abstract.  Each  mantra  has  a  very  specific  action  -  at  least  I  believe 
so  -  and  I  must  be  able  to  tell  X  in  a  concrete  way  the  exact  powers  or  capacities  you  are  now 
seeking,  and  the  general  goal  or  the  particular  results  required.  Then  he  will  find  the  mantra  or 
mantras  that  apply. 

My  explanations  will  have  to  be  simple,  for  X  speaks  English  with  difficulty,  thus  subtleties  are 
out  of  the  question.  (I  am  teaching  him  a  little  English  while  he  is  teaching  me  Sanskrit,  and  we 
manage  to  understand  each  other  rather  well  all  the  same.  He  understands  more  than  he  can  speak.) 

I  do  not  want  to  mention  this  to  Swami,  as  X  is  not  very  happy  about  the  way  Swami  seizes 
upon  every  occasion  to  appropriate  things,  and  particularly  mantras  (I  will  explain  this  to  you  when 
we  meet  again).  It  is  especially  the  way  he  says  ‘I’.  Nothing  very  serious  -  it  is  Swami’s  bad  side, 
though  he  has  good  ones  too.  You  know  that,  however. 

So  I  would  like  to  speak  to  X  knowledgeably,  in  a  very  precise  way,  and  I  am  waiting  only  for 
you  to  tell  me  what  I  should  say.  The  thing  is  too  important  to  be  approached  lightly  and  vaguely. 


As  for  my  return  to  Pondicherry,  I  would  like  you  yourself  to  decide.  I  am  anxious  to  see  you 
again,  but  I  also  think  that  it  is  not  necessary  to  rush  things,  and  the  Darshan  periods  are  heavy  for 
you. 

In  principle,  X  will  have  finished  his  ‘purging’  of  me  on  February  6.  So  after  that  date  I  will  do 
what  you  wish. 

As  for  my  mantra,  I  say  it  only  partially  now,  but  X  will  fix  an  ‘auspicious’  day  to  begin  it  really 
according  to  the  rules  when  I  am  in  Pondicherry,  for  theoretically,  one  should  not  move  once  the 
work  has  begun.  The  12th  of  February  is  an  auspicious  day,  if  you  decide  that  I  should  return  by 
then  (or  a  little  before  to  get  things  ready);  otherwise  another  date  may  be  fixed  later  on. 

Your  letter,  Sweet  Mother,  has  filled  me  with  strength  and  resolution.  I  want  to  be  victorious 
and  I  want  to  serve  you.  I  see  very  well  that  gradually  I  can  be  taught  many  useful  things  by  X.  The 
essential  thing  is  first  of  all  to  lose  this  ego  which  falsifies  everything.  Finally,  through  your  grace,  I 
believe  that  I  have  passed  a  decisive  turning  point  and  that  there  is  a  beginning  of  real  consecration 
-  and  I  feel  your  Love,  your  Presence.  Things  are  opening  a  little. 

Sweet  Mother,  I  love  you  and  I  want  to  serve  you  truly. 

Your  child, 
Signed:  Satprem 

P.S.  All  the  old  Questions  and  Answers  will  also  have  to  be  revised  with  you,  perhaps  not  in  their 
entirety,  but  certain  problems  need  clarification.  What  a  grace  to  be  able  to  work  with  you! 

(Mother ’s  reply) 


Sri  Aurobindo  Ashram 
Pondicherry,  2.2.59 


My  dear  child, 

I  have  received  your  letter  of  the  31st.  In  a  number  of  ways  it  confirms  my  experience  of  these 
past  days.  We  shall  speak  of  all  this  when  you  return. 

I  have  reflected  a  great  deal  on  a  possible  mantra,  and  I  have  also  seen  the  difficulty  of  receiving 
something  that  does  not  have  a  narrowing  effect ...  One  must  at  least  have  an  idea  of  the  possibility 
(at  least)  of  the  supermind  to  understand  what  I  need  ... 

As  for  your  arrival  here,  the  day  you  mentioned  is  the  Saraswati  Puja  -  I  will  go  downstairs  to 
give  blessings.  If  you  arrive  on  the  previous  day,  the  1 1th  -  I  will  arrange  to  see  you  at  10  o’clock, 
and  then  you  can  begin  your  mantra  on  the  12th. 

Simply  send  me  word  to  let  me  know  if  this  is  all  right.  Tell  me  also  if  you  need  money  for  your 
return,  and  how  much,  in  time  for  me  to  send  it. 

As  for  the  rest,  we  shall  speak  of  it  here. 

So,  until  we  meet  soon. 

Tell  X  that  my  body  is  on  the  way  to  complete  recovery. 

With  my  love  and  my  blessings. 


Signed:  Mother 


March  10, 1959 


(The  disciple  returned  to  the  Ashram,  but  as  he  was  very  quickly  seized  again  by  his  mania  for  the 
road,  the  Agenda  of 1959,  alas,  is  strewn  with  great  gaps  and  is  almost  nonexistent.  The  following 
conversation  is  in  regard  to  one  of  Mother’s  commentaries  on  the  Dhammapada:  ‘Evil’) 

I  spent  a  night  -  a  night  of  battle  -  when,  for  some  reason  or  other,  a  multitude  of  vital  formations 
of  all  kinds  entered  into  the  room:  beings,  things,  embryos  of  beings,  residues  of  beings  -  all  kinds 
of  things  ...  And  it  was  a  frightful  assault,  absolutely  disgusting. 

In  this  swarming  mass,  I  noticed  the  presence  of  some  slightly  more  conscious  wills  -  wills  of 
the  vital  plane  -  and  I  saw  how  they  try  to  awaken  a  reaction  in  the  consciousness  of  human  beings 
to  make  them  think  or  want,  or  if  possible,  do  certain  things. 

For  example,  I  saw  one  of  them  trying  to  incite  anger  in  someone  so  that  this  person  would 
deliver  a  blow  -  a  spiritual  blow.  And  this  formation  had  a  dagger  in  his  hand  (a  vital  dagger,  you 
see,  it  was  a  vital  being:  gray  and  slimy,  horrible),  he  was  holding  a  very  sharp  dagger  which  he  was 
flaunting,  saying,  ‘When  a  person  has  done  something  like  that  (pretending  that  someone  had  done 
an  unforgivable  thing),  this  is  what  he  deserves  ...’  and  the  scenario  was  complete:  the  being  rushed 
forward,  vitally,  with  his  dagger. 

I,  who  know  the  consequences  of  these  things,  stopped  him  just  in  time  -  I  gave  him  a  blow. 
Then  I  had  enough  of  all  this  and  it  was  over,  I  cleaned  the  place  out.  It  was  almost  a  physical 
cleaning,  for  I  had  my  hands  clasped  together  (I  was  in  a  semitrance)  and  I  threw  them  apart  in  an 
abrupt  movement,  left  and  right,  powerfully,  as  if  to  sweep  something  away,  and  frrt!  ... 
immediately  everything  was  gone. 

But  had  that  not  happened  ...  I  was  watching,  not  exactly  with  curiosity,  but  in  order  to  learn  -  to 
learn  what  kind  of  atmosphere  people  live  in!  And  it  is  ALWAYS  like  that!  They  are  always 
pestered  by  HORDES  of  little  formations  that  are  absolutely  swarming  and  disgusting,  each  one 
making  its  ...  nasty  little  suggestion. 

Take  these  movements  of  anger,  for  example,  when  someone  is  carried  away  by  his  passion  and 
does  things  which,  in  his  normal  state,  he  would  never  do:  he  is  not  doing  it,  it  is  done  by  these  little 
formations  which  are  there,  swarming  in  the  atmosphere,  just  waiting  for  an  occasion  ...  to  rush  in. 

When  you  see  them,  oh!  it’s  ...  suffocating.  When  you’re  in  contact  with  that  ...  Really,  you 
wonder  how  anyone  can  breathe  in  such  an  atmosphere.  And  yet  people  CONSTANTLY  live  in  that 
atmosphere!  They  live  in  it.  Only  when  they  rise  above  are  they  NOT  in  it.  Or  else  there  are  those 
who  are  entirely  below;  but  those  are  the  toys  of  these  things,  and  their  reactions  are  sometimes  not 
only  unexpected  but  absolutely  dreadful  -  because  they  are  puppets  in  the  hands  of  these  things. 

Those  who  rise  above,  who  enter  into  a  slightly  intellectual  region,  can  see  all  this  from  above; 
they  can  look  down  at  it  all,  keep  their  heads  above  and  breathe;  but  those  who  live  in  this  realm  ... 

Sri  Aurobindo  calls  this  realm  the  ‘intermediate  zone,’  a  zone  in  which,  he  says,  you  can  have 
all  the  experiences  you  wish  if  you  enter  into  it.  But  it  isn’t  (laughing)  very  advisable!  -  and  I 
understand  why!  I  had  that  experience  because  I  had  just  read  what  Sri  Aurobindo  says  on  this 
subject  in  a  letter  in  this  latest  book,  On  Yoga;  I  wanted  to  see  for  myself  what  it  was.  Ah,  I 
understood! 


And  I  express  this  in  my  own  way  when  I  say130  that  thoughts  ‘come  and  go,  flow  in  and  out.’ 
But  thoughts  concerning  material  things  are  formations  originating  in  that  world,  they  are  kinds  of 
wills  coming  from  the  vital  plane  which  try  to  express  themselves,  and  most  often  they  are  truly 
deadly.  If  you  are  annoyed,  for  example,  if  someone  says  something  unpleasant  to  you  and  you 
react ...  It  always  happens  in  the  same  way;  these  little  entities  are  there  waiting,  and  when  they  feel 
it’s  the  right  moment,  they  introduce  their  influence  and  their  suggestions.  This  is  what  is  vitally 
symbolized  by  the  being  with  his  dagger  rushing  forward  to  stab  you  -  and  in  the  back,  at  that!  Not 
even  face  to  face!  This  then  expresses  itself  in  the  human  consciousness  by  a  movement  of  anger  or 
rage  or  indignation:  ‘How  intolerable!  How  ...  !’  And  the  other  fellow  says,  ‘Yes!  We  shall  put  an 
end  to  it!’ 

It  is  quite  interesting  to  watch  it  once,  but  it  isn’t  very  pleasant. 


March  (?  )  1959 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Pondicherry 


Sweet  Mother, 

X  has  just  left  my  house.  He  began  by  saying  that  he  had  your  permission  to  speak  to  me  about 
certain  things  concerning  the  black  forces  that  attacked  you.  I  asked  him  why  he  did  not  speak  to 
you  directly,  because  surely  you  would  understand  better  and  more  than  I.  He  replied  in  this  way: 
‘Several  times  Mother  asked  about  these  black  powers,  and  every  time  I  felt  in  myself  a  “great 
confusion.  ”  There  (in  your  room)  it  is  such  a  Place,  Place  of  supreme  Power,  Place  of  Divinity, 
and  I  CANNOT  talk  about  small  matters.  I  CANNOT  talk  English.  I  have  tried  but  it  disturbs  my 
“meditation.  ”  Thus  I  have  asked  Mother  permission  to  talk  to  you;  with  you  I  can  talk  of  these 
matters. 11 31  These  were  almost  exactly  his  words.  Sweet  Mother,  he  said  this  in  such  a  way,  there 
was  something  so  sacred  when  he  spoke  of  you  up  in  your  room,  that  I  felt  like  prostrating  myself 
at  his  feet.  (Ah,  Sweet  Mother,  how  inadequately  we  approach  you!  ...  ) 

He  began  his  story  thus:  ‘This  girl  in  Mother’s  entourage132  was,  while  she  was  alive,  attacked 
by  an  extremely  powerful  mantric  magician. 

But  the  Protection  was  there,  and  finally  the  attack  fell  back  on  the  mantric,  who  died  from  it. 


130In  this  Commentary  on  the  Dhammapada. 


131X’s  words  are  given  in  their  original  English  when  they  appear  in  italics. 


132 A  young  woman  very  close  to  Mother  and  Sri  Aurobindo  who  did  a  great  deal  of  harni  to  Mother.  She  died  a  few 
years  after  Sri  Aurobindo’s  departure. 


He  died  in  a  great  rage  and  with  a  great  will  for  revenge  and  began  circling  around  the  Ashram  in 
the  Preta  Loka  (I  believe  this  corresponds  to  the  vital  world)  seeking  an  opportunity  to  do  harm,  but 
there  was  such  a  purity,  such  a  divine  force  that  he  could  do  nothing.  When  this  girl  died,  he 
attacked  her,  and  the  two  merged  -  he  absorbed  her.  Then  they  continued  wandering  about  the 
Ashram  in  search  of  a  physical  instrument  to  gain  entry  into  the  Ashram.  They  found  an  entryway 
through  the  intermediary  of  certain  black-minded  people.  While  doing  my  Puja,  I  came  to  know 
seven  of  them.  All  seven  came,  drawn  by  my  Yantra.133  Some  of  them  are  people  who  have  taken 
Mother’s  money  and  have  been  collecting  money  from  their  duty.  I  learned  this  yesterday,  and  I 
began  a  special  Puja  to  turn  their  mind,  put  them  again  on  the  right  path.  ’  (At  this  point,  he  said 
something  that  meant  this  would  be  easy.) 


Thereupon,  X  told  me,  ‘That  is  all.  I  will  tell  you  more  on  Friday,  after  the  Puja.  The  work  will 
be  over.’ 

Here,  the  conversation  on  this  subject  came  to  an  end.  On  the  way  back  to  his  house,  I  said  to 
him,  ‘It  would  be  very  useful  for  Mother  to  know  the  names  of  these  people;  it  would  help  her  own 
work.  ’  And  I  suggested  to  him  that  he  write  down  the  names  of  the  seven  people  and  put  them  in  a 
sealed  envelope. 

Thereupon,  X  began  saying  ‘no’  rather  categorically.  But  I  insisted,  mentioning  the  help  it  could 
bring  to  your  work  and  saying  that  apart  from  you,  of  course,  no  one  would  know  since  the  names 
would  be  placed  in  an  envelope.  Then  he  said  to  me,  ‘All  right,  I  shall  tiy  tomorrow  and  ask  from 
the  supreme  Divinity  the  name  of  three  of  them,  the  chief  ones.  ’ 

We  did  not  speak  of  the  living  magician  who  has  been  paid  by  a  member  of  the  Ashram 
(undoubtedly  one  of  these  7)  to  get  rid  of  you.  If  you  like,  I  will  ask  him  this  question  another  time. 


That’s  all,  Sweet  Mother.  Forgive  me  for  all  the  times  I  have  come  to  you  with  ‘small  matters.’ 

I  pray  that  you  deliver  me  from  my  smallness,  that  you  place  clearly  before  my  consciousness  all 
these  very  petty  and  ugly  little  things,  and  that  I  may  always  come  to  you  with  a  wider  heart,  more 
capable  of  seeing  you  and  of  loving  you  better. 

Your  child, 

Signed:  Satprem 


March  (?)  1959 

(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem  concerning  X’s  inquiry  into  who  had  practiced  black  magic  on  her) 


133Yantra:  A  drawing,  generally  made  up  of  geometric  lines,  that  serves  to  invoke  or  materialize  certain  forces. 


Pondicherry 


Sweet  Mother, 

I  will  be  seeing  you  tomorrow,  but  I  prefer  to  state  things  clearly  now;  if  you  wish,  I  can  read 
you  my  letter  when  we  meet.  Here  is  what  X  told  me: 

‘The  message  came  this  morning  during  the  Puja;  my  guru  spoke  in  the  fonn  of  Sanskrit  slokas 
and  this  is  not  easy  to  express  in  English.  Normally,  I  might  have  waited  rather  long  for  the  answer, 
but  because  of  the  greatness  of  the  Mother,  it  came  immediately.  The  message  implicated  not  7 
people,  but  25  to  50,  all  or  almost  all  Gujaratis.’  (Here,  X  said  something  I  am  not  sure  I  grasped, 
but  it  was  to  the  effect  that  either  his  guru  did  not  seem  to  find  it  easy  or  did  not  feel  like  giving  so 
many  names,  but  were  Mother  to  insist,  it  might  be  possible.  I  am  not  sure  if  I  really  understood 
this.)  Then  the  message  spoke  of  a  rivalry  between  the  Gujaratis  and  the  Bengalis  (to  occupy  the 
key  positions  in  the  Ashram);  I  put  this  in  parentheses  for  it  is  more  an  interpretation  on  my  part, 
what  I  ‘felt.’  Moreover,  X  did  not  exactly  use  the  word  ‘rivalry’  -  which  he  probably  doesn’t  know 
-  but  rather  ‘confusion  between  Gujarati  and  Bengali.  ’  However,  the  message  explicitly  implicated 
the  Gujaratis  of  the  ‘Head-departments.  ’  I  then  asked  X  if  he  meant  the  heads  of  departments  or  the 
main  departments.  He  answered,  ‘All  Gujaratis,  ’  whereupon  he  caught  himself  and  said,  ‘75%  of 
them.’  At  this  point  X  told  me,  ‘In  the  Ashram  there  are  few,  FEW  people  on  a  very  high  level,  and 
plenty  ...  ’  without  completing  his  sentence.  The  message  continued,  stating  explicitly  that  these 
Gujaratis  are  busy  making  money  from  Mother  (‘making  collection  of  money’),  while  outwardly 
pretending  to  be  serving  the  Ashram.  Here,  I  thought  I  understood  that  there  was  a  Bengali  group 
which  was  seeking  to  overthrow  the  Gujaratis  so  that  they  could  manage  the  business  affairs  as  they 
please.  Such  was  the  substance  of  the  message.  I  asked  X  if  he  could  not  write  down  the  very 
concise  Sanskrit  slokas  he  had  heard.  He  said  yes,  then  he  said  that  he  would  see  about  this  after 
going  to  his  house??? 

Then,  X  told  me  that  he  was  going  to  do  something  to  straighten  all  this  out  and  to  ‘turn  the 
mind  of  those  people  in  the  right  path.  But  I  cannot  do  it  here,  in  Pondicherry.  About  two  months 
will  be  needed.  For  two  months,  I  will  do  a  Puja  on  a  special  Yantra  and  when  it  is  finished,  I  will 
send  Mother  this  Yantra  along  with  certain  manuscripts  for  the  library.  Then  Mother  will  have  to 
keep  this  Yantra  beside  her  to  control  all  these  bad  elements,  and  it  will  help  her,  her  own  work.’ 

I  asked  X  for  details  on  at  least  those  who  had  paid  the  magician.  He  told  me  he  would  speak 
about  it  tomorrow. 

Finally,  I  read  your  letter  to  X.  Regarding  the  globe  of  light,  he  at  once  said,  ‘I  know;  it  is 
Mother’s  Shakti,  her  Power  in  a  concentrated  fonn  (he  did  not  use  the  word  “concentrated,”  but  said 
“collection”).  This  global,  concentrated  Shakti  came  back  today;  it  is  a  very  good  sign.’  Then  he 
said  something  that  meant  it  was  a  sign  that  ‘the  black  Power'  was  definitely  conquered  or 
controlled.  (I  will  speak  to  you  of  a  strange  dream  that  I  had  last  night,  which  seems  related  to 
this.134  )  ‘The  Shakti  had  been  dispersed  by  the  black  attack,  but  its  Fight  was  too  powerful  to  be 
really  touched.  It  has  come  back.  Also,  I  saw  from  certain  physical  signs  that  Mother  is  better.’ 

Then  X  expressed  the  desire  to  meditate  sitting  in  front  of  you  and  not  standing:  ‘You  see,  this 
morning  I  was  flying,  I  was  not  touching  the  floor  -  outside  of  the  body.  ’  So  he  would  be  more 
comfortable  sitting.  Then  he  added,  ‘Every  day  a  different  action  takes  place.  Mother  knows,  but  I 
can  tell  you  a  little  something  because  you  are  very  close  to  me,  YOU  ARE  MY  HEART  (I  was 
deeply  touched  when  he  told  me  that).  The  first  day  my  guruji  was  standing  there,  by  my  side,  with 
his  hand  on  my  shoulder,  blessing  me.  Another  day  I  was  growing,  growing  10  feet  instead  of  5, 
and  great,  great  Power  came  in  me.  ’  This  is  approximate,  I  no  longer  remember  exactly  how  he 
said  it.  All  I  know  is  that  something  very  powerful  came  into  him  and  afterwards  he  needed  to  rest. 
He  did  not  elaborate,  but  only  repeated,  ‘Mother  knows.  ’ 

134In  this  ‘dream,’  we  saw  a  titan  in  a  gigantic  airplane  that  crashed  to  the  ground.  However,  this  titan  did  not  seem  to 
be  dead,  or  at  least  not  completely  dead. 


So  that  is  about  all,  Sweet  Mother. 

Each  time  he  comes  to  see  me,  he  ‘transmits’  something  to  me:  there  is  a  great  force  trying  to  go 
out  of  me  which  he  seems  to  be  pulling;  it  tries  to  climb  up  through  the  neck  and  to  go  out  from  the 
head.  I  don’t  know  exactly.  Something  is  happening,  that  is  all  I  know. 

With  love,  I  am  your  child. 

Signed:  Satprem 


March  (?)  1959 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Pondicherry 


Sweet  Mother, 

I  recounted  my  dream  of  the  titan  to  X  and  told  him  that  this  titan  in  the  plane  crash  was  not,  or 
seemingly  not,  dead.  He  immediately  replied,  ‘Yes,  tomorrow  he  will  be  killed.  ’  It  is  the  last  day  of 
his  Puja. 

I  told  X  not  to  worry  about  the  whole  list  of  names,  that  you  know  them  already,  but  that  you 
had  been  intrigued  by  this  reduced  number  of  7  people.  He  told  me,  ‘They  are  the  heads  of 
departments.  ’ 


X  (I  forgot  to  tell  you  at  the  beginning  of  the  letter)  links  the  crashing  of  the  titan  to  the  fact  that 
the  globe  of  light  has  come  back  into  your  hands. 

Sweet  Mother,  you  have  already  reassured  me  several  times  on  the  subject,  but  this  thought 
frequently  recurs  and  DISTURBS  me,  as  if  there  were  something  not  right  about  the  fact  that  you 
are  here,  you,  Mother,  with  all  that  you  mean  to  me,  and  the  fact  that  I  call  X  ‘guru’  and  prostrate 
myself  at  his  feet.  It  is  delicate  to  speak  of,  because  I  really  feel  that  X  is  the  guru  of  a  certain  thing 
in  me,  and  I  prostrate  myself  at  his  feet  very  spontaneously  because  I  feel  that  there  is  something  of 
you  in  him.  And  yet  it  disturbs  me,  as  though  I  were  deceiving  you  or  removing  an  absolute  in  my 
relationship  with  you.  You  know,  like  someone  who  plays  a  ‘double  game’  -  those  voices  are 
disgusting.  Something  keeps  repeating,  ‘There  should  be  no  one  but  Mother.’  Ah,  I  don’t  know  how 
to  explain  this  to  you,  but  it  worries  me!  So,  Sweet  Mother,  enlighten  me  or  reassure  me,  or  deliver 
me  from  what  is  not  right. 

I  am  your  child. 


Signed:  Satprem 


March  1959 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Pondicherry 


Sweet  Mother, 

Just  now  I  have  left  X;  he  sent  me  away  from  his  house  a  few  minutes  after  my  arrival:  ‘I  do  not 
like  you  to  stay  here  NOW.  ’  And  he  added,  ‘There  is  hard  work.  ’  He  was  doing  a  japans  when  I 
arrived  at  5  o’clock. 

X  seems  tired,  and  the  child  -  who  is  very  sensitive  -  does  not  seem  well  either. 

This  morning,  X  told  me,  ‘Last  night  I  have  been  fighting  like  a  lion.  ’  And  apparently  it  is  not 
over,  although  he  just  told  me,  ‘He  [the  titan]  has  ‘‘one.  ’  I  asked  him  if  the  titan  was  dead,  and  he 
told  me,  ‘Yes,  yes,  closed.  ’  -  But  I  think  he  told  me  this  mainly  to  avoid  my  questions,  and  it 
contradicts  his  ‘There  is  hard  work.’ 

Then  X  told  me,  ‘He  [the  titan]  has  come  to  me  fighting,  but  did  not  dare  to  come  too  close,  and 
he  asked  me:  -  Why  do  you  give  me  trouble?  -  Because  it  is  my  duty.  ’  That  is  all  on  this  subject. 


I  forgot  to  tell  you  that  this  morning,  X  told  me  the  following:  7  would  like  to  come  back  in 
Pondicherry  after  some  time,  for  15  days  or  so,  and  to  give  initiation  to  some  people  here  in  the 
Ashram,  if  Mother  permits.  Because  here,  there  is  need  of  strong  people,  some  POLICE  TO 
GUARD  ...’  And  he  added,  ‘There  is  no  confusion  (I  think  he  meant  ‘opposition’)  between  my 
tradition  and  the  Ashram  ...  ’  Then  he  added  something  that  meant  that  the  goal  pursued  was  the 
same.  Of  course,  all  this  will  depend  absolutely  upon  you  and  your  wish  (I  very  clearly  perceived 
from  all  this  that  X  was  speaking  as  a  member  of  the  Ashram  who  wants  to  do  his  best  to  defend 
and  protect  it.) 

Your  child,  with  love. 

Signed:  Satprem 


(Mother’s  reply) 


Undated 

It  is  likely  that  X  came  to  grips  with  the  Titan  who  has  been  after  this  body  since  its  birth  and  who 
attacks  and  tries  to  possess  all  those  who  draw  near  me.  This  Titan  is  backed  by  a  very  powerful 
asuric  force. 

The  very  small  number  of  those  in  whom  I  can  have  full  confidence  would  not  submit  to  the 
discipline  of  initiation.  Among  the  others,  those  who  would  accept  would  very  probably  do  so  out 
of  ambition,  and  that  would  lead  to  misadventures  even  more  unpleasant  than  Z’s. 


\?>5Japa:  the  systematic  and  more  or  less  continuous  repetition  of  a  mantra. 


March  26,  1959 


(Concerning  Satprem ’s  most  recent  peregrinations  and  his  fundamental  rebelliousness,  which 

periodically  makes  him  take  to  the  road) 

Behind  the  Titan  attacking  us  particularly  now,  there  is  something  else.  This  Titan  has  been 
delegated  by  someone  else.  He  has  been  there  since  my  birth,  was  born  with  me.  I  felt  him  when  I 
was  very  young,  but  only  gradually,  as  I  became  conscious  of  myself,  did  I  understand  WHO  he 
was  and  what  was  behind  him. 

This  Titan  has  been  specially  sent  to  attack  this  body,  but  he  can’t  do  it  directly,  so  he  uses 
people  in  my  entourage.  It  is  something  fated:  all  those  around  me,  who  are  close  to  me,  and 
especially  those  capable  of  love,  have  been  attacked  by  him;  a  few  have  succumbed,  such  as  that 
girl  in  my  entourage  who  was  absorbed  by  him.  He  follows  me  like  a  shadow,  and  each  time  there 
is  the  least  little  opening  in  someone  near  me,  he  is  there. 

The  power  of  this  Titan  comes  from  an  Asura.  There  are  four  Asuras.  Two  have  already  been 
converted,  and  the  other  two,  the  Lord  of  Death  and  the  Lord  of  Falsehood,  made  an  attempt  at 
conversion  by  taking  on  a  physical  body  -  they  have  been  intimately  associated  with  my  life.  The 
story  of  these  Asuras  would  be  very  interesting  to  recount ...  The  Lord  of  Death  disappeared;  he  lost 
his  physical  body,  and  I  don’t  know  what  has  become  of  him. 136  As  for  the  other,  the  Lord  of 
Falsehood,  the  one  who  now  rules  over  this  earth,  he  tried  hard  to  be  converted,  but  he  found  it 
disgusting! 

At  times  he  calls  himself  the  ‘Lord  of  Nations.’  It  is  he  who  sets  all  wars  in  motion,  and  only  by 
thwarting  his  plans  could  the  last  war  be  won  ...  This  one  does  not  want  to  be  converted,  not  at  all. 
He  wants  neither  the  physical  transformation  nor  the  supramental  world,  for  that  would  spell  his 
end.  Besides,  he  knows  ...  We  talk  to  each  other;  beyond  all  this,  we  have  our  relationship.  For  after 
all,  you  see  (laughing),  I  am  his  mother!  One  day  he  told  me,  ‘I  know  you  will  destroy  me,  but 
meanwhile,  I  will  create  all  the  havoc  possible.’ 

This  Asura  of  Falsehood  is  the  one  who  delegated  the  Titan  that  is  always  near  me.  He  chose  the 
most  powerful  Titan  there  is  on  earth  and  sent  him  specially  to  attack  this  body.  So  even  if  one 
manages  to  enchain  or  kill  this  Titan,  it  is  likely  that  the  Lord  of  Falsehood  will  delegate  another 
fonn,  and  still  another,  and  still  another,  in  order  to  achieve  his  aim. 

In  the  end,  only  the  Supramental  will  have  the  power  to  destroy  it.  When  the  hour  comes,  all  this 
will  disappear,  without  any  need  to  do  anything. 


136It  was  Theon. 


March  (?)  1959 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Pondicherry 


Sweet  Mother, 

When  coming  out  of  your  room,  X  told  me,  ‘With  Mother  I  have  spoken  my  own  mother 
tongue.  ’ 


X  told  me  that  in  6  months,  he  would  come  here  to  spend  an  entire  month  for  the  initiation  and 
preparing  for  the  initiation.  He  spoke  to  me  of  this  in  the  street  after  having  seen  P,  and  in  an 
enigmatic  way  he  told  me  something  along  these  lines:  ‘Yes,  strong  men  are  needed  here.  The 
Power  is  needed.’  I  did  not  clearly  understand,  for  it  was  said  with  a  lot  of  innuendo  behind  it. 

I  am  your  child,  Sweet  Mother. 

Signed:  Satprem 


March  (?)  1959 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem  concerning  the  tantric  initiation  that  Mother  wished  to  see  X  give 

to  two  other  disciples  at  the  Ashram) 


Pondicherry 


Sweet  Mother, 

I  spoke  to  X  about  the  initiations.  He  told  me  that  he  also  had  seen  only  two  people  (when  he 
said  ‘seen,’  I  do  not  think  he  meant  physically).  He  said  that  many  people  would  be  very  eager  but 
rare  were  those  in  whom  you  could  have  full  trust  -  and  perhaps  they  have  reached  a  stage  where  it 
would  be  difficult  for  them  to  submit  to  the  discipline  of  initiation. 

I  asked  him  his  feeling  about  this  morning’s  Darshan.  He  answered  implying,  ‘I  have  already,  in 
a  few  seconds,  given  my  feeling  to  Mother.’ 


As  you  also  wished  to  know  his  feelings  about  the  playground  meditation,  I  asked  him.  He  told 
me  roughly  this:  that  the  afternoon’s  Sanskrit  recording137  would  be  enough  to  ‘set  things  right,’ 
because  there  is  a  Power  in  it  that  should  help  the  meditations. 


X  came  to  my  room  a  little  while  ago  and  something  happened,  I  don’t  know  what,  but  it  was 
still  this  same  force  that  he  pulls  from  me  with  such  great  power.  But  mostly,  I  wanted  to  tell  you 
that  when  I  got  up  (I  was  at  his  feet),  he  was  as  handsome  as  a  god,  his  look  was  divine,  it  really 
came  from  very  high  above. 

Your  child,  with  love. 

Signed:  Satprem 


End  March  (?)  1959 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 

Pondicherry 

Sweet  Mother, 

Your  letter  this  morning  touched  me.  I  keep  repeating  now,  several  times  a  day,  that  it  is  an 
enemy,  the  enemy. 

I  am  your  child,  Sweet  Mother,  and  I  want  this  crisis  to  be  THE  LAST. 

With  love. 

Signed:  Satprem 


April  7, 1959 


137A  Sanskrit  text  by  X  which  was  to  be  played  at  the  Ashram  playground  just  prior  to  the  collective  meditation. 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Pondicherry,  April  7,  1959 


Sweet  Mother, 

I  come  to  renew  before  you  the  resolution  that  I  took  this  morning  at  the  Samadhi. 138 

Henceforth  I  refuse  to  be  an  accomplice  to  this  force.  It  is  my  enemy.  Whatever  form  it  may 
take,  or  whatever  supports  it  may  find  in  my  nature,  I  will  refuse  to  yield  to  it  and  will  cling  to  you. 
You  are  the  only  reality:  that  is  my  mantra.  Anything  that  seeks  to  make  me  doubt  you  is  my 
enemy.  Y ou  are  the  only  Reality. 

And  each  time  I  feel  the  shadow  approach,  I  will  call  to  you,  immediately. 

May  you  never  again  suffer  because  of  me.  O  Mother,  purify  me  and  open  my  heart. 

Your  child, 

Signed:  Satprem 

P.S.  Perhaps  it  would  be  good  to  tell  you  of  the  two  supports  that  this  force  found  in  me  during  the 
most  recent  attack: 

1)  The  fact  that  I  am  plagued  by  a  lack  of  time  and,  occasionally,  a  certain  repugnance  for 
mental  work.  Then  the  ensuing  suggestion:  to  have  a  hut  in  Rameswaram  and  devote  myself 
exclusively  to  inner  development. 

2)  I  am  very  pulled  -  not  constantly,  but  periodically  -  by  the  need  to  write  (not  mental  things) 
and  exasperated  by  the  fact  that  this  Orpailleur  is  not  published  because  I  have  not  taken  the  time  to 
carry  out  certain  corrections.  When  I  am  in  a  good  mood,  I  offer  all  this  to  you  (is  it  perhaps  a 
hidden  ambition?  But  I  am  not  so  sure;  it  is  rather  a  need,  I  believe)  and  when  I  am  not  in  a  good 
mood,  I  ‘fume’  about  not  having  the  time  to  write  something  else. 

Please,  enlighten  me,  Sweet  Mother. 

Signed:  Satprem 


(Mother ’s  reply) 


Wednesday  morning,  4.8.59 


Satprem,  my  dear  child, 

Your  resolution  came  straight  to  me.  I  sheltered  it  in  the  depths  of  my  heart,  and  with  my 
highest  will,  I  said,  ‘So  be  it.’ 

Just  now,  I  received  your  letter  confirming  my  experience.  It  is  good. 

I  read  your  P.S.  and  I  understand.  This  too  confirms  my  feeling.  I  am  not  happy  that  you  are 
plagued  with  work,  and  especially  urgent  work  that  has  to  be  done  quickly  -  it  is  contrary  to  the 
inner  calm  and  concentration  so  indispensable  for  getting  rid  of  one’s  difficulties.  I  am  going  to  do 
what  is  necessary  to  change  this  situation.  Besides,  this  is  why  I  have  been  telling  you  recently  that 
my  work  is  not  urgent.  But  this  work  for  the  Bulletin  should  stop  for  the  moment. 

The  other  point  also  has  its  element  of  truth  -  we  shall  speak  of  it  later. 

With  all  my  love,  I  envelope  you,  my  child,  and  I  tell  you,  ‘Have  courage,  the  victory  is  certain’ 
-  not  a  compromise  or  partial  victory,  but  integral. 

Signed:  Mother 


138Sri  Aurobindo’s  tomb  in  the  Ashram  courtyard. 


April  13, 1959 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Pondicherry,  April  13,  1959 


Sweet  Mother 

Here  is  the  outline  for  the  book  on  Sri  Aurobindo  for  the  Editions  du  Seuil. 139 

It  is  a  rough  sketch,  and  in  the  actual  process  of  writing,  the  proposed  sequence  may  change 
according  to  the  inner  necessity,  but  these  are  the  themes  to  be  developed.  So  now  T  would  like  to 
know  what  you  feel  and  if  you  see  anything  to  be  changed,  added  or  deleted. 

Your  child,  with  love. 

Signed:  Satprem 


Undated  1959 


(On  Anatole  France  and  La  Revoke  des  Anges) 

...  These  children  don’t  understand  [Sri  Aurobindo’s  irony].  They  read  it  prosaically  (gesture 
indicating  the  surface).  Strangely  enough,  it’s  the  same  phenomenon  when  they  read  Anatole 
France.  And  Anatole  France,  read  without  understanding  his  irony,  is  abominably  commonplace. 

They  don’t  grasp  the  irony. 

Sri  Aurobindo  had  it.  He  understood  the  irony  of  Anatole  France  so  well,  he  had  this  same  thing 
-  so  subtle,  so  refined  ... 

‘Very  good,’  he  would  say  while  reading  La  Revolte  des  Anges  ‘Yes,  it  is  true,  which  of  the  two 


139A  French  publishing  house  that  had  asked  for  a  book  on  Sri  Aurobindo  to  be  included  in  their  collection,  ‘Spiritual 
Masters.’ 


should  we  believe?’140  (Mother  laughs). 


April  21, 1959 

Above,  beginning  with  the  center  between  the  eyebrows,  the  work  has  been  done  for  a  long  time. 
There  it  is  blank.  For  ages  upon  ages  upon  ages,  the  union  with  the  Supreme  has  been  realized  and 
is  constant. 

Below  this  center  is  the  body.  And  this  body  has  indeed  the  concrete  sensation  of  the  Divine  in 
each  of  its  cells;  but  it  needs  to  become  universalized.  That’s  the  work  to  be  done,  center  by  center. 
I  understand  now  what  Sri  Aurobindo  meant  when  he  repeatedly  insisted,  ‘Widen  yourself.’  All  this 
must  be  universalized;  it  is  the  condition,  the  basis,  for  the  Supramental  to  descend  into  the  body. 

According  to  the  ancient  traditions,  this  universalization  of  the  physical  body  was  considered  the 
supreme  realization,  but  it  is  only  a  foundation,  the  base  upon  which  the  Supramental  can  come 
down  without  breaking  everything. 


April  23, 1959 


(Letter  from  Mother  to  Satprem) 


4.23.59,  7 p.m. 


Satprem,  my  dear  child, 

I  hope  you  wrote  to  X  that  it  is  agreed,  that  we  expect  him  with  his  family  early  in  the  morning 
of  the  30th,  and  that  I  am  looking  forward  to  our  daily  morning  meditation  during  his  stay. 


Do  tell  him  that  all  is  well,  that  we  are  awaiting  his  arrival  and  that  I  am  looking  forward  to 
these  meditations. 


140Jehovah,  or  the  rebellious  Angel  who  wanted  to  take  his  place. 


With  you  always,  with  love  and  care. 


Signed:  Mother 


April  24, 1959 


(Note  sent  by  Mother  to  Satprem) 


24  April  1959 

The  divine  perfection  is  always  there  above  us;  but  for  man  to  become  divine  in  consciousness  and 
act  and  to  live  inwardly  and  outwardly  the  divine  life  is  what  is  meant  by  spirituality;  all  lesser 
meanings  given  to  the  word  are  inadequate  fumb lings  or  impostures.141 


Early  May  1959 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Pondicherry 


Sweet  Mother, 

I  have  just  spoken  for  a  few  minutes  with  X.  He  came  out  of  your  room  extremely  ‘moved’  (in 
his  deep  way).  ‘I  was  standing  before  Mother  and  I  no  longer  knew  where  I  was.  At  the  end  of 
fifteen  minutes,  I  found  myself  there.’  And  several  times,  he  said, 

‘Great  Power,  Great  Power  ...An  Ocean.  She  ONLY  can  understand  ...  ’  And  as  I  expressed  my 
surprise  -  for  while  going  to  your  room,  he  had  told  me  that  he  would  begin  this  special  ‘japa’ 
standing  before  you  only  tomorrow  -  he  told  me,  ‘When  I  went  into  Mother’s  room,  I  felt  the  Order 


141This  text  by  Sri  Aurobindo  ( The  Human  Cycle,  Cent.  Ed.  Vol.  XV  p.  247)  was  translated  into  French  by  Mother  on 
the  occasion  of  writing  to  Satprem. 


come  from  above,  and  I  began  immediately.  ’ 

He  told  me  that  this  japa  with  you  should  last  3  days  in  succession;  consequently,  that  takes  care 
of  the  question  of  interviews,  as  you  will  be  occupied  until  Wednesday  or  Thursday.  He  told  me 
that  10:15  would  be  better  for  him  (that  can  also  mean  10:20)  because  he  only  finishes  the  first  part 
of  his  puja  at  about  10  o’clock,  which  is  what  made  us  late  this  morning  (he  was  still  ‘sitting’  when 
I  went  to  fetch  him).  Furthermore,  X  is  always  ‘unexpected’  in  his  acts,  and  he  has  scarcely  any 
notion  of  time.  He  told  me,  ‘You  understand,  here  I  am  in  the  house  of  Annapurna142  and  I  am  so 
happy  to  be  able  to  do  my  japa  and  my  puja  without  being  disturbed  by  my  family  worries.  At  last, 
here,  I  can  live  for  That  only.  There  is  a  great  vibration  everywhere.’  So  he  forgets  about  time. 

Your  child, 
Signed:  Satprem 


P.S.  The  divinity  invoked  in  his  present  pujas  is  Durga. 


May  1959 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Pondicherry 


Sweet  Mother, 

He  was  even  more  overwhelmed  today  when  he  came  down  from  your  room  than  yesterday.  It 
was  physically  visible.  He  said  nothing,  except  again  that  you  ‘only’  could  understand. 


Then,  suddenly  looking  at  me  with  his  third  eye,  he  spoke  of  me,  and  said  quite  enigmatically,  7 
don  7  know  why  THESE  THOUGHTS  come  to  me  every  time  I  think  of  you  . ..’  (I  don’t  know  what 
thoughts  he  is  referring  to)  and  he  added,  ‘You  will  come  TWO  months  to  Rameswaram  -  l  shall 
ask  Mother  -  SUCH  A  THING  is  going  to  take  place  ...  When  the  time  comes  I  shall  write  to  you, 
and  you  will  stay  with  me.  ’  These  are  his  exact  words,  which  could  mean  just  about  anything. 

This  morning,  just  before  going  into  your  room,  he  hesitated  uneasily,  because  he  saw  someone 
through  the  slightly  ajar  door  of  your  antechamber.  He  asked  me  who  it  was,  but  I  urged  him 
towards  you,  telling  him  it  was  nothing.  If  such  a  thing  could  be  avoided,  it  would  be  better. 

Oh!  How  overwhelmed  he  was  when  he  came  down  your  stairway!  It  took  him  at  least  five 
minutes  to  pull  himself  together. 

Your  child, 
Signed:  Satprem 


\A2Annapuma:  ‘She  who  nourishes  the  world,’  wife  of  Shiva,  one  of  the  aspects  of  the  supreme  Mother. 


Early  May  1959 


(Letter  from  Mother  to  Satprem) 


Thursday,  1  o  'clock 


Satprem,  my  dear  child, 

I  have  received  your  letter  with  the  news. 

Concerning  Z,  X  himself  told  me  that  he  had  initiated  him  last  evening  (but  he  didn’t  say  more). 
It  seems  that  the  kundalini  was  awakened  and  the  current  was  so  strong  that  Z’s  eyes  became  all 


Did  X  tell  you  anything  of  our  meditation  this  morning?  Do  not  ask  him  any  questions.  But  if  he 
speaks  of  it,  I  would  be  happy  to  know  what  he  says. 

Always  with  you,  in  love  and  light. 

Signed:  Mother 


May  1959 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Pondicherry,  May  1959 


Sweet  Mother, 

I  read  your  letter  to  X.143  He  immediately  said,  ‘I  shall  explain  tomorrow.  ’  Then  he  added  this: 
‘Usually,  before  going  to  Mother  I  concentrate  on  the  Divinity  on  which  we  are  going  to  meditate, 


143In  which  Mother  had  asked  about  certain  experiences  that  occurred  during  her  meditations  with  X. 


or  by  which  we  are  going  to  get  help.  Thus,  some  Divinity  (goddess)  comes  and  with  it  the 
ceremony  and  ritual  and  colors.  I  shall  explain  more  tomorrow.  ’  As  I  am  wary  of  his  ‘tomorrows,’ 
I  insisted,  especially  in  regard  to  the  luminous  globe144  and  I  asked  if  it  were  the  same  thing  as  the 
Shakti  of  the  other  experiences.  He  said  it  was  not,  that  it  was  different,  and  he  repeated  ‘more 
tomorrow.  ’  Then,  by  way  of  concluding,  he  said  to  me,  ‘It  is  very  good,  very  good.  ’ 


Tomorrow,  I  shall  be  there  at  9:30  a.m. 

I  am  at  your  feet,  Sweet  Mother,  with  gratitude.  I  am  a  hard  case,  but  I  love  you  all  the  same. 

Signed:  Satprem 


May  7,  1959 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Pondicherry,  May  7,  1959 


Sweet  Mother, 

I  spoke  of  your  experience,  but  with  all  these  people  we  scarcely  have  time  to  speak,  so  I  was 
unable  to  give  many  details  or  to  get  any  very  clear  explanation.  X  is  well  acquainted  with  this 
Light  -  these  luminous  bluish-violet  waves  with  the  white  bar  running  through  the  center.  He  gave 
me  his  own  description,  which  coincides  exactly  with  yours  ...  In  short,  he  wanted  to  say  that 
perhaps  this  Light  was  the  result  of  his  concentrating  upon  you,  even  when  he  is  in  Rameswaram.  I 
spoke  to  him  of  the  universalization  of  your  body.  He  nodded,  like  someone  who  understands,  but 
without  making  any  comment.  As  for  the  orange  globe,  this  is  what  he  said:  ‘Every  time,  before 
meditation  with  Mother,  I  utter  some  letters.  And  as  you  know,  each  letter  has  a  color.  There  are  51 
ways  to  combine  letters,  and  there  are  51  "paths,  ”  or  51  places  in  the  body  where  the  force  can 
act.  Thus  the  orange  globe  is  probably  the  effect  of  some  letters;  it  may  be  some  protection  for  her 
body.  ’  In  any  case,  he  seemed  to  find  it  quite  normal  that  your  experiences  of  this  bluish-violet  light 
began  approximately  at  the  same  time  as  your  relationship,  and  in  all  the  pujas  there  are  these 
‘diagrams’  or  ‘Yantras’  that  always  have  geometric  forms.  (One  day  he  told  me,  ‘Those  diagrams 
are  the  stations  for  the  goddesses  to  come  down.  ) 

When  I  went  to  get  D  this  evening,  she  told  me  that  she  was  in  the  grip  of  some  difficulties,  as  if 
this  mantra  had  provoked  a  backlash.  X  immediately  did  some  little  operation,  and  she  left  all 
smiling. 

For  me,  this  is  what  he  said:  ‘Tomorrow  I  shall  give  you  another  mantra  of  three  letters.  Now  I 
am  going  to  change  the  Power  into  a  feminine  form.  After  some  time  you  will  see  a  small  girl 


144 Another  globe,  or  perhaps  the  same  one,  but  this  time  orange  colored. 


appear  in  front  of  you,  a  girl  of  about  10,  and  SHE  WILL  COME  TO  HELP  YOU.  This  mantra  you 
will  have  to  repeat  3  lahks145  for  three  months.  And  after  three  months,  I  shall  give  you  FULL 
initiation.  ’  Then  he  explained  to  me  that  the  sea  could  not  be  made  to  enter  into  a  vase  at  one 
stroke;  rather,  the  body  had  to  become  accustomed  little  by  little  and,  precisely,  the  sadhana  is 
meant  to  accustom  the  body  more  and  more  to  receive  the  vastness  of  the  Power  (to  put  it  very 
succinctly). 

Your  child, 
Signed:  Satprem 


May  19,  1959 

When  you  follow  the  ascending  path,  the  work  is  relatively  easy.  I  had  already  covered  this  path  by 
the  beginning  of  the  century  and  had  established  a  constant  relationship  with  the  Supreme  -  That 
which  is  beyond  the  Personal  and  the  gods  and  all  the  outward  expressions  of  the  Divine,  but  also 
beyond  the  Absolute  Impersonal.  It’s  something  you  cannot  describe;  you  must  experience  it.  And 
this  is  what  must  be  brought  down  into  Matter.  Such  is  the  descending  path,  the  one  I  began  with 
Sri  Aurobindo;  and  there,  the  work  is  immense. 

The  thing  can  still  be  brought  down  as  far  as  the  mental  and  vital  planes  (although  Sri 
Aurobindo  said  that  thousands  of  lifetimes  would  be  needed  merely  to  bring  it  down  to  the  mental 
plane,  unless  one  practiced  a  perfect  surrender 146  ).  With  Sri  Aurobindo,  we  went  down  below 
Matter,  right  into  the  Subconscient  and  even  into  the  Inconscient.  But  after  the  descent  comes  the 
transformation,  and  when  you  come  down  to  the  body,  when  you  attempt  to  make  it  take  one  step 
forward  -  oh,  not  even  a  real  step,  just  a  little  step!  -  everything  starts  grating;  it’s  like  stepping  on 
an  anthill  ...  And  yet  the  presence,  the  help  of  the  supreme  Mother,  is  there  constantly;  thus  you 
realize  that  for  ordinary  men  such  a  task  is  impossible,  or  else  millions  of  lives  would  be  needed  - 
but  in  truth,  unless  the  work  is  done  for  them  and  the  sadhana  of  the  body  done  for  the  entire  earth 
consciousness,  they  will  never  achieve  the  physical  transformation,  or  else  it  will  be  so  remote  that 
it  is  better  not  even  to  speak  of  it.  But  if  they  open  themselves,  if  they  give  themselves  over  in  an 
integral  surrender,  the  work  can  be  done  for  them  -  they  have  only  to  let  it  be  done. 

The  path  is  difficult.  And  yet  this  body  is  full  of  good  will;  it  is  filled  with  the  psychic  in  every 
one  of  its  cells.  It’s  like  a  child.  The  other  day,  it  cried  out  quite  spontaneously,  ‘O  my  Sweet  Lord, 
give  me  the  time  to  realize  You!’  It  did  not  ask  to  hasten  the  process,  it  did  not  ask  to  lighten  its 
work;  it  only  asked  for  enough  TIME  to  do  the  work.  ‘Give  me  the  time!  ’ 

I  could  have  begun  this  work  on  the  body  thirty  years  ago,  but  I  was  constantly  caught  up  in  this 


145300,000  times. 


1460riginal  English. 


harassing  ashram  life.  It  took  this  illness147  to  enable  me  truly  to  begin  doing  the  sadhana  of  the 
body.  It  does  not  mean  that  thirty  years  were  wasted,  for  it  is  likely  that  had  I  been  able  to  start  this 
work  thirty  years  ago,  it  would  have  been  premature.  The  consciousness  of  the  others  also  had  to 
develop  -  the  two  are  linked,  the  individual  progress  and  the  collective  progress,  and  one  cannot 
advance  if  the  other  does  not  advance. 

I  have  also  come  to  realize  that  for  this  sadhana  of  the  body,  the  mantra  is  essential.  Sri 
Aurobindo  gave  none;  he  said  that  one  should  be  able  to  do  all  the  work  without  having  to  resort  to 
external  means.  Had  he  reached  the  point  where  we  are  now,  he  would  have  seen  that  the  purely 
psychological  method  is  inadequate  and  that  a  japa  is  necessary,  because  only  japa  has  a  direct 
action  on  the  body.  So  I  had  to  find  the  method  all  alone,  to  find  my  mantra  by  myself.  But  now  that 
things  are  ready,  I  have  done  ten  years  of  work  in  a  few  months.  That  is  the  difficulty,  it  requires 
time  ... 

And  I  repeat  my  mantra  constantly  -  when  I  am  awake  and  even  when  I  sleep.  I  say  it  even 
when  I  am  getting  dressed,  when  I  eat,  when  I  work,  when  I  speak  with  others;  it  is  there,  just 
behind  in  the  background,  all  the  time,  all  the  time. 

In  fact,  you  can  immediately  see  the  difference  between  those  who  have  a  mantra  and  those  who 
don’t.  With  those  who  have  no  mantra,  even  if  they  have  a  strong  habit  of  meditation  or 
concentration,  something  around  them  remains  hazy  and  vague.  Whereas  the  japa  imparts  to  those 
who  practice  it  a  kind  of  precision,  a  kind  of  solidity:  an  armature.  They  become  galvanized,  as  it 
were. 


May  1959 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Pondicherry,  May  1959 


Sweet  Mother, 

You  have  rid  me  of  my  headache  in  a  spectacular  way,  not  to  mention  the  beginning  of  an 
infection  in  a  wisdom  tooth.  So  I  am  writing  you. 


I  was  prompted  to  speak  to  X  about  the  financial  difficulties  of  the  Ashram  and  I  took  the 
opportunity  to  tell  him  about  the  subtle  ‘detente’  that  has  occurred.  I  told  him  that  you  had 
wondered  whether  he  had  not  done  something  (I  am  putting  all  this  very  succinctly).  He  replied  that 
as  soon  as  he  returned  to  Rameswaram,  he  made  a  special  puja  of  gratitude  to  you  for  three  days 
and  prayed  to  his  divinity  to  repay  you  a  hundredfold  (these  are  my  words;  I  am  translating  freely 


147In  December  1958,  when  Mother  stopped  the  Questions  and  Answers  at  the  playground  and  thereafter  left  the 
Ashram  building  only  rarely. 


what  X  meant).  So  I  spoke  to  him  of  these  men  with  their  crores  of  rupees  coming  near  the  Ashram 
and  of  the  money  that  is  suddenly  diverted  in  another  direction  by  a  hostile  thrust.  All  this  left  him 
reflective.  I  will  speak  to  him  another  time  of  what  you  are  trying  to  realize  here  materially.  He  has 
felt  something. 

Your  child,  with  love. 

Signed:  Satprem 


May  25,  1959 


(Letter  from  Mother  to  Satprem) 


Tuesday,  1  o  'clock 

Satprem,  my  dear  child, 

I  can  only  repeat  the  prayer  that  I  made  to  the  Supreme  Lord  this  morning: 

‘May  Your  Will  be  done  in  all  things  and  at  every  moment.  And  may  Your  Love  manifest.’ 

As  for  you,  I  received  your  promise  made  very  solemnly  at  a  moment  of  clear  consciousness, 
and  I  am  sure  you  will  not  fail  in  it. 

My  love  is  with  you. 

Signed:  Mother 


(Satprem  's  reply) 


May  27,  1959 


Mother, 

If  it  is  to  make  me  feel  all  my  wrongs  that  you  remind  me  of  my  ‘solemn  promise,’  then  I  am 
ready  to  acknowledge  all  these  wrongs.  I  am  guilty,  without  any  extenuating  circumstances,  and  I 
expect  no  indulgence. 

I  can  easily  understand  that  your  task  on  this  earth  is  not  particularly  encouraging  and  you  must 
find  our  human  matter  stupid  and  rebellious.  I  do  not  wish  to  throw  upon  you  more  bad  things  than 
you  already  receive,  but  I  wish  you  could  also  understand  certain  things.  I  am  not  made  for  this 
withered  life,  not  made  for  putting  sentences  together  all  day  long,  not  made  for  living  alone  in  my 
hole  -  friendless,  loveless,  with  nothing  but  mantras,  and  waiting  for  a  better  that  never  comes.  For 
three  years  I  have  wanted  to  leave  and  each  time  I  yielded  out  of  scruples  that  you  needed  me, 
though  also  because  I  am  attached  to  you.  But  after  the  [book  on]  ‘Sri  Aurobindo,’  there  will  be 
something  else,  there  will  always  be  something  else  that  will  make  my  departure  look  like  a 
‘betrayal.’  I  am  fed  up  with  living  in  my  head,  always  in  my  head,  with  paper  and  ink.  It  was  not  of 


this  that  I  dreamed  when  I  was  ten  years  old  and  ran  with  the  wind  over  the  untamed  heaths.  I  am 
suffocating.  You  ask  too  much  of  me;  or  rather,  I  am  not  worth  your  expectation. 

A  love  for  you  might  have  held  me  here.  And  indeed,  for  you  I  have  devotion,  veneration, 
respect,  an  attachment,  but  there  has  never  been  this  marvelous  thing,  warm  and  full,  that  links  one 
to  a  being  in  the  same  beating  of  a  heart.  Through  love,  I  could  do  all,  accept  all,  endure  all, 
sacrifice  all  -  but  I  do  not  feel  this  love.  You  cannot  ‘give  yourself  with  your  head,  through  a 
mental  decision,  yet  that  is  what  I  have  been  doing  for  five  years.  I  have  tried  to  serve  you  as  best  I 
could.  But  I  am  at  the  end  of  my  rope.  I  am  suffocating. 

I  have  no  illusions,  and  I  do  not  at  all  suppose  that  elsewhere  my  life  may  at  last  be  fulfilled.  No, 
I  know  that  this  whole  life  is  cursed,  but  it  may  as  well  be  truly  cursed.  If  the  Divine  does  not  want 
to  give  me  his  Love,  may  he  give  me  his  curse.  But  not  this  life  between  two  worlds.  Or  if  I  am  too 
hardened,  may  he  break  me.  But  not  this  tepidness,  this  approximation. 

I  am  not  really  bad,  Mother,  but  I  can  no  longer  bear  this  life  without  love.  That  is  all. 

There  is  someone  here  who  could  have  saved  me,  whom  I  could  have  loved.  Oh,  it  has  nothing 
to  do  with  all  those  things  you  might  imagine!  My  soul  loves  her  soul.  It  is  something  very  serene. 
We  have  known  each  other  for  five  years,  and  I  had  never  even  dreamed  of  calling  it  love.  But  all 
the  outer  circumstances  are  against  us.  And  I  do  not  want  to  turn  anyone  away  from  you.  Anyway, 
if  I  sink  into  the  depths  of  the  pit,  or  so  I  tell  myself,  it  is  no  reason  to  drag  someone  else  along  with 
me.  So  this  too  is  one  more  reason  for  me  to  leave.  I  cannot  continue  suffocating  all  alone  in  my 
corner.  (It  is  useless  to  ask  her  name,  I  will  say  nothing.) 

You  are  imposing  a  new  ordeal  on  me  by  asking  me  to  go  to  Rameswaram.  For  you,  I  have 
accepted.  But  I  shall  go  there  sheathed  in  my  sturdiest  annor  and  I  will  not  yield,  because  I  know 
that  it  is  always  to  be  begun  again.  I  do  not  want  to  become  a  ‘great  Tantric’  or  whatever  else  it  may 
be.  I  want  only  to  love.  And  since  I  cannot  love,  I  am  leaving.  I  will  arrive  in  Rameswaram  at  2  in 
the  morning,  and  will  leave  again  by  the  1 1  o’clock  train. 

I  want  to  go  to  New  Caledonia.  There,  or  elsewhere  ...  there  are  forests  there.  Africa  is  closing 
up.  You  must  help  me  one  last  time  by  giving  me  the  means  to  leave  and  try  something  else  with  a 
minimum  of  chance  -  although,  at  the  point  I’m  at,  I  laugh  in  the  face  of  ‘chance.’  I  need  2,000 
rupees,  if  that  is  possible  for  you.  If  you  do  not  want  to,  or  if  you  cannot,  I  will  leave  anyway,  no 
matter  where,  no  matter  how. 

And  once  again,  you  can  judge  me  all  you  want,  I  acknowledge  all  my  wrongs.  I  am  guilty  in  a 
guilty  and  stupid  world  (which  loves  its  stupidity,  no  doubt). 

Signed:  Satprem 


The  ‘aphorisms’  will  be  ready  tomorrow. 
I  have  nothing  more  to  add. 


(Mother ’s  reply) 


5.28.59 


Satprem,  my  dear  child, 

This  morning,  the  problem  and  its  solution  appeared  to  me  very  clearly;  but  since,  for  quite 
obvious  reasons,  I  am  both  the  judge  and  the  accused  in  this  matter,  I  cannot  make  a  decision;  not 
that  my  judgment  would  necessarily  be  egoistic,  but  it  would  have  no  authority. 

Only  someone  who  loves  you  and  has  the  knowledge  can  find  the  true  solution  to  the  problem. 
X148  fulfills  these  conditions  excellently.  Go  to  him  and  simply  be  what  you  are,  without  blackening 


148The  disciple’s  tantric  guru. 


nor  embellishing,  with  the  sincerity  and  simplicity  of  a  child.  He  knows  your  soul  and  its  aspiration; 
speak  to  him  of  your  physical  life  and  of  your  need  for  space,  solitude,  untamed  nature,  the  simple 
and  free  life.  He  will  understand  and,  in  his  wisdom,  will  see  the  best  thing  to  do. 

And  what  he  decides  will  be  done. 

My  love  is  unalterably  with  you. 

Signed:  Mother 


May  28,  1959 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Pondicherry,  May  28,  1959 


Mother, 

I  do  not  want  you  to  suffer  because  of  me,  for  there  is  already  too  much  suffering  in  this  world.  I 
shall  do  what  you  wish.  I  will  go  to  Rameswaram  and  I  will  stay  there  as  long  as  X  wants.  I  have 
seen  that  there  is  no  happy  solution.  So  I  bow  before  the  circumstances. 

If  it  is  not  too  tiring  for  your  eyes,  I  would  like  you  to  read  what  follows.  I  want  to  tell  you  what 
I  have  seen,  very  clearly. 

After  the  wave  of  rebelliousness  this  morning,  I  was  seized  by  a  great  sadness,  a  great  bitterness, 
as  though  I  were  being  confronted  with  a  profound  injustice. 

There  is  a  spiritual  destiny  in  me,  but  there  are  three  other  destinies  so  intimately  bound  up  with 
it  that  I  cannot  cut  off  any  one  without  mutilating  something  of  my  living  soul  -  which  is  why, 
periodically,  these  suppressed  destinies  awaken  and  call  to  me  -  and  the  dark  forces  seize  upon 
these  occasions  to  sow  chaos  within  and  drive  me  to  ruin  everything  since  I  cannot  really  fulfill 
myself.  And  the  problem  is  insoluble. 

1)  There  is  the  destiny  of  the  adventurer:  it  is  the  one  in  me  that  needs  the  sea  or  the  forest  and 
wide  open  spaces  and  struggles.  This  was  the  best  part  of  my  childhood.  I  can  sit  on  it  and  tell 
myself  that  ‘the  adventure  is  within,’  and  it  might  ‘work’  for  a  while.  But  this  untamed  child  in  me 
continues  to  live  all  the  same,  and  it  is  something  very  valuable  in  me.  I  cannot  kill  it  through 
reasoning,  even  spiritual  reasoning.  And  if  I  tell  it  that  everything  lies  ‘within,’  not  ‘without,’  it 
replies,  ‘Then  why  was  I  born,  why  this  manifestation  in  the  outer  world?’  In  the  end,  it  is  not  a 
question  of  reasoning.  It  is  a  fact,  like  the  wind  upon  the  heaths. 

2)  There  is  the  destiny  of  the  writer  in  me.  And  this  too  is  linked  to  the  best  of  my  soul.  It  is  also 
a  profound  need,  like  adventuring  upon  the  heaths,  because  when  I  write  certain  things,  I  breathe  in 
a  certain  way.  But  during  the  five  years  I  have  been  here,  I  have  had  to  bow  to  the  fact  that, 
materially,  there  is  no  time  to  write  what  I  would  like  (I  recall  how  I  had  to  wrench  out  this 
Orpailleur,  which  I  have  not  even  had  time  to  revise).  This  is  not  a  reproach,  Mother,  for  you  do  all 


you  can  to  help  me.  But  I  realize  that  to  write,  one  must  have  leisure,  and  there  are  too  many  less 
personal  and  more  serious  things  to  do.  So  I  can  also  sit  on  this  and  tell  myself  that  I  am  going  to 
write  a  ‘Sri  Aurobindo’  -  but  this  will  not  satisfy  that  other  need  in  me,  and  periodically  it  awakens 
and  sprouts  up  to  tell  me  that  it  too  needs  to  breathe. 

3)  There  is  also  the  destiny  that  feels  human  love  as  something  divine,  something  that  can  be 
transfigured  and  become  a  very  powerful  driving  force.  I  did  not  believe  it  possible,  except  in 
dreams,  until  the  day  I  met  someone  here.  But  you  do  not  believe  in  these  things,  so  I  shall  not 
speak  of  it  further.  I  can  gag  this  also  and  tell  myself  that  one  day  all  will  be  filled  in  the  inner 
divine  love.  But  that  does  not  prevent  this  other  need  in  me  from  living  and  from  finding  that  life  is 
dry  and  from  saying,  ‘Why  this  outer  manifestation  if  all  life  is  in  the  inner  realms?’  But  neither  can 
I  stifle  this  with  reasoning. 

So  there  remains  the  pure  spiritual  destiny,  pure  interiorization.  That  is  what  I  have  been  trying 
to  do  for  the  last  five  years,  without  much  success.  There  are  good  periods  of  collaboration,  because 
one  part  of  my  being  can  be  happy  in  any  condition.  But  in  a  certain  way  this  achievement  remains 
truncated,  especially  when  you  base  spiritual  life  on  a  principle  of  integrality.  And  these  three 
destinies  in  me  have  their  own  good  reasons,  which  are  true:  they  are  not  inferior,  they  are  not 
incidental,  they  are  woven  from  the  very  threads  that  created  the  spiritual  life  in  me.  My  error  is  to 
open  the  door  to  revolt  when  I  feel  too  poignantly  one  or  the  other  being  stifled. 

So  you  see,  all  this  is  insoluble.  I  have  only  to  bow  before  these  unfortunate  circumstances.  I 
perceive  an  injustice  somewhere,  but  I  have  only  to  remain  silent. 


And  I  was  also  struck  when  you  told  me  that  I  wanted  to  ‘kick  up  a  row.’  You  so  clearly  implied 
that  I  was  leaving  the  Ashram  in  a  ‘shoddy’  way.  So  that  also  froze  me.  I  thought  I  had  done  my 
best  and,  in  order  to  serve  you,  repressed  as  much  as  I  could  the  others  in  me. 

So  there.  I  can  find  no  solution.  X  will  not  understand,  and  I  will  not  say  anything  to  him.  But  I 
obey  you  because  everything  is  futile  and  there  is  too  much  pain  in  this  world,  and  also  someone  in 
me  needs  you,  someone  who  loves  you  in  his  own  way. 

Signed:  Satprem 


(Mother ’s  reply) 


Friday,  5.29.59 


Satprem,  my  dear  little  one, 

I  have  read  your  letter  in  its  entirety  and  I  remain  convinced  that  one  day  all  the  parts  of  your 
being,  without  excluding  any,  will  be  fully  satisfied.  But  we  shall  see  about  that  later. 

For  the  moment,  I  only  want  to  tell  you,  from  the  bottom  of  my  heart  -  which  is  so  deeply 
touched  -  thank  you. 

With  all  my  love. 

Signed:  Mother 

I  will  see  you  tomorrow  morning  at  ten  o’clock  and  I  hope  that  a  few  small  misunderstandings 
may  be  clarified. 

I  am  sending  you  forthwith  the  note  that  I  had  prepared  for  tomorrow  morning. 

(Note  from  Mother  to  Satprem) 

I  did  not  utter  the  words  that  you  heard  -  I  wanted  to  speak  to  you  of  my  experience  during  the 
night,  but  I  was  paralyzed  because  I  clearly  felt  that  you  no  longer  understood  me.  As  soon  as  I 


received  your  letter,  I  concentrated  on  you  in  an  effort  to  help  you,  and  when  night  fell,  just  at  the 
hour  I  enter  into  contact  with  X,  I  called  for  his  help  -  whereupon  he  sent  me  this  little  Kali  whom 
he  had  already  sent  once  before.  So  I  went  to  your  house,  I  took  you  in  my  arms  and  pressed  you 
tightly  to  my  heart  to  keep  you  as  sheltered  as  possible  from  blows,  and  I  let  Kali  do  her  warrior 
dance  against  this  titan  who  is  always  trying  to  possess  you,  creating  this  rebelliousness  in  you.  She 
must  have  at  least  partially  succeeded  in  her  work,  because  very  early  in  the  morning  the  titan  went 
away  somewhat  discomfited,  but  while  leaving,  he  flung  this  at  me  as  he  went  by:  ‘You  will  regret 
it,  for  you  would  have  had  less  trouble  if  he  had  left.’  I  flung  his  suggestion  back  in  his  face  with  a 
laugh  and  told  him,  ‘Take  that,  along  with  all  the  rest  of  your  ugly  person!  I  have  no  need  of  it!’ 
And  the  atmosphere  cleared  up. 

I  wanted  to  tell  you  all  this,  but  1  couldn’t  because  you  were  still  far  away  from  me  and  it  would 
have  seemed  like  boasting.  Also  the  misunderstanding  created  by  the  distance  made  you  hear  other 
words  than  those  I  uttered. 


June  3, 1959 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem,  while  travelling) 

Rameswaram,  June  3,  1959 


Sweet  Mother, 

On  your  behalf,  1  told  X  that  you  had  been  worried  about  me.  He,  too,  had  felt  that  things  were 
not  going  well  and  had  ‘worked’  on  his  side.  He  told  me  to  write  you  immediately  to  tell  you  that 
‘everything  is  all  right.  ’ 


Also,  I  explained  to  him  that  a  mantra  had  come  to  you  which  you  were  repeating  between  5  and 
6  in  particular,  and  I  told  him  about  this  culminating  point  where  you  wanted  to  express  your 
gratitude,  enthusiasm,  etc.,  and  about  the  French  mantra.  After  explaining,  I  gave  him  your  French 
and  Sanskrit  texts.  He  felt  and  understood  very  well  what  you  wanted.  His  first  reaction  after 
reading  it  was  to  say,  ‘Great  meaning,  great  power  is  there.  It  is  all  right!  I  told  him  that  apart  from 
the  meaning  of  the  mantra,  you  wanted  to  know  if  it  was  all  right  from  the  ‘vibrational’  standpoint. 
He  told  me  that  he  would  take  your  text  to  his  next  puja  and  would  repeat  it  himself  to  see.  He 
should  have  done  that  this  morning,  but  he  has  a  fever  (since  his  return  from  Madurai,  he  has  not 
been  well  because  of  a  cold  and  sunstroke).  I  will  write  you  as  soon  as  I  know  the  result  of  his 
‘test.’ 

Regarding  me,  this  is  more  or  less  what  he  said:  ‘First  of  all,  I  want  an  agreement  from  you  so 
that  under  any  circumstances  you  never  leave  the  Ashram.  Whatever  happens,  even  if  Yama 149 
comes  to  dance  at  your  door,  you  should  never  leave  the  Ashram.  At  the  critical  moment,  when  the 


149Yama:  the  god  of  Death  in  the  Hindu  pantheon. 


attack  is  the  strongest,  you  should  throw  everything  into  His  hands,  then  and  then  only  the  thing 
can  be  removed  (I  no  longer  know  whether  he  said’  removed’  or  destroyed  ).  It  is  the  only  way. 
SARVAM  MAMA  BRAHMAN  [Thou  art  my  sole  refuge].  Here  in  Rameswaram,  we  are  going  to 
meditate  together  for  45  days,  and  the  Asuric-Shakti  may  come  with  full  strength  to  attack,  and  I 
shall  try  my  best  not  only  to  protect  but  to  destroy,  but  for  that,  I  need  your  determination.  It  is  only 
by  your  own  determination  that  I  can  get  strength.  If  the  force  comes  to  make  suggestions:  lack  of 
adventure,  lack  of  Nature,  lack  of  love,  then  think  that  I  am  the  forest,  think  that  I  am  the  sea,  think 
that  I  am  the  wife  (!!)  ’  Meanwhile,  X  has  nearly  doubled  the  number  of  repetitions  of  the  mantra 
that  I  have  to  say  every  day  (it  is  the  same  mantra  he  gave  me  in  Pondicherry).  X  repeated  to  me 
again  and  again  that  I  am  not  merely  a  ‘disciple’  to  him,  like  the  others,  but  as  if  his  son. 

This  was  a  first,  hasty  conversation,  and  we  did  not  discuss  things  at  length.  I  said  nothing.  I 
have  no  confidence  in  my  reactions  when  I  am  in  the  midst  of  my  crises  of  complete  negation.  And 
truly  speaking,  at  the  time  of  my  last  crisis  in  Pondicherry,  I  do  not  know  if  it  was  really  X’s  occult 
working  that  set  things  right,  for  personally  (but  perhaps  it  is  an  ignorant  impression),  I  felt  that  it 
was  thanks  to  Sujata  and  her  childlike  simplicity  that  I  was  able  to  get  out  of  it. 

In  any  event,  since  I  left  Pondicherry,  I  have  been  living  like  a  kind  of  robot  (it  began  in  the 
train);  I  am  empty,  void  of  the  least  feeling  for  whomever  it  may  be.  I  keep  going  by  a  kind  of 
acquired  momentum,  but  actually  I  feel  completely  anesthetized. 

Excuse  my  handwriting.  I  am  writing  to  you  lying  on  the  floor  of  the  dharamshala150  near  X’s 
house,  for  the  ‘hut’  meant  for  me  is  not  yet  ready. 


Suddenly,  last  evening,  X  went  furiously  on  the  warpath  against  the  Indian  ‘Congress’151  and 
with  an  irrefutable  tone,  like  someone  who  knows,  began  making  very  interesting  predictions. 

Before  five  months  are  over  (in  September,  October  or  November),  Pakistan  will  attack  India 
with  the  help  or  the  complicity  or  the  military  resources  of  the  United  States.  And  at  about  the  same 
time,  China  will  attack  India  because  of  the  Dalai  Lama,  under  the  pretext  that  India  is  supporting 
the  Dalai  Lama  and  that  thousands  of  Tibetan  refugees  are  escaping  into  India  to  carry  on  anti- 
Chinese  activities.  Then  America  will  offer  its  support  to  India  against  China  and  then,  said  X,  ‘We 
shall  see  what  will  be  the  political  policy  of  the  Congress  Party,  which  pretends  to  be  unaligned 
with  any  bloc.  If  India  accepts  American  aid,  there  will  be  no  more  Pakistan  but  rather  American 
troops  to  prevent  conflicts  between  Muslims  and  Hindus,  and  a  single  government  for  both 
countries.’  I  pointed  out  to  X  that  this  sounded  very  much  like  a  world  war  ... 

Then  he  made  the  following  comparison:  ‘When  you  throw  a  pebble  into  a  pond,  there  is  just 
one  center,  one  point  where  it  falls,  and  everything  radiates  out  from  this  center.  There  are  two  such 
centers  in  the  world  at  present,  two  places  where  there  are  great  vibrations:  one  is  India  and 
Pakistan,  and  that  will  radiate  all  over  Asia.  And  the  other  is  ...  ‘ 

In  any  case,  I  had  never  heard  him  attacking  the  Congress  as  he  did  yesterday  evening,  almost 
violently. 

That  is  all,  Sweet  Mother.  In  spite  of  my  anesthesia,  I  think  of  you.  (I  am  not  blocked;  on  the 
contrary,  it  seems  to  me  that  the  bond  has  been  renewed  since  our  last  meeting,  but  I  feel  strangely 
empty.)  I  am  unable  to  understand  how  you  can  love  me.  Oh  Mother,  I  have  truly  to  begin  living, 
truly  loving!  Your  child, 

Signed:  Satprem 


150A  caravansary,  or  Indian  style  shelter. 


151  Indian  National  Congress:  the  formative  freedom  organization  against  the  British  that  became  India’s  major 
political  party  under  Jawaharlal  Nehru  after  independence. 


(Mother’s  reply) 


6.4.59 


My  very  dear  child, 

I  received  and  read  your  very  interesting  letter. 

As  for  the  Sanskrit  text  and  the  mantra,  I  await  your  next  letter. 

For  you,  I  fully  approve  of  what  he  told  you.  Fervently,  and  with  all  my  love,  I  pray  that  he  will 
succeed  in  what  he  wants  to  do  during  these  45  days  of  meditation.  This  is  really  what  I  was 
counting  on. 

For  what  occurred  here,  I  can  say  only  one  thing:  when  the  Supreme  Lord  wants  to  save 
someone,  Fie  clothes  his  will  in  every  appearance  necessary. 

As  for  the  emptiness  you  feel  (which  perhaps  is  already  better):  to  those  who  complained  of  this 
sensation  of  inner  emptiness,  Sri  Aurobindo  always  said  that  it  is  a  very  good  thing;  it  is  the  sign 
that  they  are  going  to  be  filled  with  something  better  and  truer. 

I  have  carefully  noted  X’s  predictions. 

Certainly  his  political  rage  is  not  only  understandable  but  justified.  However,  when  one  begins 
looking  at  things  from  the  external  viewpoint  of  the  manifestation,  they  are  not  as  simple  as  that.  I 
cannot  speak  of  all  this  in  detail,  but  as  an  example  I  can  tell  you  that  here  in  Pondicherry,  those 
who  are  maneuvering  (and  not  without  some  hope)  to  oust  the  Congress  are  our  worst  enemies,  the 
enemy  of  all  that  is  disinterested  and  spiritual,  and  if  they  come  to  power,  they  would  be  capable  of 
anything  in  their  hate. 

For  all  these  world  events,  I  always  leave  it  to  the  Divine  vision  and  wisdom,  and  I  say  to  the 
Supreme:  ‘Lord,  may  Thy  Will  be  done.’ 

I  hope  to  hear  from  you  soon. 

My  love  is  with  you. 

Signed:  Mother 


June  4, 1959 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Rameswaram,  June  4,  1959 


Sweet  Mother, 


Regarding  X’s  predictions  which  I  mentioned  in  yesterday’s  letter,  X  said  something 


untranslatable  which  meant,  ‘Let  us  see  Mother’s  reactions  ’  -  for  I  told  him  that  I  had  written  it  all 
to  you.  Then  he  said,  ‘There  are  several  other  secret  matters  which  I  shall  tell  you.  ’  And  he  added, 
by  way  of  example,  ‘I  shall  tell  WHERE  the  atomic  bombs  will  be  cropped.  ’  So  if  these  things 
interest  you,  or  if  you  see  or  feel  anything,  perhaps  it  would  be  good  to  express  your  interest  in  a 
letter  to  me  which  I  would  translate  for  X.  Spontaneously,  I  emphasized  to  X  that  it  would 
undoubtedly  facilitate  your  work  to  have  details.  But  it  is  better  that  these  things  come  from  you, 
should  you  see  any  use  in  it. 

As  for  me,  X  said,  ‘Something  will  happen.  ’ 

I  need  you,  Sweet  Mother. 

Your  child, 
Signed:  Satprem 


(Mother ’s  reply) 


6.6.59 


Satprem,  my  very  dear  child,  yesterday  evening  I  received  your  second  letter  dated  the  4th, 

Regarding  my  mantra,  I  began  repeating  it  yesterday  before  receiving  your  letter,  and  I  felt  that 
it  was  all  right.  So  if  X  makes  no  alterations,  it  is  not  necessary  to  send  it  back  to  me.  I  receive  the 
force  X  gives  me  without  paper. 

I  do  not  know  if  it  is  an  illusion,  but  on  several  occasions  I  felt  that  if  X  says  this  mantra,  it  will 
cure  his  fever. 

As  for  the  predictions,  I  am  extremely  interested.  Tell  this  to  X,  and  also  that  details  of  this  kind 
are  a  great  help  in  my  work,  for  they  give  physical  clues  enabling  a  greater  precision  in  the  action. 
Needless  to  say,  I  will  be  very  grateful  for  any  indications  he  may  wish  to  give  me. 

For  you,  my  dear  child,  it  is  true  that  ‘something  must  happen  and  will  happen.’  Will  you  please 
tell  X  on  my  behalf  that  I  will  participate  with  all  my  power  in  what  he  wants  to  undertake.  He  will 
understand. 

I  am  with  you  and  wish  to  repeat  to  you:  infinite  is  the  Grace  and  invincible  is  the  Love;  be 
confident  and  will  the  victory,  for  this  is  what  X  means  by  your  collaboration. 

Signed:  Mother 


June  7, 1959 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Rameswaram,  June  7,  1959 


Sweet  Mother, 

I  thought  certain  details  from  my  conversations  with  X  might  interest  you: 

1)  X  spoke  to  me  of  the  Vedic  times  when  a  single  ‘emperor’  or  sage  ruled  the  entire  world  with 
the  help  of  ‘governors’;  then  these  governors  gradually  became  independent  kings,  and  conflicts 
were  bom.  So  I  asked  him  what  was  going  to  happen  after  this  next  war  and  whether  the  world 
would  be  better.  He  replied  as  follows:  ‘  Yes,  great  sages  like  Sri  Aurobindo  who  are  wandering 
now  in  their  subtle  bodies  will  appear.  Some  sages  may  take  the  physical  body  of  political  leaders 
in  the  West.  It  will  be  the  end  of  ignorant  atomic  machines  and  the  beginning  of  a  new  age  with 
great  sages  leading  the  world.  ’  So  it  seems  that  X’s  vision  links  up  with  Sri  Aurobindo ’s  prediction 
for  1967. 

He  did  not  give  me  any  further  details  about  this  war,  except  to  say  that  the  countries  which  will 
suffer  the  most  will  be  the  countries  of  the  North  and  the  East,  and  he  cited  Burma,  Japan,  China 
and  Russia.  He  said  rather  categorically  that  Russia  would  be  swept  away  and  that  America  would 
triumph. 

2)  X  gave  me  certain  details  about  his  powers  of  prediction,  but  perhaps  it  would  be  better  not  to 
speak  of  this  in  a  letter.  On  that  occasion,  he  told  me  that  he  did  not  want  to  keep  any  secrets  from 
me:  7  want  you  to  know  everything.  I  want  you  to  be  chief  disciple  in  my  tradition.  When  the  time 
comes,  you  will  understand  what  I  mean.  With  you  I  have  full  connection,  not  only  connection  in  my 
mind,  but  in  my  blood  and  body.  ’ 

On  another  occasion,  he  said  to  me,  7  am  ALWAYS  taking  care  of  you.  ’  And  when  I  asked  him 
why  he  was  taking  such  trouble  for  me,  he  replied,  ‘Because  I  have  orders.  ’  This  attention  that 
comes  to  me  from  you  and  him  surprises  me,  for  I  do  not  feel  that  I  am  good,  and  upon  the  least 
occasion  I  know  that  I  am  seriously  prepared  to  quit  everything  because  something  in  me  is 
profoundly  revolted  by  this  excess  of  suffering,  by  a  lack  of  love  and  flowering,  by  an  excess  of 
solitude.  Yesterday  evening,  it  was  still  fully  there,  with  all  my  approval,  and  at  such  a  time  no  one 
in  the  world  can  hold  me  back.  It  is  this  POINT  OF  SUFFERING  that  makes  me  want  to  turn  my 
back  on  everything.  Not  to  commit  suicide:  to  turn  my  back. 

X  told  me  the  story  of  my  last  three  existences  (rather  grim),  but  I  will  write  you  about  that  in 
another  letter. 

3)  X  has  not  yet  begun  his  work  with  me  nor  for  you,  as  he  has  been  unwell  until  today.  One 
evening,  he  made  a  very  beautiful  reflection  concerning  you  and  your  mantra,  but  it  is  inexpressible 
in  words,  it  was  above  all  the  tone  in  which  he  said,  ‘Who,  who,  is  there  a  single  person  in  the 
world  who  can  repeat  like  that  “TRIOMPHE  A  TOI ...  MAHIMA  ...  MAHIMA  ‘?  etc.  And  three  or 
four  times  he  repeated  your  mantra  with  such  an  expression  ... 

He  has  not  yet  done  what  he  plans  to  do  with  your  mantra  in  his  puja,  for  he  has  been  unwell 
and  had  to  interrupt  his  pujas.  But  now  he  is  better. 


I  have  no  other  details  to  give  you,  except  that  I  am  not  happy.  The  fact  is  that  these  last  three 
years  I  have  been  tied  down  by  my  penury,  otherwise  I  would  be  travelling  along  other  roads,  far 
from  here  -  with  no  greater  hope  in  my  heart,  but  with  space  before  me,  at  least.  I  am  only  here  to 
render  you  service,  but  I  do  not  know  if  I  shall  be  able  to  repress  my  need  for  space  much  longer  - 
it  has  already  been  going  on  too  long.  This  is  the  undisguised  truth.  But  what  can  I  do?  -  I  am  tied 
down.  If  I  truly  loved,  things  would  be  different,  but  it  seems  I  love  no  one,  not  even  myself,  and 
the  only  love  of  which  I  am  capable,  human  love,  is  forbidden  to  me.  So  I  can  do  nothing,  not  on 
any  plane,  and  I  have  no  hope  in  anything.  Forgive  me,  I  do  not  wish  to  pain  you,  but  neither  can  I 
pretend  any  longer  to  be  happy  with  my  lot. 


Signed:  Satprem 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Rameswaram,  June  8,  1959 

Sweet  Mother, 

Even  before  receiving  your  second  letter  in  which  you  say  that  the  mantra  is  all  right,  X  told  me 
this  morning  that  he  had  repeated  your  mantra  during  his  puja  and  that  it  was  very  good,  that  there 
is  nothing  to  be  changed:  ‘The  vibration  is  good.  ’ 

Here  are  a  few  additional  indications  regarding  the  forthcoming  events. 

As  I  appeared  to  be  doubting,  X  told  me,  ‘There  is  no  “suspicion  “  [doubt],  the  war  will  take 
place  in  November  ’  (in  fact,  it  is  to  occur  some  time  between  September  and  November),  and  for 
the  rest  of  the  talk,  he  had  a  tone  of  absolute  certitude:  ‘The  first  atom  bomb  will  fall  in  China. 
Russia  will  be  crushed.  It  will  be  a  victory  for  America.  Not  more  than  2  or  3  atom  bombs  will  be 
used.  It  will  be  very  quick.  ’  And  he  repeated  that  the  starting-point  of  the  conflict  would  be  situated 
in  India  due  to  the  aggression  of  Pakistan,  then  of  China. 

The  earthquake  he  mentioned  promises  to  be  a  kind  of  ‘pralaya’  (as  X  put  it),  for  not  only 
Bombay  will  be  touched.  This  is  what  he  said:  ‘America  supports  Pakistan,  but  the  gods  do  not 
support  Pakistan,  and  Pakistan  will  be  punished  by  the  gods.  HALF  of  western  Pakistan,  including 
Karachi,  will  go  into  the  sea.  The  sea  will  enter  into  Rajasthan  and  touch  India  also  ... 

X  then  said  that  India  would  side  with  America  against  the  Communist  bloc  (in  spite  of 
America’s  support  to  Pakistan),  and  furthermore,  that  the  day  India  sides  with  America,  America 
will  cease  supporting  Pakistan.  In  any  case,  it  will  be  the  end  of  Pakistan. 

After  I  translated  your  letter  to  him,  X  told  me  that  he  would  give  me  more  details  in  two  or 
three  days. 

I  should  write  you  what  X  has  revealed  about  my  last  three  lives,  but  I  have  neither  the  courage 
nor  the  desire  to  again  speak  of  myself. 

Your  child, 
Signed:  Satprem 

P.S.  X  asked  me  questions  about  my  family.  I  was  prompted  to  speak  to  him  of  my  mother  (seeing 
her  photo,  you  had  said  that  you  knew  her  very  well,  if  you  recall).  He  immediately  said,  ‘You 
MUST  go  and  see  your  mother.  You  will  go  in  August  and  quickly  come  back  by  plane  beginning 
September!  ’  Of  course,  I  told  him  that  all  this  seems  like  the  highest  fantasy  to  me,  and  that  to  begin 
with  I  had  no  money  and  would  surely  not  ask  you  anything  for  that.  He  said,  ‘I  shall  ask  my 
Mother.  She  will  arrange  everything. 


(Mother’s  reply) 


6.10.59 


Satprem,  my  dear  little  one, 

I  have  a  world  of  things  to  tell  you  about  all  I  have  heard,  seen  and  done  concerning  you  these 
past  days.  New  doors  of  understanding  have  opened  -  but  all  these  things  are  impossible  to  write. 

As  for  the  mantra,  since  two  days  I  am  sure  about  it,  and  all  is  well. 

I  am  extremely  interested  in  everything  X  has  revealed  to  you.  But  I  cannot  write  about  this 
either. 

If  X  told  you  to  go  see  your  mother  in  August  and  return  m  early  September,  you  must  go.  We 
shall  manage.  My  finances  are  in  an  almost  desperate  state,  but  that  cannot  last.  For  what  has  to  be 
done  will  be  done. 


You  are  constantly  with  me,  and  I  am  following  all  your  inner  movements  with  love  and 
concern. 

The  great  secret  is  to  learn  to  give  oneself ... 

With  all  my  tenderness. 

Signed:  Mother 


June  9, 1959 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Rameswaram,  June  9,  1959 


Sweet  Mother, 

Forgive  me  for  these  last  letters.  I  was  suffering. 

It  seems  to  me  that  for  months  I  have  been  far  away  from  you.  I  no  longer  see  you  in  my 
dreams,  I  no  longer  feel  you.  What,  then  is  this  path  I  am  following? 

In  spite  of  all  my  revolts,  I  need  you,  I  need  truth,  Light,  and  love.  I  feel  I  have  already  known 
all  this,  had  all  this,  and  that  I  have  been  dispossessed.  Perhaps  that  is  why  I  suffer. 

Mother,  lead  me  towards  you,  I  am  blind  and  without  strength. 


(Mother’s  reply) 


Your  child, 
Signed:  Satprem 


Thursday,  June  11,  1959 


Satprem,  my  very  dear  child, 

I  have  received  your  good  letter  of  the  9th,  It  warms  my  heart. 

All  these  things  that  you  need  -  truth,  light,  love,  my  presence  in  you  -  you  have  had  them  and 
you  still  have  them,  they  have  not  withdrawn  from  you,  but  something  came  to  veil  them  from  your 
perception,  and  this  is  why  you  became  unhappy.  They  are  waiting  just  there,  near  you,  in  you, 
anxious  for  the  shadow  to  vanish  and  for  you  to  realize  that  they  have  not  left  you. 

With  all  my  love. 

Signed:  Mother 


June  11, 1959 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Rameswaram,  June  11,  1959 


Sweet  Mother 

As  of  yesterday  evening  I  am  a  man  delivered.  It  took  only  a  very  little  word  from  X,  and 
suddenly  a  weight  seemed  to  have  been  lifted  from  me,  and  I  knew  at  last  that  I  would  be  fulfdled. 
All  this  is  still  so  new,  so  improbable  that  I  can  scarcely  believe  it,  and  I  wonder  if  by  chance  some 
evil  blow  is  not  still  lurking  in  wait  for  me  behind  this  promise  of  happiness;  thus  I  shall  be 
reassured  only  when  I  have  told  you  everything,  recounted  all.  But  X  has  asked,  me  to  wait  a  few 
more  days  before  telling  you  this  story,  for  he  wants  to  give  me  certain  additional  details  so  that  you 
may  have  all  the  elements,  as  accurately  as  possible. 

But  I  did  not  want  to  wait  any  longer  to  express  my  gratitude.  I  am  still  not  so  sure  how  all  this 
will  turn  out  nor  how  this  destiny  that  he  predicts  for  me  can  be  realized,  but  I  want  to  repeat  to  you, 
with  all  my  confidence:  I  am  your  child,  may  your  will  be  done  now  and  forever. 

Signed:  Satprem 


P.S.  X  is  also  to  give  me  certain  details  for  you  about  the  forthcoming  war. 


June  13, 1959 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Rameswaram,  June  13,  1959 


Sweet  Mother, 

I  have  received  your  last  two  letters  of  the  10th  and  1 1th.  I  told  X  what  you  wrote  about  this  trip 
to  France  and  that  your  finances  are  in  an  ‘almost  desperate’  state.  He  replied  with  perfect 
assurance,  ‘Soon  it  will  increase,  very  soon  it  will  change.  ’  I  am  obviously  hesitant  to  accept  your 
generous  offer  and  I  do  not  know  what  I  should  do.  I  had  never  thought  of  returning  to  France, 
except  in  a  distant  future.  I  don’t  know  why  X  told  me  that  I  should  return  there,  except  perhaps 
because  he  felt  who  my  mother  is.  I  know  that  she  is  sad,  that  she  believes  me  lost  to  her  and  thinks 
she  will  die  without  seeing  me  again.  It  would  surely  be  a  great  joy  to  her.  But  other  than  that,  I 
have  no  desire  to  go  there,  for  each  time  I  go  to  France,  I  feel  like  I  am  entering  a  prison.  Naturally  I 
would  be  happy  for  my  mother’s  joy;  she  is  a  great  soul,  but  is  this  reason  enough? 

Sunday,  14th 

X  has  decided  that  he  wants  to  speak  to  you  himself  about  my  former  existences  and  about  what  he 
has  seen  for  the  immediate  future.  He  has  therefore  asked  me  to  say  nothing  to  you.  Perhaps  there 
are  also  elements  he  did  not  want  to  speak  of  to  me.  (X  told  me  that  now  he  feels  capable  of 
speaking  in  English  with  you.) 

Another  thing:  we  happened  to  talk  of  Sri  Aurobindo  and  Lele. 152  Concerning  Lele,  X  told  me, 
‘He  was  a  devotee  of  the  Bhaskaraya  School;  this  is  why  there  is  close  connection  ...  ’  I  do  not  know 
if  this  is  so,  but  X  seemed  to  know. 

For  me,  the  inner  things  seem  to  have  taken  a  better  turn  since  X  revealed  certain  things  to  me, 
but  I  prefer  to  say  nothing.  I  dare  not  say  anything  since  I  know  from  experience  that  all  this  is  as 
unstable  as  dynamite. 

Your  child, 
Signed:  Satprem 


June  13, 1959 


(Letter  from  Mother  to  Satprem) 


152 Lele:  the  tantric  guru  whom  Sri  Aurobindo  met  in  1908  and  who  gave  him  mental  silence  and  Nirvana. 


6.13.59 


Satprem,  my  dear  child, 

I  repeat  to  you  simply  what  I  said  to  Sujata  this  morning: 

You  are  both  my  dear  children, 

I  love  you  and  bless  you. 

Signed:  Mother 


June  17, 1959 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Rameswaram,  June  17,  1959 


Sweet  Mother, 

I  have  received  your  card  of  the  13th.  I  dare  not  write,  for  everything  is  too  confused  as 
concerns  the  immediate  realities. 

The  only  thing  that  affirms  itself  with  a  certitude  and  a  greater  and  greater  force  is  my  soul.  I 
cling  to  It  with  all  my  strength.  It  is  my  only  refuge.  If  I  did  not  have  that,  I  would  throw  my  life 
overboard,  for  the  outer  circumstances  and  the  immediate  future  seem  to  me  impossible,  unlivable. 

I  was  touched  by  your  blessings  for  Sujata  and  myself.  But  there  lies  another  impossibility. 

These  last  days  I  have  come  to  realize  that  to  blame  all  my  ‘crises’  on  the  hostile  forces  is 
perhaps  to  oversimplify  things.  I  understand  better  and  better,  for  in  my  suffering,  my  soul  is  all  I 
have  and  I  rely  on  that  alone;  otherwise  I  could  never  bear  all  that  I  have  borne,  all  that  I  still  bear.  I 
understand,  too,  that  there  was  also  a  truth  in  the  force  which  periodically  impelled  me  to  leave,  the 
truth  of  that  destiny  in  me  which  is  not  fulfilled  in  the  Ashram. 

Mother,  I  have  suffered  so  much  and  prayed  so  much  this  last  while  that  I  am  sure  my  soul 
cannot  but  arrange  circumstances  in  such  a  way  that  somehow  I  may  live  at  last  -  that  somehow 
EVERYTHING  may  truly  become  reconciled:  not  later  on  or  ‘one  of  these  days,’  but  soon  -  for  it 
cannot  go  on  any  longer;  I  am  at  my  end. 

Mother,  I  have  prayed  with  so  much  truth  in  my  heart  that  I  am  sure  the  gods  will  come  to  help 
me,  and  that  you  will  help  me,  too.  I  think  not  only  of  Sujata,  but  of  all  these  destinies  that  are  being 
stifled  within  me. 

Your  child, 
Signed:  Satprem 

P.S.  Yes,  I  too  am  sure  that  the  ‘great  secret  is  to  give  oneself,’  but  perhaps  this  can  be  too  easily 
misunderstood,  and  I  do  not  believe  that  ‘to  give  oneself  means  to  mutilate  oneself.  As  for  the  rest, 


well,  my  life  obviously  belongs  to  That  and  is  meaningless  except  for  That. 

Would  you  please  tell  me  whether  I  may  really  write  to  my  mother  that  I  am  coming  to  see  her? 


June  25,  1959 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Rameswaram,  June  25,  1959 


Sweet  Mother, 

X  told  me  to  tell  you  what  he  has  seen  of  my  previous  lives  (but  my  impression  is  that  he  did  not 
tell  me  everything  and  that  there  are  elements  about  which  he  wants  to  speak  to  you  personally). 

To  begin  with,  I  must  tell  you  a  dream  that  I  had  here  in  Rameswaram  a  few  days  after  my 
arrival.  I  was  being  pursued  and  I  fled  like  an  assassin  -  it  is  a  dream  I  have  had  hundreds  of  times 
for  years,  but  in  this  dream,  there  was  a  new  element:  while  being  pursued,  I  climbed  a  kind  of 
stairway  to  try  to  escape  when  suddenly,  in  a  flash,  I  saw  a  feminine  form  hurtling  into  a  void.  I  saw 
only  the  lower  half  of  her  body  (with  a  kind  of  mauve-colored  saree),  because  she  was  already 
falling.  And  I  had  the  horrible  sensation  of  having  pushed  this  woman  into  the  void,  and  I  fled.  I 
climbed,  I  climbed  these  stairs  with  my  pursuers  close  at  my  heels,  and  the  image  of  this  falling 
woman  gave  me  a  horrible  feeling.  When  I  reached  the  top  of  the  ‘stairs,’  I  tried  to  close  a  door 
behind  me  to  stop  my  pursuers,  but  there  they  were,  it  was  too  late  ...  and  I  woke  up. 

The  last  time  I  was  in  Rameswaram,  I  had  two  other  very  poignant  dreams,  but  I  could  not  make 
out  what  they  meant.  In  one  dream  I  was  strangling  someone  with  my  bare  hands;  it  was  an 
abominable  feeling.  And  in  the  other,  I  saw,  in  a  kind  of  nocturnal  setting,  a  hanged  man  being 
taken  down,  with  all  kinds  of  people  bustling  about  the  corpse  with  lamps,  and  suddenly  I  knew  that 
this  hanged  man  ...  was  me. 

I  had  said  nothing  to  X  about  these  various  dreams  before  he  told  me  the  story  of  my  last  three 
existences:  three  times  I  committed  suicide  -  the  first  by  fire,  the  second  by  hanging,  and  the  third 
by  throwing  myself  into  the  void.  During  the  first  of  these  last  three  existences,  I  was  married  to  a 
‘very  good’  woman,  but  for  some  reason  I  abandoned  my  wife  ‘and  I  was  wandering  here  and 
there  in  search  of  something.  ’  Then  I  met  a  sannyasi  who  wanted  to  make  me  his  disciple,  but  I 
could  not  make  up  my  mind,  I  was  ‘neither  this  side  nor  that  side,  ’  whereupon  my  wife  came  to  me 
and  pleaded  with  me  to  take  her  back.  Apparently  I  rejected  her  -  so  she  threw  herself  into  the  fire. 
Horror-stricken,  I  followed  her,  throwing  myself  into  the  fire  in  turn.  That  was  when  I  created  ‘a 
connection  ’  with  certain  beings  [of  the  other  worlds]  and  I  fell  under  their  power.  For  two  other 
lives,  under  the  influence  of  these  beings,  the  same  drama  was  repeated  with  a  few  variations. 

During  the  second  of  these  last  three  existences,  I  was  married  to  the  same  woman  whom  I  again 
abandoned  under  the  influence  of  the  same  monk,  and  I  again  remained  between  two  worlds 
wandering  here  and  there.  Again  my  wife  came  to  plead  with  me  and  again  I  pushed  her  away.  She 


hung  herself,  and  I  hung  myself  in  turn. 

During  my  last  existence,  the  monk  succeeded  in  making  me  a  sannyasi,  and  when  my  wife 
came  to  plead  with  me,  I  told  her,  ‘Too  late,  now  I  am  a  sannyasi.  ’  So  she  threw  herself  into  the 
void,  and  horror-stricken  by  the  sudden  revelation  of  all  these  dramas  and  of  my  wife’s  goodness 
(for  it  seems  she  was  a  great  soul),  I  threw  myself  in  turn  into  the  void. 

As  for  this  last  existence,  you  already  know. 

X  told  me,  ‘Now  it  is  your  last  birth.  I  have  received  ORDER  to  deliver  you.  ’  So  be  it.  ‘I  shall 
give  you  a  white  cloth,  ’  he  added,  ‘with  my  own  hand.  ’ 

X  gave  me  a  new  mantra.  My  body  is  exhausted  from  too  much  nervous  tension.  I  am  living  in  a 
kind  of  cellar  with  four  inches  of  filth  on  the  floor  and  walls,  and  two  openings,  one  onto  the  street 
of  the  bazaar  the  other  onto  a  dilapidated  courtyard  with  a  well.  On  my  right  lives  a  madwoman 
who  screams  half  the  day.  There  is  only  my  mantra  which  burns  almost  constantly  in  my  heart,  and 
who  knows  what  hope  that  some  day  the  future  will  be  happy  and  reconciled.  There  is  also  Sujata 
and  you. 

Your  child, 
Signed:  Satprem 


July  9,  1959153 


7.9.59 


Kalki 


153This  handwritten  note  bore  only  this  word  and  the  date.  Kalki  is  the  name  of  the  last  Avatar  who  comes  on  a  white 
winged  horse  to  destroy  the  ‘barbarians’  (yavan)  at  the  end  of  the  Iron  Age  or  the  Kali  Yuga,  which  is  the  period  we  are 
now  passing  through.  His  appearance  marks  the  return  of  the  Age  of  Truth,  or  the  Satya  Yuga. 


July  10, 1959 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem,  once  again  in  Pondicherry) 

Pondicherry,  July  10,  1959 


Mother, 

Please  excuse  me,  but  I  cannot  come  to  meet  you.  My  heart  is  broken.  I  would  not  know  how  to 
speak  to  you. 

A  moment  ago  I  barely  found  the  strength  not  to  kill  myself.  Destiny  has  repeated  itself  once 
again,  but  this  time  it  was  not  I  who  rejected  her,  as  in  past  existences,  it  is  she  who  rejected  me: 
‘Too  late.  ’  For  a  moment,  I  thought  I  was  going  to  go  crazy  too,  so  much  pain  did  I  have  -  then 
finally  I  said,  ‘May  Thy  Will  be  done,’  (that  of  the  Supreme  Lord)  and  I  kept  repeating,  ‘Thy  Grace 
is  there,  even  in  the  greatest  suffering.’  But  I  am  broken,  rather  like  a  living  dead  man.  So  be  happy, 
for  I  will  never  wear  the  white  robe  that  Guruji  gave  me. 

You  will  understand  that  I  do  not  have  the  strength  to  come  to  see  you.  My  only  strength  is  not 
to  rebel,  my  only  strength  is  to  believe  in  the  Grace  in  the  face  of  everything.  I  believe  I  have  too 
much  grief  in  my  heart  to  rebel  against  anything  at  all.  I  seem  to  have  a  kind  of  great  pity  for  this 
world. 

Well,  this  time  I  shall  remain  silent. 

Adieu,  Mother. 

Signed:  Satprem 


July  14, 1959 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Pondicherry,  July  14,  1959 
Tuesday  evening 


Sweet  Mother, 

This  is  what  I  should  have  told  you  this  morning,  but  I  was  afraid.  For  the  last  month  I  have 
been  afraid  of  you,  afraid  that  you  might  not  understand.  But  I  cannot  leave  with  this  weight  on  me. 
I  beg  of  you  to  understand,  Sweet  Mother.  I  want  nothing  bad,  nothing  impure.  I  feel  I  have 
something  to  create  with  Sujata,  I  feel  she  is  absolutely  a  part  of  something  I  have  to  achieve,  that 
we  have  something  to  achieve  together.  For  the  five  years  we  have  known  each  other  I  have  never 
had  a  single  wrong  thought  -  but  suddenly  she  opened  my  heart,  which  had  been  so  completely 
walled-off,  and  this  was  like  a  wonder  in  me  and  at  the  same  time  a  fear.  A  fear,  perhaps  because 


this  love  has  been  thwarted  for  so  many  lives. 


Mother,  I  need  Sujata  like  my  very  soul.  It  seems  to  me  that  she  is  a  part  of  me,  that  she  alone 
can  help  me  break  with  this  horrible  past,  that  she  alone  can  help  me  to  love  truly  at  last.  I  need 
peace  so  much,  a  quiet,  PEACEFUL  happiness  -  a  base  of  happiness  upon  which  I  could  use  my 
strength  to  build,  instead  of  always  fighting,  always  destroying.  Mother,  I  am  not  at  all  sure  of  what 
must  be,  but  I  know  that  Sujata  is  part  of  this  realization. 

That’s  all,  Mother.  Forgive  me,  but  I  am  so  afraid.  For  how  is  this  possible  in  the  Ashram?  What 
would  people  say? 

Mother,  my  whole  soul  writes  you  this.  I  swear  there  is  in  me  a  single  great  need  of  Love, 
beauty,  nobility,  purity.  And  we  would  work  for  you  together  in  joy  at  last.154 

Your  anxious  child, 

Signed:  Satprem 


July  24-25, 1959155 

First  penetration  of  the  supramental  force  into  the  body. 

Sri  Aurobindo  alive  in  a  concrete  and  permanent  subtle  physical  body. 


August  11, 1959 


(Letter  from  Mother  to  Satprem,  on  the  road) 


154Shortly  afterwards,  Satprem  left  on  a  journey  and  returned  only  two  months  later. 


155Note  written  by  Mother  in  French  regarding  a  crucial  experience  to  which  She  will  later  refer  a  number  of  times 


8.11.59 


Satprem,  my  dear  little  one, 

Now  I  can  tell  you  that  not  for  one  hour  have  I  left  you;  I  have  been  constantly  near  you,  hoping 
that  your  inner  eyes  would  open  and  that  you  would  see  me,  watching  over  you  and  enveloping  you 
with  my  force  and  my  love.  It  is  within  yourself  that  I  want  you  to  find  the  certitude,  truth  and  joy. 

Now  I  write  you  what  I  have  wanted  to  tell  you  from  the  beginning:  when  you  return  to  the 
Ashram,  do  not  put  on  the  orange  robe156  again,  return  with  the  clothing  X  has  given  you  ... 

And  we  shall  leave  the  care  of  deciding  about  the  details  of  the  future  to  the  Supreme  Lord. 

With  all  my  love  and  blessings. 

Signed:  Mother 


August  15, 1959 


(Letter  from  Mother  to  Satprem) 

...  And  now,  today,157 1  am  writing  you  again  because  it  is  the  day  of  great  amnesties,  the  day  when 
all  past  errors  are  effaced  ... 

With  all  my  unvarying  and  eternal  love. 


October  6, 1959 


(Thus  the  bird  flew  back  once  more  ... ) 


156The  color  worn  by  sannyasis. 


157August  15th,  Sri  Aurobindo’s  birthday. 


For  the  West,  with  all  its  outward  development,  a  few  centuries  may  be  needed  before  the  junction 
between  the  two  worlds  can  be  made.  And  yet  these  two  worlds  -  the  physical  world  and  the  world 
of  Truth  -  are  not  distant  from  one  another.  They  are  as  if  superimposed.  The  world  of  Truth  is 
there,  close  by,  like  a  lining  of  the  other. 

Shortly  before  the  1  5th  of  August  I  had  a  unique  experience  that  exemplifies  all  this.158  For  the 
first  time  the  supramental  light  entered  directly  into  my  body,  without  passing  through  the  inner 
beings.  It  entered  through  the  feet  (a  red  and  gold  color  -  marvelous,  warm,  intense),  and  it  climbed 
up  and  up.  And  as  it  climbed,  the  fever  also  climbed  because  the  body  was  not  accustomed  to  this 
intensity.  As  all  this  light  neared  the  head,  I  thought  I  would  burst  and  that  the  experience  would 
have  to  be  stopped.  But  then,  I  very  clearly  received  the  indication  to  make  the  Calm  and  Peace 
descend,  to  widen  all  this  body-consciousness  and  all  these  cells,  so  that  they  could  contain  the 
supramental  light.  So  I  widened,  and  as  the  light  was  ascending,  I  brought  down  the  vastness  and  an 
unshakable  peace.  And  suddenly,  there  was  a  second  of  fainting. 

I  found  myself  in  another  world,  but  not  far  away  (I  was  not  in  a  total  trance).  This  world  was 
almost  as  substantial  as  the  physical  world.  There  were  rooms  -  Sri  Aurobindo’s  room  with  the  bed 
he  rests  on  -  and  he  was  living  there,  he  was  there  all  the  time:  it  was  his  abode.  Even  my  room  was 
there,  with  a  large  mirror  like  the  one  I  have  here,  combs,  all  kinds  of  things.  And  the  substance  of 
these  objects  was  almost  as  dense  as  in  the  physical  world,  but  they  shone  with  their  own  light.  It 
was  not  translucent,  not  transparent,  not  radiant,  but  self-luminous.  The  various  objects  and  the 
material  of  the  rooms  did  not  have  this  same  opacity  as  the  physical  objects  here,  they  were  not  dry 
and  hard  as  in  the  physical  world  we  know. 

And  Sri  Aurobindo  was  there,  with  a  majesty,  a  magnificent  beauty.  He  had  all  his  beautiful  hair 
as  before.  It  was  all  so  concrete,  so  substantial  -  he  was  even  being  served  some  kind  of  food.  I 
remained  there  for  one  hour  (I  had  looked  at  my  watch  before  and  I  looked  at  it  afterwards).  I  spoke 
to  Sri  Aurobindo,  for  I  had  some  important  questions  to  ask  him  about  the  way  certain  things  are  to 
be  realized.  He  said  nothing.  He  listened  to  me  quietly  and  looked  at  me  as  if  all  my  words  were 
useless:  he  understood  everything  at  once.  And  he  answered  me  with  a  gesture  and  two  expressions 
on  his  face,  an  unexpected  gesture  that  did  not  at  all  correspond  to  any  thought  of  mine;  for 
example,  he  picked  up  three  combs  that  were  lying  near  the  mirror  (combs  similar  to  those  I  use 
here,  but  larger)  and  he  put  them  in  his  hair.  He  planted  one  comb  in  the  middle  of  his  head  and  the 
two  others  on  each  side,  as  if  to  gather  all  his  hair  over  his  temples.  He  was  literally  COIFFED  with 
these  three  combs,  which  gave  him  a  kind  of  crown.  And  I  immediately  understood  that  by  this  he 
meant  that  he  was  adopting  my  conception:  ‘You  see,  I  embrace  your  conception  of  things,  and  I 
coif  myself  with  it;  it  is  my  will.  ’  Anyway,  I  remained  there  for  one  hour. 

And  when  I  awoke,  I  didn’t  have  this  feeling  of  returning  from  afar  and  of  having  to  re-enter  my 
body,  as  I  usually  do.  No,  it  was  simply  as  though  I  were  in  this  other  world,  then  I  took  a  step 
backwards  and  found  myself  here  again.  It  took  me  a  good  half  an  hour  to  understand  that  this 
world  here  existed  as  much  as  the  other  and  that  I  was  no  longer  on  the  other  side  but  here,  in  the 
world  of  falsehood.  I  had  forgotten  everything  -  people,  things,  what  I  had  to  do;  everything  had 
gone,  as  if  it  had  no  reality  at  all. 

You  see,  it’s  not  as  if  this  world  of  Truth  had  to  be  created  from  nothing:  it  is  fully  ready,  it  is 
there,  like  a  lining  of  our  own  present  world.  Everything  is  there,  EVERYTHING  is  there. 

I  remained  in  that  state  for  two  full  days,  two  days  of  absolute  felicity.  And  Sri  Aurobindo  was 
with  me  the  whole  time,  the  whole  time  -  when  I  walked,  he  walked  with  me,  when  I  sat  down,  he 
sat  next  to  me.  On  the  day  of  August  15th,  too,  he  remained  there  constantly  during  the  darshan.  But 
who  was  aware  of  it?  A  few  -  one  or  two  -  felt  something.  But  who  saw?  -  No  one. 

And  I  showed  all  these  people  to  Sri  Aurobindo,  this  whole  field  of  work,  and  asked  him 
WHEN  this  other  world,  the  real  one  that  is  there,  so  near,  would  come  to  take  the  place  of  our 


158See  July  24-25. 


world  of  falsehood.  Not  ready.  That  was  all  he  replied.  Not  ready. 

Sri  Aurobindo  gave  me  two  days  of  this  -  total  bliss.  But  all  the  same,  by  the  end  of  the  second 
day  I  realized  that  I  could  not  continue  to  remain  there,  for  the  work  was  not  advancing.  The  work 
must  be  done  in  the  body;  the  realization  must  be  attained  here  in  this  physical  world,  for  otherwise 
it  is  not  complete.  So  I  withdrew  from  that  world  and  set  to  work  here  again. 

And  yet,  it  would  take  little,  very  little,  to  pass  from  this  world  to  the  other,  or  for  the  other  to 
become  the  real  world.  A  little  click  would  be  enough,  or  rather  a  little  reversal  in  the  inner  attitude. 
How  should  I  put  it?  ...  It  is  imperceptible  to  the  ordinary  consciousness;  a  very  little  inner  shift 
would  be  enough,  a  change  in  quality. 

It  is  similar  with  this  japa:  an  imperceptible  little  change,  and  one  can  pass  from  a  more  or  less 
mechanical,  more  or  less  efficient  and  real  japa,  to  the  true  japa  full  of  power  and  light.  I  even 
wondered  if  this  difference  is  what  the  tantrics  call  the  ‘power’  of  the  japa.  For  example,  the  other 
day  I  was  down  with  a  cold.  Each  time  I  opened  my  mouth,  there  was  a  spasm  in  the  throat  and  I 
coughed  and  coughed.  Then  a  fever  came.  So  I  looked,  I  saw  where  it  was  coming  from,  and  I 
decided  that  it  had  to  stop.  I  got  up  to  do  my  japa  as  usual,  and  I  started  walking  back  and  forth  in 
my  room.  I  had  to  apply  a  certain  will.  Of  course,  I  could  do  my  japa  in  trance,  I  could  walk  in 
trance  while  repeating  the  japa,  because  then  you  feel  nothing,  none  of  all  the  body’s  drawbacks. 
But  the  work  has  to  be  done  in  the  body!  So  I  got  up  and  started  doing  my  japa.  Then,  with  each 
word  pronounced  -  the  Light,  the  full  Power.  A  power  that  heals  everything.  I  began  the  japa  tired, 
ill,  and  I  came  out  of  it  refreshed,  rested,  cured.  So  those  who  tell  me  they  come  out  of  it  exhausted, 
contracted,  emptied,  it  means  that  they  are  not  doing  it  in  the  true  way. 

I  understand  why  certain  tantrics  advise  saying  the  japa  in  the  heart  center.  When  one  applies  a 
certain  enthusiasm,  when  each  word  is  said  with  a  warmth  of  aspiration,  then  everything  changes.  I 
could  feel  this  difference  in  myself,  in  my  own  japa. 

In  fact,  when  I  walk  back  and  forth  in  my  room,  I  don’t  cut  myself  off  from  the  rest  of  the  world 
-  although  it  would  be  so  much  more  convenient!  ...  All  kinds  of  things  come  to  me  -  suggestions, 
wills,  aspirations.  But  automatically  I  make  a  movement  of  offering:  things  come  to  me  and  just  as 
they  are  about  to  touch  my  head,  I  turn  them  upwards  and  offer  them  to  the  Light.  They  don’t  enter 
into  me.  For  example,  if  someone  speaks  to  me  while  I  am  saying  my  japa,  I  hear  quite  well  what  is 
being  said,  I  may  even  answer,  but  the  words  remain  a  little  outside,  at  a  certain  distance  from  the 
head.  And  yet  sometimes,  there  are  things  that  insist,  more  defined  wills  that  present  themselves  to 
me,  so  then  I  have  to  do  a  little  work,  but  all  that  without  a  pause  in  the  japa.  If  that  happens,  there 
is  sometimes  a  change  in  the  quality  of  my  japa,  and  instead  of  being  fully  the  power,  fully  the  light, 
it  is  certainly  something  that  produces  results,  but  results  more  or  less  sure,  more  or  less  long  to 
fructify;  it  becomes  uncertain,  as  with  all  things  of  this  physical  world.  Yet  the  difference  between 
the  two  japas  is  imperceptible;  it’s  not  a  difference  between  saying  the  japa  in  a  more  or  less 
mechanical  way  and  saying  it  consciously,  because  even  while  I  work  I  remain  fully  conscious  of 
the  japa  -  I  continue  to  repeat  it  putting  the  full  meaning  into  each  syllable.  But  nevertheless,  there 
is  a  difference.  One  is  the  all-powerful  japa;  the  other,  an  almost  ordinary  japa  ...  There  is  a 
difference  in  the  inner  attitude.  Perhaps  for  the  japa  to  become  true,  a  kind  of  joy,  an  elation,  a 
warmth  of  enthusiasm  has  to  be  added  -  but  especially  joy.  Then  everything  changes. 

Well,  it  is  the  same  thing,  the  same  imperceptible  difference,  when  it  comes  to  entering  the 
world  of  Truth.  On  one  side  there  is  the  falsehood,  and  on  the  other,  close  by,  like  the  lining  of  this 
one,  the  true  life.  Only  a  little  difference  in  the  inner  quality,  a  little  reversal,  is  enough  to  pass  to 
the  other  side,  into  the  Truth  and  Light. 

Perhaps  simply  to  add  joy  would  suffice. 

I  will  have  to  look  at  this  in  my  body  since  that  is  where  it  is  happening,  where  things  are  being 
prepared. 


This  other  world  you  speak  of,  this  world  of  Truth,  is  it  the  supramental  world? 


My  feeling  is  that  this  life  which  Sri  Aurobindo  is  living  right  now  is  not  the  full  satisfaction  of  the 
supramental  life  for  him. 

In  this  other  world,  there  was  infinity,  majesty,  perfect  calm,  eternity  -  all  was  there. 

Perhaps  it  was  joy  that  was  missing. 

Of  course,  Sri  Aurobindo  himself  had  joy.  But  I  had  the  impression  that  it  was  not  total  and  that 
this  is  why  I  had  to  continue  the  work.  I  felt  that  it  could  only  be  total  when  things  here  have 
changed. 


October  15, 1959 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Rameswaram,  October  15,  1959 


Sweet  Mother, 

Here  are  two  or  three  things  that  might  interest  you: 

1)  X  spoke  to  me  again  of  the  war  without  my  asking  anything.  He  repeated,  ‘There  will  be 
war,  ’  and  he  again  spoke  of  an  attack  on  India  by  China  ... 

2)  X  spoke  to  me  of  the  Ashram’s  financial  difficulties  and  said  ‘I  shall  tell  you  the  secret  why 
there  are  such  difficulties.  ’  I  think  he  is  going  to  speak  to  me  today  or  tomorrow.  In  any  case,  he 
told  me  that  he  was  working  ( 7  am  preparing’ ...  )  to  change  these  conditions,  and  he  asked  me  if 
there  had  been  any  improvement  as  yet.  I  replied  that  I  did  not  believe  the  situation  had  changed 
very  much.  He  spoke  as  well  of  certain  people  in  the  Ashram,  but  I  will  tell  you  about  this  in 
person.  He  had  a  rather  amusing  way  of  speaking  about  people,  ‘people  who  pretend  to  worship  the 
Mother  but  who  keep  their  mind  as  a  dustbin!  ’ 


7)  X  wants  to  send  me  back  to  Pondicherry  this  Sunday  (Sunday  the  18th,  arriving  Monday  the 
19th  morning).  He  says  it  is  useless  for  me  now  to  remain  here  any  longer  since  his  house  is  not 
ready  and  he  can  do  nothing.  But,  he  said,  ‘I  will  have  you  come  to  my  house  for  3  months  and  I 
shall  give  you  a  training  by  which  you  can  know  Past,  Present  and  Future,  and  have  the  same 
qualifications  as  me  7 

8)  He  gave  me  certain  methods  to  follow,  about  which  I  shall  speak  to  you  in  person. 

Sweet  Mother,  I  have  such  a  yearning  for  everything  in  my  consciousness  to  harmonize  and  for 
the  tantric  discipline,  the  japa,  etc.,  not  to  separate  me  from  you.  I  want  to  be  your  child,  open  to 
you,  without  any  contradictions.  I  would  like  so  much  to  find  your  almost  physical  Presence  within 
me  again,  as  before.  May  all  be  clear,  pure,  one. 

I  would  wish  to  be  like  Sujata,  completely  transparent,  your  child  with  her  at  your  feet.  Mother, 
help  me.  I  need  you.  Sujata  is  healing  something  that  was  very  painful  in  me,  as  though  it  were 


flayed  or  wounded,  and  which  threw  me  into  revolt.  With  this  calming  influence,  I  would  like  to 
begin  a  new  life  of  self-giving.  This  change  of  residence  is  for  me  like  the  symbol  of  another 
change.  Oh,  Mother!  may  the  painful  road  be  over,  and  may  all  be  achieved  in  the  joy  of  your  Will. 

Your  child, 
Signed:  Satprem 


November  25, 1959 

There  is  a  difference  between  immortality  and  the  deathless  state.  Sri  Aurobindo  has  described  it 
very  well  in  Savitri. 

The  deathless  state  is  what  can  be  envisaged  for  the  human  physical  body  in  the  future:  it  is 
constant  rebirth.  Instead  of  again  tumbling  backwards  and  falling  apart  due  to  a  lack  of  plasticity 
and  an  incapacity  to  adapt  to  the  universal  movement,  the  body  is  undone  ‘futurewards,’  as  it  were. 

There  is  one  element  that  remains  fixed:  for  each  type  of  atom,  the  inner  organization  of  the 
elements  is  different,  which  is  what  creates  the  difference  in  their  substance.  So  perhaps  similarly, 
each  individual  has  a  different,  particular  way  of  organizing  the  cells  of  his  body,  and  it  is  this 
particular  way  that  persists  through  all  the  outer  changes.  All  the  rest  is  undone  and  redone,  but 
undone  in  a  forward  thrust  towards  the  new  instead  of  collapsing  backwards  into  death,  and  redone 
in  a  constant  aspiration  to  follow  the  progressive  movement  of  the  divine  Truth. 

But  for  that,  the  body  -  the  body-consciousness  -  must  first  learn  to  widen  itself.  It  is 
indispensable,  for  otherwise  all  the  cells  become  a  kind  of  boiling  porridge  under  the  pressure  of  the 
supramental  light. 

What  usually  happens  is  that  when  the  body  reaches  its  maximum  intensity  of  aspiration  or  of 
ecstasy  of  Love,  it  is  unable  to  contain  it.  It  becomes  flat,  motionless.  It  falls  back.  Things  settle 
down  -  you  are  enriched  with  a  new  vibration,  but  then  everything  resumes  its  course.  So  you  must 
widen  yourself  in  order  to  learn  to  bear  unflinchingly  the  intensities  of  the  supramental  force,  to  go 
forward  always,  always  with  the  ascending  movement  of  the  divine  Truth,  without  falling 
backwards  into  the  decrepitude  of  the  body. 

That  is  what  Sri  Aurobindo  means  when  he  speaks  of  an  intolerable  ecstasy 159  ;  it  is  not  an 
intolerable  ecstasy:  it  is  an  unflinching  ecstasy. 


159 Thoughts  and  Aphorisms:  ‘Cruelty  transfigured  becomes  Love  that  is  intolerable  ecstasy  ...’ 


Prayers  of  the  Consciousness  of  the  Cells 

(1951  - 1959) 


September  21, 1951 


6 

supreme 
j  ’aspire 
cette 

j  ’absorbe, 

dans 

de 

Ta 

Ta 

Ta  toute-bonte. 


mon 


a 

nourriture 


toutes 


doux 

Verite 

ce 

infuse 

les 


mon 

toute-connaissance, 

toute-puissance, 


Seigneur, 

que 

que 

cellules 

corps 


*  *  * 


(translation) 


O 

supreme 

I 

this 

I 

may 

into 

of 

Your 

Your 

Your  all-kindness. 


my 


aspire 


sweet  Lord 

Truth, 

that 

food 

take 

infuse 

the  cells 

body 

all-knowledge, 

all-power, 


July  25,  1958 


0 

mon 

doux 

Maitre, 

Seigneur 

et 

Dieu 

de 

de 

Bonte 

Misericorde. 

Ce  que  tu  veux  qu  'on  sache,  on  le  saura,  ce  que  tu  veux  qu  'on  fasse,  on  le  fera,  ce  que  tu  veux 
qu  ’on  soit,  on  le  sera  -  a  jamais. 


Om  -  namo  -  bhagavateh 

Car  c  ’est  Toi  qui  es,  qui  vis,  et  qui  sais  -  c  ’est  Toi  qui  fais  toute  chose  et  qui  es  le  resultat  de 
toute  action. 


*  *  * 


(translation) 

O  my  sweet  Master, 

Lord  God  of  Kindness 

and  Mercy. 

What  you  want  us  to  know,  we  shall  know,  what  you  want  us  to  do,  we  shall  do,  what  you  want  us 
to  be,  we  shall  be  -  forever. 


Om  -  namo  -  bhagavateh 

For  it  is  You  who  is,  who  lives  and  who  knows  -  it  is  You  who  does  all  things,  You  who  is  the 
result  of  every  action. 


July  25,  1958 

O  my  Lord, 

What  you  want  of 

What  you  want  me  to  do,  let  me  do.160 


my 

me,  let 


Lord! 

me  be. 


Prayers  of  the  Consciousness  of  the  Cells161 


160Original  English. 


161  All  these  prayers  were  written  by  Mother  and  this  title  was  given  by  Her. 


(The  Stages  of  Mother’s  Japa) 
1958-1959 


October  3, 1958 


Et  le  corps  dit 

‘Ce  que  Tu  veux  que 
ce  que  Tu  veux  que 
ce  que  Tu  veux  que  je  fasse,je  le  ferai.  ’ 


au  Seigneur 

je  sois,  je 
je  sache,  je 


Supreme: 
le  serai, 

le  saurai, 


*  *  * 


(translation) 


And 

the 

body 

says 

to 

the 

Supreme 

Lord: 

‘What 

You 

want 

me 

to 

be, 

I  shall 

be, 

What 

You 

want 

me 

to 

know, 

I  shall 

know, 

What  you  want  me  to  do,  I  shall  do.’ 


January  21, 1959 


OM 

OM,  Seigneur  Supreme 
Prends  possession  de  ce  corps 
Manifeste-Toi  en  lui. 


*  *  * 


(translation) 


OM 

OM,  Supreme  Lord 
Take  possession  of  this  body 
Manifest  Yourself  in  it. 


Undated 


6 

Divine 

Lumiere, 

Realite 

supramentale, 

avec 

cette 

nourriture, 

penetre 

le  corps 

totalement, 

entre  dans 

toutes 

les  cellules, 

installe-Toi 

dans 

tous 

les  atonies; 

que 

tout 

devienne 

parfaitement 

sincere 

et 

receptif 

libre 

de 

tout 

ce 

qui  fait 

obstacle 

a 

ta 

manifestation, 

en 

somme 

ouvre 

a 

Toi 

toutes 

les  parties 

de 

mon 

corps 

qui  ne 

vent  pas 

deja  Toi-meme. 

*  *  * 


(translation) 


0 

Divine 

Light, 

Supramental  Reality, 

with 

this 

food 

imbue 

the  body 

fully, 

enter 

into 

all 

the  cells, 

come 

into 

every 

atom; 

may 

all 

become 

perfectly 

sincere 

and 

receptive 

free 

from 

all 

that 

creates 

an 

obstacle 

to 

your 

manifestation 

in 

short 

open 

unto 

Yourself 

all 

the  parts 

of 

already  You. 

my 

body 

which 

are  not 

January  1959 


Invocation 


Seigneur, 

Dieu 

de 

bonte 

et 

de  misericorde 

Seigneur, 

Dieu 

d’ unite 

souveraine, 

Seigneur, 

Dieu 

de  beaute 

et  d’harmonie, 

Seigneur, 

Dieu 

de 

puissance 

et 

de  realisation, 

Seigneur, 

Dieu 

d’ amour  et 

de 

compassion, 

Seigneur, 

Dieu 

de 

silence  et 

de 

contemplation, 

Seigneur, 

Dieu 

de 

lumiere  et 

de 

connaissance, 

Seigneur, 

Dieu 

de 

vie 

et 

d  ’immortalite, 

Seigneur, 

Dieu 

de 

jeunesse 

et 

de  progres, 

Seigneur, 

Dieu 

d’abondance  et 

de 

plenitude, 

Seigneur, 

Dieu 

de 

force 

et 

de  sante, 

Seigneur, 

Dieu 

de 

paix 

et 

d  ’immensite, 

Seigneur, 

Dieu 

de 

pouvoir 

et 

d  ’invincibilite, 

Seigneur, 

Dieu 

de  la 

Verite  victorieuse. 

Prends 

possession 

de 

ce  corps, 

Manifeste-toi  en 

lui. 

*  *  * 


(translation) 


Lord, 

God 

of 

kindness 

and 

mercy, 

Lord, 

God 

of 

sovereign 

oneness, 

Lord, 

God 

of 

beauty 

and 

harmony, 

Lord, 

God 

of 

force 

and 

realization, 

Lord, 

God 

of 

love 

and 

compassion, 

Lord, 

God 

of 

silence 

and 

contemplation, 

Lord, 

God 

of 

light 

and 

knowledge, 

Lord, 

God 

of 

life 

and 

immortality, 

Lord, 

God 

of 

youth 

and 

progress, 

Lord, 

God 

of 

abundance 

and 

plenitude, 

Lord, 

God 

of 

strength 

and 

health, 

Lord, 

God 

of 

peace 

and 

vastness, 

Lord, 

God 

of 

power 

and 

invincibility, 

Lord, 

God 

of 

victorious 

Take 

possession 

of 

this 

Manifest  Yourself  in  it. 

Truth. 

body, 


Undated  1959  (?) 


OM, 

Seigneur 

Supreme 

Prends 

possession 

de 

ces 

cellules 

Prends 

possession 

de 

ce 

cerveau 

Prends 

possession 

de 

ces 

nerfs 

Prends 

possession 

de 

ce 

corps 

Prends 

possession 

de 

cette 

matiere 

Prends 

possession 

de 

ces 

atomes 

OM, 

Seigneur 

Supreme 

Manifeste  Ta  Splendeur 

*  *  * 

(translation) 

OM, 

Supreme 

Lord 

Take 

possession 

of 

these 

cells 

Take 

possession 

of 

this 

brain 

Take 

possession 

of 

these 

nerves 

Take 

possession 

of 

this 

body 

Take 

possession 

of 

this 

matter 

Take 

possession 

of 

these 

atoms 

OM, 

Supreme 

Lord 

Manifest  Your  Splendor 

Undated  1959  (?) 


Om,  Seigneur  Supreme,  Dieu 

de 

Verite 

et  de 

Perfection. 

Seigneur,  Dieu  de 

Purete 

et 

de 

Perfection 

Dieu  de  Justice 

Dieu  d’ Amour  et  de  Felicite 

et 

de 

Paix 

*  *  * 

(translation) 


Om,  Supreme  Lord, 
Lord,  God  of 

God  of 

God  of  Love  and  Felicity 


God  of 
Purity 


Truth 

and 

and 


and  Perfection. 
Perfection 
Peace 


Justice 


January  1959 


I 

am 

not 

a 

scholar 

I  am 

a 

creative 

force  in 

action,  that 

is  all. 

Everything 

depends 

on 

the  Lord’s 

Will. 

If 

such 

is 

His 

will, 

when 

I 

have 

to 

know,  I 

know, 

when 

I 

have 

to 

fight,  I 

fight, 

when 

I 

have 

to 

love,  I 

love, 

and  always  there  is  the  need  to  love,  to  know  and  to  fight. 162 


January  1959 


0 

mon 

doux 

Toi 

seul, 

Tu 

es 

Toi 

seul, 

Tu 

vois 

Toi  seul  peux  me 

conduire  la  ou  je 

veux  aller. 

Seigneur, 

grand, 

grand, 


*  *  * 


(translation) 


O  my 

You  alone,  You 

You  alone,  You 

You  alone  can  lead  me  there  where  I  want  to 


sweet 


go- 


vastly 

vastly 


Lord, 


are, 

see, 


1620riginal  English. 


January  1959 

O  seigneur,  qu  ’il  est  doux  d ’avoir  besoin  de  Toil ... 


* 


(translation) 


O  Lord,  how  sweet  it  is  to  need  You!  ... 


October  9, 1959 


(Durga) 


Tu 

es 

ma 

Lumiere, 

ma 

Puissance 

et 

ma 

Joie 

Tu 

es 

ma 

Realisation 

souveraine. 

* 

(translation) 


You 

are 

my 

Light, 

my 

Force 

and 

my 

Joy 

You 

Realization. 

are 

my 

sovereign 

*  *  * 

O  Seigneur,  Tu  es  ma  paix,  ma  puissance  et  ma  joie, 
Tu  es  ma  realisation  souveraine. 


* 


(translation) 

O  Lord,  You  are  my  peace,  my  force  and  my  joy, 
You  are  my  sovereign  realization. 


*  *  * 


Om 

Seigneur 

Supreme, 

Tu  es  ma 

Lumiere, 

ma 

Puissance 

et 

ma 

Joie 

Tu  es  ma  Realisation  souveraine. 

* 


(translation) 


Om 

Supreme 

Lord, 

You  are  my 

Light, 

my 

Force 

and 

my 

Joy 

You  are  my  sovereign  Realization. 

Undated 

OM 


Om, 

Seigneur 

Supreme, 

Dieu 

de  bonte 

et 

de 

misericorde, 

Om, 

Seigneur 

Supreme, 

Dieu 

d  ’amour 

et  de 

compassion, 

Om, 

Seigneur 

Supreme, 

prends 

possession 

de 

ces 

cellules, 

Om, 

Seigneur 

Supreme, 

prends 

possession 

de 

ce 

cei~veau, 

Om, 

Seigneur 

Supreme, 

prends 

possession 

de 

ces  nerfs, 

Om, 

Seigneur 

Supreme, 

prends 

possession 

de 

cette 

pensee, 

Om, 

Seigneur 

Supreme, 

prends 

possession 

de 

cette 

parole, 

Om, 

Seigneur 

Supreme, 

prends 

possession 

de 

cette 

action, 

Om, 

Seigneur 

Supreme, 

prends 

possession 

de 

ce 

corps, 

Om, 

Seigneur 

Supreme, 

prends 

possession 

de 

ce 

cceur, 

Om, 

Seigneur 

Supreme, 

prends 

possession 

de 

cette 

matiere, 

Om, 

Seigneur 

Supreme, 

prends 

possession 

de 

ces 

atomes, 

Om, 

Seigneur 

Supreme, 

prends 

possession 

du 

subconscient, 

Om,  Seigneur  Supreme 

,  prends  possession  de  l  ‘inconscient. 

Om, 

namo,  bhagavateh 

Om, 

Seigneur 

Supreme, 

Dieu 

de  bonte 

et 

de 

misericorde, 

Om, 

Seigneur 

Supreme, 

Dieu 

d  ’amour 

et 

de 

felicite 

Om, 

Seigneur 

Supreme, 

manifeste 

Ta 

Volonte 

Om, 

Seigneur 

Supreme, 

manifeste 

Ta 

Verite 

Om, 

Seigneur 

Supreme, 

manifeste 

Ta 

Purete 

Om, 

Seigneur 

Supreme, 

manifeste 

Ta 

Perfection 

Om, 

Seigneur 

Supreme, 

manifeste 

Ton 

Unite 

Om, 

Seigneur 

Supreme, 

manifeste 

Ton 

Eternite 

Om, 

Seigneur 

Supreme, 

manifeste 

Ton 

Infinite 

Om, 

Seigneur 

Supreme, 

manifeste 

Ton 

Immortalite 

Om, 

Seigneur 

Supreme, 

manifeste 

Ton 

Silence 

Om, 

Seigneur 

Supreme, 

manifeste 

Ta 

Paix 

Om, 

Seigneur 

Supreme, 

manifeste 

Ton 

Existence 

Om, 

Seigneur 

Supreme, 

manifeste 

Ta 

Conscience 

Om, 

Seigneur 

Supreme, 

manifeste 

Ta 

Toute-Puissance 

Om, 

Seigneur 

Supreme, 

manifeste 

Ta 

Felicite 

Om, 

Seigneur 

Supreme, 

manifeste 

Ta 

Connaissance 

Om, 

Seigneur 

Supreme, 

manifeste 

Ton 

Omniscience 

Om, 

Seigneur 

Supreme, 

manifeste 

Ta 

Sagesse 

Om, 

Seigneur 

Supreme, 

manifeste 

Ton 

Egalite 

Om, 

Seigneur 

Supreme, 

manifeste 

Ton 

Intensite 

Om, 

Seigneur 

Supreme, 

manifeste 

Ta 

Lumiere 

Om, 

Seigneur 

Supreme, 

manifeste 

Ton 

Harmonie 

Om, 

Seigneur 

Supreme, 

manifeste 

Ta 

Compassion 

Om, 

Seigneur 

Supreme, 

manifeste 

Ta 

Beaute 

Om, 

Seigneur 

Supreme, 

manifeste 

Ton 

Amour 

Om,  Seigneur  Supreme,  remporte  Ta  Victoire. 


Gloire 

a 

Toi, 

Seigneur 

triomphateur 

supreme 

Gloire 

a 

Toi, 

Seigneur 

triomphateur 

supreme 

Gloire 

a 

Toi, 

Seigneur 

triomphateur 

supreme 

Gloire 

a 

Toi, 

Seigneur 

triomphateur 

supreme 

Gloire 

a 

Toi, 

Seigneur 

triomphateur 

supreme 

Gloire 

a 

Toi, 

Seigneur 

triomphateur 

supreme 

Gloire 

a 

Toi, 

Seigneur 

triomphateur 

supreme 

Gloire 

a 

Toi, 

Seigneur 

triomphateur 

supreme 

Gloire 

a 

Toi, 

Seigneur 

triomphateur 

supreme 

Gloire 

a 

Toi, 

Seigneur 

triomphateur 

supreme 

Gloire 

a 

Toi, 

Seigneur 

triomphateur 

supreme 

Gloire  a 

Toi,  Seigneur  triomphateur  supreme 

Mahima 

Tawaiwa 

prabho 

parama 

jitwara163 

Mahima 

Tawaiwa 

prabho 

parama 

jitwara 

Mahima 

Tawaiwa 

prabho 

parama 

jitwara 

Mahima 

Tawaiwa 

prabho 

parama 

jitwara 

Mahima 

Tawaiwa 

prabho 

parama 

jitwara 

Om, 

namo 

bhagavateh 

Mahima 

Tawaiwa 

prabho 

parama 

jitwara 

Om, 

namo 

bhagavateh 

Mahima 

Tawaiwa 

prabho 

parama 

jitwara 

Om, 

namo 

bhagavateh 

Mahima 

Tawaiwa 

prabho 

parama 

jitwara 

Om, 

namo 

bhagavateh 

Mahima 

Tawaiwa 

prabho 

parama 

jitwara 

Om, 

namo 

bhagavateh 

Mahima 

Tawaiwa 

prabho 

parama 

jitwara 

Om, 

namo 

bhagavateh 

Mahima 

Tawaiwa 

prabho 

parama 

jitwara 

163These  lines  were  written  by  Mother  in  Sanskrit. 


Om, 

namo 

bhagavateh 

Mahima 

Tawaiwa 

prabho 

parama 

jitwara 

Om, 

namo 

bhagavateh 

Mahima 

Tawaiwa 

prabho 

parama 

jitwara 

Om, 

namo 

bhagavateh 

Mahima 

Tawaiwa 

prabho 

parama 

jitwara 

Om, 

namo 

bhagavateh 

Mahima 

Tawaiwa 

prabho 

parama 

jitwara 

Om, 

namo 

bhagavateh 

Mahima 

Tawaiwa 

prabho 

parama 

jitwara 

Om, 

namo 

bhagavateh 

Mahima 

Tawaiwa 

prabho 

parama 

jitwara 

Om 

Tat 

Sat 

Om 

Sat 

Chittapas 

Ananda 

Om 

namo 

bhagavateh 

Om 

mon 

doux 

Seigneur 

OM, 

mon  Bien-Aime 

*  *  * 


(translation) 

OM 

Om, 

Supreme  Lord, 

God 

of  kindness 

and 

mercy, 

Om, 

Supreme  Lord, 

God 

of  love 

and  compassion, 

Om, 

Supreme  Lord, 

take 

possession  of  these 

cells, 

Om, 

Supreme  Lord, 

take 

possession  of  this 

brain, 

Om, 

Supreme  Lord, 

take 

possession  of 

these 

nerves, 

Om, 

Supreme  Lord, 

take 

possession  of  this 

mind, 

Om, 

Supreme  Lord, 

take 

possession  of 

this 

speech, 

Om, 

Supreme  Lord, 

take 

possession  of  this 

action, 

Om, 

Supreme  Lord, 

take 

possession  of  this 

body, 

Om, 

Supreme  Lord, 

take 

possession  of  this 

heart, 

Om, 

Supreme  Lord, 

take 

possession  of  this 

matter, 

Om, 

Supreme  Lord, 

take 

possession  of 

these 

atoms, 

Om, 

Supreme  Lord, 

take 

possession  of 

the  subconscient, 

Om,  Supreme  Lord,  take  possession  of  the  inconscient. 

Om  namo  bhagavateh 

Om, 

Supreme  Lord,  God  of  kindness  and  mercy 

Om, 

Supreme  Lord, 

God  of  love  and 

felicity 

Om, 

Supreme 

Lord, 

manifest 

Your 

Will 

Om, 

Supreme 

Lord, 

manifest 

Your 

Truth 

Om, 

Supreme 

Lord, 

manifest 

Your 

Purity 

Om, 

Supreme 

Lord, 

manifest 

Your 

Perfection 

Om, 

Supreme 

Lord, 

manifest 

Your 

Oneness 

Om, 

Supreme 

Lord, 

manifest 

Your 

Eternity 

Om, 

Supreme 

Lord, 

manifest 

Your 

Infinity 

Om, 

Supreme 

Lord, 

manifest 

Your 

Immortality 

Om, 

Supreme 

Lord, 

manifest 

Your 

Silence 

Om, 

Supreme 

Lord, 

manifest 

Your 

Peace 

Om, 

Supreme 

Lord, 

manifest 

Your 

Existence 

Om, 

Supreme 

Lord, 

manifest 

Your 

Consciousness 

Om, 

Supreme 

Lord, 

manifest 

Your 

Omnipotence 

Om, 

Supreme 

Lord, 

manifest 

Your 

Felicity 

Om, 

Supreme 

Lord, 

manifest 

Your 

Knowledge 

Om, 

Supreme 

Lord, 

manifest 

Your 

Omniscience 

Om, 

Supreme 

Lord, 

manifest 

Your 

Wisdom 

Om, 

Supreme 

Lord, 

manifest 

Your 

Equality 

Om, 

Supreme 

Lord, 

manifest 

Your 

Intensity 

Om, 

Supreme 

Lord, 

manifest 

Your 

Light 

Om, 

Supreme 

Lord, 

manifest 

Your 

Harmony 

Om, 

Supreme 

Lord, 

manifest  Your  Compassion 

Om, 

Supreme 

Lord, 

manifest 

Your 

Beauty 

Om, 

Supreme 

Lord, 

manifest 

Your 

Love 

Om,  Supreme  Lord,  win  Your  Victory. 

Glory 

to 

You, 

Lord 

supreme 

conqueror 

Glory 

to 

You, 

Lord 

supreme 

conqueror 

Glory 

to 

You, 

Lord 

supreme 

conqueror 

Glory 

to 

You, 

Lord 

supreme 

conqueror 

Glory 

to 

You, 

Lord 

supreme 

conqueror 

Glory 

to 

You, 

Lord 

supreme 

conqueror 

Glory 

to 

You, 

Lord 

supreme 

conqueror 

Glory 

to 

You, 

Lord 

supreme 

conqueror 

Glory 

to 

You, 

Lord 

supreme 

conqueror 

Glory 

to 

You, 

Lord 

supreme 

conqueror 

Glory 

to 

You, 

Lord 

supreme 

conqueror 

Glory  to  You,  Lord  supreme  conqueror 


Mahima  Tawaiwa  prabho  parama  jitwara 164 


Mahima 

Tawaiwa 

prabho 

parama 

jitwara 

Mahima 

Tawaiwa 

prabho 

parama 

jitwara 

Mahima 

Tawaiwa 

prabho 

parama 

jitwara 

Mahima 

Om, 

Tawaiwa 

prabho 

namo 

parama 
bhagavateh 165 

jitwara 

Mahima 

Om, 

Tawaiwa 

prabho 

namo 

parama 

jitwara 

bhagavateh 

Mahima 

Om, 

Tawaiwa 

prabho 

namo 

parama 

jitwara 

bhagavateh 

Mahima 

Om, 

Tawaiwa 

prabho 

namo 

parama 

jitwara 

bhagavateh 

Mahima 

Om, 

Tawaiwa 

prabho 

namo 

parama 

jitwara 

bhagavateh 

Mahima 

Om, 

Tawaiwa 

prabho 

namo 

parama 

jitwara 

bhagavateh 

Mahima 

Om, 

Tawaiwa 

prabho 

namo 

parama 

jitwara 

bhagavateh 

Mahima 

Om, 

Tawaiwa 

prabho 

namo 

parama 

jitwara 

bhagavateh 

Mahima 

Om, 

Tawaiwa 

prabho 

namo 

parama 

jitwara 

bhagavateh 

164Glory  to  You,  Lord  supreme  conqueror.  These  lines  were  written  by  Mother  in  Sanskrit. 


1650m,  1  salute  the  Supreme  Lord. 


Mahima 

Tawaiwa 

prabho 

parama 

jitw’ara 

Om, 

namo 

bhagavateh 

Mahima 

Tawaiwa 

prabho 

parama 

jitw’ara 

Om, 

namo 

bhagavateh 

Mahima 

Tawaiwa 

prabho 

parama 

jitw’ara 

Om, 

namo 

bhagavateh 

Mahima 

Tawaiwa 

prabho 

parama  jitwara 

Om 

Tat 

Sat 

Om 

Sat 

Chittapas 

Ananda166 

Om 

namo 

bhagavateh 

Om 

my 

sweet 

Lord 

OM,  my 

Beloved 

166The  supreme  principles  of  Being:  Tat  (the  Absolute,  That),  Sat  (Existence),  Chit  (Consciousness),  Tapas  (Energy), 
Ananda  (Bliss). 


January  28, 1960 


All  these  repetitions  of  the  man  tra,  these  hours  of  japa  I  have  to  do  every  day,  seem  to  have 

increased  the  difficulties,  as  if  they  were  raising  up  or  aggravating  all  the  resistances. 

To  the  most  stubborn  goes  the  victory. 

When  I  started  my  japa  one  year  ago,  I  had  to  struggle  with  every  possible  difficulty,  every 
contradiction,  prejudice  and  opposition  that  fills  the  air.  And  even  when  this  poor  body  began 
walking  back  and  forth  for  japa,  it  used  to  knock  against  things,  it  would  start  breathing  all  wrong, 
coughing;  it  was  attacked  from  all  sides  until  the  day  I  caught  the  Enemy  and  said,’  Listen  carefully. 
You  can  do  whatever  you  want,  but  I’m  going  right  to  the  end  and  nothing  will  stop  me,  even  if  I 
have  to  repeat  this  mantra  ten  crore167  times.’  The  result  was  really  miraculous,  like  a  cloud  of  bats 
flying  up  into  the  light  all  at  once.  From  that  moment  on,  things  started  going  better. 

You  have  no  idea  what  an  irresistible  effect  a  well-determined  will  can  have. 

Some  difficulties  remained,  of  course,  but  they  stemmed  more  from  what  had  to  change  within. 

Actually,  difficulties  come  from  very  small  things;  they  may  seem  quite  commonplace,  totally 
uninteresting,  but  they  block  the  way.  They  come  for  no  earthly  reason  -  some  detail,  a  word  that 
comes  rubbing  against  a  sensitive  spot,  an  illness  in  someone  close  to  me,  anything  at  all,  and 
suddenly  something  in  me  contracts.  Then  all  the  work  has  to  be  started  afresh  as  though  nothing 
had  been  done. 

Of  all  forms  of  ego,  you  might  think  that  the  physical  ego  is  the  most  difficult  to  conquer  (or 
rather,  the  body  ego,  because  the  work  was  already  done  long  ago  on  the  physical  ego).  It  might  be 
thought  that  the  form  of  the  body  is  a  point  of  concentration,  and  that  without  this  concentration  or 
hardness,  physical  life  would  not  be  possible.  But  that’s  not  true.  The  body  is  really  a  wonderful 
instrument;  it’s  capable  of  widening  and  of  becoming  vast  in  such  a  way  that  everything,  everything 
-  the  slightest  gesture,  the  least  little  task  -  is  done  in  a  wonderful  hannony  and  with  a  remarkable 
plasticity.  Then  all  of  a  sudden,  for  something  quite  stupid,  a  draft,  a  mere  nothing,  it  forgets  -  it 
shrinks  back  into  itself,  it  gets  afraid  of  disappearing,  afraid  of  not  being.  And  everything  has  to  be 
started  again  from  scratch.  So  in  the  yoga  of  matter  you  start  realizing  how  much  endurance  is 
needed.  I  calculated  it  would  take  200  years  to  say  ten  crore  of  my  japa.  Well,  I’m  ready  to  struggle 
200  years  if  necessary,  but  the  work  will  be  done. 

Sri  Aurobindo  had  made  it  clear  to  me  when  I  was  still  in  France  that  this  yoga  in  matter  is  the 
most  difficult  of  all.  For  the  other  yogas,  the  paths  have  been  well  laid,  you  know  where  to  tread, 
how  to  proceed,  what  to  do  in  such-and-such  a  case.  But  for  the  yoga  of  matter,  nothing  has  ever 
been  done,  never,  so  at  each  moment  everything  has  to  be  invented. 

Of  course,  things  are  now  going  better,  especially  since  Sri  Aurobindo  became  established  in  the 
subtle  physical,  an  almost  material  subtle  physical.168  But  there  are  still  plenty  of  question  marks  ... 
The  body  understands  once,  and  then  it  forgets.  The  Enemy’s  opposition  is  nothing,  for  I  can  see 
clearly  that  it  comes  from  outside  and  that  it’s  hostile,  so  I  do  what’s  necessary.  But  where  the 
difficulty  lies  is  in  all  the  small  things  of  daily  material  life  -  suddenly  the  body  no  longer 
understands,  it  forgets. 

Yet  it’s  HAPPY.  It  loves  doing  the  work,  it  lives  only  for  that  -  to  change,  to  transform  itself  is 
its  reason  for  being.  And  it’s  such  a  docile  instrument,  so  full  of  good  will!  Once  it  even  started 
wailing  like  a  baby:  ‘O  Lord,  give  me  the  time,  the  time  to  be  transfonned  ...’  It  has  such  a  simple 

1670ne  crore  =10  million. 


168Experience  of  July  24-25,  1959,  ‘Sri  Aurobindo’s  abode.’ 


fervor  for  the  work,  but  it  needs  time  -  time,  that’s  it.  It  wants  to  live  only  to  conquer,  to  win  the 
Lord’s  Victory.169 


January  31, 1960 


(Letter  from  Mother  to  the  disciple  concerning  her  former  commentaries  on  the  ‘Dhammapada  ’  at 

the  Playground) 

...  When  I  began  the  readings  from  the  Dhammapada,  I  had  hoped  that  my  listeners  would  take 
enough  interest  in  the  ‘practical’  spiritual  side  for  me  to  read  only  one  verse  at  a  time.  But  quite 
quickly,  I  saw  they  found  this  very  boring  and  were  making  no  effort  to  benefit  from  the  meditation. 
The  only  solution  then  was  to  treat  the  matter  as  an  intellectual  study,  which  is  why  I  started  reading 
chapter  by  chapter. 


March  3, 1960 

Experiences  are  coming  at  a  furious  pace  -  fabulous  experiences.  If  I  were  to  speak  now,  it’s  certain 
that  I  would  not  at  all  speak  as  I  used  to.  That’s  why  we  must  date  all  these  Questions  and  Answers, 
at  least  all  which  come  before  the  [Supramental]  Manifestation  of  February  1956,  so  that  there  will 
be  a  clear  cut  between  those  before  and  those  after. 

Only  a  few  days  ago,  on  the  morning  of  the  29th,  I  had  one  of  those  experiences  that  mark  one’s 
life.  It  happened  upstairs  in  my  room.  I  was  doing  my  japa,  walking  up  and  down  with  my  eyes 
wide  open,  when  suddenly  Krishna  came  -  a  gold  Krishna,  all  golden,  in  a  golden  light  that  filled 
the  whole  room.  I  was  walking,  but  I  could  not  even  see  the  windows  or  the  rug  any  longer,  for  this 
golden  light  was  everywhere  with  Krishna  at  its  center.  And  it  must  have  lasted  at  least  fifteen 
minutes.  He  was  dressed  in  those  same  clothes  in  which  he  is  normally  portrayed  when  he  dances. 


169 As  a  matter  of  fact,  Mother  had  ended  upon  this  sentence:  ‘It  wants  to  live  only  to  conquer.’  Then  the  next  day, 
Mother  sent  the  following  note  to  the  disciple:  ‘Friday,  1.29.60  -  yesterday,  when  I  left  you,  the  experience  was  there, 
but  in  my  hurry  to  leave,  the  words  did  not  come  correctly,  or  rather  they  were  incomplete  (I  had  said,  ‘to  live  only  to 
conquer’).  What  my  body  was  experiencing  was,  ‘Live  to  win  the  Lord’s  Victory.’ 


He  was  all  light,  all  dancing:  ‘You  see,  I  will  be  there  this  evening  during  the  Darshan. 170  ’  And 
suddenly,  the  chair  I  use  for  darshan  came  into  the  room!  Krishna  climbed  up  onto  it,  and  his  eyes 
twinkled  mischievously,  as  if  to  say,  ‘I  will  be  there,  you  see,  and  there’ll  be  no  room  for  you.’ 

When  I  came  down  that  evening  for  distribution,171  at  first  I  was  annoyed.  I  had  said  that  I  didn’t 
want  anybody  in  the  hah,  precisely  because  I  wanted  to  establish  an  atmosphere  of  concentration, 
the  immobility  of  the  Spirit  -  but  there  were  at  least  thirty  people  in  there,  those  who  had  decorated 
the  hall,  thirty  of  them  stirring,  stirring  about,  a  mass  of  little  vibrations.  And  before  I  could  even 
say  ‘scat’  -  I  had  hardly  taken  my  seat  -  someone  put  the  tray  of  medals  on  my  lap  and  they  started 
filing  past. 

But  what  is  surprising  is  that  in  a  flash,  no  one  was  there  any  longer.  No  one,  you  understand  -  I 
was  gone.  Perhaps  I  was  everywhere  (but  in  fact  I  am  always  everywhere,  I  am  always  conscious  of 
being  everywhere  at  the  same  time),  though  normally  there  is  the  sense  of  the  body,  a  physical 
center,  but  that  evening  there  was  no  more  center!  Nothing,  no  one,  not  even  the  sense  that  there 
was  no  one  -  nothing.  I  was  gone.  There  was  indeed  something  handing  out  the  medals  which  felt 
the  joy  of  giving  the  medal,  the  joy  of  receiving  it,  the  joy  of  mutually  looking  at  each  other.  It  was 
simply  the  joy  of  the  action  taking  place,  the  joy  of  looking,  this  joy  everywhere,  but  me?  - 
Nothing,  no  one,  gone.  Only  later,  afterwards,  did  I  see  what  had  happened,  for  everything  had 
disappeared,  even  the  higher  mind  that  understands  and  organizes  things  (by  ‘understand’  I  mean 
contain,  which  ‘contains’  things).  That  also  was  gone.  And  this  lasted  the  entire  distribution.  Only 
when  that  [the  body]  had  gone  back  upstairs  to  the  room  did  the  consciousness  of  what  is  me  return. 

There  is  a  line  by  Sri  Aurobindo  in  Savitri  which  expresses  this  very  well:  to  annul  oneself  so 
that  only  the  Supreme  Lord  may  be. 

And  there  are  many,  many  experiences  like  this.  It  is  only  a  small,  a  very  small  beginning.  This 
one  in  particular  came  to  mark  the  new  stage:  four  years  have  elapsed,  and  now  four  years  to  come. 
Because  everything  has  focused  on  this  body  to  prepare  it,  everything  has  concentrated  on  it  - 
Nature,  the  Master  of  the  Yoga,  the  Supreme,  everything  ...  So  only  when  it’s  over,  not  before,  will 
it  really  be  interesting  to  speak  of  all  this.  But  maybe  it  will  never  be  over,  after  ah.  It’s  a  small 
beginning,  very  small. 


March  7, 1960 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Pondicherry,  March  7,  I960 


170The  Darshan  on  February  29,  1960,  the  first  anniversary  of  the  Supramental  Manifestation. 


1710n  this  first  anniversary  of  the  Supramental  Manifestation,  Mother  distributed  medals  commemorating  the  occasion 
to  the  disciples  filing  past. 


Mother, 

Here  is  the  letter  from  the  publisher.  All  comes  from  you,  all  is  yours. 

May  I  always  serve  you. 

With  love. 

Your  child, 
Signed:  Satprem 


EDITIONS  DU  SEUIL 


Paris,  March  1,  I960 


Dear  Satprem, 

Publisher  and  friend  are  here  one  in  telling  you  that  L  ’Orpailleur  is  a  beautiful  book  whose 
richness  and  force  have  struck  me  even  more  this  time  than  before  when  I  read  the  first  version.  I 
cannot  tell  you  how  much  your  Job  is  my  brother  -  in  his  darkness  as  in  his  light.  The  joy,  the  wild, 
irrepressible  joy  that  furtively  yearns  and  at  times  bursts  forth,  embracing  all,  this  joy  at  the  heart  of 
the  book  bums  the  reader  -  for  a  few,  in  any  case,  who  are  prepared  to  be  inflamed.  In  the  end,  I 
can’t  say  if  L  ’Orpailleur  will  or  will  not  be  noticed,  if  the  critics  will  or  will  not  bestow  an  article,  a 
comment,  an  echo  upon  it,  if  bookstores  will  or  will  not  ‘sell’  it  (poor  orpailleur!).  But  what  I  know 
is  that  for  a  few  readers  -  2,  3,  10  perhaps  -  your  book  will  be  the  cry  that  will  rip  them  from  their 
sleep  forever.  To  your  song,  another  song  in  themselves  will  respond.  Where,  how  shall  this  concert 
finish?  Who  knows  -  anything  is  possible! 

My  words  are  a  bit  disjointed  -  but  I’m  not  in  the  mood  to  give  an  articulate  discourse.  Which  is 
a  way  of  saying,  once  again,  how  happy  I  am  -  and  grateful. 

With  my  warmest  regards, 

Signed:  M.C. 


April  7, 1960 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Hyderabad,  April  7,  I960 


Sweet  Mother, 

A  few  lines  to  tell  you  that  I  miss  you.  I  truly  realize  more  and  more  that  I  shall  never  be  happy 
until  I  have  disappeared  in  you  entirely.  There  must  be  nothing  left  but  That.  I  understand  well 
enough,  but  I’m  so  blocked,  so  thick.  In  any  case,  I  ‘think’  of  you  a  lot  and  I  really  only  live  by  this 
something  that  pulls  me  deep  within.  If  that  were  not  there,  it  would  all  be  so  absurd. 


I’ve  booked  my  ticket  to  Rameswaram  for  the  evening  of  the  13th,  so  I  will  probably  reach  there 
on  the  15th. 

I  brought  some  work  with  me  (revision  of  The  Human  Cycle),  and  that  helps  me  to  live.  I  still 
don’t  clearly  see  the  meaning  of  this  trip.  Just  before  I  left,  I  received  word  from  the  publisher  in 
Paris  that  ‘my’  book  will  come  out  in  September. 

There  are  moments  when  I  feel  you  so  close  to  me  -  could  you  not  help  me  be  more  conscious 
of  your  presence  (not  as  an  impersonal  force,  but  you)? 

I  love  you,  sweet  Mother.  You  are  truly  my  Mother,  and  I  need  you  so  much. 

With  all  my  love,  I  am  at  your  feet. 

Signed:  Satprem 

Things  are  better  physically.  But  it’s  always  a  terrible  physical  shock  for  me  to  take  the  train. 

(Mother’s  reply) 


4.12.60 


My  dear  little  one, 

Your  good  letter  of  the  7th  has  arrived. 

This  inner  fusion  you  speak  of  as  a  truth  to  be  realized  is  already  accomplished,  absolutely 
perceptible  to  me.  For  long  I  have  felt  you  as  an  integral  part  of  my  being;  it  seems  to  me  that  only 
some  surface  eddies  prevent  you  also  from  feeling  and  living  it. 

But  I  am  convinced  it  will  come.  Meanwhile,  I  am  trying  to  make  you  feel  my  presence  not  as 
an  ‘impersonal  force’  but  as  a  real  and  concrete  presence,  and  I  am  happy  to  have  succeeded  in  part. 


Send  me  news  of  yourself,  for  I  am  always  happy  to  hear  from  you. 

I  am  with  you,  in  love  and  joy. 

Signed:  Mother 

As  regards  L  ’Orpailleur,  it’s  good.  I  keep  feeling  that  everything  is  going  to  turn  out  well. 


April  13, 1960 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Hyderabad,  April  13,  1960 


Sweet  Mother, 


My  friend  here  gave  me  the  book  Templier  et  Alchimiste  [Templar  and  Alchemist]  to  read;  it’s 
published  by  the  group  he  is  going  to  join  in  France.  They  too  speak  of  the  transmutation  of  matter 
and  proclaim  the  end  of  ‘homo  sapiens’  and  the  birth  of  the  superman. 

I  long  to  be  with  you  and  work  on  the  book  on  Sri  Aurobindo  -  I  want  to  put  all  my  soul  into  it 
and,  with  your  grace,  create  something  inflaming. 

Sweet  Mother,  I  am  your  child.  I  want  to  belong  to  you  more  and  more  completely. 

With  love. 

Signed:  Satprem 


(Mother’s  reply) 


4.18.60 


My  dear  little  one, 

I  received  your  letter  of  April  13  only  yesterday.  Letters  from  Hyderabad  are  taking  long  to 
come. 

You  spoke  of  the  book  on  Sri  Aurobindo;  I  too  am  happy  that  we  shall  do  this  work  together. 

Yesterday  was  distribution.  I  am  putting  six  handkerchiefs  in  this  envelope  for  you  and  to  give 
to  others  if  you  wish.  I  am  also  enclosing  the  April  24  message. 

Always  with  you,  in  love  and  joy. 

Signed:  Mother 


April  14, 1960 


(Letter  to  Pavitra  from  Satprem) 


Hyderabad,  April  14,  1960 


Dear  Pavitra, 

The  following  passage,  taken  from  the  Revue  des  Deux  Mondes  of  March  1960,  was  part  of  a 
course  taught  by  Dimitri  Manowilski  in  1931  at  the  Lenin  School  of  Political  Warfare  in  Moscow: 

‘Our  turn  will  come  in  twenty  to  thirty  years.  To  win,  we  need  an  element  of  surprise.  The 
bourgeoisie  should  be  lulled  to  sleep.  Therefore,  we  must  first  launch  the  most  spectacular  peace 
movement  that  has  ever  existed,  replete  with  inspiring  proposals  and  extraordinary  concessions.  The 
stupid  and  decadent  capitalist  countries  will  cooperate  joyfully  in  their  own  destruction.  They  will 
jump  at  this  new  opportunity  for  friendship.  As  soon  as  their  guard  is  down,  we  shall  crush  them 
beneath  our  closed  fist.’  (Quoted  in  the  Revue  Militaire  d’ Information,  December  1959.) 


What  does  Mother  think  of  this? 

Fraternally, 

Signed:  Satprem 


(Pavitra ’s  reply) 


4.16.60 


Satprem, 

I  read  Mother  the  extract  from  the  Revue  des  Deux  Mondes.  This  was  her  comment: 

‘It  is  quite  possible  that  this  is  their  original  intention,  I  am  aware  of  it.  But  they  are  wrong  if 
they  think  it  will  turn  out  like  that ...  We  shall  see!  ’ 

Love, 

Signed:  Pavitra 


April  20, 1960 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Rameswaram,  April  20,  1960 


Sweet  Mother, 


I  was  pained  and  shocked  upon  reaching  X’s  place  to  see  him  in  such  a  horrible  house  -  a  train 
station  in  miniature  (and  not  as  nice)  with  little  pastries  in  garish  yellow  cement.  Cement 
everywhere  -  they  even  cemented  the  patio  and  uprooted  the  beautiful  tree  that  was  there.  O 
Mother,  it’s  vandalism,  it’s  barbaric!  You  cannot  imagine!  Really,  M  has  committed  a  terrible  sin. 

To  compensate  for  that,  however,  I  had  the  joy  of  finding  your  two  letters.  Yes,  for  some  time  I 
have  been  feeling  your  physical  Presence  more  clearly.  But  then,  why  am  I  so  blocked,  where  is  the 
flaw?  It  constantly  feels  as  though  I  am  living  at  the  outskirts  of  myself,  or  more  precisely  in  a 
miniscule  region  of  myself,  and  I’m  unable  to  be  conscious  of  the  rest  -  a  perpetual  amnesic.  It  is 
unpleasant  and  quite  stupid.  What  is  it  that  will  explode  this  shell? 

I  am  anxious  to  return  to  you. 

Your  child,  full  of  gratitude  and  love. 


Signed:  Satprem 


April  24, 1960 


(Letter  from  Mother  to  Satprem) 

...  It  is  to  make  you  understand  that  whenever  you  are  ill,  something  is  ill  in  your  being. 


April  26, 1960 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Rameswaram,  April  26,  I960 


Sweet  Mother, 

There  are  days  when  everything  is  so  simple,  when  I  see  and  feel  that  all  one  needs  is  to  let 
oneself  be  carried  -  and  everything  is  light.  I  have  really  to  be  done  with  this  ‘me’. 

It  will  be  a  joy  to  be  with  you  again  and  resume  the  work.  Here,  I  am  sparing  as  many  hours  as  I 
can  to  correcting  The  Human  Cycle  ...  I  follow  X  perfectly  in  his  inner  life,  unreservedly,  but  I  have 
to  force  myself  to  follow  him  in  his  outer  life. 

Mother,  I  am  at  your  feet,  with  my  love  and  my  gratitude. 

Your  child, 
Signed:  Satprem 


May  6,  1960 


At  times  I  sense  there’s  an  extraordinary  secret  to  discover,  just  there  at  my  finger  tips;  I  feel  that  I 
am  going  to  catch  the  Thing,  to  know  ... 

Sometimes,  for  a  second,  I  see  the  Secret;  there  is  an  opening,  and  again  it  closes.  Then  once 
again  it  is  unveiled  for  a  second  and  I  come  to  know  a  little  more.  Yesterday  the  Secret  was  there 
completely  clear,  wide  open.  But  it’s  not  something  that  can  be  explained:  words  are  silly,  it  must 
be  experienced. 

Sri  Aurobindo  speaks  of  this  Secret  almost  everywhere,  especially  in  his  Essays  on  the  Gita.  He 
tells  us  that  in  the  Gita  itself  one  gets  glimpses  of  this  thing  which  is  beyond  the  Impersonal, 
beyond  even  the  Personal  behind  the  Impersonal,  beyond  the  Transcendent. 

Well,  I  saw  this  Secret  -  I  saw  that  the  Supreme  only  becomes  perfect  in  terrestrial  matter,  on 
earth. 

‘Becomes’  is  just  a  way  of  speaking,  of  course,  for  everything  already  is,  and  the  Supreme  is 
what  He  is.  But  we  live  in  time,  in  a  successive  unfoldment,  and  it  would  be  absurd  to  say  that  at 
present  Matter  is  the  expression  of  a  perfect  Divine. 

I  saw  this  Secret  (which  is  getting  more  and  more  perceptible  as  the  Supramental  becomes 
clear),  I  saw  it  in  the  everyday,  outer  life,  precisely  in  this  very  physical  life  which  all  spirituality 
rejects  ...  a  kind  of  accuracy  or  exactitude  right  down  to  the  atom. 

I  am  not  saying  that  the  ‘Divine’  becomes  perfect  in  Matter  -  the  Divine  is  already  there  -  but 
that  THE  SUPREME  becomes  perfect  in  Matter. 


May  16,  1960 

If  there  is  one  fundamental  necessity,  it  is  humility.  To  be  humble.  Not  humble  as  it  is  normally 
understood,  such  as  merely  saying,  ‘I  am  so  small,  I’m  nothing  at  all’  -  no,  something  else  ... 
Because  the  pitfalls  are  innumerable,  and  the  further  you  progress  in  yoga,  the  more  subtle  they 
become,  and  the  more  the  ego  masks  itself  behind  marvelous  and  saintly  appearances.  So  when 
somebody  says,  ‘I  no  longer  want  to  rely  on  anything  but  Him.  I  want  to  close  my  eyes  and  rest  in 
Him  alone,’  this  comfortable  ‘Him,’  which  is  exactly  what  you  want  him  to  be,  is  the  ego  -  or  a 
fonnidable  Asura,  or  a  Titan  (depending  on  each  one’s  capacity).  They’re  all  over  the  earth,  the 
earth  is  their  domain.  So  the  first  thing  to  do  is  to  pocket  your  ego  -  not  preserve  it,  but  get  rid  of  it 
as  soon  as  possible! 

You  can  be  sure  that  the  God  you’ve  created  is  a  God  of  the  ego  whenever  something  within 
you  insists,  ‘This  is  what  I  feel,  this  is  what  I  think,  this  is  what  I  see;  it’s  my  way,  my  very  own  - 
it’s  my  way  of  being,  my  way  of  understanding,  my  relationship  with  the  Divine,  etc.’ 


And  then  they  say,  ‘I  want  to  close  my  eyes  and  see  nothing  but  Him  I  want  nothing  more  of  the 
outer  world.’  And  they  forget  there’s  Love!  That  is  the  great  Secret,  that  which  is  behind  the 
Existent  and  the  Non-Existent,  the  Personal  and  the  Impersonal  -  Love.  Not  a  love  between  two 
things,  two  beings  ...  A  love  containing  everything. 

In  the  early  part  of  the  century,  I  wrote  Prayers  and  Meditations,  and  I  too  spoke  of  ‘Him’;  but  I 
wrote  that  with  all  my  aspiration,  all  my  sincerity  (at  least  with  all  the  sincerity  of  the  conscious 
parts  of  my  being)  and  I  locked  it  up  in  a  drawer  so  that  no  one  would  see  it.  It  was  Sri  Aurobindo 
who  later  asked  me  to  publish  it,  for  it  could  be  useful  ...  If  I  knew  then,  fifty  years  ago,  what  I 
know  now,  I  would  have  been  crushed!  ...  All  this  ‘shame,’  all  this  ‘unworthiness’  ... 

After  all,  it’s  good  to  know  gradually,  good  to  have  some  illusions  -  not  for  the  sake  of  illusions 
but  as  a  necessary  step  along  the  way. 

Everything  comes  at  the  right  moment. 

And  what  is  wonderful  is  that  at  each  moment  the  Grace,  the  Joy,  the  Light,  the  Love  never 
cease  pouring  down  in  the  very  midst  of  all  this  -  despite  the  ego,  despite  the  shame,  despite  the 
unworthiness.  To  be  humble  ... 


*  *  * 


(soon  afterwards) 

I  was  sick  two  days  ago  with  a  cold  and  fever.  I  know  why  -  a  point  to  be  transfonned.  The  body 
may  have  put  too  much  zeal  into  it,  so  it  teetered  a  little.  But  thanks  to  that,  I  had  an  interesting 
experience.  X172  had  put  his  force  on  me  to  speed  up  the  healing.  And  of  course,  according  to  each 
one’s  nature,  the  force  gets  colored,  so  to  speak  -  it  clothes  itself  in  a  different  color.  In  me,  this  was 
translated  by  a  new  physical  experience  which  lasted  from  4  in  the  morning  till  6:30,  when  I  had  to 
start  speaking  with  people  and  deal  with  outer  things.  It  was  a  kind  of  eternity,  a  kind  of  absolute 
PHYSICAL  immobility  which  contained  no  possibility  of  illness  within  it  -  as  a  matter  of  fact, 
nothing  remained  in  this  immobility,  it  was  a  sort  of  nirvana.  But  it  did  not  keep  me  from  going 
through  all  my  usual  motions  of  getting  dressed. 

I  spent  the  whole  day  yesterday  trying  to  understand  this  experience. 

And  in  that  kind  of  physical  eternity  (which  lasted  two  and  a  half  hours  -  it’s  a  long  time  for  an 
experience),  I  was  aware  of  something  missing,  something  not  there:  the  joy  of  the  consciousness. 
Because  throughout  my  life  I  have  developed  the  habit  of  being  conscious  of  everything,  always,  at 
each  second.  And  the  joy  of  the  consciousness  was  not  there.  So  I  thanked  the  Grace  that  made  me 
see  that  this  kind  of  nirvana  was  quite  simply  physical  tamas.173 

(silence) 

X  has  the  power  of  rendering  things  very  material  -  that’s  his  great  power,  which  is  why  things 
get  upset  when  he  comes  here.  Overnight,  someone  progressing  well  comes  to  grips  with 
difficulties;  money  on  the  way  stops  coming;  you  fall  sick,  things  break  down  -  all  because  he  has 
the  power  to  give  materiality  to  things  from  above.  For,  you  see,  you  can  go  right  to  the  height  of 
your  consciousness  and  from  there  sweep  away  the  difficulties  (at  a  certain  moment  of  the  sadhana, 
difficulties  truly  don’t  exist,  it’s  only  a  matter  of  nabbing  the  undesirable  vibration  and  it’s  over,  it’s 
reduced  to  dust).  And  everything  is  fine  up  above,  but  down  below  it’s  swarming.  When  X  comes, 
it’s  precisely  all  this  swarming  that  becomes  tangible. 

The  mastery  must  be  a  TRUE  mastery,  a  very  humble  and  austere  mastery  which  starts  from  the 
1 72The  tantric  guru. 


USTamas:  inertia.  Later,  Mother  would  discover  that  this  is  not  tamas  but  something  else. 


very  bottom  and,  step  by  step,  establishes  control.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  it  is  a  battle  against  small, 
really  tiny  things:  habits  of  being,  ways  of  thinking,  feeling  and  reacting. 

When  this  mastery  at  the  very  bottom  combines  with  the  consciousness  at  the  very  top,  then  you 
can  really  begin  doing  some  work  -  not  only  work  on  yourself  but  also  the  work  for  all. 


May  21,  1960 

What  I  call  purity,  the  true  purity,  is  not  ah  those  things  morality  teaches:  it  is  non-ego. 

There  must  be  nothing  but  Him. 

Him,  not  only  because  we  have  given  Him  everything  and  consecrated  ourselves  totally  to  Him 
(that  is  not  enough),  but  Him  because  He  has  taken  total  possession  of  the  human  instrument. 

At  times,  I  feel  that  I’ll  never  get  over  the  difficulty.  We  are  besieged  by  this  enormous  world  of 
hostile  forces  -  oceans  of  forces,  churning  and  combining  and  submerging  each  other  in  gigantic 
pralayas,174  then  again  regrouping  and  combining.  When  you  see  that,  it  feels  as  if  you  had  to  be  the 
Divine  Himself  to  get  over  the  difficulty.  Precisely  so!  (And  it’s  the  hostile  forces  who  help  you  to 
see  this,  it’s  their  role.)  You  have  TO  BE  THE  DIVINE,  that  is  the  solution,  that  is  the  true  divine 
purity. 


*  *  * 

When  X  is  here,  I  get  the  impression  that  things  are  going  backwards  instead  of  forwards.  But  once 
he’s  left,  I  suddenly  leap  ahead.  And  then  I  perceive  that  the  progress  is  a  real  progress,  that  things 
won  have  really  been  won  and  they  don’t  come  undone  again.  That  is  X’s  true  power,  a  very 
material  power.  For  I  often  feel  that  things  could  come  into  being,  they  could  be  realized  in  the 
consciousness  above  (and  the  vision  is  there,  the  Power  is  there,  I  have  it  -  the  invisible  power  over 
the  earth).  But  when  you  come  down  to  the  material  plane,  everything  is  uncertain.  Whereas  with  X, 
once  things  have  come  down,  they  no  longer  dissipate.  This  is  certainly  why  the  Supreme  put  him 
on  my  path. 

For  example,  there  was  one  difficulty  he  helped  me  resolve.  I  have  always  been  literally 
pestered,  constantly,  night  and  day,  by  ah  kinds  of  thoughts  coming  from  people  -  all  kinds  of  calls, 
questions,  formations175  that  have  naturally  to  be  answered.  For  I  have  trained  myself  to  be 
conscious  of  everything,  always.  But  it  disturbed  me  in  the  work,  particularly  when  I  needed 
absolute  concentration  -  and  I  could  never  cut  myself  off  from  people  or  cut  myself  off  from  the 
world.  I  had  to  answer  ah  these  calls  and  these  questions,  I  had  to  send  the  necessary  force,  the 

1  lAPmlaya:  apocalypse,  end  of  a  world. 


175Formations,  in  occult  language,  refer  to  all  the  psychological  movements  and  impulses,  conscious  or  unconscious, 
constantly  emanating  from  the  disciples  and  others,  and  which  leave  an  imprint  in  the  subtle  atmosphere  or  a  wandering 
entity  seeking  to  fulfill  itself. 


necessary  light,  the  healing  power,  I  constantly  had  to  purify  all  these  formations,  these  thoughts, 
these  wills,  these  false  movements  that  were  falling  on  me. 

What  was  needed  was  to  effect  a  shift,  a  sort  of  transference  upwards,  a  lifting  up  of  all  these 
things  that  come  to  me  -  so  that  each  one,  each  thing,  each  circumstance  could  directly  and 
automatically  receive  the  force  from  above,  the  light,  the  response  from  above,  and  I  would  be  a 
mere  intermediary  and  a  channel  of  the  Light  and  the  Force. 

Well,  I  tried  hard  but  I  couldn’t  really  find  the  way.  At  times,  I  almost  seemed  to  have  it,  a  mere 
nothing  would  have  been  enough;  it  was  just  a  matter  of  getting  the  knack  (and  at  heart,  this  is  what 
Power  is  all  about  -  to  get  the  knack,  to  suddenly  seize  upon  the  means,  the  right  vibration,  what  in 
India  is  called  siddhi).  Well,  after  his  departure,  all  of  a  sudden  it  came.  It  happened  while  I  was 
doing  my  japa,  while  I  was  walking  up  and  down  my  room  ...  As  if  I  were  holding  all  that  in  my 
arms  -  it  was  so  concrete  -  and  lifting  it  up  towards  the  Light,  along  with  this  ascending  OM,  rising 
from  the  very  depths,  OM!  -  and  I  was  carrying  all  these  people,  and  it  was  spreading  forth, 
PHYSICALLY  spreading,  and  I  was  carrying  the  earth,  I  was  carrying  the  whole  universe,  but  in 
such  a  tangible,  concrete  way  -  all  towards  the  Supreme  Lord. 

And  this  was  not  the  invisible  power:  it  was  concrete,  it  was  tangible,  it  was  MATERIAL. 


May  24,  1960 

It  happened  last  night.  For  approximately  three  hours,  the  physical  ego  disintegrated  for  the  first 
time  in  such  a  total  way. 

Nothing  remained  but  the  Force,  nothing  remained  but  Sat- Chit- Ananda, 176  and  not  only  in  the 
consciousness  but  in  the  physical  sensation  -  the  divine  Satchidananda  spreading  in  a  constant  flood 
throughout  the  universe. 

These  experiences  are  always  absolute,  as  long  as  they  last;  then,  through  certain  signs  that  I 
know  (I  am  accustomed  to  it),  I  notice  that  the  body  consciousness  begins  closing  up  again.  Or 
rather,  ‘something’  -  evidently  a  Supreme  Wisdom  -  decides  it’s  sufficient  for  this  time  and  that  the 
body  has  had  enough.  It  ought  not  to  break,  which  is  why  certain  precautions  are  taken.  So  this 
comes  in  several  little  stages  that  I  know  quite  well.  The  final  one  is  always  a  bit  unpleasant 
because  my  body  gets  into  rather  peculiar  positions  as  a  result  of  the  work.  As  it’s  only  a  sort  of 
machine,  towards  the  end  I  have  some  difficulty  straightening  my  knees,  for  example,  or  opening 
my  fingers  -  I  think  they  even  make  a  noise,  like  something  forced  into  one  position  whose  life  has 
become  purely  spontaneous  and  mechanical.  There  are  plenty  of  people  like  that,  plenty,  who  enter 
into  trance  and  then  can  no  longer  get  out  by  themselves;  they  get  themselves  into  a  certain  position 
and  someone  has  to  free  them.  This  has  never  happened  to  me;  I  have  always  managed  to  extricate 
myself.  But  yesterday  evening,  the  experience  lasted  a  very  long  time.  There  was  even  a  little 
cracking  at  the  end,  as  when  people  have  rheumatism. 

And  during  all  this  time,  approximately  three  hours,  the  consciousness  was  completely, 


\16Sat-Chit-Ananda:  the  three  Supreme  Principles,  Existence  (Sat),  Consciousness  (Chit),  and  Bliss  (Ananda). 


completely  different.  It  was  here,  however;  it  was  not  outside  the  earth,  it  was  on  earth,  but  it  was 
completely  different  -  even  the  body  consciousness  was  different.  And  what  remained  was  very 
mechanical;  it  was  a  body,  but  it  could  just  as  well  have  been  anything.  All  this  power  of 
consciousness  that  for  more  than  seventy  years  I’ve  gradually  pushed  into  each  of  the  body’s  cells 
so  that  each  cell  could  become  conscious  (and  it  goes  on  constantly,  constantly),  all  this  seemed  to 
have  withdrawn  -  there  only  remained  one  almost  lifeless  thing.  However,  I  could  raise  myself  up 
from  my  bed  and  even  drink  a  glass  of  water,  but  it  was  all  so  ...  bizarre.  And  when  I  went  back  to 
bed,  it  took  nearly  forty- five  minutes  for  the  body  to  regain  its  normal  state.  Only  after  I  had  entered 
into  another  type  of  samadhi 177  and  again  come  out  of  it  did  my  consciousness  fully  return.  It  is  the 
first  time  I  have  had  an  experience  of  this  kind. 

During  those  three  hours,  there  was  nothing  but  the  Supreme  manifesting  through  the  eternal 
Mother. 

But  there  was  no  consciousness  of  being  Mother,  neither  eternal  nor  whatever:  it  was  a 
continuous  and  all-powerful  flood,  and  so  extraordinarily  varied,  of  the  Lord  manifesting  Himself. 

It  was  as  vast  as  the  universe,  a  continuous  movement  -  the  movement  of  manifestation  of 
something  which  was  EVERYTHING  at  once,  a  single  whole.  There  was  no  division.  And  such  a 
variety  of  colors,  vibrations,  powers  -  extraordinary!  It  was  one  single  thing,  and  everything  was 
within  it. 

The  three  Supreme  Principles  were  very  clearly  there:  Existence,  Consciousness  (an  active, 
realizing  consciousness)  and  Ananda.  A  universal  vastness  that  kept  going  on  and  on  and  on  ... 

It  moves  and  it  doesn’t  move.  How  can  you  explain  that?  It  was  in  motion,  a  constant,  unceasing 
motion,  and  yet  there  was  no  shifting  of  place.  I  had  the  perception,  or  rather  there  was  the 
perception,  of  something  which  WAS  forever,  which  never  repeated  itself,  neither  began  nor  ended, 
which  didn’t  shift  places  yet  was  always  in  motion. 

Words  cannot  express  it.  No  translation,  none,  not  even  the  most  subtle  mental  translation  can 
express  this.  It  was  ...  Even  now  the  memory  I  have  of  it  is  inexpressible.  You  have  to  be  in  it  to 
feel  it,  otherwise  ... 

However,  to  the  consciousness  it  was  very,  very  clear.  It  was  neither  mysterious  nor 
incomprehensible,  it  was  absolutely  obvious  -  though  untranslatable  to  our  mental  consciousness. 
For  they  were  contradictory,  yet  they  existed  simultaneously,  indistinguishable:  they  were  not 
stacked  one  upon  another  -  it  was  all  simultaneous.  How  can  you  explain  that?!  It’s  too  difficult.  It 
must  be  experienced. 

You  see,  when  something  goes  beyond  thought,  a  sort  of  conception  of  it,  or  superconception 
rather,  remains  behind.  But  in  this  case,  in  my  experience,  there  was  no  question  of  thought  -  it  was 
a  question  of  physical  sensation.  It  was  not  beyond  thought,  it  was  beyond  sensation.  I  was  LIVING 
this  thing.  And  there  was  no  more  T.  There  was  nothing  but  this  thing,  and  yet  there  was  a 
sensation.  I  can’t  explain  it! 

When  I  went  back  to  bed,  the  transitional  period  lasted  45  minutes.  During  this  time,  I  tried  to 
locate  the  role  of  the  individual  consciousness  on  earth.  In  a  flash,  I  understood  its  purpose.  For  you 
see,  as  long  as  the  experience  lasted,  I  did  not  feel  any  necessity  at  all  of  an  individuality  for  this 
supreme  flood  to  manifest.  Then  I  understood,  precisely,  that  the  individuality  served  to  put  into 
contact,  in  this  flood,  all  that  reached  out  towards  what  is  called  ‘I’  -  this  individualized 
representation  of  the  Divine  -  in  order  to  receive  help  and  support  from  it,  and  to  be  put  into 
contact.  I  did  not  say  ‘put  into  contact  WITH  this  flood’  but  ‘put  into  contact  IN  this  flood,’  for  it 
was  not  happening  outside  -  nothing  was  outside  this  flood,  nothing  exists  outside  it. 

And  what  was  really  very  lovely  was  the  ACCURACY  and  the  power  which  directed  the  forces. 
I  watched  this  for  three  quarters  of  an  hour:  for  each  thing  that  presented  itself  (it  could  have  been 


1 11  Samadhi:  trance. 


someone  thinking,  something  taking  place,  anything  at  all),  a  special  little  concentration  of  this 
flood  went  exactly  onto  that  point,  like  a  special  insistence. 

And  all  this  was  absolutely  egoless,  without  any  personal  reaction,  nothing;  there  was  nothing 
but  the  consciousness  of  the  Supreme  Action.  It  was  the  only  thing  existing. 

And  of  course,  the  whole  ordinary  and  higher  mind  (as  well  as  the  physical  mind,  it  goes 
without  saying,  for  that  must  be  abolished  before  going  into  trance),  everything  here  in  the  head, 
above  the  head,  around  the  head  -  absolutely  immobile. 

After  all  that,  towards  the  end  of  the  night,  at  two  in  the  morning,  only  a  kind  of  faint  suggestion 
was  left:  How  can  this  state  -  which  I  knew  in  trance,  in  samadhi,  and  which  necessitates  lying 
down  -  become  constant  in  a  physical  body  which  moves  about?  There  is  something  to  discover 
there.  And  what  form  will  it  take?  For  in  my  consciousness,  you  see,  it  is  constantly  like  that,  this 
universal  flood,  but  the  problem  is  IN  THE  BODY:  it’s  the  problem  of  the  Force  in  its  most 
material  form. 

And  during  the  time  my  experience  lasted,  I  had  no  feeling  of  anything  exceptional,  but  rather 
simply  the  fact  that  after  all  its  preparation,  the  body  consciousness  was  ready  for  a  total 
identification  with  That  -  in  my  consciousness  it’s  always  the  same,  a  perpetual,  constant  and 
eternal  state  in  that  it  never  leaves  me.  It’s  like  that,  and  it  never  varies.  What  diminishes  the 
immensity  of  the  Vibration  are  the  limitations  of  the  material  consciousness  which  can  color  it  and 
even  sometimes  change  it  by  giving  it  a  personal  appearance.  Thus,  when  I  see  someone  and  speak 
to  him,  for  example,  when  my  eyes  concentrate  on  the  person,  I  have  almost  the  sensation  of  this 
flood  flowing  from  me  towards  the  person  or  of  it  passing  through  me  to  go  onto  the  person.  There 
is  an  awareness  of  the  eyes,  the  body.  And  it  is  this  which  limits  or  even  changes  a  little  the 
immensity  of  the  thing  ...  But  already  this  feeling  has  almost  disappeared;  this  immensity  seems  to 
be  acting  almost  constantly.  There  are  moments  when  I  am  less  interiorized,  when  I  am  more  on  the 
surface,  and  it  feels  like  it’s  passing  through  a  body  -  moments  when  the  body  consciousness  comes 
back  a  little.  And  this  is  what  diminishes  the  thing. 

This  experience  last  night  also  enabled  me  to  understand  what  X  had  felt  during  one  of  our 
meditations.  He  had  explained  his  experience  by  way  of  saying  that  I  was  this  mystic  tree  whose 
roots  plunge  into  the  Supreme  and  whose  branches  spread  forth  over  the  world, 178  and  he  said  that 
one  of  these  branches  had  entered  into  him  -  and  it  had  been  a  unique  experience.  He  had  said,  ‘this 
is  the  Mother.’ 

And  now  I  understand  that  what  he  had  seen  and  translated  by  this  Vedic  image  was  that  kind  of 
perpetual  flood. 

And  you  see,  this  experience  he  had,  this  contact  between  him  and  me,  is  just  a  point,  a  drop,  it’s 
nothing;  it’s  merely  something  the  consciousness  puts  into  words,  but  the  THING  itself  is  universal. 
Last  night  it  was  universal;  there  was  no  room,  no  bed,  no  door  -  and  it  was  concrete,  concrete,  so 
concrete,  with  such  a  splendor!  There  was  all  the  Joy  -  this  perpetual  downpour  in  a  limitless 
splendor. 

I  was  reluctant  to  speak  (because  of  this  problem  that  remains  hanging:  to  make  it  permanent, 
even  in  the  active  consciousness),  and  I  said  to  myself  that  if  I  speak,  it  will  create  difficulties  for 
me  in  finding  the  solution  ...  But  it’s  all  right.  I  shall  simply  have  to  make  a  still  greater  effort, 
because  something  always  evaporates  when  you  speak. 


178The  Ashwatha  Tree  (Katha  Upanishad,  II,  iii,  1). 


May  28,  1960 

K  left  his  body.  The  operation  had  been  extraordinarily,  almost  miraculously  successful  -  one  of 
those  dreadful  operations  where  they  extract  part  of  your  body.  He  was  quite  all  right  for  four  days 
afterwards,  then  everything  went  wrong. 

During  the  operation  and  just  afterwards,  I  had  simply  put  the  Force  on  him,  as  I  always  do  in 
such  cases,  so  that  everything  would  turn  out  for  the  best.  Then  a  few  days  ago,  during  my  japa,  a 
kind  of  order  came  -  a  very  clear  order  -  to  concentrate  on  him  so  that  he  would  be  conscious  of  his 
soul  and  able  to  leave  under  the  best  conditions.  And  I  saw  that  the  concentration  worked 
wonderfully:  it  seems  that  during  his  last  days  he  was  ceaselessly  repeating  Ma-Ma-Ma 179  -  even 
while  he  was  in  a  semi-coma. 

And  the  concentration  grew  stronger  and  stronger.  The  day  before  yesterday  it  became  very, 
very  powerful,  and  yesterday  morning,  around  half  past  noon,  it  pulled  me  inward;  he  came  to  me  in 
a  kind  of  sleep,  a  conscious  sleep,  and  I  even  said  almost  aloud,  ‘Oh,  K!  ’ 

It  lasted  fifteen  minutes;  I  was  completely  within,  inside,  as  if  to  receive  him. 

But  there  is  something  interesting:  when  I  went  down  at  2  p.m.,  I  found  the  family  had  come  to 
infonn  me  that  they  had  been  notified  by  telephone  that  he  had  died  at  1 1 :45  a.m.  Myself,  I  saw  him 
come  at  12:30. 

So  you  see,  the  outer  signs  ...  It’s  not  the  first  time  I’ve  noticed  this  -  the  doctors  observe  all  the 
outer  signs,  then  they  declare  you  dead,  but  you’re  still  in  your  body! 

In  other  words,  he  was  still  in  his  body. 

So  it’s  probably  during  this  period  that  people  are  ‘resuscitated,’  as  they  say.  It  must  be  during 
this  period,  for  they  have  not  left  their  bodies,  they  are  not  really  dead,  though  the  heart  may  give 
every  appearance  of  having  stopped.  So  K  left  his  body  at  around  half  past  noon,  and  officially  it 
was  at  1 1:45.  Forty- five  minutes  later,  in  other  words. 

And  it  takes  place  very  gently,  very  gently  (when  it’s  done  right),  very  gently,  very  gently, 
smoothly,  without  any  shock. 

So  this  morning  they’re  burning  him. 

When  they’re  in  too  much  of  a  hurry  to  burn  them,  sometimes  they  bum  them  alive!  ...  They 
should  wait. 

For  there’s  a  consciousness  of  the  form,  a  life  of  the  form.  There’s  a  consciousness,  a 
consciousness  in  the  form  assumed  by  the  cells.  That  takes  SEVEN  DAYS  to  come  out.  So 
sometimes  the  body  makes  abrupt  movements  when  burned  -  people  say  it’s  mechanical.  It’s  not 
mechanical,  I  know  it’s  not. 

I  know  it.  I  know  that  this  consciousness  of  the  form  exists  since  I  have  actually  gone  out  of  it. 
Once,  long  back,  I  was  in  a  so-called  cataleptic  state,  and  after  awhile,  while  still  in  this  state,  the 
body  began  living  again180 ;  that  is,  it  was  capable  of  speaking  and  even  moving  (it  was  Theon  who 
gave  me  this  training).  The  body  managed  to  get  up  and  move.  And  yet,  everything  had  gone  out  of 
it! 


\19Ma:  Mother,  in  the  languages  of  India. 


Once  everything  had  gone  out,  it  naturally  became  cold,  but  the  body  consciousness  manages  to 
draw  a  little  energy  from  the  air,  from  this  or  that ...  And  I  spoke  in  that  state.  I  spoke  -  I  spoke  very 
well,  and  besides,  I  recounted  all  I  was  seeing  elsewhere. 

So  I  don’t  like  this  habit  of  burning  people  very  much. 

I  think  they  do  it  here  (apart  from  entirely  sanitary  considerations  in  the  case  of  people  who  have 
died  from  nasty  diseases),  here  in  India,  mainly  because  they  are  very  afraid  of  all  these  little 
entities  that  come  from  desires,  impulses  -  things  which  are  dispersed  in  the  air  and  which  make 
‘ghosts’  and  all  kinds  of  things.  All  desires,  all  attachments,  all  those  things  are  like  pieces  that 
break  off  (each  one  goes  its  own  way,  you  see),  then  these  pieces  gain  strength  in  the  surrounding 
atmosphere,  and  when  they  can  fasten  on  to  someone,  they  vampirize  him.  Then  they  keep  on  trying 
to  satisfy  their  desires. 

The  world,  the  terrestrial  atmosphere,  is  full  of  filth. 

And  people  here  are  much  more  sensitive  than  in  Europe  because  they  are  much  more 
interiorized,  so  they  are  conscious  of  all  these  little  entities,  and  naturally  they’re  afraid.  And  the 
more  afraid  they  are,  the  more  they’re  vampirized! 

I  think  that  many  of  these  entities  are  dispersed  by  fire  -  that  creates  havoc. 

I  know  one  person,  a  boy  who  died  here,  who  was  burned  before  he  had  left!  He  had  a  weak 
heart,  and  not  enough  care  was  taken  -  that  is,  they  probably  should  not  have  operated  on  him.  He 
was  our  engineer.  He  died  in  the  hospital.  Not  a  serious  operation,  an  appendicitis,  but  his  heart 
could  not  take  up  its  natural  movement. 

But  as  he  was  accustomed  to  going  out  of  his  body,  he  didn’t  know!  He  even  used  to  make 
experiments  -  he  would  go  out,  circle  around  in  his  room,  see  his  body  from  outside,  observe  the 
difference  between  the  subtle  physical  and  the  material  physical,  etc.  So  he  didn’t  know.  And  it’s 
only  when  they  burned  his  body  ... 

I  tried  to  delay  the  moment,  but  he  was  in  the  hospital,  so  it  was  difficult.  I  was  in  my  room 
when  they  burned  his  body,  and  then  suddenly  I  saw  him  arrive  -  sobbing  -  saying,  ‘But ...  But  I  m 
dead.  I  DIDN’T  WANT  to  die!  Why  am  I  dead,  I  DIDN’T  WANT  to  die!’  It  was  dreadful.  So  I 
kept  him  and  held  him  against  me  to  quiet  him  down. 

He  remained  there  for  years. 

And  whenever  we  used  to  have  meetings  to  decide  on  the  construction  of  something  or  on 
repairs  to  be  made,  for  example,  I  always  felt  him  there  and  he  influenced  those  who  were  present. 

He  wanted  to  live  again;  I  managed  to  give  him  the  opportunity.  He  was  very  conscious;  the 
child  isn’t  yet  so. 

But  people  are  such  fools,  they  are  so  ignorant!  ... 


1 80It  was  at  Tlemcen,  in  Algeria.  While  Mother  was  in  trance,  Theon  caused  the  thread  which  linked  Mother  to  her 
body  to  break  through  a  movement  of  anger.  He  was  angry  because  Mother,  who  was  in  a  region  where  she  saw  the 
‘mantra  of  life,’  refused  to  tell  him  the  mantra.  Faced  with  the  enormity  of  the  result  of  his  anger  Theon  got  hold  of 
himself,  and  it  took  all  Mother’s  force  and  all  Theon’s  occult  science  to  get  Mother  back  into  her  body  -  which  created 
a  kind  of  very  painful  friction  at  the  moment  of  re-entry,  perhaps  the  type  of  friction  that  makes  new  bom  children  cry 
out. 


Undated  May  (?)  1960 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Pondicherry 


Mother, 

You  sent  me  this  flower,  ‘Vital  Collaboration.’  I  am  taking  this  opportunity  to  tell  you 
something  which  has  been  weighing  on  my  heart  for  years  and  which,  naturally,  comes  back  up 
whenever  things  go  badly. 

I  have  been  here  seven  years  and  I  can’t  count  a  single  concrete  experience,  not  a  single  vision 
(the  only  things  that  have  ever  happened  were  in  Ceylon  or  Rameswaram).  I  haven’t  even  managed 
to  have  a  few  slightly  conscious  nights. 

Isn’t  this  reason  enough  to  be  discouraged?  In  any  case,  these  questions  are  stirring  in  me  -  and 
the  vital  is  not  happy  [nor  the  mental,  nor  the  physical]. 

Excuse  me  if  I  speak  too  frankly. 

Signed:  Satprem 


June  3, 1960 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Pondicherry,  June  3,  I960 


Sweet  Mother, 

I’m  a  bit  discouraged.  Every  night  I  slip  into  a  black  abyss  from  which  I  wake  up  in  the  morning 
drained.  Not  one  second  of  conscious  sleep.  It  takes  me  an  hour  to  recuperate  from  my  ‘sleep’.  In 
fact,  I  am  constantly  ‘on  edge’  and  the  least  thing  exhausts  my  body. 

But  that’s  nothing.  I  would  bear  all  the  exhaustion  quite  willingly  if  there  were  at  least  a  touch 
of  something  conscious.  But  nothing,  as  if  I  were  as  thick  as  a  Paris  concierge! 

Mother,  there  is  hardly  an  instant  of  my  conscious  life  that  I  am  not  aspiring  for  ‘more 
consciousness’  -  but  there’s  still  this  abyss  I  slip  into  at  night,  as  if  nothing  existed! 

Pardon  my  “rumblings.  If  only  at  least  I  knew  what  I  could  do  to  change  all  this. 


Your  child, 


Signed:  Satprem 


(Mother ’s  reply) 


Sunday  afternoon 


My  dear  child, 

The  best  rest  is  to  enter  into  the  inner  silence  for  a  few  moments. 

Blessings. 

Signed:  Mother 


June  4, 1960 


(The  disciple  complains  of  his  bad  nights) 

If  you  wake  up  tired  in  the  morning,  it  is  due  to  tamas,  nothing  else  -  a  dreadful  mass  of  tamas.  I 
became  aware  of  this  when  I  started  doing  the  yoga  of  the  body.  And  it’s  inevitable  as  long  as  the 
body  is  not  transfonned. 

Myself,  I  go  to  bed  very  early,  at  eight  o’clock.  It’s  still  quite  noisy  everywhere,  but  I  don’t 
mind;  at  least  I’m  sure  of  no  longer  being  disturbed.  First  you  must  stretch  out  flat  and  relax  all  your 
muscles,  all  your  nerves  -  you  can  learn  this  easily  -  become  like  a  ‘dishrag’  on  the  bed,  as  I  call  it; 
there  should  be  nothing  left.  And  if  you  can  also  do  that  with  the  mind,  you  get  rid  of  a  lot  of  idiotic 
dreams  that  make  you  more  tired  when  you  wake  up  than  when  you  went  to  bed;  they  are  the  result 
of  the  cellular  activity  of  the  brain  going  on  uncontrollably,  which  is  very  tiring.  Therefore,  relax 
fully,  bring  everything  to  a  complete,  tensionless  calm  in  which  everything  has  stopped.  But  this  is 
only  the  beginning. 

Once  I’m  relaxed,  I  have  developed  the  habit  of  repeating  my  mantra.  But  it’s  very  strange  with 
these  mantras  -  I  don’t  know  how  it  is  for  others;  I’m  speaking  of  my  own  mantra,  the  one  I  myself 
found  -  it  came  spontaneously.  Depending  on  the  occasion,  the  time,  depending  on  what  I  might 
call  the  purpose  for  repeating  it,  it  has  quite  different  results.  For  example,  I  use  it  to  establish  the 
contact  while  walking  back  and  forth  in  my  room  -  my  mantra  is  a  mantra  of  evocation;  I  evoke  the 
Supreme  and  establish  the  contact  with  the  body. 

This  is  the  main  reason  for  my  japa.  There’s  a  power  in  the  sound  itself,  and  by  forcing  the  body 
to  repeat  the  sound,  you  force  it  to  receive  the  vibration  at  the  same  time.  But  I’ve  noticed  that  if 
something  in  the  body’s  working  gets  disturbed  (a  pain  or  disorder,  the  onset  of  some  illness)  and  I 
repeat  my  mantra  in  a  certain  way  -  still  the  same  words,  the  same  mantra,  but  said  with  a  certain 
purpose  and  above  all  in  a  movement  of  surrender,  surrender  of  the  pain,  the  disorder,  and  a  call, 
like  an  opening  -  it  has  a  marvelous  effect.  The  mantra  acts  in  just  the  right  way,  in  this  way  and  in 


no  other.  And  after  a  while  everything  is  put  back  in  order.  And  simultaneously,  of  course,  the 
precise  knowledge  of  what  lies  behind  the  disorder  and  what  I  must  do  to  set  it  right  comes  to  me. 
But  quite  apart  from  this,  the  mantra  acts  directly  upon  the  pain  itself. 

I  also  use  my  mantra  to  go  into  trance.  After  relaxing  on  the  bed  and  making  as  total  a  self- 
offering  as  possible  of  everything,  from  top  to  bottom,  and  after  removing  as  fully  as  possible  all 
resistance  of  the  ego,  I  start  repeating  the  mantra.181  After  repeating  it  two  or  three  times,  I  am  in 
trance  (at  the  beginning  it  took  longer).  And  from  this  trance  I  pass  into  sleep;  the  trance  lasts  as 
long  as  necessary  and,  quite  naturally,  spontaneously,  I  pass  into  sleep.  And  when  I  come  back,  I 
remember  everything.  The  sleep  was  like  a  continuation  of  the  trance.  And  essentially,  the  only 
reason  for  sleep  is  to  allow  the  body  to  assimilate  the  results  of  the  trance,  then  to  allow  these 
results  to  be  accepted  throughout  and  to  let  the  body  do  its  natural  night’s  work  of  eliminating 
toxins.  My  periods  of  sleep  practically  don’t  exist  -  sometimes  they  are  as  short  as  half  an  hour  or 
15  minutes.  But  in  the  beginning,  I  had  long  periods  of  sleep,  one  or  even  two  hours  in  succession. 
And  when  I  woke  up,  I  did  not  feel  this  residue  of  heaviness  which  comes  from  sleep  -  the  effects 
of  the  trance  continued. 

It  is  even  good  for  people  who’ve  never  been  in  trance  to  repeat  a  mantra  (or  a  word,  a  prayer) 
before  going  to  sleep.  But  the  words  must  have  a  life  of  their  own  -  by  this  I  don’t  mean  an 
intellectual  meaning,  nothing  of  the  kind,  but  rather  a  vibration.  And  this  has  an  extraordinary  effect 
on  the  body,  it  starts  vibrating,  vibrating,  vibrating  ...  and  so  calm,  you  let  yourself  go,  like  falling 
off  to  sleep.  And  the  body  vibrates  more  and  more,  more  and  more,  more  and  more,  and  you  drift 
off. 

Such  is  the  cure  for  tamas. 

It’s  tamas  that  gives  you  a  bad  sleep.  There  are  two  kinds  of  bad  sleep  -  that  which  makes  you 
heavy  and  leaden,  as  if  the  result  of  all  your  effort  the  day  before  were  wasted,  and  that  which 
exhausts  you,  as  if  you  had  spent  the  whole  time  fighting.  And  I’ve  observed  that  if  you  cut  your 
sleep  up  into  sections  (it  becomes  a  habit),  the  nights  get  better.  In  other  words,  you  must  be  able  to 
come  back  to  your  normal  consciousness  and  your  nonnal  aspiration  at  certain  intervals,  come  back 
to  the  call  of  your  consciousness  ...  But  you  must  not  use  an  alarm  clock.  When  in  trance,  it’s  not 
good  to  be  jolted. 

Just  as  you  are  drifting  off,  you  can  make  a  formation  and  say,  ‘I  shall  wake  up  at  such-and-such 
time’  (children  do  it  very  easily). 

You  should  count  on  at  least  three  hours  for  the  first  part  of  your  sleep;  for  the  last  part,  one 
hour  is  enough.  But  the  first  should  be  a  minimum  of  three  hours.  In  fact,  it  is  best  to  remain  in  bed 
for  at  least  seven  hours;  with  six,  you  don’t  have  the  time  to  do  much  (of  course,  I’m  speaking  from 
the  standpoint  of  sadhana,  to  make  the  nights  useful). 

But  for  years  together  I  only  slept  2  1/2  hours  a  night  in  all.  I  mean  that  my  night  consisted  of  2 
1/2  hours.  And  I  went  straight  to  Sat-Chit-Ananda  and  then  came  back:  2  1/2  hours  were  spent  like 
that.  But  the  body  was  tired.  That  lasted  more  than  five  or  six  years  while  Sri  Aurobindo  was  still  in 
his  body.  And  during  the  day,  I  was  all  the  time  going  into  trance  for  the  least  thing  (it  was  trance, 
not  sleep  -  I  was  conscious).  But  I  clearly  saw  that  the  body  was  affected,  for  it  had  no  time  to  bum 
its  toxins.182 

...  There  would  be  many  interesting  things  to  tell  about  sleep,  because  it’s  one  of  the  things  I’ve 
studied  the  most  -  to  speak  of  how  I  became  conscious  of  my  nights,  for  instance.  (I  learned  this 
with  Theon,  and  now  that  I  know  all  these  things  of  India,  I  realize  that  he  knew  a  GREAT  deal.) 


181Mother  added:  ‘Or  any  word  that  has  a  power  for  you,  a  word  spontaneously  springing  from  the  heart,  like  a  prayer 
which  sums  up  your  aspiration.’ 


1 82Unfortunately,  Mother  had  us  cut  many  things  from  this  text.  We  regret  the  fact. 


But  it  bothers  me  a  lot  to  say  ‘I’  -  I  this,  I  that.  I’d  rather  speak  of  these  things  in  the  form  of  a 
treatise  or  an  essay  on  sleep,  for  example.  Sri  Aurobindo  always  spoke  of  his  experiences  but  rarely 
did  he  say’  I’  -  it  always  sounds  like  boasting. 

Sri  Aurobindo  said  that  the  true  or  yogic  reason  for  sleep  is  to  put  the  consciousness  back  into 
contact  with  Sat-Chit-Ananda  (I  used  to  do  this  without  knowing  it).  For  some  people  the  contact  is 
established  immediately,  while  for  others  it  takes  eight,  nine,  ten  hours  to  do  it.  But  really,  normally 
you  should  not  wake  up  till  the  contact  has  been  established,  and  that’s  why  it’s  very  bad  to  wake 
up  in  an  artificial  way  (with  an  alarm  clock,  for  example),  because  then  the  night  is  wasted. 

As  for  me,  my  night  is  now  organized.  I  go  to  bed  at  8  o’clock  and  get  up  at  4,  which  makes  for 
a  very  long  night,  and  it’s  sliced  into  three  parts.  And  I  get  up  punctually  at  4  in  the  morning.  But 
I’m  always  awake  ten  or  fifteen  minutes  beforehand,  and  I  review  all  that  has  happened  during  the 
night,  the  dreams,  the  various  activities,  etc.,  so  that  when  I  get  up,  I  am  fully  active. 

To  make  use  of  your  nights  is  an  excellent  thing,  for  it  has  a  double  effect:  a  negative  effect,  in 
that  it  keeps  you  from  falling  backwards,  from  losing  what  you’ve  gained  (that  is  really  painful); 
and  a  positive  effect,  in  that  you  progress,  you  continue  progressing.  You  make  use  of  your  nights, 
so  there’s  no  more  residue  of  fatigue. 

There  are  two  things  to  avoid:  falling  into  a  stupor  of  unconsciousness,  with  all  those  things 
coming  up  from  the  subconscious  and  the  unconscious  that  invade  and  penetrate  you,  and  a  vital 
and  mental  hyperactivity  in  which  you  pass  your  time  literally  fighting  -  terrible  battles.  People 
come  out  of  that  black  and  blue,  as  if  they  had  been  beaten  -  and  they  have  been,  it  is  not  ‘as  if! 
And  I  see  only  one  way  out  -  to  change  the  nature  of  sleep. 


Undated  June  1960 


(Letter  from  Mother  to  Satprem) 

Monday  morning 

My  dear  little  child, 

I  have  something  interesting  to  tell  you  that  happened  Friday  night.  It  cannot  be  written  down.  I 
shall  tell  you  tomorrow.  But  it  seemed  to  me  that  you  should  feel  a  little  better  after  that. 

Tomorrow  at  10. 

My  love  watches  over  you. 


Signed:  Mother 


June  7, 1960 

...I  have  to  see  some  fellow  again  whom  I  saw  yesterday.  But  I  told  him  to  come  at  1 1  o’clock.  So 
if  I  leave  here  at  10:55,  that  will  give  me  enough  time. 

They  brought  these  people  to  ‘Prosperity’  to  introduce  them  to  me.  You  know,  I  had  precisely 
the  impression  that  they  feed  only  on  banknotes!  (Mother  laughs)  It  makes  you  gray,  oh!  ...  And  dry 
like  dead  wood. 

They  came  to  see  their  son  (son,  son-in-law,  nephew  ...  anyway,  it’s  the  same  person)  about 
some  business  -  some  money  matter.  Then  one  of  them  asked  to  see  me.  I  thought  they  would 
simply  send  some  woman  -  not  at  all:  the  whole  group,  face  to  face  and  in  a  circle,  and  they  began 
lecturing  me  on  business!  ...  So  I  had  some  fun.  Once  they  had  their  say  (they  weren’t  moving,  they 
were  planted  there),  I  told  them,  ‘Listen,  since  you  are  here,  it  must  be  for  SOMETHING!’  And 
then  I  gave  them  a  lecture.  But  just  imagine,  one  of  them  was  so  shaken  that  he  asked  to  see  me 
again  this  morning.  The  one  who  was  shaken  wore  a  handsome  pink  turban. 

So  I  said,  ‘All  right,  let  him  come.’ 

There.  Now,  what  do  you  have  to  say? 

Me?  I  have  come  with  some  work ...  To  say?  ... 

It’s  not  going  so  well? 

(the  disciple  grimaces) 


Are  you  sure?  Believe  it  or  not,  but  I’m  not  so  sure. 

You  aren  ’t  sure  of  what? 

That  it’s  not  going  so  well. 

??? 

You  look  a  little  ...  You  were  frowning  at  me  at  the  balcony!  (Mother  laughs)  But ... 

No,  it’s  about  your  nights.183 

I  don  7  know  ...  (In  a  disgusted  tone)  Really  ...  I  don  7  know.  It  feels  like  only  some  dynamite 
could  make  all  that  move. 

Huh? 

I  feel  that  nothing  but  constant  dynamiting  could  blow  all  that  up.  It  doesn  7  move;  it  can  7  do 
anything,  can  7 feel  anything,  can  7 see  anything.  It’s  ...  it’s  all  blocked. 


1 83The  disciple  is  still  complaining  about  his  nights. 


(long  silence) 


Does  it  feel  like  a  wall? 

Myself,  I  ... 

It  feels  like  something  I  can ’t  get  across.  I’m  getting  nowhere,  I’m  always  turning  in  circles,  the 
same  groove ... 

Yes. 


...  something  has  to  break,  PHYSICALLY  break.  It  could  keep  on  turning  like  that  for  centuries. 

Hmm!  ...  But  life  is  like  that.  Physical  life  is  like  that  -  for  everyone.  This  feeling  of  it  turning 
round  and  round  and  round  and  round  -  and  it’s  the  same  for  people,  objects,  countries,  the  whole 
world. 

Something  changes,  of  course,  but  it’s  so  ...  phew!  I  mean,  at  the  speed  it’s  going,  it  will  take  us 
millions  of  years  to  make  any  perceptible  progress.  We  might  just  as  well  say  it’s  not  moving. 

These  days  I’ve  been  feeling  very  clearly  this  thing  that  doesn’t  move. 

But  just  now  ...  You  see,  when  I  am  in  contact  with  you  -  not  when  we’re  sitting  together,  but  at 
the  balcony  or  at  the  meditation  or  ...  at  any  time  at  all  -  this  contact  is  very  good,  very  good,  very 
luminous  and  clear.  I  wrote  you  that,  and  it’s  getting  more  and  more  tangible.  But  when  we’re 
HERE  together,  it  feels  as  though  it  doesn’t  move  ...  Something  is  preventing  it  from  taking  place 
HERE.  So  when  you  spoke  ...  (it  was  when  you  made  a  face),  I  looked. 

It  gives  me  the  impression  of  something  like  ...  Yes,  that’s  it,  like  a  caveman  -  Oh  (Mother 
speaks  mockingly),  surely  one  of  the  cave  artists  or  poets  or  writers!  The  intellectual  life  of  the 
caves,  I  mean!  But  the  cave  happens  to  be  low  and  when  you’re  in  it,  you  are  like  this  (Mother 
stoops  over),  but  the  whole  time  you  want  to  stand  up  straight.  That  makes  you  furious.  That’s 
exactly  the  feeling  it  gives  me  -  not  a  cave  meant  for  a  man  standing  on  his  two  feet;  it’s  a  cave  for 
a  lion  or  for  ...  for  any  four-legged  animal. 

It’s  symbolic.  I’m  speaking  symbolically. 

And  so  ... 

(silence) 

Ah,  that’s  what  it  is!  Your  cave  ...  it  IS  like  that,  it’s  really  like  that,  I  understand  why  you  feel  you 
have  to  blast  it  with  dynamite!  But  if  you  go  right  to  the  end  -  right  to  the  end  -  there’s  no  more  top 
to  the  cave,  it’s  wide  open  to  the  stars.  I  can  see  it.  Go  to  the  very  end.  It’s  very  dark.  It’s  very  dark 
and  not  very  enticing,  and  it  feels  as  if  ...  it  may  still  be  worse  -  but  it  won’t  be  worse.  Go  right  to 
the  end,  and  suddenly  you’ll  be  able  to  stand  up  straight. 

(long  silence) 


It  looks  like  you  are  stubbornly  trying  to  go  through  where  you  can’t  go  through. 
And  it’s  suffocating  and  irritating  and  annoying  and  ...  tiring  and  ... 


(silence) 


You’re  going  to  make  a  face  again! 

But  that’s  how  it  is;  I  feel  it  is  so  ...  (How  can  I  put  it?)  There  are  always  at  least  two  ways  of 
doing  things.  I  have  a  very  strong  feeling  -  very  strong  -  that  you  want  me  to  take  you  by  the  hand 
and  go  together  ... 

Do  you  have  that  idea  or  not? 


(no  answer) 


I’m  talking  about  our  relationship,  nothing  exterior  or  physical. 

It  ’.v  strange,  but  I  rarely  ‘see  ‘you  in  a  very  physical  way  -  you,  just  as  you  are. 184 
Do  you  only  see  me  physically? 

No,  on  the  contrary,  I  have  difficulty  ... 

But  my  little  one,  it’s  useless  to  ‘see’  me  physically! 

It’s  rather  something  which  has  no  image  that  I  call  ‘Mother.  ’ 

Yes,  but  that’s  so  much  better!  Much  better.  That  is  the  very  obstacle  for  most  people:  they  want  to 
see  me  as  I  am  -  but  as  I  am,  as  my  body  is,  it’s  stupid.  It’s  absolutely  stupid. 

No,  no  -  that’s  not  what  I  mean.  I’m  speaking  of  the  relationship  I  have  with  you,  the  true  one  - 
what  I  was  telling  you  about  just  a  moment  ago.  Because,  you  see,  I’m  going  to  tell  you  everything! 
(Mother  laughs)  I  have  the  impression  that  it  would  go  much  faster  if  I  could  pick  you  up,  put  you 
here  (Mother  touches  her  heart),  carry  you  here  and  tell  you,  ‘Calm  yourself,  listen!’  But  it’s  not 
possible  (alas).  You’re  always  fast  on  your  feet  with  your  head  touching  this  very  low  ceiling. 
Myself,  I  can’t  be  like  that.  I’m  not  even  sure  (laughing)  if  my  feet  would  get  in! 

Anyway,  my  child,  it’s  not  that  I’m  not  trying  -  I  am  trying.  And  it’s  not  that  you  can’t  -  you 
can.  That’s  the  problem  ...  You  know,  it’s  as  if  you  were  stubbornly  trying  to  turn  the  key  the  wrong 
way  in  the  lock. 

I  don ’t  know.  I  suppose  it ’s  the  ego. 

What  do  you  mean,  the  ego? 

The  ego,  the  knot,  I  don ’t  know.  I  don ’t  know  what  movement  to  make. 


(silence) 

And  just  imagine!  The  other  day,  in  the  middle  of  the  night,  I  suddenly  found  myself  inside  you. 
‘Ah,  so  that’s  what  he’s  like,’  I  said.  I  woke  up  in  the  middle  of  the  night  with  that.  And  right  away 
I  said  to  myself,  ‘But ...  (laughing)  but  why  is  he  like  that!?’  And  this  lasted  ...  perhaps  one  or  two 
minutes,  maybe  more.  I  was  ...  I  felt  like  kicking  out  in  every  direction  ...  in  a  kind  of  rage.  And  the 
next  second,  I  thought,  ‘But  why  all  this?  My  goodness,  it’s  so  easy;  the  remedy  is  simply  to  do  this 
...’  and  immediately  (I  did  what  I  always  do,  you  see  -  it’s  how  I  am  constantly),  quite  simply,  I 
melted  into  the  Supreme.  ‘Enough  of  all  this’  -  and  the  very  next  second,  everything  was  all  right. 

So  then  I  thought,  ‘This  surely  must  have  had  some  effect  (on  the  disciple).  What  has 
happened?’  I  am  ...  I  was  literally  in  peace. 

And  that’s  really  how  it  was  ...  Hmm,  maybe  that’s  what  it’s  like  for  an  infant  shut  up  in  his 
mother’s  womb,  so  he  kicks  about  in  every  direction  -  and  for  a  long  time.  He’s  had  enough  of 
being  shut  in. 

It  was  a  kind  of  rage  against  something  that  shuts  you  in. 

But  note  that  this  is  not  something  particular  to  you,  for  as  I  have  told  you,  all  physical  life  feels 


184The  disciple  means  in  meditation  -  to  imagine  Mother  in  her  physical  form  or  to  use  her  physical  form  as  an  ‘object’ 
of  meditation.  In  fact,  he  was  very  afraid  of  getting  caught. 


like  that  to  me,  as  though  people  were  confined  in  a  kind  of  ...  shell  -  this  feeling  of  separation, 
isolation.  This  division  everywhere,  everywhere,  everywhere.  It’s  dreadful.  Every  encounter  is  a 
shock. 

(silence) 

(Mother  looks  at  the  disciple) 


Good. 

It’s  not  a  matter  of  something  breaking  -  it  shouldn’t  break  (that  makes  even  more  pieces,  we 
don’t  want  more  pieces),  it  should  ...  melt. 

Something  that  melts. 


June  11, 1960 

When  a  question  is  put  to  me,  the  answer  does  not  come  from  a  will;  what  happens  is  that  materials 
come  which  I  then  use  to  give  shape  to  the  answer,  but  it’s  only  a  shape.  The  thing  itself  is  there, 
but  it  needs  to  be  shaped.  The  difference  between  one  and  the  other  is  rather  like  the  difference 
between  a  picture  and  an  apparition. 

Sometimes  the  Force  comes  direct.  And  it  picks  up  words,  any  words  at  all,  that  makes  no 
difference;  the  nature  of  the  words  changes,  and  they  become  expressive  BECAUSE  of  the  power 
entering  into  them.  This  happens  when  I  look  directly  at  the  thing. 

But  when  a  question  is  put  to  me,  it  comes  coated  with  all  the  mental  atmosphere  of  whoever  is 
asking  the  question.  And  this  coating  is  often  a  mere  reflection  -  much  of  the  life  has  been  removed. 

The  same  thing  occurs,  there  is  the  same  difference,  when  I  say  something  and  when  I  see  it  (for 
example,  when  I  look  at  one  of  those  essential  problems  that  will  be  solved  only  when  the  world 
changes).  When  I  look  at  that  in  silence,  there  is  a  power  of  life  and  truth  -  which  evaporates  when 
it’s  put  into  words.  It  becomes  diminished,  impoverished  and  of  course  distorted.  When  you  write 
or  speak,  the  experience  disintegrates,  it’s  inevitable. 

We  need  a  new  language. 

For  instance,  if  I  have  a  vision  (not  a  vision  with  pictures,  not  that,  but  something  without  any 
fonn  or  sound  or  words  or  ...  the  THING  itself,  when  I  live  the  thing),  and  then  later  I  speak  of  it  to 
someone  ...  I  have  a  very  tangible  feeling  of  having  to  pull  something  to  make  it  visible,  perceptible 
and  communicable  -  the  splendor  goes. 

We  need  new  organs  of  expression  ...  It  will  come. 


Undated,  June  1960 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Pondicherry,  June  I960 

Sweet  Mother, 

This  is  to  tell  you  that  the  proofs  of  L  ’Orpailleur  are  being  sent  off  this  morning  at  1 1  o’clock  ... 

I  don’t  have  many  pages  of  The  Synthesis  ready.  Nevertheless,  will  I  see  you  tomorrow  as  you 
planned? 

Your  child, 
Signed:  Satprem 


P.S.  Please  protect  ‘my’  Orpailleur! 


(Mother ’s  reply) 

6.17.60 

My  dear  little  one, 

I  am  with  you,  and  what  is  needed  shall  be  done. 

Don’t  worry,  all  will  go  well. 

In  a  confident  peace  and  joy. 

Signed:  Mother 


July  12, 1960 

Last  night  something  happened  to  me  that  I  found  quite  amusing.  I  was  awakened  by  a  Voice,  or 
rather  it  roused  me  from  one  trance  to  put  me  into  another.  It  happened  at  about  1 1  o’clock.  Not  a 
human  Voice.  I  don’t  exactly  recall  its  words  any  longer,  but  it  had  to  do  with  the  Ashram  -  its 
protection,  its  success,  its  power.  And  what  was  interesting  was  that  when  I  woke  up,  I  was  in  a 
state  in  which  this  formation  that  is  the  Ashram  and  the  Force  that  is  condensed  here  to  realize  what 


this  Voice  wanted,  seemed  a  very  tiny,  tiny  part  of  myself. 

I  heard  the  Voice  and  awoke  with  the  feeling  of  this  Power,  this  Light,  this  Force  of  realization 
concentrated  here  which  sets  everything  in  motion  (as  always,  it  is  always  the  same,  a  Power  in 
motion).  It  was  a  dazzling  white  light.  But  then,  what  I  found  funny  was  that  there  I  was,  quite  in 
my  natural  state,  and  this,  the  Ashram,  was  a  tiny,  tiny  part  of  myself.  And  throughout  the  whole 
experience,  it  remained  like  that  -  a  very  tiny  part  of  myself.  Everything  else  was  ...  I  can’t  say 
deconcentrated,  but  an  entirely  general,  overall  activity,  as  it  normally  is  every  night.  And  I  saw  the 
Ashram  quite  clearly  -  it  was  something  special,  made  for  special  reasons,  but  whereas  I  seemed  to 
have  an  immense  body,  that  was  very  small,  very  small.  It  went  on  for  an  hour.  That’s  what  I  found 
amusing;  the  other  things  just  happen,  and  they  may  be  interesting,  but  this  was  so  spontaneous;  I 
was  watching  it  (I  don’t  know  where  my  head  was),  I  was  looking  down  from  above  ...  so  tiny,  so 
tiny. 

What  was  me  was  up  above,  and  the  Ashram  was  ...  It  began  just  here  (the  navel)  and  went  that 
way  (downwards),  and  it  was  encircled,  to  show  that  it  was  a  special  fonnation  -  encircled  in  the 
inconscience  of  the  terrestrial  creation.  And  I  was  everything  else,  with  the  usual  vibrations  of 
power  and  light.  And  then  one  current  and  another  current  and  another  were  passing  into  it,  into  this 
fonnation,  and  they  kept  going  in  and  in  and  in,  accumulating.  They  kept  going  in,  and  yet  they  did 
not  come  out,  they  did  not  leave.  It  was  not  an  undulatory  movement,  but  rather  a  pulsating 
movement  -  it  had  no  beginning,  it  didn’t  go  out,  and  yet  it  kept  moving.  It’s  very  difficult  to 
describe. 

The  fonnation  represented  by  the  Ashram  was  located  approximately  here,  at  the  height  of  the 
navel  in  relation  to  what  I  was  -  but  although  the  body  was  not  delimited,  it  had  certain  attributes  or 
undefined  forms,  each  one  of  which  was  situated  in  relation  to  the  other  as  though  each  represented 
one  part  of  the  body;  each  was  symbolic  of  either  an  activity  or  a  part  of  the  world  or  a  mode  of 
manifestation.  So  the  formation  started  from  about  here,  near  the  navel,  and  went  down  towards  the 
appendix  ...  Here,  I’ll  draw  you  a  sketch: 


It’s  form  was  elongated,  slanting  downwards  (it  always  has  this  form).  At  the  top  it  looked  like  a 
head,  then  the  lines  disappeared  down  below.  It  had  no  openings.  And  then,  it  was  surrounded  by 
various  dark  sheaths,  a  very  dark  purple  which  is  the  color  of  protection.  A  sparkling  light  was 
entering  into  it  -  it  kept  entering,  but  without  making  any  holes.  It  passed  right  through  everything, 


through  the  purple  -  through  everything.  It  passed  through  and  entered  inside,  where  there  were 
sparklings  of  every  color,  like  a  cascade.  There  are  always  these  cascades  of  force  -  similar  to  a 
cascading  stream  whose  waters  neither  flow  on  nor  disappear,  but  accumulate:  an  accumulation  of 
energies,  a  condensation.  And  they  accumulate  without  taking  up  any  more  space  through  a  kind  of 
compression.  And  inside,  it’s  moving,  vibrating,  vibrating,  vibrating,  it  keeps  coming  and  coming  - 
you  don’t  know  where  it  comes  from,  but  it  keeps  coming  and  accumulating. 

It  was  a  force  with  a  sparkling  white  light  at  its  center,  the  light  which  is  the  force  of  the  Divine 
Mother,  and  as  soon  as  it  was  well  packed  and  concentrated  inside,  or  condensed,  it  took  on  all  the 
colors  -  vibrations  of  every  color  ...  Like  a  materialization  -  these  colors  were  like  a  materialization 
of  the  Divine  Force  when  it  enters  matter.  (Just  as  matter  is  a  condensation  of  energy,  well,  this 
seemed  to  be  a  condensation  of  Divine  Force.  That’s  really  the  impression  it  gave.) 

It  reminded  me  of  tantric  things.  I  have  seen  tantric  formations  and  how  forces  are 
systematically  separated  by  them  -  each  vibration,  each  color.  It’s  very  interesting.  They  are  all  one, 
and  yet  each  is  distinct.  That  is,  they  are  separated  in  order  to  be  distinguished  and  for  each  one  to 
be  used  individually.  Each  one  represents  a  particular  action  for  obtaining  something  in  particular. 
This  is  the  special  knowledge  the  tantrics  have,  I  believe.  Or  it’s  the  reflection  of  their  knowledge. 
And  my  impression  is  that  when  they  do  their  pujas  or  say  their  mantras,  what  they  are  trying  to  do 
is  recombine  all  that  into  the  white  light.  I’m  not  sure.  I  know  they  use  each  one  separately  for  a 
separate  purpose,  but  when  they  speak  of  their  puja  ‘succeeding,’  it  may  mean  that  they  have  been 
able  to  recombine  the  light.  But  I  say  this  very  guardedly.  For  I  would  have  to  see  X  do  his  puja  one 
day  to  really  know  -  from  afar  I’m  not  so  sure.  It’s  merely  an  impression. 

This  is  what  I  am  constantly  seeing  now,  but  along  with  this  Divine  Force  or  this  Divine 
Consciousness  that  Sri  Aurobindo  speaks  of  when  he  says,  ‘Mother’s  Force  is  with  you.’  When  it 
comes,  it  is  sparkling  white,  perfectly  white  and  perfectly  luminous.  And  as  it  accumulates  inside,  it 
makes  living  vibrations  of  every  color.  And  it  goes  on  and  on  and  on.  Sometimes  it  lasts  half  an 
hour,  three-quarters  of  an  hour,  an  hour  -  nothing  goes  out.  And  it  keeps  constantly  entering.  And  it 
piles  up.  It’s  as  if  it  is  all  being  accumulated  or  compressed  together. 

So,  the  observing  mind,  the  intelligence  that  watches,  looked  at  all  this  -  ‘Ah,  that’s  what  it’s 
like’  (an  intelligence  that  watches  without  interfering  in  the  least).  It’s  like  a  spectator  talking  to 
himself. 

So  in  my  vision,  my  body  was  as  big  as  the  universe,  and  that  (the  Ashram)  was  so  tiny,  so  tiny. 

*  *  * 


(Soon  afterwards,  regarding  an  old  ‘Question  and  Answer  ) 

Heaven  and  hell  are  at  once  true  and  false.  They  exist  and  don’t  exist.  I’ve  seen  various  people  go  to 
heavens  or  hells  after  their  death,  and  it’s  very  difficult  to  make  them  understand  that  it  is  not  real. 
Once  it  took  me  more  than  a  year  to  convince  someone  that  his  so-called  hell  was  not  hell,  and  to 
get  him  out  of  it. 

But  there  is  something  else  -  the  psychological  condition  that  you  yourself  create,  the  asuric  hell 
you  live  in  when  you  cultivate  an  asuric  nature  within  you. 

*  * 


If  no  vibrations  ever  disappear,  then  what  happens  with  all  these  horrible  things  coming  from 
every  corner  of  the  world?  Don  7  they  pile  up?  Don  7  the  bad  vibrations  take  on  a  more  and 
more  enormous  volume  in  the  end? 


They  are  transformed.  And  at  times  they  are  transformed  almost  immediately. 

You  can’t  see  it  or  feel  it  till  you  concretely  live  the  fact  that  all  is  divine,  that  HE  is 
everywhere,  in  everything,  always,  in  all  that  happens. 

The  first  reaction  is  always  a  kind  of  shrinking  before  things  which  seem  horrible,  but  if  you  can 
overcome  that  and  really  have  the  experience,  everything  changes. 

And  there  are  hundreds  and  hundreds  of  little  experiences  like  that,  like  so  many  little  stones 
marking  the  way.  Then  you  see  that  the  two  things  are  ALWAYS  together:  the  destructive  and  the 
constructive.  You  can’t  see  one  without  seeing  the  other.  A  time  comes  when  the  effort  is  to 
conquer  the  negative  parts  of  creation  and  death  (as  at  the  end  of  Savitri),  and  when  you  have 
conquered  that,  then  you’re  above.  And  then  if  you  look  at  all  these  things,  even  those  which  seem 
the  most  opposed  to  the  Divine,  even  acts  of  cruelty  done  for  the  pleasure  of  cruelty,  you  see  the 
Presence  -  the  Presence  that  annuls  their  effects.  And  it’s  absolutely  marvelous. 

I  had  a  startling  experience  one  day  when  X  was  doing  his  pujas  to  encircle  the  titans.  He  was  in 
difficulty  and  I  was  about  to  intervene  to  help  him  when  I  was  abruptly  stopped.  I  was  faced  by  a 
massive  blackness  (blacker  than  the  blackest  physical  thing)  and  suddenly,  right  at  its  center,  I  saw 
the  Divine  Love  shining  with  such  a  splendor  -  I  had  never  seen  it  so  splendid. 

And  now  it  has  become  constant;  each  time  I  hear  or  see  something  ugly  or  horrible,  or  each 
time  something  ugly  or  horrible  happens,  something  which  is  a  negation  of  the  divine  life  ...  just 
behind  is  this  flame  -  so  wonderful.  And  then  the  effect  is  annulled. 

There  is  a  magnificence  of  realization  which  could  not  have  been  had  this  evil,  this  horror  and 
this  negation  not  been. 

Our  consciousness  shrinks  from  these  things  which  belong  to  the  past  and  which  are  no  longer 
in  their  place,  so  we  feel  disgust  and  revulsion  -  because  we  are  ignorant.  But  if  we  can  raise 
ourselves  above  and  be  in  contact  with  That  -  the  supreme  Light  -  which  is  ALWAYS  just  behind, 
then  this  Light  seems  all  the  more  supreme  because  it  is  so  much  its  own  opposite. 

Then  you  know. 

You  know,  so  there  is  no  longer  this  uneasiness,  this  shrinking.  You  feel  carried  more  and  more 
by  all  that  you  reject;  you  are  in  a  forward  movement,  further  and  further,  higher,  constantly  further. 


July  15, 1960 


(Letter  from  Mother  to  Satprem) 


7.15.60 


My  dear  little  one, 

This  is  to  tell  you  that  I  am  seeing  you  more  and  more  frequently  during  the  night,  and  in  the 
world  where  we  meet  together  we  have  established  a  kind  of  companionship  in  work. 


Although  it  is  still  in  a  region  of  the  physical  mind,  it  is  a  mind  striving  towards  a  luminous 
organization  and  clearly  aspiring  to  rise  towards  the  higher  realms. 

And  last  night  especially  I  had  a  very  positive  impression  (a  sort  of  feeling)  that  I  can  count  on 
you. 

We’ll  see  what  can  be  done  for  the  ‘manuscripts’  on  Sunday. 

With  all  my  tender  affection. 

Signed:  Mother 


July  18, 1960 

Of  course,  we’re  dating  all  these  old  Questions  and  Answers,  but  not  everyone  pays  attention  to 
dates.  How  can  those  old  ones  be  mixed  with  the  present  things  which  are  on  an  altogether  different 
plane? 

There  is  an  experience  in  which  one  is  entirely  outside  of  time  -  that  is,  ahead,  behind,  above, 
below,  all  these  things  are  one  and  the  same.  And  at  the  very  moment  the  identification  takes  place, 
there  is  no  longer  any  past,  present  or  future.  And  really,  it’s  the  only  way  to  know. 

As  the  experiences  unfold,  these  old  Questions  and  Answers  give  me  the  feeling  of  someone 
circling  outside  a  garden  while  describing  what’s  inside  it.  But  a  day  comes  when  you  enter  the 
garden,  and  then  you  know  a  little  better  what’s  inside.  And  I’m  starting  to  enter.  I’m  starting. 


July  23,  1960 

Something  interesting  happened  last  night  exactly  between  ten  and  eleven.  I  was  in  some  kind  of 
vehicle.  I  didn’t  see  the  vehicle  but  I  was  in  it.  Someone  in  front  of  me  was  driving,  though  I  could 
only  see  his  back;  I  didn’t  bother  about  who  it  was  -  he  was  simply  the  one  meant  to  do  it. 

It  was  as  if  the  doors  of  destruction  had  been  flung  open.  Floods  -  floods  as  vast  as  an  ocean  - 
were  rushing  down  onto  ...  something  ...  the  earth?  A  formidable  current  pouring  down  at  an  insane 
speed,  with  an  unstoppable  power.  It  was  brackish  water  -  not  transparent,  but  brackish.  And  it  was 
imperative  to  reach  a  certain  spot  BEFORE  the  water.  Had  the  water  reached  there  ahead  of  me, 


nothing  could  have  been  done.  Whereas  if  I  got  there  first  (I  say  ‘I’,  but  it  was  not  I  with  this  body), 
if  I  got  to  the  other  side  before  the  water,  I  would  be  completely  safe;  and  from  this  safe  position,  I 
would  be  able,  I  would  have  a  chance  to  help  those  left  behind. 

And  this  vehicle  was  going  faster  than  the  flood  (I  saw  and  felt  it  by  its  motion)  -  a  fonnidable 
flood,  but  the  vehicle  was  going  still  faster.  It  was  so  wonderful.  In  places  there  were  some 
especially  difficult  and  dangerous  spots,  but  I  ALWAYS  got  there  before  the  water,  just  before  the 
water  barred  the  way.  And  we  kept  going  and  going  and  going.  Then,  with  a  final  effort  (there  was 
no  effort,  really,  it  was  willed),  with  a  final  push,  we  made  it  to  the  other  side  -  and  the  water  came 
rushing  just  behind!  It  rushed  down  at  a  fantastic  speed.  We  had  made  it.  Then,  just  on  the  other 
side,  it  changed  color.  It  was  ...  it  changed  in  color  to  a  predominant  blue,  this  powerful  blue  which 
is  the  force,  the  organizing  force  in  the  most  material  world.  So  there  we  were,  and  the  vehicle 
stopped.  And  then,  after  having  been  looking  straight  ahead  the  whole  time  we  were  speeding 
along,  I  turned  around  and  said,  ‘Ah,  now  I  can  start  helping  those  who  are  behind.’ 

Here,  I’ll  draw  you  a  little  sketch: 


The  water  was  flowing  off  towards  the  right.  From  time  to  time  there  were  these  fissured  dips  or 
depressions  along  the  vehicle’s  path  where  the  water  rushed  through,  and  in  fact  it  must  have  rushed 
through  each  one  just  as  soon  as  I  had  sped  past.  It  was  most  dangerous,  for  if  you  had  reached  there 
a  second  too  late,  the  water  would  already  have  flooded  in  and  you  would  no  longer  have  been  able 
to  get  across;  it  was  such  that  with  even  only  a  few  drops,  you  would  no  longer  get  across.  Not  that 
they  were  very  wide,  but  ...  And  the  water  was  pouring  in  (‘pouring  in’  ...  our  words  are  very 
small),  it  was  pouring  in,  and  I  could  see  it  ahead,  but  then  the  vehicle  would  arrive  at  full  speed 
and  instead  of  stopping,  in  a  wild  roller  coaster-like  movement  it  would  plunge  through,  vroom!  - 
just  in  time,  exactly  like  a  roller  coaster.  I  always  arrived  just  in  time  to  get  through.  And  then  again 
the  same  thing,  broken  here  and  there  (in  this  way  there  were  many  fissures,  though  I’ve  only  drawn 
two;  there  were  quite  a  few,  five  or  six  at  least),  and  again  we  would  dart  across,  then  race  on  until 
we  would  reach  the  spot  where  I  have  drawn  the  water  turning. 

Right  at  the  end,  there  was  a  place  where  the  water  had  to  turn  to  run  down  -  this  was  the  Great 
Passage.  If  you  got  caught  in  that,  it  was  all  over.  You  had  to  reach  this  spot  and  cross  over  before 
the  water  came.  It  was  the  only  place  you  could  get  across.  Then  a  last  plunge,  and  like  an  arrow 
shot  from  a  bow,  full  speed  ahead,  I  crossed  over  and  there  I  was. 

And  once  on  the  other  side,  without  even  a  rise  in  ground  level  (I  don’t  know  why),  it  was 
immediately  safe.  And  the  current  went  on  and  on,  waves  upon  waves,  on  and  on,  as  far  as  the  eye 
could  see,  but  it  was  canalized  here  at  the  Great  Turning;  and  as  soon  as  it  went  past  this  point,  the 


inundation  was  total,  it  spread  out  over  something  ...  over  the  earth.  And  the  current  turned  -  it 
turned  -  but  I  was  already  on  the  other  side.  And  down  below,  everything  was  finished,  the  water 
rushed  down  everywhere.  Only,  as  soon  as  I  was  on  the  other  side,  it  could  not  touch  me  -  the  water 
could  not  get  across,  it  was  stopped  by  something  invisible,  and  it  turned  away. 

Moreover,  it  seemed  that  everything  had  already  been  prepared,  as  if  the  way  had  been  made  to 
divert  the  water. 

There,  down  below  me,  below  the  vehicle,  I  had  the  impression  that  it  was  the  earth,  it  really 
seemed  like  the  earth,  and  the  water  was  rushing  down  towards  it. 

The  vehicle’s  path  was  not  on  earth,  but  up  above  (probably  in  interstellar  regions!),  a  special 
path  for  this  vehicle.  And  I  didn’t  know  where  the  water  was  coming  from;  I  couldn’t  see  its  origin, 
which  was  off  beyond  the  horizon.  But  it  came  raging  down  in  torrents  -  not  precipitously  like  a 
waterfall,  but  rather  like  a  rushing  torrent.  My  path  passed  between  the  torrents  of  water  and  the 
earth  below.  And  I  saw  the  water  before  me,  everywhere,  in  front  and  behind  -  it  was  so 
extraordinary,  for  it  looked  like  ...  it  was  everywhere,  you  see,  except  along  my  path  (and  even  then, 
there  was  some  seepage).  Water  speeding  everywhere.  But  there  was  a  kind  of  conscious  will  in  this 
onrush,  and  I  had  to  reach  the  Great  Passage  before  this  conscious  will.  This  water  resembled 
something  physical,  but  there  was  a  consciousness,  a  conscious  will,  and  I  had  to  ...  it  was  like  a 
battle  between  the  will  I  represented  and  that  will.  And  I  passed  each  fissure  just  in  time.  Only  when 
I  reached  the  Great  Turning  did  I  see  the  will  that  impelled  this  water.  And  I  reached  there  just 
before  it.  And  passed  through  at  a  fantastic  speed  -  like  lightning.  Even  time  ceased  ...  I  crossed 
over  like  a  flash  of  lightning.  And  then,  suddenly,  respite  -  and  it  was  blue.  A  square. 

At  the  time,  I  didn’t  know  what  it  all  meant.  Then  this  morning,  I  thought,  ‘It  must  have 
something  to  do  with  the  world  situation.  ’ 

It  had  all  the  dimensions  of  something  almost ...  the  earth  seemed  small  in  comparison,  you  see. 
It  was  similar  to  what  happens  here  when  water  is  unleashed  on  earth,  during  floods  for  instance, 
but  on  a  much  greater  scale. 

What  was  pleasing,  and  really  quite  interesting,  was  this  tremendous  speed,  like  an  arrow,  and  I 
always  arrived  in  time,  just  in  time,  just  in  time.  Once  I  had  crossed  over  to  the  other  side  (I  clearly 
felt  that  nothing  would  be  left,  for  it  was  such  a  powerful  deluge),  the  danger  was  finished,  there 
was  no  longer  ANY  possibility  at  all  of  being  touched  -  this  was  the  main  feeling.  Everything  was 
stopped.  Nothing  could  touch. 

I  turned  around  and  saw  all  this  water  rushing  down,  and  I  thought,  ‘Now  let’s  see  if  we  can  do 
something  here.’  There  was  someone  behind  who  interested  me,  someone  or  something  -  it  was  still 
something;  it  was  very  likable  and  had  something  of  the  blue  color  that  was  here  on  the  other  side. 
Not  really  individuals,  but  more  like  beings  representative  of  something  that  was  following  me 
quite  closely.  When  I  was  there,  it  also  was  there,  but  it  could  not  keep  up,  it  kept  losing  ground  - 
as  my  speed  increased,  its  decreased.  It  could  not  keep  up.  But  it  interested  me  in  a  special  way. 
‘Oh,  he’s  so  close  (he  or  it);  he  might  just  make  it,’  I  thought.  And  at  that  moment,  I  saw  that  all  this 
destructive  will  with  its  instrument  of  water,  symbolically  water,  had  rushed  past  and  was  spreading 
out  everywhere.  But  there  was  still  a  chance  of  saving  all  those  who  were  along  this  path.  And 
that’s  immediately  what  I  thought  of,  it  was  my  first  wish:  ‘Let’s  see  if  they  can  still  get  across,  if  I 
can  manage  to  get  them  across.’  I  remembered  some  especially  dangerous  spots  (while  speeding 
past,  I  had  remarked,  ‘Oh,  here  we  might  still  be  able  to  do  this,  there  that  could  still  be  done’  -  my 
consciousness  moved  at  the  same  speed,  and  I  noted  everything  along  the  way),  and  once  I  was 
firmly  there  on  the  other  side,  I  started  sending  back  messages. 

Down  below,  the  water  was  having  a  grand  time;  it  was  ...  it  was  hopeless.  But  here,  along  this 
path,  there  was  still  a  hope,  even  ...  even  after  the  water  had  passed;  I  probably  had  a  certain  power 
at  my  disposal  to  help  others  cross  these  fissured  places.  But  because  I  woke  up,  I  didn’t  see  what  it 
was.  So  that  stopped  everything.  Probably  because  I  woke  up  rather  abruptly,  I  could  not  see  what  it 
meant. 


All  this  is  a  translation  in  human  language,  actually,  because  really  it  was  ... 

And  it  happened  quite  early  in  the  night  -  at  such  an  early  hour,  they  are  not  visions  or  things 
you  observe:  they  are  things  you  do. 

I’ve  been  seeing  for  a  long  time  that  nights  are  actions.  They  are  no  longer  images  or  symbols  or 
representations  -  they  are  all  actions.  And  they  take  place  certainly  not  on  a  human  scale. 

Does  that  indicate  war? 

I  don’t  feel  any  war. 

S.M  came  the  other  day  ...  He’s  quite  infonned  about  events  as  only  the  government  knows 
them.  He  brings  me  government  news  -  not  what  they  feed  to  the  public.  It  doesn’t  look  good.  But 
as  he  has  confidence,  he  wanted  to  know  (so  much  confidence  that  he  goes  and  tells  Nehru  and 
others,  ‘Oh,  Mother  said  this,  Mother  said  that.’  And  it  turns  out  true,  fortunately!).  So  after 
describing  things  at  some  length,  he  asked  my  opinion. 

Logically,  according  to  reason,  war  seems  unavoidable.  But  as  he  asked,  I  looked  -  I  looked  at 
my  nights,  precisely,  as  well  as  other  things.  And  then  I  said,  ‘I  don’t  feel  it.  I  don’t  feel  any  war.’ 

And  again  this  morning,  when  I  looked  at  this  vision,  I  asked  myself,  ‘Will  there  be  war?’  -  I 
don’t  feel  it  will  be  like  that ...  It  may  be  worse. 

You  see,  it  didn’t  seem  human. 

I  remember  wandering  about  one  night  some  time  ago.  It’s  no  longer  very  clear,  but  one  thing 
has  remained  -  I  had  gone  out  of  India,  and  then  when  I  returned  to  India,  I  found  huge  elephants 
installed  EVERYWHERE  -  enonnous  elephants.  At  that  time  I  was  not  at  all  aware  that  the 
Communists  in  India  had  adopted  the  elephant  as  their  symbol;  I  only  learned  that  later.  ‘What  does 
this  mean,’  I  said  to  myself.  ‘Does  it  signify  the  Indian  army?’  But  they  did  not  resemble  war 
elephants.  These  elephants  were  like  immense  mammoths,  and  they  looked  like  they  were  settling 
down  with  all  the  power  of  a  tremendous  inertia.  That  was  the  impression  -  something  heavy  in  an 
inert  and  very  tamasic  way,  forever  immovable.  I  did  not  like  this  occupation.  When  I  came  back,  I 
had  a  rather  painful  feeling,  and  for  several  days  I  wondered  if  it  did  not  mean  war.  Then  by  chance, 
in  a  conversation,  I  learned  that  the  Communists  had  selected  the  elephant  as  their  symbol  whereas 
the  Congress  had  chosen  the  bullock  ...  In  my  vision,  I  was  moving  (as  I  always  do),  I  was  moving 
among  them,  and  nothing  moved.  And  if  I  needed  room,  some  of  them  even  tried  to  stir  a  little. 

But  when  human  beings  are  involved,  I  believe  that  visions  take  on  a  special  form  -  it’s  a 
special  image.  Not  an  inundation  like  this.  That  was  very,  very  impersonal.  They  were  forces.  A 
feeling  of  floodgates  bursting  open,  of  something  being  held  back,  retained  or  prevented,  then 
suddenly  ... 

The  vehicle  and  the  forward  movement  are  the  sadhana,  beyond  the  shadow  of  a  doubt.  I 
understood  that  the  speed  of  sadhana  was  greater  than  the  speed  of  the  forces  of  destruction.  And  it 
ended  in  certain  victory,  there  is  not  a  shadow  of  doubt.  This  feeling  of  POWER  once  I  was  firmly 
grounded  there  [in  the  ‘square’],  enough  power  to  help  others. 

These  were  universal  forces.  I  can’t  say  it  means  war.  I’ve  foreseen  many  wars  -  widespread 
wars,  local  wars,  so  many  wars  -  and  up  to  now  they  have  never  been  presented  to  me  in  that  fonn. 
They’ve  always  come  as  a  fire  -  flames,  flames,  the  home  burning.  Not  as  an  inundation. 

A  cataclysm? 

Ah,  that,  we’ve  already  had  some.  From  all  around,  people  are  proclaiming  that  in  1962,  there  will 
be  ...  some  people  have  even  foreseen  the  end  of  the  earth,  but  that’s  foolish!  For  the  earth  was  built 
with  a  certain  purpose,  and  before  things  are  done,  it  will  not  disappear. 

But  there  may  be  ...  some  changes. 


(soon  afterwards) 


In  fact,  the  Ashram’s  financial  situation  has  never  been  so  bad.  We’re  living  from  day  to  day, 
minute  to  minute  ...  One  day,  it  will  crack  -  all  these  things  are  connected  (Mother  is  alluding  to  the 
vision  of  the  flood  She  has  just  described). 

I  myself  am  clearly  seeing  it  from  the  other  side;  I  see  a  black,  muddy  form  -  a  black,  black 
force.  And  I  see  the  [Divine]  Force  acting  on  people  and,  miraculously,  the  money  comes  -  and 
then  ...  it’s  like  something  armored185  -  it  seeps  in  with  difficulty,  a  thin  trickle  from  day  to  day. 

Provided  the  sadhana  works,  that’s  all  that  is  needed. 

And  in  fact,  periodically,  in  one  way  or  another,  in  one  form  or  another,  I  receive  a  kind  of 
assurance,  a  promise  that  it  will  all  go  well. 


* 

When  I  read  what  Sri  Aurobindo  writes  in  The  Synthesis,  how  things  should  be  and  what  they  are 
now,  when  I  see  the  two,  that’s  when  I  feel  we’re  turning  in  circles. 

It’s  more  and  more  a  universal  yoga  -  the  whole  earth  -  and  it  is  like  that  day  and  night,  when  I 
walk  and  when  I  speak  and  when  I  eat.  It’s  constantly  like  that.  As  if  the  whole  earth  were  ...  it’s 
like  kneading  dough  to  make  it  rise. 

But  when  I  read  his  Yoga  of  Self-Perfection  and  see  ...  simply  what  we  are  ...  phew!  What  yeast 
we  would  need  to  make  all  that  rise! 

But  this  is  not  true:  HE  alone  is  doing  it,  it’s  always  He. 

And  sometimes  things  stagnate,  they  seem  so  absolutely  obscure  and  stupid.  And  then,  if  you 
simply  go  like  this  (gesture  of  offering),  simply,  truly  -  do  it,  not  think  it  -  it’s  instantly  like  a 
shower  of  bliss  ...  A  tiny  point,  something  very  small  which  looks  stubbornly  stupid  and  obstinate, 
if  only  you  do  this  (and  if  you  want,  you  can):  ‘Take,  take!’  Give  it  to  Him,  simply,  like  this,  truly 
give  it  to  Him:  ‘It’s  You,  it’s  Yours,  take  it,  do  with  it  what  You  want.’  And  instantly,  instead  of 
this  shrinking  and  this  painful  feeling  -  ‘What  in  the  world  can  I  do  with  all  this?’  -  a  shower,  it 
comes  like  a  shower.  Truly  Ananda.  Of  course,  if  you  are  stupid  enough  to  call  back  the  difficulty, 
it  returns.  But  if  you  remain  quiet,  if  you  keep  your  head  quiet,  it  goes  -  finished,  cured.  But  there 
are  thousands  and  thousands  and  thousands  of  such  points  ... 

With  my  japa,  I’ve  reached  about  seven  lakhs186  . 1  repeat  it  1,400  times  a  day.  But  you  must  be 
much  further  than  I! 187 

I don  ’t  see  what  effect  it ’s  having,  in  any  case  ... 

No,  but ...  in  the  morning  while  walking,  I  see  the  difference.  There  is  definitely  a  difference. 

In  the  beginning,  I  said  I’d  do  a  crore,188  and  if  that  were  not  enough,  I’d  do  ten  crore.  And  one 
crore  will  take  ...  20  years! 


185Mother  means  that  the  Ashramites  themselves  create  the  armor.  See  also  X’s  reflections  in  an  undated  letter  of  May 
1959. 


1860ne  lakh  =  100,000. 


187The  disciple  was  doing  about  five  hours  of  japa  a  day  at  this  time,  then  later  seven  hours  -  until  it  cracked. 


1880ne  crore  =  10,000,000. 


We  shall  see. 

This  also  is  quite,  enjoyable. 

This  feeling  of  something  ...  everlasting . 189  It’s  enjoyable.  Quiet ...  like  floating  in  eternity. 

You  reach  a  point  where  there  is  no  more  worry,  neither  for  yourself  nor  for  the  world  nor 
anything.  When  you  reach  that,  you  are  always  smiling,  you  are  always  happy.  And  when 
something  happens,  it  doesn’t  matter,  you  look  at  it  with  a  smile,  forever  a  smile. 

So  there  you  are,  my  child. 


July  26,  1960 

I  woke  up  at  three  o’clock  (what  I  mean  is,  I  came  out  of  my  nightly  activities).  I  had  an  hour  ahead 
of  me  before  getting  up.  So  I  concentrated  and  went  within. 

I  came  out  of  the  concentration  at  4: 10  -  quite  late.  For  I  was  VERY  busy!  I  was  in  some  sort  of 
small  house  similar  to  my  room,  but  it  was  at  the  top  of  a  tower,  for  you  could  see  the  landscape 
from  above.  It  was  similar  to  my  room  here,  with  large  windows.  And  I  was  much  taller  than  I 
actually  am,  for  there  was  a  ledge  below  each  window  (there  was  a  cupboard  below  each  window, 
as  in  my  room),  and  this  ledge  came  quite  low  on  me;  in  my  room,  it  comes  up  to  my  chest,  whereas 
it  was  much  lower  in  my  vision.  And  from  there  ...  oh,  what  beautiful  landscapes!  It  was  surrounded 
by  such  lovely  countryside!  ...  There  was  a  flowing  river,  woods,  sunlight  -  oh,  it  was  really  lovely! 
And  I  was  very  busy  looking  up  words  in  the  dictionary! 

I  had  taken  out  a  dictionary.  ‘There,  it’s  this  one,’  I  said.  Someone  was  next  to  me,  but  this 
someone  is  always  symbolic:  each  activity  takes  on  a  special  form  which  may  resemble  someone  or 
other.  (The  people  around  me  for  the  work  here  are  like  families  in  those  worlds  there;  they  are 
types,  that  is  -  each  person  represents  a  type  -  so  then  I  know  that  I’m  in  contact  with  all  the  people 
of  this  same  type.  If  they  were  conscious,  they  would  know  that  I  was  there  telling  them  something 
in  particular.  But  it’s  not  a  person,  it’s  a  type  -  and  not  a  type  of  character,  but  a  type  of  activity  and 
relationship  with  me.) 

I  was  with  a  certain  ‘type,’  and  I  was  looking  for  a  word,  I  wanted  to  conjugate  the  verb  vaincre 
[to  conquer]:  je  vaincs,  tu  vaincs,  il  vainc  -  good,  now  nous  vainquons,  how  do  you  spell  that,  nous 
vainquons?  It  was  so  funny!  And  I  was  looking  it  up  in  the  dictionary  -  vainquons,  how  do  you 
spell  that? 

And  at  the  same  time,  I  had  the  feeling  of  something  completely  arbitrary,  and  all  this  kind  of 
knowledge  seemed  so  unreal  -  a  completely  arbitrary  convention  corresponding  to  nothing 
luminous  anywhere. 

I  was  very  ...  oh,  I  was  very,  very  anxious  to  know  how  je  vaincs,  tu  vaincs  goes  ...  nous 
vainquons,  vous  vainquez.  And  I  woke  up  at  4: 15  ...  without  having  found  it  in  the  dictionary! 

Then  when  I  woke  up,  I  immediately  said  to  myself,  ‘Hmm,  it’s  true  -  how  would  I  spell  that?’ 


1 890riginal  English. 


It  took  me  half  a  minute  to  remember.  It  was  really  funny! 

Coming  at  the  end  of  the  night  as  it  did,  it  means  that  it’s  an  exploration  in  some  part  or  another 
of  a  subconscious  mental  activity.  And  you  can  make  so  many  discoveries  there  ...  it  is 
unbelievable!  But  it’s  lovely.  And  rarely  unpleasant.  There  was  a  time  when  it  was  very  unpleasant, 
oppressive,  full  of  effort  and  resistance.  I  would  want  to  go  somewhere,  but  it  would  be  impossible; 
I  toiled  and  struggled,  but  everything  would  go  wrong  -  the  straight  paths  would  suddenly  plunge 
into  an  abyss,  and  I’d  have  to  cross  the  abyss.  For  years  it  was  like  that.  Just  recently,  I  looked  back 
over  this  whole  period  ...  But  now  it  is  over.  Now  it’s  something  ...  it’s  lovely,  it’s  enjoyable,  it’s  a 
little  ...  it  has  a  childlike  simplicity. 

However,  it’s  not  a  personal  subconscient,  but  a  ...  it’s  more  than  the  Ashram.  For  me,  the 
Ashram  is  not  a  separate  individuality  -  except  in  that  vision  the  other  day,190  which  is  what 
surprised  me.  It’s  hardly  that.  Rather,  it  is  still  this  Movement  of  everything,  of  everything  that  is 
included.  So  it’s  like  entering  into  the  subconscient  of  the  whole  earth,  and  it  takes  on  forms  which 
are  quite  familiar  images  to  me,  but  they  are  absolutely  symbolic  and  very,  very  funny!  It  took  a 
moment  to  see  that  vainquons  is  spelled  q-u-o-n-s.  And  I  wasn’t  sure!  I  meant  to  ask  Pavitra  for  a 
dictionary  which  gives  verb  conjugations,  for  then  if  I’m  stuck  on  something  while  writing,  I  can 
look  it  up. 

The  other  day  I  wrote  something  -  it  was  a  letter  I  gave  Pavitra  to  read.  ‘I  think  there’s  a 
spelling  mistake,’  he  said.  ‘It’s  quite  possible,’  I  answered,  ‘I  make  plenty  of  them.’  He  looked  it  up 
in  a  splendid  dictionary  and,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  it  was  a  mistake.  I  meant  to  ask  him  for  a  dictionary 
this  morning. 

It’s  very  simple,  actually;  it’s  a  convention,  a  conventional  construction  somewhere  in  the 
subconscious  brain,  and  you  write  automatically.  But  if  you  want  to  try  to  bring  the  light  of  a 
slightly  higher  reason  into  it,  it’s  terrible.  It  becomes  meaningless,  and  you  forget  everything. 

You  have  to  be  inside  this  automatic  convention  to  remember;  it’s  very  difficult  (Mother 
laughs).  So  /  make  a  lot  of  spelling  mistakes  ...  (under  her  breath,  in  a  mischievous  tone)  l  think  I’ll 
ask  him  for  his  dictionary  (laughter)! 

Vaincre!  ...  /  wanted  to  write  to  someone  to  proclaim  the  Victory.  The  idea  was  very  clear,  it 
was  really  lovely.  Then,  in  a  second,  I  was  stopped  -  ‘How  do  you  spell  vainquons?  And  how  do 
you  spell  vaincs?’  The  person  next  to  me  didn’t  know  a  thing  -  nothing.  ‘It’s  spelled  v-a-i-n,’  he 
said.  So  I  said,  ‘No,  I  don’t  think  so!  ’  (laughter)  It  went  on  like  that,  you  know,  it  was  so  funny!  ... 

Are  you  good  at  spelling? 

Oh,  it  depends.  When  I  don ’t pay  attention,  it’s  all  right.  I  usually  don  7  make  mistakes  -  not  too 

many! 

Yes,  yes;  it’s  quite  automatic,  a  kind  of  convention  somewhere.  But  if  you  have  the  misfortune  to 
step  out  of  that  and  to  look  at  it,  it’s  finished,  you  don’t  know  anything  any  more. 


190The  vision  of  July  12,  1960. 


August  10, 1960 


(Concerning  two  teachers  at  the  Ashram  ’s  Center  of  Education  who  wrote  Mother  asking  if  ‘only  ’ 
Sri  Aurobindo  should  be  studied.  Pavitra  was  present  during  this  conversation.) 

An  eight  page  letter  -  nothing  but  passion. 

(Pavitra:)  Yes,  Mother. 

It’s  all  from  up  here  (Mother  touches  her  forehead). 

(Pavitra:)  Passion  and  reactions. 

Passion,  passion  -  but  this  passion  and  these  reactions  are  the  same  thing. 

And  then  they  stuff  into  it  what  they  consider  intellectual  reasonings,  but  their  intellectuality  is 
not  so  terribly  luminous  -  anyway  ...  (Mother  shows  the  letter)  Here,  I’ll  read  this  to  you  for  your 
edification  (!). 

‘And  finally,  Sweet  Mother,  what  I  would  really  like  to  know  is  the  purpose  of  our  Center  of 
Education.  Is  it  to  teach  the  works  of  Sri  Aurobindo?  And  only  these?  All  the  works  or  some 
only?  Or  is  it  to  prepare  the  students  to  read  the  works  of  Sri  Aurobindo  and  the  Mother?  Is  it  to 
prepare  them  for  the  Ashram  life  or  for  ‘outside’  occupations  as  well?  So  many  opinions  are 
floating  in  the  air,  and  even  the  old  disciples  from  whom  we  expect  some  knowledge  make  so 
many  contradictory  statements  ... 

(Laughing,  to  Pavitra:)  /  suppose  that’s  for  you! 

‘that  we  no  longer  know  what  to  believe  nor  on  what  to  base  ourselves.  So  what  should  be  our 
foundation  upon  which  to  work  in  the  absence  of  a  true  and  certain  knowledge?  Please  enlighten 
us,  Mother.’ 

I  answered.  The  letters  must  have  left.  I  wrote  (in  English)  that  it’s  not  so  much  a  question  of 
organization  as  of  attitude  -  to  begin  with.  Then  I  said,  ‘It  seems  to  me  that  unless  the  teachers 
themselves  get  out  of  this  ordinary  intellectuality  (!),  they  will  never  be  able  to  fulfill  their  duty.’ 
And  this  is  what  I  wrote  to  Z  (Mother  reads): 

‘It  is  not  a  question  of  preparing  students  to  read  these  or  some  other  works.  It  is  a  question  of 
drawing  all  those  who  are  capable  of  it  out  of  the  usual  human  routine  of  thought,  feelings, 
action;  of  giving  those  who  are  here  every  opportunity  to  reject  the  slavery  of  the  human  way  of 
thinking  and  acting;  of  teaching  all  those  who  want  to  listen  that  there  is  another,  truer  way  of 
living,  and  that  Sri  Aurobindo  taught  us  to  become  and  to  live  the  true  being  -  and  that  the 
purpose  of  education  here  is  to  prepare  the  children  for  this  life  and  to  make  them  capable  of  it. 


As  for  all  the  others,  all  those  who  want  the  human  way  of  thinking  and  living,  the  world  is  vast 
and  there  is  place  there  for  everyone. 


We  do  not  want  large  numbers;  we  want  a  selection.  We  do  not  want  brilliant  students;  we  want 
living  souls.’ 

Once  I’ve  drummed  that  into  their  heads  long  enough,  they  may  end  up  understanding. 


Then  Z  asks  about  languages:  should  they  choose  ONE  language  or  ...  I  don’t  know.  And  then, 
if  only  ONE  language,  which  language?  ...  She  said,  ‘Should  it  be  a  common  or  international 
language,  or  their  [the  students’]  vernacular?’  I  answered  her,  ‘If  only  ONE  language  is  known 
[well],  it  is  better  (international  or  common).  ’m 

These  are  matters  of  common  sense  -  I  don’t  even  know  why  they  bring  them  up. 

Then  they  asked  some  questions  about  teaching  literature  and  poetry.  I  answered  them.  And 
then,  at  the  bottom,  I  added  this: 

‘If  you  carefully  study  what  Sri  Aurobindo  has  written  on  every  subject ... 

He  wrote  on  EVERYTHING,  there  is  not  one  subject  on  which  he  has  not  written!  The  point  is 
to  find  it  everywhere. 

...  a  complete  knowledge  of  the  things  of  the  world  can  be  easily  achieved.’ 

What  I  call  ‘studying’  is  to  take  Sri  Aurobindo ’s  books,  where  he  quotes  or  speaks  of  one  thing 
or  another,  then  have  the  corresponding  books  -  when  he  quotes  something,  you  must  take  the  book 
it  corresponds  to;  when  he  speaks  of  something,  you  must  study  the  writings  on  that  subject.  This  is 
what  I  call  ‘studying.’  Then,  after  having  read  the  corresponding  works,  you  compare  them  with 
what  Sri  Aurobindo  has  said,  and  in  this  way  there  may  be  a  beginning  of  understanding.  If 
someone  is  very  studious,  he  can  ‘review’  all  that  has  ever  been  written  or  taught  by  going  through 
Sri  Aurobindo’s  books.  I  mean  this  for  someone  who  loves  working. 

I  SEE  this  state  of  mind,  this  mental  attitude  ...  Oh!  It’s  ...  it’s  so  repugnant.  People  are  so  afraid 
of  taking  sides,  so  afraid  of  appearing  biased;  they  are  so  afraid  of  appearing  to  have  faith,  so 
afraid  ...  Oh,  it’s  disgraceful. 

And  I  will  keep  hammering  that  into  your  heads  till  I  enter  right  into  them. 

*  *  * 


(Pavitra  hands  Mother  a  new  French  dictionary,  the  ‘All-in-One  ) 

Oh!  French  verbs!  ... 

(Pavitra:)  Yes,  Mother;  in  this  dictionary  each  verb  is  shown  -  the  category  it  is  in,  how  it  is 
conjugated ... 

The  verbs  ... 

...  Take  ‘choyer’  [coddle,  pamper] ,  for  example  ...  (Pavitra  shows  Mother),  it’s  conjugated  like 
‘aboyer’  [snarl,  bark]. 

What  a  comparison!  (Mother  laughs)  Oh,  they  have  such  psychological  subtleties!  But  it’s 
especially  for  the  spelling  of  verbs.  I  believe  I  know  how  to  conjugate! 

(Pavitra:)  It  has  everything  -  how  to  play  bridge,  how  to  play  tennis,  the  art  of  carving  a 
chicken  ... 

Fine. 

(Satprem.j  ‘All-in-One,  ’  it’s  rather  like  yoga! 


1910riginal  English. 


(After  Pavitra  leaves) 


I’m  continuing  The  Yoga  of  Self-Perfection.  It’s  really  something  ...  I  shall  never  tire  of  saying  it’s 
‘fabulous.’  Everything,  absolutely  everything,  in  detail,  everything  is  there.  And  he  foresaw  - 
foresaw,  gave  the  remedy;  foresaw,  gave  the  remedy;  foresaw,  gave  ... 

Have  you  read  it? 

Long  back. 

What  have  you  brought  me? 

I’ll  soon  finish  re-reading  1 Essays  on  the  Gita  ’ ... 

Ah! 


...  to  prepare  for  the  book.'92 1  haven ’t  quite  finished,  but  nearly.  Everyday  I  force  myself  to  read 
(well,  not  exactly  force )... 

But  that  one  also  is  ex-traor-dinary!  ... 

Yes,  there  are  many  things. 

What  is  so  interesting  in  it  is  this  insistence  on  the  divinity  of  man  ...  If  that  -  this  feeling  of  the 
inner  divinity  -  could  be  established  in  oneself  in  a  constant  way  (I’ve  seen  this  for  most  people  I 
know),  so  MANY  things  would  ...  There  is  no  need  for  any  effort  at  all,  things  fall  away  from  you 
like  dust. 

There  is  no  need  to  react  against  difficulties;  you  are  immediately  pulled  out  of  them,  as  if  you 
were  taken  out  like  this  (gesture  of pulling  someone  out  of  a  difficulty  with  her  two  fingers). 


August  16, 1960 


(Letter  from  Mother  to  Satprem  regarding  the  first  copy  of  his  first  book,  L  ’Orpailleur) 

8.16.60 


1925/7  Aurobindo  and  the  Transformation  of  the  World,  an  initial  book  on  Sri  Aurobindo  by  Satprem  that  was  never 
published.  It  was  meant  to  be  part  of  a  certain  ‘Series  of  Spiritual  Masters,’  but  finally  Sri  Aurobindo  never  took  part. 


Satprem 

A  very  beautiful  book, 
a  great  success 
forerunner 
opening  the  way 
to  other  books 
more  beautiful  still. 


Signed:  Mother 


August  20, 1960 


(While  filing  various  old  papers,  notes,  etc.,  Mother  happens  upon  the  plan  for  a  film  studio  at  the 

lake193 ) 

It’s  at  the  lake.  The  property  belonged  to  the  mission  and  at  that  time  its  manager  was  a  very  good 
friend  of  ours,  even  though  he  was  a  missionary.  He  said  that  he  would  arrange  for  us  to  have  it. 
Everything  was  arranged,  and  I  was  to  receive  the  money  to  buy  it  (they  asked  for  more  than  fifty  or 
sixty  thousand  rupees194  ).  But  then  the  money  didn’t  come  and  our  missionary  friend  left.  He’s  no 
longer  there;  he’s  been  replaced  by  someone  else. 

(Mother  looks  at  a  piece  of  paper)  ‘Calling  Antonin  Raymond195  .’  The  architect  for  the 
construction. 

Then  there  was  also  ‘making  ready  temporary  quarters  for  Z196 .’  But  then  Z  left;  he  died. 

That’s  what  happens  -  things  change.  It’s  not  that  the  project  stops,  but  it’s  forced  to  take  other 
paths. 

But  this  film  project  has  been  completely  abandoned  now,  hasn  7  it? 

No,  no.  You  see,  it  wasn’t  a  studio  -  it  was  a  school,  a  school  of  photography,  television  and  film. 
It’s  not  at  all  buried. 

But  L  has  enlarged  the  program.  (Mother  indicates  the  plan)  This  is  only  a  small  part  of  his 
193 Some  five  miles  from  Pondicherry. 


194  About  $7,000. 


195The  architect  who  had  already  built  ‘Golconde,’  the  Ashram  guest  house. 


196 An  American  filmmaker. 


extensive  total  program.  He  is  planning  to  have  a  school  of  agriculture,  a  modem  dairy  with  grazing 
land  -  there’s  a  lot  of  agriculture,  really  a  lot  -  fruit  orchards,  large  rice  fields,  many  things.  And 
then  a  ceramics  factory.  My  ceramics  factory  will  be  at  the  far  end  of  the  lake,  so  as  to  utilize  the 
clay  -  the  government  has  agreed;  as  they  have  to  dig  out  the  lake  one  day,  we  shall  use  the  top  soil 
for  the  fields.  First  we’ll  remove  all  the  pebbles  (you  know,  there  are  hills  over  there),  which  can  be 
used  for  construction  -  it’s  a  mine  of  pebbles.  After  removing  the  pebbles,  there  will  be  holes  which 
then  we’ll  fill  with  earth  from  the  lake.  And  below  this  earth  is  a  thick  and  compact  layer  of  clay 
which  is  so  hard  it  can’t  be  used  for  fanning  -  it’s  impossible  -  but  it’s  wonderful  for  making 
ceramics.  So  right  at  the  very  end,  in  Indian  territory,197  we’ll  have  a  large  ceramics  industry.  On  the 
other  side,  we’ll  have  a  little  factory  for  firing  clay. 

All  this  is  huge.  A  tremendous  program.198 

We  can  file  it  with  the  other  things. 

(Mother  pauses  at  a  note  from  February  10,  1956m  ) 

It  was  in  the  beginning  of  February  56  -  it  was  formidable.  It  was  really  formidable.  All  the  asuric 
forces  of  destruction  descended  upon  me  ...  They  tried  their  best. 

And  naturally,  they  make  use  of  all  those  around  me!  -  It’s  the  only  way  of  getting  at  my  body. 

I’m  used  to  it. 


*  *  * 


(Mother  looks  at  another  note) 

I  no  longer  remember  when  this  happened.  Someone  had  put  his  hands  on  my  shoulders  -  I  was  a 
bit  surprised.  This  person  imagined  that  I  would  feel  extraordinary  things.  I  must  have  made  a  face 
(I  wasn’t  expecting  it,  after  all).  Then  afterwards,  someone  asked  me,  ‘What  was  your  experience 
(!),  what  did  you  feel?’  I  didn’t  answer.  Once  I  was  alone,  this  is  what  I  wrote: 

Something  like  what 
Christ  must  have  experienced 
when  on  his  shoulders 
he  felt  the  weight 
of  the  cross. 

To  this  day  I  remember  the  experience.  Truly,  that’s  what  I  felt  -  I  did  not  intellectualize  it.  Exactly 
the  impression  of  what  Christ  must  have  experienced  when  he  felt  the  weight  of  the  cross.  It  was  the 
weight  of  a  whole  world  of  darkness,  unconsciousness,  universal  bad  will,  total  incomprehension, 
something  ...  And  it  really  felt  like  that  ...  as  if  I  were  carrying  a  frightful  weight  -  which  was 
frightful  because  of  its  darkness,  not  because  of  its  weight.  So  I  thought,  ‘Well,  well.  This  must  be 
how  Christ  felt  when  they  laid  the  cross  on  him.’ 

There  are  plenty  of  them!  (Mother  indicates  a  pile  of  various  papers)  In  another  pile  there  must 
be  as  many  again!  It  is  a  mania  for  collecting  papers. 


197Pondicherry  was  a  French  enclave,  under  French  administration.  The  neighboring  territory  was  the  Indian  state  of 
Madras,  or  Tamil  Nadu. 


198Perhaps  it  was  the  beginning  of  Auroville. 


199This  note  has  disappeared. 


Oh  no,  sweet  Mother!  Fortunately  they  have  been  kept. 


Oh!  I  have  plenty  of  them,  plenty.  There  must  be  many  more  boxes  full. 

*  * 


(Soon  afterwards,  in  regard  to  the  filing  of  these  notes) 

With  a  lot  of  patience  and  time,  it  could  all  be  organized,  but  I’d  have  to  be  convinced  that  it’s 
worth  the  trouble.  All  these  old  papers  are  like  dead  leaves.  We  should  make  a  bonfire.™ 

Oh,  no! 

YOU  people  may  have  this  opinion,  but  it’s  not  mine.  I’ll  tell  you  exactly  the  effect  it  has  on  me: 
whenever  someone  has  wanted  to  arrange  things,  I’ve  always  thought,  ‘Yes,  it  will  be  quite  useful 
to  arrange  these  things  ...  after  my  death!’ 

But  then  I’d  rather  not  die  ...  if  possible.  And  if  I  don’t  die,  it  will  be  perfectly  useless,  because 
that  would  then  be  the  obvious  proof  of  an  uninterrupted  ascent;  consequently,  what  there  will  be  at 
the  very  end  will  be  much  more  interesting. 

You  alone  have  convinced  me  that  the  ‘history’  of  the  way  might  be  of  some  interest,  so  I’m 
letting  you  do  it  ...  I’ve  taken  a  very,  very  handsome  file  upstairs  with  all  your  notes  in  it.201  It’s 
filling  up;  it’s  going  to  be  fonnidable!  (Mother  laughs)  ...  a  frightful  documentation. 

Not  at  all! 

Anyway  ...  I  am  doing  it  very  conscientiously.  I’m  gathering  everything  and  putting  it  all  together. 

You  know,  someone  who  appreciates  this  work  tremendously  is  Nolini.  Once  he  timidly  asked 
me,  ‘Could  I  have  a  copy202  ?’  ‘Fine,’  I  said.  Oh,  he  really  appreciates  it.  And  when  I  have 
something  amusing  like  these  most  recent  notes,  I  give  him  a  copy.  With  that,  he’s  happy.  So  he 
blesses  you!  (Mother  laughs)  Oh!  Without  you,  this  would  never  have  been  done  -  you  can  be  quite 
sure.  Never. 


*  # 


(Getting  up  to  leave,  Mother  holds  in  her  hands  the  first  copy  o/L’Orpailleur  which  the  disciple  has 

just  received  from  France  and  offered  to  Her) 

Shall  I  take  your  book  or  ...  ?  Don’t  you  want  it? 

I  don ’t  need  it. 

Don’t  you  want  it?  I  like  it  very  much,  very  much.  It’s  a  very  good  friend  (Mother  holds  the  book 
against  her  heart).  Oh,  I  must  write  a  few  letters  here  and  there,  to  France  (to  announce  the 


2000riginal  English. 


201  The  future  Agenda. 


202Of  these  conversations  that  make  up  the  Agenda. 


publication  of  the  book).  I  already  wrote  to  A,  but  I  must  write  him  again.  Though  I  suppose  he 
knows  that  it  has  come  out  -  he  should  know.  I  told  him  to  follow  it  with  ... 

I  don  7  know  if  the  book  has  come  out  yet.  I  believe  it ’s  to  appear  in  early  September. 

Oh,  so  this  was  only  the  harbinger. 

I  think  so.  That  was  their  plan,  in  any  case™ 

Did  you  tell  them  that  you’ve  received  it? 

Yes,  I  sent  them  a  note. 

Did  you  tell  them  you  were  happy? 

Yes,  yes. 

(Mischievously)  Did  you  tell  them  Mother  was  happy?  -  They  couldn’t  care  less!  (Mother  laughs) 

(Unruffled)  They  don ’t  exactly  know  who  ‘Mother  ’  is. 

No,  fortunately  not!  Fortunately,  my  child!  Fortunately. 

(Just  at  the  doorstep,  as  She  is  leaving,  Mother  tells  the  disciple  that  She  had  seen  three  books, 
a  trilogy,  and  the  third  one  would  be  about  Her.  And  She  adds:) 

Sri  Aurobindo  came  during  my  japa  to  tell  me,  ‘I  will  help  him  all  through.’ 


August  27,  1960 

I  would  like  to  see  you  much  more  often,  perhaps  three  or  four  times  a  week,  every  other  day  -  if 
people  would ... 

It’s  the  same  with  the  letters. 

They  assassinate  me  with  their  letters. 

The  little  basket  I  put  them  in  can  no  longer  close!  I  take  45  minutes  every  morning  upstairs  to 
write  letters.  And  I  receive  six,  seven,  eight,  ten  letters  a  day,  so  how  can  I  manage?  In  the  end,  Sri 
Aurobindo  spent  the  whole  night  writing  letters  -  till  he  went  blind. 

Myself,  I  can’t  afford  to  do  that,  I  have  other  things  to  do.  And  I’m  not  keen  on  going  blind 
either.  I  need  my  eyes,  they  are  my  work  instruments. 


203The  French  publishers,  Editions  du  Seuil. 


On  top  of  that,  there  are  all  the  people  who  want  to  see  me.  Now  everyone  wants  to  see  me!  And 
since  they  are  happy  after  coming  once,  they  ask  to  come  again!  If  I  were  very  disagreeable  and  told 
them  ...  (Mother  laughs)  but  that  can’t  be  done. 

...  We  should  not  allow  all  this  to  upset  us.  There  is  but  one  thing  to  do  -  remain  in  a  state  of 
constant  peace,  constant  equanimity,  for  things  are  not ...  they  are  not  very  pleasant.  Oh,  if  you  only 
knew  all  the  letters  they  write  me  ...  if  you  knew,  first  of  all,  the  tremendous  pile  of  stupidities  that 
need  never  be  written  at  all;  then,  added  to  that,  such  a  display  of  ignorance,  egoism,  bad  will,  total 
incomprehension  and  unequalled  ingratitude,  and  all  this  ...  so  candid,  my  child!  They  heap  all  this 
on  me  daily,  you  know,  and  it  comes  from  the  most  unexpected  quarters. 

If  this  were  to  affect  me  (Mother  laughs),  I  would  long  ago  have  been  ...  who  knows  where.  I 
don’t  care  at  all,  not  at  all,  really  not  at  all  -  it  doesn’t  bother  me,  it  makes  me  smile. 

(silence) 

So  don’t  let  yourself  be  upset  ...  I  often  think  of  you,  for  I  know  how  very  sensitive  you  are  to  all 
this.  It  is  ...  it  is  really  ugly.  A  whole  realm  of  human  intelligence  (it’s  too  great  a  compliment  to 
call  that  intelligence),  of  the  human  mind,  that  is  very,  very  ...  repugnant.  We  must  come  out  of  that. 
It  doesn’t  touch  us.  WE  are  elsewhere  -  elsewhere.  We  are  NOT  in  that  rut!  We  are  elsewhere, 
automatically. 

Our  head  is  above. 

I  myself  see  you  outside,  I  feel  you  outside,  I  always  meet  you  there. 


September  2, 1960 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Pondicherry,  September  2,  1 960 


Sweet  Mother, 

After  leaving  your  room,  X  kept  repeating,  ‘Very  wonderful.’  Then  he  explained  to  me  that 
‘white  rays’  were  ‘vibrating  everywhere’  -  along  the  whole  length  of  the  Kundalini,  white,  yellow 
and  blue,  but  especially  white  (he  indicated  the  forehead  in  particular). 

He  looked  quite  ecstatic  while  speaking  of  his  experience. 

In  conclusion,  he  said,  ‘Where  is  the  Mother  and  where  is  X?’  meaning,  I  suppose,  that  all 
separation  had  disappeared. 

With  love. 


Signed:  Satprem 


September  20, 1960 


X  has  spoken  to  me  several  times  of  his  lack  of  esteem  for  most  people  in  the  Ashram:  ‘Why 

does  Mother  keep  all  these  empty  pots?  ’  he  says. 

If  he  imagines  for  one  moment  that  I  believe  all  the  people  here  are  doing  sadhana,  he  is  grossly 
mistaken! 

The  idea  is  that  the  earth  as  a  whole  must  be  prepared  in  all  its  forms,  including  even  those  least 
ready  for  the  transformation.  There  must  be  a  symbolic  representation  of  all  the  elements  on  earth 
upon  which  we  can  work  to  establish  the  link.204  The  earth  is  a  symbolic  representation  of  the 
universe,  and  the  group  is  a  symbolic  representation  of  the  earth. 

Sri  Aurobindo  and  I  had  discussed  the  matter  in  1914  (quite  a  long  time  ago),  for  we  had  seen 
two  possibilities:  what  we  are  now  doing,  or  to  withdraw  into  solitude  and  isolation  until  we  had  not 
only  attained  the  Supermind,  but  begun  the  material  transformation  as  well.  And  Sri  Aurobindo 
rightfully  said  that  we  could  not  isolate  ourselves,  for  as  you  progress,  you  become  more  and  more 
universalized,  and  consequently  ...  you  take  the  burden  upon  yourself 205  in  any  case. 

And  life  itself  has  responded  by  bringing  people  forward  to  form  a  nucleus.  Of  course,  we 
clearly  saw  that  this  would  make  the  work  a  bit  more  complex  and  difficult  (it  gives  me  a  heavy 
responsibility,  an  enormous  material  work),  but  from  the  overall  point  of  view  -  for  the  Work  -  it’s 
indispensable  and  even  inevitable.  And  in  any  case,  as  we  were  later  able  to  verify,  each  one 
represents  simultaneously  a  possibility  and  a  special  difficulty  to  resolve.  I  have  even  said,  I 
believe,  that  each  one  here  is  an  impossibility.206 

But  this  way  of  seeing  is  too  far  removed  from  the  state  of  mind  and  spiritual  education  in  which 
X  has  lived,207  of  course,  for  him  to  understand.  Nor  am  I  in  favor  of  proselytizing  (to  convince  X); 
it  would  disturb  him  quite  needlessly.  He  has  not  come  here  for  that.  He  came  here  for  something 
special,  something  I  wanted  which  he  brought,  and  I  have  learnt  it.  Now  it’s  excellent,  he  is  a  part 
of  the  group  in  his  own  fashion,  that’s  all.  And  in  a  certain  way,  his  presence  here  is  having  a  very 
good  effect  on  a  whole  category  of  people  who  had  not  been  touched  but  who  are  now  becoming 
more  and  more  favorably  inclined.  It  was  difficult  to  reach  all  the  traditionalists,  for  example,  the 
people  attached  to  the  old  spiritual  forms;  well,  they  seem  now  to  have  been  touched  by  something. 


204With  the  Supramental  World. 


205Original  English. 


206‘Each  one  here  represents  an  impossibility  to  be  resolved’;  Words  of  the  Mother ,  p.  14  (January  15,  1933). 


207Traditional  tantrism. 


When  Amrita,208  seized  with  zeal,  wanted  to  make  him  understand  what  we  were  doing  here  and 
what  Sri  Aurobindo  had  wanted,  it  almost  erupted  into  an  unpleasant  situation.  So  after  that,  I 
decided  to  identify  myself  with  him  to  see  -  I  had  never  done  this,  because  normally  I  only  do  it 
when  I  am  responsible  for  someone,  in  order  to  truly  help  someone,  and  I’ve  never  felt  any 
responsibility  in  regard  to  X.  So  I  wanted  to  see  his  inner  situation,  what  could  and  could  not  be 
done.  That  was  the  day  you  saw  him  coming  down  from  our  meditation  in  an  ecstatic  state,  when  he 
told  you  that  all  separation  between  him  and  me  had  dropped  away  -  it  was  to  be  expected,  I 
anticipated  as  much! 

But  when  I  did  that,  I  saw  what  X  wanted  to  do  for  me.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  I  recalled  that  when 
we  first  met  I  had  told  him  that  everything  was  all  right  up  to  this  point  (Mother  indicates  the 
region  above  the  head),  but  below  that,  in  the  outer  being,  I  wanted  to  hasten  the  transformation, 
and  things  there  were  difficult  to  handle. 

When  Sri  Aurobindo  was  here,  I  never  bothered  about  all  this;  I  was  constantly  up  above  and  I 
did  what  the  Gita  and  the  traditional  writings  advise  -  I  left  it  to  Nature’s  care.  In  fact  I  left  it  to  Sri 
Aurobindo’s  care.  ‘He  is  making  the  best  use  of  it,’  I  would  say.  ‘He  will  manage  it,  he  will  do  with 
it  what  he  wants.’  And  I  was  constantly  up  above.  And  from  up  there  I  worked,  leaving  the 
instrument  as  it  was  because  I  knew  that  he  would  see  to  it. 

Actually,  it  was  very  different  at  that  time  because  I  was  not  even  aware  of  any  resistance  or  any 
difficulty  in  the  outer  being;  it  was  automatic,  the  work  was  done  automatically.  Later  on,  when  I 
had  to  do  both  things  -  what  he  had  been  doing  as  well  as  what  I  was  doing  -  it  became  rather 
complicated  and  I  realized  there  were  many  ...  what  we  could  call  ‘gaps’  -  things  which  had  to  be 
worked  out,  transformed,  set  right  before  the  total  work  could  be  done  without  hindrance.  So  then  I 
began.  And  several  times  I  thought  how  unfortunate  it  was  that  I  had  never  studied  or  pursued 
certain  ancient  Indian  disciplines.  Because,  for  example,  when  Sri  Aurobindo  and  I  were  working  to 
bring  down  the  supramental  forces,  a  descent  from  the  mental  plane  to  the  vital  plane,  he  was 
always  telling  me  that  everything  I  did  (when  we  ‘meditated’  together,  when  we  worked)  -  all  my 
movements,  all  my  gestures,  all  my  postures,  all  my  reactions  -  was  absolutely  tantric,  as  if  I  had 
pursued  a  tantric  discipline.  But  it  was  spontaneous,  it  did  not  correspond  to  any  knowledge,  any 
idea,  any  will,  nothing,  and  I  thought  it  was  like  that  simply  because,  as  He  knew,  naturally  I 
followed. 

Later  on,  when  Sri  Aurobindo  left  his  body,  I  said  to  myself,  ‘If  only  I  knew  what  he  had 
known,  it  would  be  easier!’  So  when  Swami  and  later  X  came,  I  thought,  ‘I  am  going  to  take 
advantage  of  this  opportunity.’  I  had  written  to  Swami  that  I  was  working  on  transforming  the  cells 
of  the  body  and  that  I  had  noticed  the  work  was  going  faster  with  X’s  influence.  So  it  was 
understood  that  X  would  help  when  he  came  -  that’s  how  things  began,  and  this  idea  has  remained 
with  X.  But  I  have  raced  on  -  I  don’t  wait.  I’ve  raced  on,  I’ve  gone  like  wildfire.  And  now  the 
situation  is  reversed.  What  I  wanted  to  find  out,  I  found  out.  I  experienced  what  I  wanted  to 
experience,  but  he  is  still  ...  He  is  very  kind,  actually,  he  wants  really  to  help  me.  So,  when  I 
identified  with  him  the  other  day  during  our  meditation,  I  realized  that  he  wanted  to  give  silence, 
control  and  perfect  peace  to  the  physical  mind.  My  own  ‘trick,’  if  you  will,  is  to  have  as  little 
relationship  with  the  physical  mind  as  possible,  to  go  up  above  and  stay  there  -  this  (Mother 
indicates  her  forehead),  silent,  motionless,  turned  upwards,  while  That  (gesture  above  the  head) 
sees,  acts,  knows,  decides  -  all  is  done  from  there.  Only  there  can  you  feel  at  ease. 

Along  the  way,  I  once  went  down  into  this  physical  mind  for  awhile  to  try  to  set  it  right,  to 
organize  it  a  little  (it  was  done  rather  quickly,  I  didn’t  stay  there  long).  So  when  I  went  inside  X,  I 
saw  ...  It  was  rather  curious,  for  it’s  the  opposite  of  the  method  we  follow.  In  his  material 
consciousness  (physical  and  vital),  he  has  trained  himself  to  be  impersonal,  open,  limitless,  in 
communication  with  all  the  universal  forces.  In  the  physical  mind,  silence,  immobility.  But  in  the 
speculative  mind,  the  one  there  at  the  very  top  of  the  head  ...  what  an  organization,  phew!  ...  All  the 


208One  of  the  Ashram  secretaries. 


tradition  in  its  most  superb  organization,  but  such  a  ri-gi-dity!  And  it  had  a  pretty  quality  of  light,  a 
silver  blue  -  VERY  pretty.  Oh,  it  was  very  calm,  wonderfully  calm  and  quiet  and  still.  But  what  a 
ceiling  it  had!  -  the  outer  form  resembled  rigid  cubes.  Everything  inside  was  beautiful,  but  that ... 
There  was  a  very  large  cube  right  at  the  top,  I  recall,  bordered  by  a  purple  line,  which  is  a  line  of 
power  -  all  this  was  quite  luminous.  It  looked  like  a  pyramid;  the  smaller  cubes  formed  a  kind  of 
base,  the  lower  part  of  which  faded  into  something  cloudy,  and  then  this  passed  imperceptibly 
downwards  to  a  more  material  realm,  or  in  other  words,  the  physical  mind.  The  cube  on  top  was  the 
largest  and  most  luminous,  and  the  least  yielding  -  even  inflexible,  you  could  say.  The  others  were 
somewhat  less  defined,  and  at  the  bottom  it  was  very  blurred.  But  up  at  the  top!  -  that’s  where  I 
wanted  to  go,  right  to  the  top. 

When  I  got  there,  I  felt  a  moment  of  anguish;  my  feeling  was  that  nothing  could  be  done.  Not 
for  him  in  particular,  but  universally,  for  all  those  in  his  category  -  it  seemed  hopeless.209  If  that  was 
perfection,  then  nothing  more  could  be  done.  This  lasted  only  a  second,  but  it  was  painful.  And  then 
I  tried  ...  that  is,  I  wanted  to  bring  my  consciousness  down  into  the  highest  cube  -  this  eternal, 
universal  and  infinite  consciousness  which  is  the  first  and  foremost  expression  of  the  manifestation 

-  but ...  nothing  doing.  It  was  impossible.  I  tried  for  several  minutes  and  saw  that  it  was  absolutely 
impossible.  So  I  had  to  make  a  curious  movement  (I  couldn’t  get  through  it,  it  was  impassable),  I 
had  to  come  back  down  into  the  so-called  lower  consciousness  (not  lower,  actually  -  it  was  vast  and 
impersonal),  and  from  there  I  came  out  and  regained  ...  my  equilibrium.  This  is  what  gave  me  that 
splitting  headache  I  told  you  about.  I  came  out  of  there  as  if  I  were  carrying  the  weight ...  the  weight 
of  an  irreducible  absolute  -  it  was  dreadful.  Unfortunately,  I  was  unable  to  rest  afterwards,  and  as 
people  were  waiting  to  see  me,  I  had  to  talk  -  which  is  very  tiring  for  me.  And  this  produced  a 
bubbling  in  my  head,  like  a  ...  this  dark  blue  light  of  power  in  matter  was  there,  shot  through  with 
streaks  of  white  and  gold,  and  all  this  was  flashing  back  and  forth  in  my  head,  this  way  and  that  way 

-  I  thought  I  was  going  to  have  a  stroke!  (Mother  laughs) 

This  lasted  a  good  half  hour  before  I  could  calm  it  down,  make  it  quiet,  quiet.  And  I  saw  that 
this  came  from  the  fact  that  he  wanted  to  bring  the  Power  down,  to  transmit  the  Power  into  the 
physical  mind!  But  as  soon  as  I’m  put  in  contact  with  the  Power,  you  understand,  it  makes 
everything  explode!  (Mother  laughs)  It  felt  exactly  like  my  head  was  going  to  explode! 

I  felt  better  that  night  because  I  was  concentrated,  but  my  head  was  still  hurting  a  little.  Then  the 
following  day  I  said  to  myself,  or  rather  I  told  him  inwardly,  ‘Whether  you  like  it  or  not,  I  am 
bringing  down  what’s  up  above;  it  is  the  only  way  I  can  feel  comfortable!’  And  I  told  you  what 
happened  -  as  soon  as  I  sat  down  I  was  so  surprised,  for  he  didn’t  start  doing  what  he  had  done  the 
day  before;  I  myself  did  the  same  thing,  I  ...  participated,  so  to  speak,  in  his  will  (so  as  to  find  out), 
but  with  the  resolve  to  remain  consciously  in  contact  with  the  highest  consciousness,  as  always,  and 
to  bring  it  down.  And  it  came  in  a  marvelous  flood.  He  was  quite  happy,  he  did  not  protest!  ...  All 
the  pain  was  gone,  there  was  nothing  left,  it  was  perfect.  Only  towards  the  end  of  the  meditation  did 
he  again  want  to  start  doing  his  little  trick  of  enclosing  my  physical  mind  in  this  construction,  but  it 
didn’t  last  -  I  watched  all  this  from  above. 

And  he  isn’t  aware  of  this,  actually,  he  isn’t  aware  at  all.  If  he  were  told,  he  would  absolutely 
deny  it  -  for  him,  it’s  an  opening  onto  Infinity!  ...  But  in  fact,  it’s  always  like  that,  we  are  always 
shut  in,  each  of  us  -  each  one  is  enclosed  inside  certain  limits  which  he  doesn’t  feel,  for  should  he 
feel  it,  he  would  get  out!  Oh,  I  know  this  feeling  very  well,  for  when  I  was  with  Sri  Aurobindo  I 
was  open  in  this  way  (gesture  towards  the  heights),  and  I  always  had  this  feeling  of  ‘Yes,  my 
child  ...’  -  He  tolerated  me  the  way  I  was  and  waited  for  it  to  change.  That’s  truly  how  things  are, 
you  know.  And  now  I  feel  my  limits,  which  are  the  limits  of  the  world  as  it  is  at  present,  but  beyond 
that  there’s  an  unmanifested  immensity,  eternity  and  infinity  -  to  which  we  are  closed.  It  merely 
seeps  in  -  it  is  not  the  great  opening.  What  I  am  trying  to  bring  about  is  the  great  opening.  Only 
when  it  has  opened  wide  will  there  really  be  the  ...  (how  should  I  put  it?)  the  irreducible  thing,  and 


209Original  English. 


all  the  world’s  resistance,  all  its  inertia,  even  its  obscurity  will  be  unable  to  swallow  it  up  -  the 
determining  and  transfonning  thing  ...  I  don’t  know  when  it  will  come. 

But  this  experience  with  X  was  really  interesting.  I  learned  many  things  that  day,  many  things  ... 
If  you  concentrate  long  enough  on  any  one  point,  you  discover  the  Infinite  (and  in  his  own 
experience  he  found  the  infinite),  what  could  be  called  your  own  Infinite.  But  this  is  not  what  WE 
want,  not  this;  what  we  want  is  the  direct  and  integral  contact  between  the  manifested  universe  and 
the  Infinite  out  of  which  this  universe  has  emerged.  So  then  it  is  no  longer  an  individual  or  personal 
contact  with  the  Infinite,  it’s  a  total  contact.  And  Sri  Aurobindo  insists  on  this,  he  says  that  it’s 
absolutely  impossible  to  have  the  transfonnation  (not  the  contact,  but  the  supramental 
transformation)  without  becoming  universalized  -  that  is  the  first  condition.  You  cannot  become 
supramental  before  being  universal.  And  to  be  universal  means  to  accept  everything,  be  everything, 
become  everything  -  really  to  accept  everything.  And  as  for  all  those  who  are  shut  up  in  a  system, 
even  if  it  belongs  to  the  highest  regions  of  thought,  it  is  not  THAT. 

But  to  each  his  destiny,  to  each  his  work,  to  each  his  realization,  and  to  want  to  change 
someone’s  destiny  or  someone’s  realization  is  very  wrong.  For  it  simply  throws  him  off  balance  - 
that’s  all  it  does. 

But  for  us  who  want  an  integral  realization,  are  all  these  mantras  and  this  daily  japa  really  a 

help,  or  do  they  also  shut  us  in? 

It  gives  discipline.  It’s  an  almost  subconscious  discipline  of  the  character  more  than  of  thought. 

Especially  at  the  beginning,  Sri  Aurobindo  used  to  shatter  to  pieces  all  moral  ideas  (you  know, 
as  in  the  Aphorisms,  for  example).  He  shattered  all  those  things,  he  shattered  them,  really  shattered 
them  to  pieces.  So  there’s  a  whole  group  of  youngsters110  here  who  were  brought  up  with  this  idea 
that  ‘we  can  do  whatever  we  want,  it  doesn’t  matter  in  the  least!’  -  that  they  need  not  bother  about 
all  those  concepts  of  ordinary  morality.  I’ve  had  a  hard  time  making  them  understand  that  this 
morality  can  be  abandoned  only  for  a  higher  one  ...  So,  one  has  to  be  careful  not  to  give  them  the 
Power  too  soon. 

It’s  an  almost  physical  discipline.  Moreover,  I  have  seen  that  the  japa  has  an  organizing  effect 
on  the  subconscient,  on  the  inconscient,  on  matter,  on  the  body’s  cells  -  it  takes  time,  but  by 
persistently  repeating  it,  in  the  long  run  it  has  an  effect.  It  is  the  same  principle  as  doing  daily 
exercises  on  the  piano,  for  example.  You  keep  mechanically  repeating  them,  and  in  the  end  your 
hands  are  filled  with  consciousness  -  it  fills  the  body  with  consciousness. 

I  have  a  hard  time  making  X  understand  that  I  have  work  to  do  when  I’m  with  him.  He  doesn  7 

understand  that  one  can  work. 

Of  course  not!  A  disciplined  work,  which  to  us  seems  important,  is  to  him  basically  an  ignorance. 
What  is  true  to  such  a  person  is  a  contemplative,  ecstatic  life  -  along  with  a  sentiment  of 
compassion  and  charity,  so  that  nonetheless  you  spend  a  bit  of  your  time  helping  out  the  poor 
brutes!  But  the  true  thing  is  ecstatic  contemplation.  As  for  those  who  are  advanced  and  yet  still 
attach  some  importance  to  work  -  it’s  irrational! 

The  only  way  I  can  make  him  understand  that  I  have  work  to  do  is  to  tell  him,  ‘ Mother  asked  me 

to  do  it  then  he  keeps  quiet. 

Yes,  he  doesn’t  dare  say  a  thing  ...  He  doesn’t  understand  it  very  well.  What  funny  ideas,  eh!  He 
must  think  I  have  funny  ideas,  but  anyway  ...  In  the  end,  he  tells  himself,  ‘Oh,  it’s  just  because  she’s 
born  in  France  that  she  is  still  carrying  this  burden’ ! 


210Original  English. 


It’s  quite  funny. 

Sri  Aurobindo  saw  more  clearly.  He  said  -  it  was  even  the  first  thing  he  told  the  boys  around 
him  when  I  came  in  1914  (he  had  only  seen  me  once)  -  he  told  them  that  I,  Mirra  (he  immediately 
called  me  by  my  first  name),  ‘was  born  free.’ 

And  it’s  true,  I  know  it,  I  knew  it  then.  In  other  words,  all  this  work  that  usually  has  to  be  done 
to  become  free  was  done  beforehand,  long  ago  -  quite  convenient! 

He  saw  me  the  next  day  for  half  an  hour.  I  sat  down  -  it  was  on  the  verandah  of  the  ‘Guest 
House’,  I  was  sitting  there  on  the  verandah.  There  was  a  table  in  front  of  him,  and  Richard  was  on 
the  other  side  facing  him.  They  began  talking.  Myself,  I  was  seated  at  his  feet,  very  small,  with  the 
table  just  in  front  of  me  -  it  came  to  my  forehead,  which  gave  me  a  little  protection  ...  I  didn’t  say 
anything,  I  didn’t  think  anything,  try  anything,  want  anything  -  I  merely  sat  near  him.  When  I  stood 
up  half  an  hour  later,  he  had  put  silence  in  my  head,  that’s  all,  without  my  even  having  asked  him  - 
perhaps  even  without  his  trying. 

Oh,  I  had  tried  -  for  years  I  had  tried  to  catch  silence  in  my  head  ...  I  never  succeeded.  I  could 
detach  myself  from  it,  but  it  would  keep  on  turning  ...  But  at  that  moment,  all  the  mental 
constructions,  all  the  mental,  speculative  structures  ...  none  of  it  remained  -  a  big  hole. 

And  such  a  peaceful,  such  a  luminous  hole! 

Afterwards,  I  kept  very  still  so  as  not  to  disturb  it.  I  didn’t  speak,  above  all  I  refrained  from 
thinking  and  held  it,  held  it  tight  against  me  -  I  said  to  myself,  ‘make  it  last,  make  it  last,  make  it 
last ...’ 

Later  on,  I  heard  Sri  Aurobindo  saying  that  there  were  two  people  here  to  whom  he  had  done 
this  and  as  soon  as  there  was  silence,  they  panicked:  ‘My  God,  I’ve  gone  stupid! !’  And  they  threw  it 
all  overboard  by  starting  to  think  again. 

Once  it  was  done,  it  was  done.  It  was  well-rooted. 

For  years,  from  1912  to  1914, 1  did  endless  exercises,  all  kinds  of  things,  even  pranayama211  -  if 
it  would  only  shut  up!  Really,  if  it  would  only  be  quiet!  ...  I  was  able  to  go  out  (that  wasn’t 
difficult),  but  inside  it  kept  turning. 

This  lasted  about  half  an  hour.  I  quietly  remained  there  -  I  heard  the  noise  of  their  conversation, 
but  I  wasn’t  listening.  And  then  when  I  got  up,  I  no  longer  knew  anything,  I  no  longer  thought 
anything,  I  no  longer  had  any  mental  construction  -  everything  was  gone,  absolutely  gone,  blank!  - 
as  if  I  had  just  been  born. 


* 


(soon  afterwards) 

I  went  to  inaugurate  the  sugar  factory212  the  other  day.  I  had  an  amusing  experience. 

From  the  material  point  of  view,  it’s  almost  hellish  -  the  noise,  the  smell  -  a  nauseating  smell.  I 
had  to  apply  all  my  will  not  to  be  physically  disturbed  -  they  made  me  climb  up  narrow  little  stairs, 
go  down,  climb  back  up,  look  into  deep  pits.  At  some  places  there  weren’t  even  guardrails,  so  I  had 
really  to  control  myself. 

I  was  watching  all  this  sugar  cane  -  piles  of  sugar  cane  -  which  is  thrown  into  the  machine,  and 
then  it  travels  along  and  falls  down  to  be  crushed,  crushed,  and  crushed  some  more.  And  then  it 
comes  back  up  to  be  distilled.  And  then  I  saw  ...  all  this  is  living  when  it’s  thrown  in,  you  see,  it’s 


2 1 1 Pranayama :  breathing  exercises. 


212New  Horizon  Sugar  Mills,  which  belongs  to  a  disciple.  The  inauguration  was  on  September  15. 


full  of  its  vital  force,  for  it  has  just  been  cut.  As  a  result,  the  vital  force  is  suddenly  hurled  out  of  the 
substance  with  an  extreme  violence  -  the  vital  force  comes  out  ...  the  English  word  angry  is  quite 
expressive  of  what  I  mean  -  like  a  snarling  dog.  An  angry  force.213 

So  I  saw  this  -  I  saw  it  moving  about.  And  it  kept  coming  and  coming  and  coming, 
accumulating,  piling  up  (they  work  24  hours  a  day,  six  days  a  week  -  only  on  the  seventh  do  they 
rest).  So  I  thought  that  this  angry  force  must  have  some  effect  on  the  people  -  who  knows,  maybe 
this  is  what  creates  accidents.  For  I  could  see  that  once  the  sugar  cane  was  fully  crushed  and  had 
gone  back  up  the  chute,  this  force  that  had  been  beaten  out  was  right  there.  And  this  worried  me  a 
little;  I  thought  that  there  must  be  a  certain  danger  in  doing  such  a  thing!  ...  What  saves  them  is  their 
ignorance  and  their  insensitivity.  But  Indians  are  never  entirely  insensitive  in  the  way  Westerners 
are  -  they  are  much  more  open  in  their  subconscious. 

I  didn’t  speak  of  it  to  anyone,  but  it  caused  me  some  concern.  And  just  the  next  day  the  machine 
broke  down!  When  I  was  informed,  immediately  I  thought  ...  It  was  then  repaired,  and  again  it 
broke  down  -  three  times.  Then  the  following  night,  just  before  ten  o’clock  ...  I  should  mention  that 
during  the  day  I  had  thought,  ‘But  why  not  attract  these  forces  to  our  side,  take  them  and  satisfy 
them,  give  them  some  peace  and  joy  and  use  them?’  I  thought  about  it,  concentrated  a  little,  but 
then  I  didn’t  bother  any  further.  At  ten  o’clock  that  evening,  they  came  upon  me  -  in  a  flood!  They 
kept  coming  and  coming.  And  I  was  busy  with  them  the  whole  time.  They  were  not  ugly  (not  so 
luminous  either!  ),  they  were  wholesome,  straightforward  -  honest  forces.  So  I  worked  on  them. 
This  began  exactly  at  9:30,  and  for  one  hour  I  was  busy  working.  After  an  hour,  I’d  had  enough: 
‘Listen,  this  is  quite  fine,  you’re  very  nice,  but  I  can’t  spend  all  my  time  like  this!  We  shall  see  what 
to  do  later’  -  for  it  absorbed  my  whole  consciousness.  They  kept  coming  and  coming  (you 
understand  what  that  means  to  a  body?!).  So  at  10:30  I  told  them,  ‘Listen,  my  little  ones,  be  quiet 
now,  that’s  enough  for  today  ...’  At  10:30,  the  machine  broke  down! 

I  found  out,  of  course,  because  they  log  everything  at  the  factory,  so  when  they  came  to  inform 
me  of  the  breakdown  the  next  morning,  I  asked  them  what  time  it  had  happened  -  exactly  10:30. 

After  that,  I  made  a  kind  of  pact  with  them  -  the  trouble,  you  see,  is  that  there  are  constantly 
new  ones.  If  only  they  were  the  same!  They  are  constantly  coming  in  new  floods,  so  there  was  the 
need  of  a  permanent  formation  over  there.  I’ve  tried  to  make  this  permanent  fonnation,  to  take  and 
absorb  them,  to  calm  them  down  and  scatter  them  a  little  so  they  don’t  accumulate  in  one  spot, 
which  in  the  end  could  be  dangerous. 

I  found  this  quite  amusing. 

The  most  recent  incident  took  place  a  few  days  ago,  for  there  was  a  general  excitement  in  the 
factory  due  to  the  expected  visit  of  a  government  minister  during  the  day.  That  afternoon,  exactly  at 
half  past  three,  I  felt  that  I  had  to  make  a  little  concentration.  So  I  paid  attention  and  saw  poor  L214 
praying  to  me.  He  was  praying,  praying,  calling  me  -  such  a  strong  call  that  it  pulled  me.  I  was 
having  my  bath  (you  know  what  happens  when  I’m  very  strongly  pulled  -  I’m  stopped  right  in  the 
very  midst  of  a  gesture,  then  the  consciousness  goes  wandering  off!  And  I  can’t  do  anything,  it 
stops  me  dead.  That’s  exactly  what  happened  to  me  in  the  bathroom).  When  I  saw  what  was 
happening,  I  straightened  things  out.  Then  they  must  have  had  their  ceremony,  for  suddenly  I  felt, 
‘Ah,  now  it  has  calmed  down,  it’s  all  right.’  And  I  went  on  to  something  else. 

The  next  day,  L  came  to  see  me.  He  told  me  that  shortly  before  3:30,  the  machine  had  stopped 
once  again,  but  this  time  it  was  quickly  set  right;  they  found  out  right  away  what  had  to  be  done. 
And  then  he  told  me  that  at  3:45  he  had  started  praying  to  me  that  all  should  go  well.  ‘Oh,  I  know!’ 
I  said. 


2130riginal  English. 


214The  disciple  who  manages  the  sugar  factory. 


Things  can  be  done  in  this  way.  In  truth,  a  lot  can  be  done  -  it’s  man’s  ignorance  that  gets  him 
in  trouble. 


September  24,  1960 

Imagine!  I  thought  I  had  lost  my  hearing.  But  I  just  realized  that  when  I  don’t  hear  ...  it’s  because 
I’m  elsewhere. 

Just  now,  I  concentrated  a  little  and  tuned  into  your  voice.  And  not  one  word  escaped  me!  It 
became  clear,  absolutely  clear. 

Normally  I’m  not  there.  And  some  people  I  hear,  others  I  don’t  hear.  But  I  hadn’t  imagined  that 
it  depended  on  this  -  I  thought  I  had  lost  my  hearing.  But  just  now  I  stopped  everything,  absolutely 
everything,  I  concentrated  and  tuned  in  -  it  became  so  clear! 

Basically,  it  must  be  the  same  for  my  eyes.  Sometimes  I  see  wonderfully,  and  sometimes  it’s 
blurred.  It  must  be  for  the  same  reason  ...  I  probably  have  to  learn  to  concentrate! 

Yes,  laugh  if  you  want  -  what  I  mean  is  concentrate  on  what  I’m  doing.  Not  concentrate 
within  ...  Precisely,  I’m  rather  too  concentrated! 


October  2, 1960 


10.2.60 


This  wonderful  world  of 
delight  waiting  at  our 


gates  for  our  call 
to  come  down  upon 


earth.215 


215Text  written  by  Mother  in  French  and  English;  it  became  the  New  Year’s  Message  for  1961. 


Signed:  Mother 


H=  *  * 

This  world  of  Delight  above  us  is  waiting  -  not  for  us  to  be  ready  but  for  us  to  accept,  for  us  to 
condescend  to  receive  it! 

This  is  what  I  am  looking  at  in  this  photograph.216 
In  fact,  this  is  what  I  am  pulling  down. 


*  * 

My  nights  contain  so  many  things  that  I  don’t  always  do  the  necessary  work  to  remember  -  that 
takes  up  a  lot  of  time.  Sometimes  I  get  up  during  the  night  and  sit  there  recalling  precisely 
everything  that  has  already  happened,  but  that  sometimes  takes  half  an  hour!  -  and  as  urgent  work 
still  calls,  I  don’t  take  the  time  to  remember  and  it  gets  erased.  But  then,  you  know,  with  all  that’s 
coming  you  could  write  volumes! 

From  a  documentary  standpoint,  my  nights  are  getting  quite  interesting.  In  the  Yoga  of  Self- 
Perfection,  Sri  Aurobindo  describes  precisely  this  state  you  reach  in  which  all  things  assume 
meaning  and  a  quality  of  inner  significance,  clarification  of  various  points,  and  help.  From  this 
point  of  view,  my  nights  have  become  extraordinary.  I  see  infinitely  more  things  than  I  saw  before. 
Before,  it  was  very  limited  to  a  personal  contact  with  people.  Now  ...  In  my  nights,  each  thing  and 
each  person  has  the  appearance,  the  gesture,  the  word  or  the  action  that  describes  EXACTLY  his 
condition.  It’s  becoming  quite  interesting. 

Of  course,  I  much  prefer  being  in  my  great  currents  of  force  -  from  a  personal  standpoint,  such 
immensity  of  action  is  much  more  interesting.  But  these  documentary  things  are  also  valuable.  It  is 
so  tremendously  different  from  the  dreams  and  even  the  vi.  signs  you  have  when  you  enter  certain 
representative  realms  of  the  mind  (which  is  what  I  used  to  do).  It  is  so  different,  it  has  another 
content,  another  life  altogether:  it  carries  its  light,  its  understanding,  its  explanation  within  itself  - 
you  look,  and  everything  is  explained. 

It  always  gives  me  the  feeling  that  I  am  shrinking  a  little,  but  it’s  interesting.  And  it’s  useful,  for 
I  am  constantly  moving  about  and  doing  things  with  people;  it  indicates  to  me  what  I  have  to  say 
and  do  with  each  one.  It’s  useful.  But  all  the  same,  I  miss  the  fullness  and  joy  of  the  more 
impersonal  Movement  of  forces. 

Before  going  to  bed,  sometimes  I  say  to  myself,  ‘I  will  do  what  is  necessary  to  spend  my  night 
in  these  great  currents  of  force’  (because  there  is  a  way  to  do  it).  And  then  I  think,  ‘Oh,  what  an 
egotist  you  are,  my  girl!’  So  sometimes  it  happens,  sometimes  it  doesn’t  -  when  there’s  something 
important  to  do,  it  doesn’t  happen.  But  all  I  have  to  do  is  concentrate  in  a  certain  way  before  going 
to  sleep  to  spend  my  whole  night  in  these  ...  very  far  from  here,  very  far  ...  I  can’t  say  very  far  from 
the  earth,  for  surely  it’s  in  an  intermediate  zone  between  the  forces  from  above  and  the  earth’s 
atmosphere.  That’s  what  it  mainly  is,  in  any  case.  It’s  a  great  universal  current  as  well,  but  mainly 
it’s  what  descends  and  comes  onto  the  earth,  and  it  is  permeating  the  earth’s  atmosphere  all  the 
time,  all  the  time,  and  it  comes  with  this  wide,  overall  vision  -  it  makes  for  wonderful  nights  ...  I  no 
longer  bother  about  people  at  all  -  at  least  not  as  such,  but  in  a  more  impersonal  way. 

(silence) 

I  have  been  pestered  my  whole  life  by  ...  something  similar  to  the  sense  of  duty  without  its 
stupidity.  Sri  Aurobindo  had  told  me  that  it  was  a  ‘censor,’  that  I  had  with  me  a  ‘considerable’  one! 


216A  photograph  of  Mother  that  accompanied  the  1961  New  Year’s  Message. 


It  was  constantly,  constantly  telling  me,  ‘No,  it’s  not  like  that,  it’s  like  this  ...  Oh,  no!  It’s  wrong  to 
do  that;  be  careful,  don’t  be  egotistical;  be  careful  -  do  this,  do  that.’  He  was  right,  but  I  sent  it 
away  long  ago  -  or  rather,  Sri  Aurobindo  sent  it  away.  But  there  remains  the  habit  ...  of  not  doing 
what  I  like.  Rather,  of  doing  what  MUST  be  done,  and  whether  it’s  pleasant  or  not  makes  no 
difference. 

This,  too,  Sri  Aurobindo  had  explained  to  me.  I  used  to  tell  him,  ‘Yes,  you  always  speak  of 
life’s  “delight,”  life  for  the  sake  of  its  delight.’  But  as  soon  as  I  had  the  notion,  as  soon  as  I  was  put 
in  the  presence  of  the  Supreme,  it  was:  ‘For  You  -  exclusively  what  You  want.  You  are  the  sole,  the 
unique  and  exclusive  reason  for  being.’  And  that  has  remained,  and  this  movement  is  so  strong  that 
even  when  ...  you  see,  now  I  have  ecstasy  and  ananda  in  abundance  -  everything  comes,  everything. 
But  even  then,  even  when  that  is  there,  something  in  me  always  turns  towards  the  Supreme  and 
says,  ‘Does  this  TRULY  serve  You?  Is  it  what  You  expect  of  me,  what  You  want  from  me?’ 

This  has  protected  me  from  all  seeking  for  pleasure  in  life.  It  was  a  wonderful  protection, 
because  pleasure  always  seemed  so  futile  to  me  -  yes,  futile;  for  the  sake  of  your  personal 
satisfaction.  Later,  I  even  understood  how  foolish  it  is,  for  you  can  never  be  satisfied  -  though  when 
you’re  small  you  don’t  yet  know  that.  I  never  liked  it:  ‘But  is  it  really  useful,  does  it  serve  some 
purpose?’  And  I  still  have  this  attitude  in  regard  to  my  nights.  I  have  this  widening  of  the 
consciousness,  this  impersonalization,  this  wonderful  joy  of  being  above  ...  all  that.  But  at  the  same 
time  I  also  have,  ‘I’m  here  in  this  body,  on  earth,  to  do  something  -  I  mustn’t  forget  it.  And  this  is 
what  I  have  to  do.’  But  probably  I’m  wrong!  ... 

I’m  waiting  for  the  Lord  to  tell  me  clearly. 

But  when  I  say  that,  I  always  see  Him  smiling  -  a  smile  ...  it’s  all  very  good  to  smile,  but  ...  it 
encourages  you  more  than  it  cures  you! 


October  2, 1960 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Pondicherry,  October  2,  I960 
Sunday  evening 


Sweet  Mother, 

As  I  did  not  find  the  translation  of  the  Message  fully  satisfying,  I  have  continued  pondering  over 
it.  Then  another  possibility,  which  MAY  be  better,  presented  itself.  Here  it  is: 

Ce  monde  merveilleux  de  felicite, 

a  nos  portes, 

qui  attend  notre  appel 


pour  descendre  sur  la  terre.217 

In  this  way  we  keep  the  word  appel  [call],  which  is  strong.  All  I  did  was  change  the  relative 
pronoun  (at  first  you  had  translated  it  as  qui,  a  nos  portes,  attend  notre  appel.. ,218  ). 

I  don’t  know.  Perhaps  it  is  more  incisive  this  way. 

Your  child,  with  love. 

Signed:  Satprem 


(Mother’s  reply) 


Yes,  my  dear  little  one,  it  is  much  better  like  that  -  it  becomes  poetry.219 
With  all  my  tender  affection. 


Monday  morning 


Signed:  Mother 


October  8, 1960 

There  are  moments  while  reading  the  Synthesis  of  Yoga  when  I  feel  so  clearly  why  he  put  this 
particular  word  in  that  particular  place,  and  why  it  could  not  have  been  otherwise  -  that’s  what 
makes  the  translation  difficult. 

For  the  placement  of  words  is  not  the  same  in  English  and  in  French.  In  English,  for  example, 
the  place  an  adverb  occupies  is  of  major  importance  for  the  precise  meaning.  In  French  also,  but 
generally  it’s  not  the  same!  If  at  least  it  were  exactly  the  opposite  of  English  it  would  be  easier,  but 
it’s  not  exactly  the  opposite.  It’s  the  same  thing  for  the  word  order  in  a  series  of  modifiers  or  any 
string  of  words;  usually  in  English,  for  example,  the  most  important  word  comes  first  and  the  least 
important  last.  In  French,  it’s  usually  the  opposite  -  but  it  doesn’t  always  work! 

The  spirit  of  the  two  languages  is  not  the  same.  Something  always  escapes.  This  must  surely  be 
why’  revelations’  (as  Sri  Aurobindo  calls  them)  sometimes  come  to  me  in  one  language  and 


217‘This  wonderful  world  of  delight, 
at  our  gates, 
waiting  for  our  call 
to  come  down  upon  earth.’ 


218‘waiting  at  our  gates  for  our  call ...’ 


219A  somewhat  mocking’!’  is  missing.  This  note  was  accompanied  by  a  flower:  ‘Aristocracy  of  Beauty’. 


sometimes  in  the  other.  And  it  does  not  depend  on  the  state  of  consciousness  I’m  in,  it  depends  on 
what  has  to  be  said. 

And  the  revelations  would  probably  be  more  exact  if  we  had  a  more  perfect  language.  Our 
language  is  poor. 

Sanskrit  is  better.  Sanskrit  is  a  much  fuller  and  subtler  language,  so  it’s  probably  much  better. 
But  these  modem  languages  are  so  artificial  (by  this,  I  mean  superficial,  intellectual);  they  cut 
things  up  into  little  pieces  and  remove  the  light  behind. 

I  also  read  On  the  Veda  where  Sri  Aurobindo  speaks  of  the  difference  between  the  modern  mind 
and  the  ancient  mind;  and  it’s  quite  obvious,  especially  from  the  linguistic  point  of  view.  Sanskrit 
was  certainly  much  more  fluid,  a  better  instrument  for  a  more  ...  global,  more  comprehensive  light, 
a  light  containing  more  things  within  itself. 

In  these  modern  languages,  it’s  as  if  things  are  passed  through  a  sieve  and  broken  up  into 
separate  little  bits,  so  then  you  have  all  the  work  of  putting  them  back  together.  And  something  is 
always  lost. 

But  I  even  doubt  that  the  modern  mind,  built  as  it  now  is,  would  be  able  to  know  Sanskrit  in  this 
way.  I  think  they  are  cutting  up  Sanskrit  as  well,  out  of  habit. 

We  need  a  new  language. 

We  need  to  make  a  new  language. 

Not  some  kind  of  esperanto!  -  but  sounds  springing  straight  from  above. 

The  SOUND  must  be  captured.  There  must  be  one  sound  at  the  origin  of  all  language  ...  And 
then,  to  capture  it  and  project  it.  To  make  it  vibrate  ...  because  it  doesn’t  vibrate  in  the  same  way 
here  as  it  does  above. 

That  would  be  an  interesting  work. 

The  words  must  have  a  power  -  an  expressive  power.  Yes,  they  should  carry  the  meaning  in 
themselves! 


October  11, 1960 


I’m  just  now  finishing  the  Yoga  of  Self-Perfection  ...  When  we  see  what  human  life  is  and,  even  in 
the  best  of  cases,  what  it  represents  in  the  way  of  imbecility,  stupidity,  narrowness,  meanness  (not 
to  mention  ignorance  because  that  is  too  flagrant)  ...  and  even  those  who  believe  themselves  to  have 
generous  heart,  for  example,  or  liberal  ideas,  a  desire  to  do  good!  ...  Each  time  the  consciousness 
orients  itself  in  one  direction  to  attain  some  result,  everything  that  was  in  existence  (not  just  one’s 
personal  existence,  but  this  sort  of  collectivity  of  existences  that  each  being  represents),  everything 
that  is  contrary  to  this  effort  immediately  presents  itself  in  its  crudest  light. 

It  happened  this  morning  while  I  was  walking  back  and  forth  in  my  room.  I  had  finished  my  japa 
...  I  had  to  stop  and  hold  my  head  in  my  hands  to  keep  from  bursting  into  tears.  ‘No,  it  is  too 
dreadful,’  I  said  to  myself;  ‘and  to  think  that  we  want  Perfection!  ’ 

Then  naturally  there  came  as  a  consolation:  only  because  the  consciousness  is  getting  closer  to 
THE  REAL  THING  can  it  see  all  this  wretchedness,  and  the  contrast  alone  makes  these  things 
appear  so  mean. 

And  it’s  true,  those  things  I  saw  this  morning  which  seemed  so  ...  above  all  stupid  and  ugly  (I’ve 
never  had  a  sense  of  morality  at  any  time  in  my  life,  thank  God!  But  stupid  and  ugly  things  have 
always  seemed  ...  I’ve  always  done  my  best  to  distance  myself  from  them,  even  when  I  was  very 
small).  And  now  I  see  that  these  things  which  seem  not  only  ridiculous  but,  well,  almost  shameful 
were  considered,  as  I  recall,  remarkably  noble  earlier  on  and  they  represented  an  exceptionally  lofty 
attitude  in  life  -  the  very  same  things.  So  then  I  understood  that  it’s  quite  simply  a  question  of 
proportion. 

And  that’s  how  the  world  is  -  things  which  now  seem  totally  unacceptable  to  us,  things  we 
CANNOT  tolerate,  were  quite  all  right  in  the  past. 

The  day  before  yesterday,  I  spent  the  whole  night  looking  on.  I  had  read  the  passage  by  Sri 
Aurobindo  in  The  Synthesis  on  ‘supramental  time’  (wherein  past,  present  and  future  coexist  in  a 
global  consciousness).  While  you’re  in  it,  it’s  marvelous!  You  understand  things  perfectly.  But 
when  you’re  not  in  it ...  Above  all,  there’s  this  problem  of  how  to  keep  the  force  of  one’s  aspiration, 
the  power  of  progress,  this  power  which  seems  so  inevitable  -  so  inevitable  if  existence  (let’s 
simply  take  terrestrial  existence)  is  to  mean  anything  and  its  presence  to  be  justified.  (This 
ascending  movement  towards  a  progressive  ‘better’  that  will  be  eternally  better)  -  How  is  this  to  be 
kept  when  you  have  the  total  vision  ...  this  vision  in  which  everything  coexists.  At  that  moment,  the 
other  becomes  something  like  a  game,  an  amusement,  if  you  will.  (Not  everyone  finds  it  amusing!) 
And  when  you  contain  all  that,  why  allow  yourself  the  pleasure  of  succession?  ...  Is  this  pleasure  of 
succession,  of  seeing  things  one  after  the  other,  equal  to  this  intensity  of  the  will  for  progress?  ... 
Words  are  foolish! 

The  effort  to  see  and  to  understand  this  gripped  me  all  night.  And  when  I  woke  up  this  morning, 
I  thanked  the  Lord;  I  said  to  Him,  ‘Obviously,  if  You  were  to  keep  me  totally  in  that  consciousness, 
I  could  no  longer  ...  I  could  no  longer  do  my  work!’  How  could  I  do  my  work?  For  I  can  only  say 
something  to  people  when  I  feel  it  or  see  it,  when  I  see  that  it’s  what  must  be  said,  but  if  I  am 
simultaneously  in  a  consciousness  in  which  I’m  aware  of  everything  that  has  led  to  that  situation, 
everything  that  is  going  to  happen,  everything  I’m  going  to  say,  everything  the  other’s  going  to  feel 
-  then  how  could  I  do  it! 

There  are  still  many  hundreds  of  years  to  go  before  it  becomes  entirely  what  Sri  Aurobindo 
describes  -  there’s  no  hurry! 

The  mental  silence  Sri  Aurobindo  gave  you  in  1914,  about  which  you  were  speaking  the  other 

day ... 


It  has  never  left.  I  have  always  kept  it.  Like  a  smooth  white  surface  turned  upwards.  And  at  any 
moment  at  all ...  You  see,  we  speak  like  a  machine,  but  there  nothing  moves;  at  any  moment  at  all  it 
can  turn  towards  the  heights.  It’s  ALWAYS  turned  like  that,  but  we  can  become  aware  of  it  being 
like  that.  Then,  if  we  listen,  we  can  hear  what  comes  from  above.  My  active  consciousness,  which 
was  here  (Mother  points  to  her  forehead),  has  settled  above,  and  it  has  never  again  moved  from 
there. 

I  told  this  to  X  -  or  rather  had  someone  tell  him  -  to  see  his  reaction.  And  I  realized  that  he  did 
not  understand  in  the  least!  Once  Amrita  asked  him  how  he  himself  SAW  and  KNEW  things.  So  he 
tried  to  explain;  he  told  Amrita  that  he  had  to  pull  his  consciousness  upwards  by  a  gradual  effort,  to 
go  beyond  the  heart,  beyond  the  throat  center  ...  to  pull  it  right  up  here  (the  top  of  the  head),  and 
once  there,  you’re  divine,  you  know!  All  of  a  sudden,  I  understood  that  when  I  said  it  was  there, 
above  the  head,  it  must  have  seemed  absolutely  impossible  to  him!  For  him,  it’s  the  crown  of  the 
head 1220  (what  they  call  the  thousand-petalled  lotus),  just  at  the  top  of  the  head,  whereas  in  my 
experience  it  opens,  it  rises  and  you  go  above,  and  then  you  settle  there  ...  For  a  number  of  years  it 
even  changed  my  [physical]  vision  -  it  was  as  if  I  were  looking  at  things  from  above.  It  returns  from 
time  to  time,  too,  as  if  suddenly  I  were  seeing  from  above  instead  of  from  here,  at  eye  level. 

But  the  faculty  of  forming  thoughts  is  now  there,  up  above;  it’s  no  longer  here  (Mother  points  to 
her  forehead).  And  that’s  contrary  to  their  teachings. 

The  tantrics  recognize  seven  chakras,221  I  believe.  Theon  said  he  knew  of  more,  specifically  two 
below  the  body  and  three  above.  That  is  my  experience  as  well  -  I  know  of  twelve  chakras.  And 
really,  the  contact  with  the  Divine  Consciousness  is  there  (Mother  motions  above  the  head),  not 
here  (at  the  top  of  the  head).  One  must  surge  up  above. 

Doing  japa  seems  to  exert  a  pressure  on  my  physical  consciousness,  which  goes  on  turning! 

How  can  I  silence  it?  As  soon  as  my  concentration  is  not  absolute,  the  physical  mind  starts  up  - 
it  grabs  at  anything,  anything  at  all,  any  word,  fact  or  event  that  comes  along,  and  it  starts 
turning,  turning.  If  you  stop  it,  if  you  put  some  pressure  on  it,  then  it  springs  back  up  two 
minutes  later  ...  And  there  is  no  inner  consent  at  all.  It  chews  on  words,  it  chews  on  ideas  or 
feelings  -  interminably.  What  should  I  do? 

Yes,  it’s  the  physical  mind.  The  japa  is  made  precisely  to  control  the  physical  mind. 

I  myself  use  it  for  a  very  special  reason,  because  ...  You  see,  I  invoke  (the  words  are  a  bit 
strange)  ...  the  Lord  of  Tomorrow.  Not  the  unmanifest  Lord,  but  the  Lord  as  he  will  manifest 
‘tomorrow,’  or  in  Sri  Aurobindo’s  words,  the  divine  manifestation  in  its  supramental  form. 

So  the  first  sound  of  my  mantra  is  the  call  to  that,  the  evocation.  With  the  second  sound,  the 
body’s  cells  make  their’  surrender,’  they  give  themselves.  And  with  the  third  sound  comes  the 
identification  of  this  [the  body]  with  That,  which  produces  the  divine  life.  These  are  my  three 
sounds. 

And  in  the  beginning,  during  the  first  months  that  I  was  doing  the  japa,  I  felt  them  ...  I  had  an 
almost  detailed  awareness  of  these  myriads  of  cells  opening  to  this  vibration;  the  vibration  of  the 
first  sound  is  an  absolutely  special  vibration  (you  see,  above,  there  is  the  light  and  all  that,  but 
beyond  this  light  there  is  the  original  vibration),  and  this  vibration  was  entering  into  all  the  cells  and 
was  reproduced  in  them.  It  went  on  for  months  in  this  way. 

Even  now,  when  something  or  other  is  not  all  right,  I  have  only  to  reproduce  the  thing  with  the 


220Original  English. 


22\Chakrci:  center  of  consciousness.  1)  The  crown  of  the  head  (sahasradala),  2)  between  the  eyebrows  (ajna),  3)  the 
throat  (vishuddha),  4)  the  heart  (anahcita)  5)  the  navel  (manipura),  6)  the  abdomen  (svadhishthana),  7)  the  base  of  the 
spine  (muladhara). 


same  type  of  concentration  as  at  the  beginning  ...  for,  when  I  say  the  japa,  the  sound  and  the  words 
together  -  the  way  the  words  are  understood,  the  feel  of  the  words  -  create  a  certain  totality.  I  have 
to  reproduce  that.  And  the  way  it’s  repeated  is  evolving  all  the  time.  The  words  are  the  same, 
however,  the  original  sound  is  the  same,  but  it’s  all  constantly  evolving  towards  a  more 
comprehensive  realization  and  a  more  and  more  complete  STATE.  So  when  I  want  to  obtain  a 
certain  result,  I  reproduce  a  certain  type  of  this  state.  For  example,  if  something  in  the  body  is  not 
functioning  right  (it  can’t  really  be  called  an  illness,  but  when  something’s  out  of  order),  or  if  I  wish 
to  do  some  specific  work  on  a  specific  person  for  a  specific  reason,  then  I  go  back  to  a  certain  state 
of  repetition  of  my  mantra,  which  acts  directly  on  the  body’s  cells.  And  then  the  same  phenomenon 
is  reproduced  -  exactly  the  same  extraordinary  vibration  which  I  recognized  when  the  supramental 
world  descended.  It  comes  in  and  vibrates  like  a  pulsation  in  the  cells. 

But  as  I  told  you,  now  my  japa  is  different.  It  is  as  if  I  were  taking  the  whole  world  to  lift  it  up; 
no  longer  is  it  a  concentration  on  the  body,  but  rather  a  taking  of  the  whole  world  -  the  entire  world 
-  sometimes  in  its  details,  sometimes  as  a  whole,  but  constantly,  constantly  -  to  establish  the 
Contact  (with  the  supramental  world). 

But  what  you  are  speaking  of,  this  sort  of  sound-mill,  this  milling  of  words  interminably 
repeating  the  same  thing,  I’ve  suddenly  caught  it  two  or  three  times  (not  very  often  and  with  long 
intervals).  It  has  always  seemed  fantastic  to  me!  How  is  it  stopped?  ...  Always  in  the  same  way.  It’s 
something  that  takes  place  outside,  actually;  it’s  not  inside  -  it’s  outside,  on  the  surface,  generally 
somewhere  here  (Mother  indicates  the  temples),  and  the  method  is  to  draw  your  consciousness  up 
above,  to  go  there  and  remain  there  -  white.  Always  this  whiteness,  white  like  a  sheet  of  paper,  flat 
like  a  plate  of  glass.  An  absolutely  flat  and  white  and  motionless  surface  -  white!  White  like 
luminous  milk,  turned  upwards.  Not  transparent:  white. 

When  this  mill  starts  turning  -  usually  it  comes  from  this  side  (Mother  indicates  the  right  side  of 
the  head)  -  it  takes  hold  of  any  sound  or  any  word  at  all,  and  then  it  starts  turning,  harping  on  the 
same  thing.  This  has  happened  to  me  a  dozen  times  perhaps,  but  it  doesn’t  come  from  me;  it  comes 
from  outside,  from  someone  or  something  or  some  particular  work.  So  then  you  take  it  -  as  if  you 
were  picking  it  up  with  pincers,  and  then  ...  (She  lifts  it  upwards),  then  I  hold  it  there,  in  this 
motionless  white  -  no  need  to  keep  it  there  for  long! 

Aren’t  you  aware  of  this  thing  up  above,  this  white  plate  at  the  crown  of  the  head?  It’s  what 
receives  intuitions.  It’s  just  like  a  photographic  plate,  and  it’s  not  even  active  -  things  pass  right 
through  it  without  our  even  realizing  it.  And  then  if  you  concentrate  just  a  little,  everything  stops, 
everything  stops. 

A  few  days  ago,  I  recall,  I  wanted  to  know  something  that  was  going  to  happen.  I  thought  that 
with  the  consciousness  of  supramental  time,  I  could  find  out  ...  ‘I  MUST  find  out  what’s  going  to 
happen.  What’s  going  to  happen?’  -  No  answer.  So  I  concentrated  on  it,  which  is  what  I  usually  do, 
I  stopped  everything  and  looked  from  above  -  total  silence.  Nothing.  No  answer.  And  I  felt  a  slight 
impatience:  ‘But  why  can’t  I  know?!’  And  what  came  was  the  equivalent  of  (I’m  translating  it  in 
words),  ‘It’s  none  of  your  business! !  ‘ 

So  I  understand  more  and  more.  Everything  -  this  whole  organization,  this  whole  aggregate,  all 
these  cells  and  nerves  and  sensors  -  are  all  meant  uniquely  for  the  work,  they  have  no  other  purpose 
than  the  work;  every  foolish  act  that  is  done  is  for  the  work;  every  stupidity  that  is  thought  is  for  the 
work;  you  are  made  the  way  you  are  because  only  in  that  way  can  you  do  the  work  -  and  it’s  none 
of  your  business  to  seek  to  be  somewhere  else.  That’s  my  conclusion.  ‘Very  well,  as  You  wish,  may 
Your  will  be  done!’  -  No,  not  ‘be  done’;  it  IS  done.  As  You  wish,  exactly  as  You  wish! 

And  in  the  end,  it’s  quite  fun. 


*  *  * 


(Concerning  an  old  ‘Question  and  Answer  ’  of  July  4,  1956  at  the  Playground  in  which  Mother 
speaks  of  her  first  realization  of  the  Divine,  in  Paris) 

Just  as  the  shooting  star  flashed  past,  there  sprang  from  my  consciousness:  ‘To  realize  the  divine 
union,  for  my  body!  ’  And  before  twelve  months  were  out,  it  was  done. 

I  remember,  it  was  at  the  door  of  our  studio222  in  Paris.  I  can  still  see  it.  That’s  how  I  always 
remember  -  the  picture  simply  comes  to  me. 

I  am  just  finishing  The  Synthesis  of  Yoga,  and  what  Sri  Aurobindo  says  is  exactly  what  has 
happened  to  me  throughout  my  life.  And  he  explains  how  you  can  still  make  mistakes  as  long  as 
you  are  not  supramentalized.  Sri  Aurobindo  describes  all  the  ways  by  which  images  are  sent  to  you 
-  and  they  are  not  always  images  or  reflections  of  the  truth  of  things  past,  present  or  future;  there 
are  also  all  the  images  that  come  from  human  mental  formations  and  all  the  various  things  that  want 
to  be  considered.  It  is  very,  very  interesting.  And  interestingly  enough,  in  these  few  pages  I  have 
found  a  description  of  the  work  I  have  spent  my  whole  life  doing,  trying  to  SIFT  out  all  we  see. 

I  can  only  be  sure  of  something  once  a  certain  type  of  picture  comes,  and  then  the  whole  world 
could  tell  me,  ‘But  things  didn’t  happen  like  that’;  I  would  reply,  ‘Sorry,  but  I  see  it.’  And  that  type 
of  picture  is  certain,  for  I  have  studied  it,  I  have  studied  their  differences  in  quality  and  the  texture 
of  the  pictures.  It  is  very  interesting. 


*  *  * 

Basically,  I  see  more  and  more  that  the  Supreme  Consciousness  makes  use  of  ANYTHING  AT 
ALL  when  the  time  comes. 

In  these  Questions  and  Answers,  for  example,  you  had  wanted  to  edit  out  the  words  ‘Sweet 
Mother’  since  people  from  the  West  might  not  understand.  But  then,  we  have  just  now  received  a 
letter  from  someone  who  suddenly  had  a  very  beautiful  experience  when  he  came  across  those 
words,  ‘Sweet  Mother.’  He  saw,  he  suddenly  felt  this  maternal  presence  of  love  and  compassion 
watching  over  the  world.  The  moment  had  come  and,  precisely,  it  did  its  work.  It’s  very  interesting. 

Mentally  we  say,  ‘Oh,  that  can’t  go.’  And  even  I  am  often  inclined  to  say,  ‘Don’t  publish  this, 
don’t  speak  of  something  or  other.’  Then  I  realize  how  silly  it  is!  There  is  something  that  uses 
everything.  Even  what  may  seem  useless  to  us  -  or  perhaps  worse  than  useless,  harmful  -  might  be 
just  the  thing  to  give  someone  the  right  shock. 


October  15, 1960 

I  see  Z  every  day,  yet  he  asked  me,  ‘Why  do  you  do  nothing  for  me?’! !  ‘Each  time  you  come  here,’ 
I  told  him,  ‘I  am  NECESSARILY  doing  something  for  you,  it  cannot  be  otherwise!’  But  since  it’s 


222Rue  Lemercier. 


just  a  part  of  his  work,223  it  doesn’t  count! 

Of  course,  I  don’t  say,  ‘All  right,  now  let’s  meditate!  ...’  So  on  his  birthday  I’ll  have  to  sit  down 
and  tell  him,  ‘Now  we  are  going  to  meditate’  -  that  way  he’ll  feel  sure.  What  childishness! 

It’s  so  funny  -  the  thing  in  itself  doesn’t  exist  for  people.  What’s  important  to  them  is  their 
attitude  towards  the  thing,  what  they  think  of  it.  How  odd! 

Each  thing  carries  within  itself  its  own  truth  -  its  absolute  truth,  so  luminous  and  so  clear.  And  if 
you  are  in  contact  with  THAT,  then  everything  falls  into  place  so  wonderfully;  but  men  are  NOT  in 
contact  with  that,  they  are  always  in  contact  through  their  thought:  what  they  think  of  something, 
what  they  feel  about  something,  the  meaning  they  attach  to  it  (or  sometimes  it’s  worse)  -  but  the 
highest  they  go  is  always  the  thought  they  have  of  it.  That’s  what  creates  all  this  mixture  and  all  this 
disorder  -  things  in  themselves  are  very  good,  and  then  they  get  confused. 


October  19, 1960 


(The  day  before  ‘Kali  Puja,  ’  the  ritual  festival  devoted  each  year  in  India  to  the  goddess  Kali,  the 

warrior  aspect  of  the  universal  Mother) 

She  has  already  been  here  for  two  days  and  ...  Oh,  yesterday  especially,  she  was  so  ...  in  such  a 
mood!  -  like  a  warrior.  I  said  to  her,  ‘But  why  not  change  them  through  ...  through  an  excess  of 
love?’ 

So  then  she  answered  (I  remember  how  she  put  it),  ‘First  a  good  punch  in  the  chest  (she  didn’t 
say  ‘in  the  nose’!),  a  good  punch  in  the  chest,  and  then  when  they’re  down,  gasping  for  air,  they’re 
ready.  ’ 

That’s  one  opinion! 


*  *  * 


(Concerning  a  tantric) 


Those  people  deny  the  reality  of  all  physical  needs. 

It’s  quite  all  right  when  you’ve  come  TO  THE  END,  when  you  have  totally  mastered  the  body 
by  means  of  the  spiritual  consciousness.  But  until  then,  I  don’t  agree  - 1  do  not  at  all  agree. 

It’s  the  same  as  when  X  tells  people,  ‘I  am  feeding  you,  so  eat!’  And  he  serves  you  ten  times 
more  than  you  can  put  in.  If  you  tell  him,  ‘My  stomach  can’t  digest  it,’  he  answers  that  this  is 
nonsense:  ‘Eat,  and  you  will  see!’  And  in  fact,  up  above  -  that  is,  once  you’ve  mastered  it  -  it’s 
perfectly  true.  But  we  aren’t  there  yet,  far  from  it!  He  himself  is  sick  all  the  time. 

Then  he  would  answer,’  Everyone  is  sick.’  -  But  that’s  no  reason. 


223Z’s  work  involved  seeing  Mother  everyday  to  watch  over  her  health  and  her  food. 


It’s  very  well  to  say,  ‘If  you  live  in  the  Spirit,  it’s  not  the  same.’  That’s  quite  true,  but ...  MUCH 
later.  For  the  last  two  years,  I  myself  have  been  learning  this,  and  I  see  how  difficult  it  is  -  one 
mustn’t  boast.  And  to  say,  ‘Oh,  it’s  all  the  same  to  me,’  is  a  way  of  boasting.  It  SHOULD  NOT  be 
all  the  same  to  you.  This  body  is  not  meant  for  us  -  it  wasn’t  for  us  that  it  was  given,  it’s  for  the 
Work,  so  consequently  it  must  be  in  working  order. 

That’s  what  annoys  me  sometimes.  Why  not  have  this  mastery?  We  SHOULD  be  masters  of  it. 
With  consciousness,  we  should  be  able  to  be  the  masters  of  our  bodies. 

Yes,  this  was  precisely  the  extraordinary  thing  Sri  Aurobindo  had.  He  made  no  effort ...  But  then  he 
didn’t  use  it  on  himself! 

But  for  humans,  this  is  something  UNTHINKABLE. 

He  wanted  to  go. 

You  see,  he  had  decided  to  go.  But  he  didn’t  want  me  to  know  that  he  was  doing  it  deliberately; 
he  knew  that  if  for  a  single  moment  I  knew  he  was  doing  it  deliberately,  I  would  have  reacted  with 
such  a  violence  that  he  would  not  have  been  able  to  leave! 

And  he  did  this  ...  he  bore  it  all  as  if  it  were  some  unconsciousness,  an  ordinary  illness,  simply 
to  keep  me  from  knowing  -  and  he  left  at  the  very  moment  he  had  to  leave.  But ... 

And  I  couldn’t  even  imagine  he  was  gone  once  he  had  gone,  just  there,  in  front  of  me  -  it 
seemed  so  far  away  ...  And  then  afterwards,  when  he  came  out  of  his  body  and  entered  into  mine,  I 
understood  it  all  ...  It’s  fantastic. 

Fantastic. 

It’s  ...  it’s  absolutely  superhuman.  There’s  not  one  human  being  capable  of  doing  such  a  thing. 
And  what ...  what  a  mastery  of  his  body  -  absolute,  absolute! 

And  when  it  came  to  others  ...  he  could  remove  an  illness  like  that  (gesture,  as  if  Mother  were 
calmly  extracting  an  illness  from  the  body  with  her  fingertips).  That  happened  to  you  once,  didn’t 
it?  You  said  that  I  had  done  this  for  you  -  but  it  wasn’t  me;  he  was  the  one  who  did  it ...  He  could 
give  you  peace  in  the  mind  in  the  same  way  (Mother  brushes  her  hand  across  her  forehead).  You 
see,  his  actions  were  absolutely  ...  On  others,  it  had  all  the  characteristics  of  a  total  mastery  ... 
Absolutely  superhuman. 

One  day,  he’ll  tell  you  all  this  himself.224 
Now  I  understand  it. 

It’s  tre-men-dous. 

I  would  like  very  much  to  ask  you  something  ...  Why  did  he  have  to  go? 

Ah!  That  can’t  be  told. 

(long  silence) 

I  can  tell  you  why,  but  in  a  purely  superficial  way  ...  Because  for  him  to  do  IMMEDIATELY  - 
without  leaving  his  body,  that  is  -  what  he  had  to  do,  well ... 

(silence) 

We  can  put  it  this  way:  the  world  was  not  ready.  But  to  tell  you  the  truth,  it  was  the  totality  of  things 
around  him  that  was  not  ready.  So  when  he  SAW  this  (I  only  understood  this  afterwards),  he  saw 
that  it  would  go  much  faster  if  he  were  not  there. 


224He  came  to  tell  us  this  fifteen  years  later,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  while  we  were  writing  The  Divine  Materialism. 


And  he  was  ABSOLUTELY  right,  it  was  true. 

Once  I  saw  that,  I  accepted.  When  I  saw  it,  when  he  made  me  understand,  I  accepted; 
otherwise  ... 

There  was  a  difficult  period. 


see  if  the  entire  Work  ...  Outwardly,  I  said,  ‘After  twelve  days  I  will  tell  you  if  the  Ashram  (the 
Ashram  was  nothing  but  a  symbol,  of  course),  if  the  Ashram  will  continue  or  if  it  is  finished.’ 

And  later  (I  don’t  know  -  it  didn’t  take  twelve  days;  I  said  that  on  December  9,  and  on  the  12th 
it  was  all  decided  -  seen,  clear  and  understood),  on  the  12th,  I  saw  people,  I  saw  a  few  people. 
However,  we  began  all  the  activities  again  only  after  12  days  from  December  5.  But  it  was  decided 
on  the  12th. 

Everything  was  left  hanging  until  the  moment  he  made  me  understand  the  COMPLETE  thing,  in 
its  entirety  ...  But  that’s  for  later  on. 

He  himself  will  tell  you,  it’s  true  -  later  on. 


October  22, 1960 


(Pavitra  shows  Mother  a  photograph  of  the  house  in  which  She  lived  in  Paris,  rue  du  Val  de  Grace) 


Well,  well!  The  house  on  Val  de  Grace!  It  looks  inhabited,  the  windows  have  curtains  in  them.  I 
lived  there  -  a  small  house,  really  very  small,  with  a  bedroom  upstairs. 

Here,  this  is  the  kitchen;  here  is  the  living  room,  this  is  the  studio.  And  then  behind  the  kitchen 
there  was  a  small  room  that  I  used  as  the  dining  room,  and  it  opened  onto  a  courtyard.  Between  the 
dining  room  and  the  kitchen  there  was  a  bathroom  and  a  small  hallway.  The  kitchen  is  here;  you 
went  up  three  steps  and  then  there  was  this  small  hallway  with  the  stairs  leading  up  to  the  bedroom. 
Next  to  the  bedroom  was  a  bathroom  about  as  big  as  a  thimble. 

It  is  part  of  a  huge  house.  There’s  a  seven-story  apartment  building  on  each  side,  and  the  street 
is  here. 

It  wasn’t  very  big.  The  studio  was  rather  large  -  a  beautiful  room  ...  That’s  where  I  received 
Madame  David-Neel  -  we  saw  each  other  nearly  every  evening. 

There  was  a  considerable  library  in  the  studio;  one  whole  end  was  given  over  to  the  library  - 
more  than  two  thousand  books  belonging  to  my  brother.  There  were  even  the  complete  works  of 
several  classical  writers.  And  I  had  my  entire  collection  of  the  Revue  Cosmique,  and  my  post  card 


225Mother  stopped  all  her  activities  for  twelve  days  from  December  5,  1950,  the  day  Sri  Aurobindo  departed. 


collection  (it  was  down  below)  -  mainly  post  cards  of  Algeria,  Tlemcen,  nearly  200  of  them.  But 
there  were  five  years  of  the  Revue  Cosmique.  And  written  in  such  a  French!  How  funny  it  was! 

Theon’s  wife  dictated  it  in  English  while  she  was  in  trance.  Another  English  lady  who  was  there 
claimed  to  know  French  like  a  Frenchman.  ‘Myself,  I  never  use  a  dictionary,’  she  would  say,  ‘I 
don’t  need  a  dictionary.’  But  then  she  would  turn  out  such  translations!  She  made  all  the  classic 
mistakes  of  English  words  that  mustn’t  be  translated  like  that.  Then  it  was  sent  to  me  in  Paris  for 
correcting.  It  was  literally  impossible. 

There  was  this  Themanlys,  my  brother’s  schoolmate;  he  wrote  books,  but  he  was  lazy-minded 
and  didn’t  want  to  work!  So  he  had  passed  that  job  on  to  me.  But  it  was  impossible,  you  couldn’t  do 
a  thing  with  it.  And  what  words!  Theon  would  invent  words  for  the  subtle  organs,  the  inner  senses; 
he  had  found  a  word  for  each  thing  -  a  frightful  barbarism!  And  I  took  care  of  everything:  I  found 
the  printer,  corrected  the  proofs  -  all  the  work  for  a  long  time. 

They  were  stories,  narratives,  an  entire  initiation  in  the  form  of  stories.  There  was  a  lot  in  it, 
really  a  lot.  She  knew  many  things.  But  it  was  presented  in  such  a  way  that  it  was  unreadable. 

I  also  wrote  one  or  two  things,  experiences  I  had  noted  down;  they  were  rather  interesting, 
which  is  why  I’d  like  to  get  them  back.  I  had  described  some  of  my  visions  to  Madame  Theon,  and 
then  she  explained  their  meaning  to  me.  So  I  would  narrate  the  vision  and  give  its  explanation.  That 
was  readable  and  interesting,  because  there  was  some  symbolism. 

( Pavitra :)  What  was  this  ‘Chronicle  of  Ki  ’? 

It  wasn’t  ‘Ki’  but  ‘Chi,’  for  he  was  the  founder  of  China!  -  those  things  were  fantastic!  The  story 
was  almost  childish,  but  there  was  a  whole  world  of  knowledge  in  it.  Madame  Theon  was  an 
extraordinary  occultist.  That  woman  had  incredible  faculties,  incredible. 

She  was  a  small  woman,  fat,  almost  flabby  -  she  gave  you  the  feeling  that  if  you  leaned  against 
her,  it  would  melt!  Once,  I  remember  ...  I  was  there  in  Tlemcen  with  Andre’s  father,  who  had  come 
to  join  us  -  a  painter,  an  artist.  Theon  was  wearing  a  dark  purple  robe.  Theon  said  to  him,  ‘This  robe 
is  purple.’  ‘No,  it’s  not  purple,’  the  other  answered,  ‘it’s  violet.’  Theon  went  rigid:  ‘When  I  say 
purple,  it’s  purple!’  And  they  started  arguing  over  this  foolishness.  Suddenly  there  flashed  from  my 
head,  ‘No,  this  is  too  ridiculous!’  -  I  didn’t  say  a  word,  but  it  went  out  from  my  head  (I  even  saw 
the  flash),  and  then  Madame  Theon  got  up  and  came  over  to  me,  stood  behind  me  (neither  of  us 
uttered  a  word  -  the  other  two  were  staring  at  each  other  like  two  angry  cocks),  then  she  laid  my 
head  against  her  breast  -  absolutely  the  feeling  of  sinking  into  eiderdown! 

And  never  in  my  life,  never,  had  I  felt  such  peace  -  it  was  absolutely  luminous  and  soft  ...  a 
peace,  such  a  soft,  tender,  luminous  peace.  After  a  moment,  she  bent  down  and  whispered  in  my 
ear,  ‘One  must  never  question  one’s  master!’  It  wasn’t  I  who  was  questioning! 

She  was  a  wonderful  woman,  wonderful.  But  as  for  him  ...  well ... 

It’s  funny  ...  I  don’t  know  why,  but  a  short  while  ago  this  house  on  Val  de  Grace  suddenly  came 
to  me  ...  (to  Pavitra)  When  did  this  photograph  come? 

Yesterday. 

Suddenly  the  house  had  come  into  the  atmosphere.  ‘Well,  well,’  I  said  to  myself;  ‘someone  is 
thinking  about  that  house.’ 


*  * 


I  entered  into  your  sleep  last  night.  I  saw  you  and  told  you  certain  things,  I  even  gave  you  some 
explanations:  ‘You  see,  you  must  do  it  this  way  ...  you  must  go  like  this  ...’  I  also  said,  ‘One  day, 
we  shall  meditate  together.’  But  more  precisely,  you  had  once  spoken  to  me  about  the  problem  in 


your  physical  mind  -  that  it  keeps  on  turning  interminably  -  and  you  had  told  me  that  it  happens 
during  your  japa.  So  last  night  I  told  you,  ‘I  would  like  you  to  do  your  japa  for  a  few  minutes  with 
me  one  day  so  that  I  may  see  what  goes  on  inside  you,  in  your  physical  mind.  ’ 

But  I  wasn’t  speaking  to  you  with  words  ...  Everything  I  see  at  night  has  a  special  color  and  a 
special  vibration.  It’s  strange,  but  it  looks  sketched  ...  When  I  said  that  to  you,  for  example,  there 
was  a  kind  of  patch,216  a  white  patch,  as  I  recall  -  white,  exactly  like  a  piece  of  white  paper  -  a 
patch  with  a  pink  border  around  it,  then  this  same  blue  light  I  keep  telling  you  about  -  deep  blue  - 
encircling  the  rest,  as  it  were.  And  beyond  that,  it  was  swanning  -  a  swarming  of  black  and  dark 
gray  vibrations  ...  in  a  terrible  agitation.  When  I  saw  this,  I  said  to  you,  ‘You  must  repeat  your 
mantra  once  in  my  presence  so  that  I  may  see  if  there  is  anything  I  can  do  about  this  swanning.’ 
And  then  -  I  don’t  know  why  -  you  objected,  and  this  objection  was  red,  like  a  tongue  of  fire 
lashing  out  from  the  white,  like  this  (Mother  draws  an  arabesque).  So  I  said,  ‘No,  don’t  worry,  it 
doesn’t  matter,  I  won’t  disturb  a  thing227  !  ’  (Mother  laughs  mischievously) 

All  this  took  place  in  a  realm  which  is  constantly  active,  everywhere;  it  is  like  a  permanent 
mental  transcription  of  everything  that  physically  takes  place  ...  They  aren’t  actually  thoughts;  when 
I  see  this,  I  don’t  really  get  the  impression  of  thinking,  but  it’s  a  transcription  ...  it’s  the  result  of 
thoughts  on  a  certain  mental  atmosphere  which  records  things. 

And  I  see  it  all  the  time  now.  If  someone  is  speaking  or  if  I’m  doing  something,  I  see  the  two 
things  at  the  same  time  -  I  see  the  physical  thing,  his  words  or  my  action,  and  then  this  colored, 
luminous  transcription  at  the  same  time.  The  two  things  are  superimposed.  For  example,  when 
someone  speaks  to  me,  it  gets  translated  into  some  kind  of  picture,  a  play  of  light  or  color  (which  is 
not  always  so  luminous!)  -  this  is  why  most  of  the  time,  in  fact,  I  don’t  even  know  what  has  been 
said  to  me.  I  recall  the  first  time  this  phenomenon  happened,  I  said  to  myself,  ‘Ah,  so  that’s  what 
these  modem  artists  see!’  Only,  as  they  themselves  aren’t  very  coherent,  what  they  see  is  not  very 
coherent  either! 

And  that’s  how  it  works  -  it  is  translated  by  patches  and  moving  forms,  which  is  how  it  gets 
registered  in  the  earth’s  memory.  So  when  things  from  this  realm  enter  into  people’s  active 
consciousness,  they  get  translated  into  each  one’s  language  and  the  words  and  thoughts  that  each 
one  is  accustomed  to  -  because  that  doesn’t  belong  to  any  language  or  to  any  idea:  it  is  the  exact 
IMPRINT  of  what  is  happening. 

I  am  constantly  seeing  this  now. 

And  it  is  here,  too,  that  I  see  the  result  of  this  confusion  and  excitement  in  the  Ashram  -  it 
jumps,  jumps,  jumps  about.  It  keeps  jumping  on  the  same  spot.  There  are  machines  like  that  - 
constantly  shaking;  it’s  exasperating. 


*  *  H= 

For  some  time  now  I’ve  been  experiencing  a  precise  moment  during  my  japa  when  something  takes 
hold  of  me  and  I  have  all  the  difficulty  in  the  world  to  keep  from  entering  into  trance.  Yet  I  remain 
standing.  Usually  I’m  walking,  but  some  things  I  say  while  leaning  up  against  the  window  -  not  a 
very  good  place  to  go  into  trance!  And  it  grabs  me  exactly  at  the  same  place  each  time. 

Yesterday,  I  suddenly  saw  a  huge  living  head  of  blue  light  -  this  blue  light  which  is  the  force, 
the  powerful  force  in  material  Nature  (this  is  the  light  the  tantrics  use).  The  head  was  made  entirely 
of  this  light,  and  it  wore  a  sort  of  tiara  -  a  big  head,  so  big  (Mother  indicates  the  length  of  her 
forearm);  its  eyes  weren’t  closed,  but  rather  lowered,  like  this.  The  immobility  of  eternity, 
absolutely  -  the  repose,  the  immobility  of  eternity.  A  magnificent  head,  quite  similar  to  the  way  the 

2260riginal  English. 


227Traditionally,  one’s  mantra  is  never  to  be  repeated  before  anyone  except  the  guru. 


gods  here  are  represented,  but  even  better;  something  between  certain  heads  of  the  Buddha  and  ... 
(these  heads  most  probably  come  to  the  artists).  Everything  else  was  lost  in  a  kind  of  cloud. 

I  felt  that  this  kind  of  ...  yes,  immobility  came  from  there:  everything  stops,  absolutely 
everything  stops.  Silence,  immobility  ...  truly,  you  enter  into  eternity.  - 1  told  him  it  wasn’t  time! 

But  I  tried  to  understand  what  he  wanted  ...  It’s  been  difficult  here  in  the  Ashram  for  some  time 
-  everyone  is  seized  with  a  sort  of  frenzy,  a  weary  restlessness.  They  are  all  writing  to  me,  they  all 
want  to  see  me.  It  makes  for  such  an  atmosphere  ...  I  react  as  well  as  I  can,  but  I’m  not  able  to  pass 
this  on  to  them  to  keep  them  quiet  (the  more  tired  and  weary  you  are,  the  more  calm  you  ought  to 
remain  -  certainly  not  get  excited,  that’s  dreadful!).  So  I  understood:  this  head  had  come  to  tell  me, 
‘This  is  what  you  must  give  them.’ 

But  if  I  were  to  pass  that  on  to  them,  they’d  all  think  they  were  becoming  rattle-brained,  that 
they  were  losing  their  faculties,  that  their  energy  was  spent.  For  they  only  feel  energy  when  they 
spend  it.  They  are  incapable  of  feeling  energy  in  immobility  -  they  have  to  be  stirring  about,  they 
have  to  be  spending  it.  Or  else,  it  has  to  be  pounded  into  them. 

I  looked  at  this  problem  yesterday;  it  occupied  me  for  much  of  the  day.  And  I’m  sure  this  head 
came  to  give  me  the  solution.  For  me,  it’s  very  easy  -  at  once  ...  three  seconds,  and  everything 
stops,  everything.  But  the  others  are  stubborn!  And  yet  I’m  positive,  I’m  positive,  I  tell  them,  ‘But 
relax;  why  are  you  on  pins  and  needles  like  that?  Relax!  It’s  the  only  way  to  overcome  your 
fatigue.’  But  they  immediately  start  feeling  that  they’ll  lose  their  faculties  and  become  inert  -  the 
opposite  of  life! 

And  this  is  surely  what  oriented  my  night,  for  I  started  my  night  looking  at  this  problem:  How 
can  I  make  them  accept  this?  For  neither  should  they  fall  into  the  other  extreme  and  slip  from  this 
weary  agitation  into  tamas.22S  That’s  obvious. 

But  how  many  letters  I  receive  from  people  telling  me,  ‘I  feel  listless,  all  I  want  to  do  is  sleep,  to 
rest,  not  do  anything.’  They  go  on  complaining. 

The  experience  I  have  -  what  I  mean  by  ‘I’  is  this  aggregate  here  (Mother  indicates  her  body), 
this  particular  individuality  -  is  that  the  more  quiet  and  calm  it  is,  the  more  work  it  can  do  and  the 
faster  the  work  can  be  done.  What  is  most  disturbing  and  time  consuming  are  all  these  agitated 
vibrations  that  fall  on  me  (truly  speaking,  each  person  who  comes  throws  them  on  me).  And  this  is 
what  makes  the  work  difficult  -  it  stirs  up  a  whirlwind.  And  you  can’t  do  anything  in  this 
whirlwind,  it’s  impossible.  If  you  try  to  do  something  material,  your  fingers  stumble;  if  you  try  to 
do  something  intellectual,  your  thoughts  get  all  entangled  and  you  no  longer  see  clearly.  I’ve  had 
the  experience,  for  example,  of  wanting  to  look  up  a  word  in  the  dictionary  while  this  agitation  was 
in  the  atmosphere,  and  everything  jumps  up  and  down  (yet  the  lighting  is  the  same  and  I’m  using 
the  same  magnifying  glass),  I  no  longer  see  a  thing,  it’s  all  jumping!  I  go  page  by  page,  but  the 
word  simply  doesn’t  exist  in  the  dictionary!  Then  I  remain  quiet,  I  do  this  ...  (Mother  makes  a 
gesture  of  bringing  down  the  Peace)  and  after  half  a  minute  I  open  the  dictionary:  the  very  spot,  and 
the  word  leaps  out  at  me!  And  I  see  clearly  and  distinctly.  Consequently  I  have  now  the  indisputable 
proof  that  if  you  want  to  do  anything  properly,  you  must  FIRST  be  calm  -  but  not  only  be  calm 
yourself;  you  must  either  isolate  yourself  or  be  capable  of  imposing  a  calm  on  this  whirlwind  of 
forces  that  comes  upon  you  all  the  time  from  all  around. 

All  the  teachers  are  wanting  to  quit  the  school  -  weary!  Which  means  they’ll  begin  the  year  with 
half  the  teachers  gone.  They  live  in  constant  tension,  they  don’t  know  how  to  relax  -  that’s  really 
what  it  is.  They  don’t  know  how  to  act  without  agitation. 

I  think  that’s  what  this  head  came  to  tell  me,  and  it’s  precisely  what’s  wrong  in  the  Ashram  - 
everything  here  is  done  in  agitation,  absolutely  everything.  So  it’s  constantly  a  comedy  of  errors; 
someone  speaks,  the  other  doesn’t  listen  and  responds  all  wrong,  and  nothing  gets  done.  Someone 


228Tamas:  inertia. 


asks  one  thing,  another  answers  to  something  else  -  bah!  It’s  a  dreadful  con-fu-sion. 


(silence) 


What  if  we  meditated  a  little. 

Sit  as  you  normally  do  and  ...  forget  that  I’m  here! 

(After  the  meditation) 

I’m  going  to  tell  you  what  I  saw  -  it’s  very  interesting.  First,  emanating  from  here  (Mother 
indicates  the  chest),  a  florescence  of  every  color  like  a  peacock’s  tail  spread  wide;  but  it  was  made 
of  light,  and  it  was  very,  very  delicate,  very  fine,  like  this  (gesture).  Then  it  rose  up  and  fonned 
what  truly  seemed  like  a  luminous  peacock,  up  above,  and  it  remained  like  that.  Then,  from  here 
(the  chest),  what  looked  like  a  sword  of  white  light  climbed  straight  up.  It  went  up  very  high  and 
fonned  a  kind  of  expanse,  a  very  vast  expanse,  which  was  like  a  call  -  this  lasted  the  longest.  And 
then,  in  response,  a  veritable  rain,  like  ...  (no,  it  was  much  finer  than  drops)  a  golden  light  -  white 
and  golden  -  with  various  shades,  at  times  more  towards  white,  at  times  more  golden,  at  times  with 
a  tinge  of  pink.  And  all  this  was  descending,  descending  into  you.  And  here  (the  chest),  it  changed 
into  this  same  deep  blue  light,  with  a  powdering  of  green  light  inside  it  -  emerald  green.  And  at  that 
moment,  when  it  reached  here  (the  level  of  the  heart),  a  number  of  little  divinities  of  living  gold  -  a 
deep,  living  gold  -  came,  like  this,  and  then  looked  at  you.  And  just  as  they  looked  at  you,  there  was 
the  image  of  the  Mother  right  at  the  very  center  of  you  -  not  as  she  is  commonly  portrayed  but  as 
she  is  in  the  Indian  consciousness  ...  Very  serene  and  pure  and  luminous.  And  then  that  changed 
into  a  temple,  and  inside  the  temple  there  seemed  to  be  an  image  of  Sri  Aurobindo  and  an  image  of 
me  -  but  living  images  in  a  powdering  of  light.  Then  it  grew  into  a  magnificent  edifice  and  settled 
in  with  an  extraordinary  power.  And  it  remained  motionless. 

That  is  the  representation  of  your  japa. 

It’s  beautiful. 

I  had  to  stop  because  there  is  something  like  time  that  exists  here  -  what  a  shame! 

But  it  is  very  good. 

And  it  shouldn’t  be  difficult  to  keep  that  all  the  time. 

I  didn’t  notice  you  being  bothered  by  these  things  of  the  physical  mind  you  had  mentioned. 
However,  I  had  first  done  this  (gesture  of  cleansing  the  atmosphere),  right  at  the  beginning,  so  that 
nothing  would  come  to  disturb  us  ...  Did  you  feel  anything? 

I  felt  that  you  were  there.  I  felt  your  Force. 

Ah!  You  felt  it! 

Yes,  of  course  -  very  strongly.  At  one  moment  it  was  very,  very  powerful. 

(Mother  laughs  heartily)  Your  japa  is  lovely.  Oh,  it’s  a  whole  world  that’s  fonning,  and  it’s  truly 
harmonious,  powerful,  beautiful.  It’s  very  good.  If  you  like,  we’ll  do  this  for  a  few  moments  from 
time  to  time.  It  was  very  ...  how  should  I  put  it?  ...  very  pleasant  for  me.  It  feels  comfortable,  a  bit 
removed  from  all  this  porridge!  I  was  very  glad. 

If  you  want  to  prevent  these  disturbances  in  your  physical  mind,  then  when  you  sit  for  japa  ... 
You  know  my  Force,  don’t  you?  Well  then,  wrap  it  around  you,  like  this,  twelve  times,  from  top  to 
bottom. 


October  25, 1960 

There  is  a  black  cloud  over  the  ashram.  It’s  origin  is  rather  unique  and  very  interesting. 

S  has  a  nephew  in  Bombay,  and  one  day  towards  the  end  of  August  or  beginning  September,  he 
told  me  an  extraordinary  story  about  this  nephew,  who  had  disappeared  (he  showed  me  his 
photograph  -  he  looks  rather  like  a  medium).  He  returned  home  two  days  later,  I  believe.  He’d  been 
found  in  a  train  in  a  hypnotic  state;  fortunately  someone  shook  him  and  he  suddenly  woke  up:  ‘Why 
am  I  here?  What  am  I  doing  here?’  (He  had  no  intention  of  travelling,  you  see;  he  had  simply  left 
his  house  to  visit  a  neighbor  in  Bombay.)  So  he  returned  home  without  knowing  what  had  happened 
to  him.  And  he  was  quite  bizarre,  really  rather  off. 

A  few  days  later,  this  nephew  had  to  go  somewhere,  I  don’t  know  where;  he  went  down  to  the 
railway  station  -  and  didn’t  return.  Impossible  to  find  out  what  had  happened  to  him,  he  was 
nowhere  to  be  found.  Several  days  had  passed  when  the  family  decided  to  send  me  his  photograph 
and  to  tell  me  the  story,  adding  that  it  was  surely  a  sequel  to  the  previous  occurrence  (there  must  be 
some  people  doing  hypnotism),  and  then  they  asked  me  where  he  was  and  what  had  become  of  him. 

All  this  happened  just  on  the  day  X229  was  leaving.  So  I  told  S  to  take  the  photograph  and  letter 
to  X  and  tell  him  the  story.  X  consulted  some  book,  did  a  very  short  japa  for  a  few  seconds  and  said, 
‘Oh,  he’ll  come  back  before  September  26,  BUT  inform  Mother  so  that  She  may  see  to  ft.’ 
therefore,  I  concentrated  a  little. 

About  two  weeks  later  (in  other  words,  ten  days  or  so  before  September  26),  some  more  news  - 
the  boy’s  older  brother,  who  lives  in  Ahmedabad  (not  Bombay),  came  to  visit  his  mother,  father  and 
grandmother  (there’s  also  a  grandmother),  and  he  asked  about  his  brother.  He  had  come  with  a 
friend.  ‘Your  brother  has  disappeared,’  they  explained,  ‘we  don’t  know  what  has  happened  to  him.’ 
So  the  two  of  them  decided  to  search  for  him:  ‘We’ll  find  him  .’ 

The  day  before  their  departure,  the  elder  brother’s  friend  said  he  was  going  to  visit  the 
grandmother  (she  lives  some  hundred  yards  away).  He  went  out  -  and  didn’t  return.  Disappeared. 

So  of  course  they  were  terribly  worried;  they  wondered  what  had  happened.  I  had  someone 
write  to  X,  I  concentrated,  and  four  days  later  the  boy  (the  brother’s  friend,  that  is)  returned  in  a 
lamentable  state:  white,  emaciated,  barely  able  to  speak.  Then  he  recounted  his  story: 

On  his  way  to  the  grandmother’s  house,  he  passed  by  the  station  and  went  in  to  drink  something. 
While  drinking,  two  persons  who  were  there  started  playing  with  some  balls  in  front  of  him.  He 
WATCHED.  But  suddenly,  he  felt  very  uneasy;  he  wanted  to  leave  and  ran  towards  an  exit  that 
opened  onto  the  tracks  -  it  was  closed  and  he  could  not  get  out.  And  these  two  people  were  just 
behind  him;  suddenly  he  lost  consciousness:  ‘I  don’t  know  what  happened  to  me  after  that.’ 

He  woke  up  in  a  railway  station  somewhere  between  Bombay  and  Poona,  and  he  began  telling 
them  that  he  was  hungry  (he  was  with  those  same  two  persons).  They  punched  him  in  the  stomach 
and  put  a  handkerchief  over  his  nose  -  he  again  passed  out!  At  Poona,  he  woke  up  again  (he’d  lost 
his  appetite  by  then!),  and  again  they  put  the  handkerchief  over  his  nose.  And  it  went  on  like  that  - 
they  kept  on  punching  him  a  lot.  When  he  woke  up  in  the  country  on  the  outskirts  of  Poona,  four 
men  were  around  him  arguing  in  a  language  he  didn’t  know  (his  language  is  Gujarati).  They  were 


229The  disciple’s  tantric  guru. 


probably  speaking  in  some  other  language,  I  don’t  know  which  one  -  it  seems  they  were  very  dark. 
He  didn’t  understand,  but  from  various  signs  they  made  he  could  see  that  they  were  arguing  about 
whether  to  kill  him  or  not.  Finally,  they  told  him  (probably  in  a  language  he  could  understand), 
‘Either  you  join  our  gang,  or  we’ll  kill  you.’  He  grunted  in  reply  so  as  not  to  commit  himself.  The 
others  decided  to  wait  for  their  chief  (thus  the  chief  wasn’t  there):  ‘We’ll  decide  after  he  comes.’ 
Then  just  to  make  sure,  they  punched  him  a  few  more  times  in  the  belly  and  put  the  handkerchief 
over  his  nose  -  out! 

Sometime  later  (he  doesn’t  know  how  long,  for  until  he  returned  he  had  no  sense  of  time),  he 
woke  up  in  a  rather  dark,  low-roofed  house  way  out  in  the  country;  there  were  five  persons  now,  not 
four.  They  were  busy  eating,  so  he  was  careful  not  to  budge.  Mainly  they  were  drinking  (they  have 
prohibition  there).  Four  of  them  were  already  dead  drunk.  So  he  got  up  to  have  a  look.  The  fifth 
one,  whom  he  hadn’t  seen  before  (he  must  have  been  the  chief),  was  not  yet  totally  drunk;  when  he 
saw  the  boy  stirring,  he  let  out  a  fearful  growl  -  so  the  poor  boy  threw  himself  flat  in  the  corner  and 
lay  still  -  he  waited.  After  awhile,  the  fifth  one  (after  downing  another  bottle)  was  also  dead  drunk. 
So  now  that  he  saw  them  all  fast  asleep,  he  got  up  very  cautiously  and  ...  he  said  he  ran  for  an  hour 
and  a  half!  ...  A  boy  pummelled  as  he  had  been,  who  hadn’t  eaten  for  four  days!  I  think  that’s  a 
miracle. 

After  running  for  an  hour  and  a  half,  he  found  himself  back  at  the  Poona  station,  he  doesn’t 
know  how.  He  caught  a  train  back  to  Bombay,  scarcely  knowing  how  he  managed  it. 

When  I  found  this  out,  I  immediately  thought,  ‘Good,  this  boy  caught  the  formation230  X  had 
made  for  the  other  one,  and  it  got  him  back.’  For  it’s  really  miraculous  that  he  succeeded.  But  the 
other  one,  the  nephew,  was  left  stranded,  nowhere  to  be  found.  It  was  obviously  the  same  gang  and 
the  same  method. 

Then  the  police  got  involved.  They  wanted  to  take  him  back  to  the  countryside  around  Poona 
(naturally  I  suppose  they  nursed  him  in  the  meantime),  but  not  much  came  out  of  it.  Seems  that 
wherever  he  remembered  seeing  these  people,  when  he  said  he  had  seen  them,  he  fainted.  Finally,  I 
was  told  the  story,  and  the  poor  family  wrote  to  me  saying,  ‘Who  are  these  demons  with  such  a 
great  power  that  even  it  withstands  Mother’s  force  as  well  as  that  of  X  -  and  who  are  holding  our 
son?’  So  X  was  again  informed  and,  knowing  the  story  of  the  elder  brother’s  friend,  he  said,  ‘Ah, 
now  I  know  where  the  other  one  is,  and  I  hope  it  won’t  take  too  long.’  But  then  September  26 
passed  -  general  despair  in  the  family.  They  wrote  to  me,  and  I  concentrated. 

It  was  just  before  Durga  Puja,231  or  just  after  -  I  can’t  remember  (dates  and  I  don’t  go  together)  - 
no,  it  was  after  Durga  Puja.  So  I  went  into  a  deep  concentration  and,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  I  saw  that  a 
very  powerful  and  dangerous  raks basic232  power  was  involved.  And  then,  when  I  started  walking 
for  my  japa  upstairs  in  my  room  (I  had  given  some  thought  to  this  story  and  tried  asking  for 
something  to  be  done),  I  suddenly  saw  Durga  before  me  raising  high  a  lance  of  white  light  -  the 
lance  of  light  that  destroys  the  hostile  forces  -  and  She  struck  into  a  black  swarming  mass  of  men. 

But  then  there  came  a  ...  frightful  reaction.  For  one  day  I  was  nearly  as  sick  -  not  quite  -  as  two 
years  ago233  (they  must  have  used  the  same  mantra).  And,  you  see,  I  who  never  vomit  ...  terrible 
vomiting  -  everything  inside  came  out!  Only  now  I’m  a  bit  more  experienced  than  two  years  ago 


230In  occult  language,  a  ‘formation’  is  a  concentration  of  power  towards  a  specific  end.  In  this  case,  the  tantric  guru’s 
formation  to  save  the  nephew. 


231  The  yearly  ritual  worship  in  honor  of  Durga,  the  universal  Mother. 


232The  rakshas  are  demons  of  the  lower  vital  plane. 


233The  attack  of  black  magic  in  December  1958. 


(!),  so  I  set  it  right  ...  It  happened  here,  downstairs,  in  the  afternoon.  I  went  right  back  up  to  my 
room  (I  didn’t  see  anyone  that  afternoon),  and  I  remained  concentrated  to  try  to  find  out  what  had 
happened.  I  saw  that  it  came  from  there  -  a  backlash  of  those  people  trying  to  defend  themselves. 

I  did  what  had  to  be  done. 

But  unfortunately,  this  spread  all  over  the  Ashram,  all  over  everyone  -  a  black  cloud 
everywhere.  It  was  rather  ...  troublesome! 

But  some  days  later,  a  telephone  call:  the  boy  was  found  in  Ahmedabad  and  brought  back  to 
Bombay. 

The  boy’s  story  is  ...  fantastic!  It’s  fantastic.  He  was  thin,  gray,  empty-headed.  I  no  longer  recall 
all  the  details,  but  ultimately  it  was  the  same  story:  abducted  from  a  railway  station  in  the  same 
way;  he  saw  some  people,  an  hypnotic  state,  and  then  no  more  recollection  of  what  had  happened  to 
him,  nothing  at  all.  I  don’t  know  if  they  used  a  handkerchief  on  him  as  well,  but  he  was 
‘hypnotized.’  They  punched  him  also  when  he  asked  to  eat.  And  after  that,  no  more  appetite!  As  if 
they  removed  all  interest  in  eating  -  even  when  there  was  food,  he  didn’t  touch  it.  And  absolutely 
empty-headed. 

However,  he  recalls  them  repeatedly  telling  him  this:  ‘You  have  no  family;  that  name  is  not 
yours;  you  are  called  by  such-and-such-a-name  (they  gave  him  another  name);  you  are  all  alone  and 
depend  exclusively  upon  us.’  But  then,  probably  this  boy  had  a  slightly  deeper  consciousness,  for 
although  his  brain  did  not  seem  to  be  working  outwardly,  something  deep  down  was  able  to  observe 
and  remember. 

Finally,  they  had  him  work  as  a  waiter  in  a  small  cafe  in  Ahmedabad,  near  the  station.  One  day 
it  even  happened  that  his  brother  and  his  brother’s  friend  stopped  by  (he  vaguely  recalls  having  seen 
them)  but  he  was  incapable  of  speaking  to  them  or  of  getting  them  to  recognize  him.  Another  time, 
he  tried  to  leave  and  headed  towards  the  station,  but  after  awhile  he  could  no  longer  walk,  he  was 
suddenly  stopped  by  something  (he  doesn’t  know  what),  and  he  had  to  go  back.  That’s  how  it  was  - 
quite  a  ...  unique  state.  But  one  day,  a  friend  of  the  brother  stopped  at  this  cafe  to  drink  something, 
and  this  same  boy  served  him.  He  had  changed  a  lot,  but  the  other  fellow  recognized  him  all  the 
same  and  asked,  ‘What’s  your  name?’  He  saw  that  the  boy  seemed  dazed  and  couldn’t  answer.  So 
he  didn’t  say  anything  but  ran  immediately  to  where  the  elder  brother  lived;  they  came  back,  took 
the  boy  into  a  corner  and  doused  his  face  with  seltzer  water.  It  seems  that  then  he  started  becoming 
more  alive.  Then  they  led  him  away  and  informed  the  police. 

I  don’t  have  any  more  details  yet ... 

(Here  we  introduce,  parenthetically,  the  details  of  the  story  as  Mother  told  them  two  months  later) 

I  found  out  the  details:  this  boy  had  to  go  to  the  station,  but  on  his  way,  he  went  into  a  shoe  store 
just  next  to  the  station  to  buy  a  pair  of  sandals.  As  he  entered,  he  saw  a  man  there  choosing  a  pair  of 
women’s  shoes  for  himself!  This  seemed  strange  to  him:  ‘What’s  this  man  doing  buying  ...’  and  he 
WATCHED  -  suddenly,  nothing  more.  He  lost  consciousness  and  no  longer  knew  what  happened 
to  him.  And  that’s  how  the  story  began  -  a  man  selecting  women’s  shoes  in  a  shop!  He  must  do 
strange  things  -  probably  intentionally  -  to  attract  people’s  attention.  Naturally,  out  of  curiosity,  the 
boy  started  watching,  and  that  was  that  -  all  of  a  sudden,  blank,  nothing  more!  And  long  afterwards 
he  found  himself  far  away  in  a  train  with  this  man.  He’s  here  now  with  his  mother  -  they  came  to 
thank  me.  It’s  he  who  gave  me  the  details.  He’s  a  nice  boy,  but  all  this  has  left  him  with  some 
anxiety,  especially  when  he  speaks  of  it.  He’s  trying  to  forget.  He  told  me  he’d  like  to  join  the  anny 
and  asked  my  permission.  The  boy  feels  a  need  for  force  and  he  has  the  idea  that  to  be  part  of  such  a 
force  would  be  good  for  him.  (Of  course,  he  didn’t  tell  me  all  this,  he’s  not  that  conscious.  But 
that’s  what  he  feels  -  the  need  to  be  supported  by  an  organization  of  force.)  So  I  encouraged  him.  I 
told  him  it  was  a  good  idea.  His  mother  wasn’t  very  happy!  She  feared  he  was  leaping  from  the 
frying  pan  into  the  fire! 


Another  curious  detail  is  that  after  having  taken  away  all  his  appetite  and  having  put  him  in  the 
cafe  as  a  waiter,  they  told  him,  ‘Now  you  must  eat,’  so  he  tried  to  eat,  and  for  four  days  he  vomited 
up  everything  he  put  in  -  it  was  completely  black!  After  that,  he  was  able  to  start  eating  a  little.  It’s 
a  fantastic  story! 


(The  conversation  resumes  here) 

But  I  was  mainly  interested  by  the  fact  that  I  felt  the  danger  these  people  represented  -  not  because 
they  were  brigands,  but  because  they  had  some  power  -  brigands  with  a  power  -  and  from  what  I 
saw,  it  was  not  merely  an  hypnotic  power.  There  must  have  been  a  tantric  force  in  it,  otherwise  they 
would  not  have  been  so  powerful,  and  especially  so  powerful  from  a  distance.  I  had  said  to  myself, 
‘They  MUST  be  caught.’  Which  was  why  ...  (the  Force  kept  on  working,  you  see).  And  yesterday, 
the  newspaper  said  that  a  gang  of  five  men,  eight  women  and  half  a  dozen  children  had  been 
arrested  by  the  police  in  Allahabad  for  using  what  the  newspaper  called  ‘mesmeric’  means  to  rob 
people,  attack  them,  etc.  (They  were  operating  in  Poona,  Bombay  and  Ahmedabad,  but  they  were 
caught  in  Allahabad).  Probably  when  they  realized  that  the  boy  was  gone,  they  got  frightened  and 
fled  to  the  North.  And  they  were  arrested  in  Allahabad  -  I  had  made  a  very  strong  formation  and 
had  said,  ‘They  MUST  be  caught.’ 

As  of  now,  I  have  no  other  news  ...  They’ve  been  caught,  so  they  can’t  do  any  wrong 
OUTWARDLY,  but  still  their  power  is  there.  We’re  going  to  have  to  be  ...  And  everyone  here  says 
the  same  thing  -  like  a  black  veil  of  unconsciousness  that  has  fallen  upon  us.  Even  those  who  aren’t 
accustomed  to  such  things  have  felt  it.  I’m  presently  cleaning  the  whole  place  -  it’s  not  easy. 
Everything  is  upside  down. 

I  had  X  infonned.  But  I  didn’t  tell  him  my  difficulty  (this  mantra  they  threw  on  me  to  kill  me),  I 
didn’t  speak  of  that  at  all.  For  he  had  insisted,  from  the  beginning  he  had  said,  ‘Mother  must  see  to 
it,  only  Mother’s  grace  can  save  them.’  And  I  understood  -  their  attack  came  just  at  the  time  of 
Durga  Puja,  so  I  understood  that  Durga  had  to  intervene.  So  that’s  the  story. 

Things  are  not  going  so  well  for  X  either;  everywhere  it’s  grating.  It  was  probably  very 
important ...  I  am  hopeful  that  it  can  bring  some  change. 

But  normally,  shouldn ’t  the  mantra  bounce  back  on  them? 

Obviously!  It’s  boomeranging  back  on  them.  They  must  be  having  a  rather  hard  time  of  it  now,  but 
too  bad  for  them!  They  won’t  escape  it. 

I  don’t  know  what’s  going  to  happen  to  them  ...  They  must  have  killed  quite  a  few  people.  If 
that’s  discovered,  they’ll  get  what  they  deserve  and  we’ll  be  rid  of  them  -  they’ll  become  little 
disembodied  demons!  It’s  less  dangerous. 

Unless  they  reincarnate  somewhere  else.  Some  people  are  always  ready  to  accept  demons,  that’s 
the  trouble! 

(No  sooner  had  Mother  finished  telling  this  story  than,  by  a  curious  ‘coincidence,  ’  someone 
brought  her  a  portrait  drawn  by  P.K.,  one  of  the  Ashram  artists.  Several  days  earlier,  at  about  two 
in  the  morning  during  an  uncommonly  violent  lightning  storm,  P.K.  had  suddenly  SEEN  amidst  the 
flashes  of  lightning  in  the  sky  a  rather  terrible,  demoniacal  head  in  front  of  his  very  eyes.  Having 
nothing  else  available,  he  hastily  drew  his  vision  in  chalk  on  a  schoolchild’s  slate,  which  is  the 

portrait  Mother  speaks  of  here:) 

Well,  well!  So  P.K.  is  clairvoyant!  It’s  him,  for  sure  -  this  is  the  being  behind  those  people.  That’s 
why  they  had  so  much  power.  And  he  came  here  because  of  that  -  he  was  furious.  Quite  a  demon! 

I  also  saw  him  that  night.  ‘You  fools  with  your  small  crackers,  ’  he  said,  ‘I  will  show  you  what 


real  crackers  are!’234  -  and  those  flashes  of  lightning,  such  an  astonishing  violence  ...  Oh,  he 
proclaimed  all  kinds  of  things,  disasters,  what  not  ...  But  these  are  very  complex  matters  and  it’s 
better  not  to  go  into  detail. 


(Some  days  later,  Mother  added  the  following:) 

Merely  by  looking  at  that  portrait,  one  child  came  down  with  fever!235 

I  myself  didn  7  dare  look  at  it  for  long! 

Oh,  it’s  terrifying!  I  don’t  know  who  had  the  stupid  idea  of  showing  this  to  the  child,  but  after  he 
saw  it  he  had  a  fever  for  three  days,  with  terrible  chills.  And  I  believe  the  artist  too  was  sick  after 
finishing  his  sketch. 


*  *  * 


(soon  afterwards) 


What  about  you,  is  your  health  better?  (the  disciple  had  not  been  well) 

When  you  have  to  slip  in  seven  hours  of  japa  a  day,  it  makes  your  life  a  bit  strange! 

It’s  so  contrary  not  only  to  the  education  but  to  the  make  up  of  people  from  the  West!  For  an 
Indian  ...  for  a  modern  Indian  it  would  be  difficult,  but  for  those  who  have  kept  something  of  the  old 
tradition  it  would  not  be  difficult.  It’s  easy  for  children  raised  in  a  monastery  or  near  the  guru  ... 

(silence) 

I  looked  and  saw  the  realm  which  is  under  the  influence  of  thought  -  the  power  of  thought  on  the 
body  is  tremendous!  You  cannot  imagine  how  tremendous  it  is.  Even  a  subconscious  or  sometimes 
unconscious  thought  acts  and  provokes  fantastic  results!  ...  I’ve  studied  this.  I’ve  been  studying  it 
IN  DETAIL  for  the  last  two  years  -  it’s  incredible!  If  I  had  the  time  one  day  to  explain  all  this,  it 
would  be  interesting. 

Even  tiny,  the  tiniest  mental  or  vital  reactions  -  so  tiny  that  to  our  ordinary  consciousness  they 
don’t  appear  to  have  the  LEAST  importance  -  act  upon  the  body’s  cells  and  can  create  disorders  ... 
You  see,  when  you  observe  carefully,  you  suddenly  become  aware  of  a  very  slight  uneasiness,  a 
mere  nothing  (when  you’re  busy,  you  don’t  even  notice  it),  and  then  if  you  follow  this  uneasiness  to 
see  what  it  is,  you  perceive  that  it  comes  from  something  quite  imperceptible  and  ‘insignificant’  to 
our  active  consciousness  -  but  it’s  enough  to  create  an  uneasy  feeling  in  the  body. 

Which  is  why  -  unless  you  are  intentionally  and  constantly  in  what  here  is  called  the  Brahmic 
consciousness  -  it  is  practically  impossible  to  control.  And  this  is  what  gives  the  impression  of 
certain  things  happening  in  the  body  independently  of  ...  not  only  of  our  will  but  of  our 
consciousness  -  BUT  IT  IS  NOT  TRUE. 

Only,  there  is  all  that  comes  from  outside  -  that’s  what  is  most  dangerous.  Constantly, 
constantly  -  when  you  eat,  you  catch  it ...  oh,  what  a  mass  of  vibrations!  The  vibrations  of  the  thing 
you  eat  when  it  was  living  (they  always  remain),  the  vibrations  of  the  person  who  cooked  it, 
vibrations  of ...  All  the  time,  all  the  time,  they  never  stop  -  you  breathe,  they  enter.  Of  course,  when 
you  start  talking  to  someone  or  mixing  with  people,  then  you  become  a  bit  more  conscious  of  what 
is  coming,  but  even  just  sitting  still,  uninvolved  with  others  -  it  comes!  There  is  an  almost  total 

2340riginal  English.  This  happened  at  the  time  of ‘Deepavali,’  the  Festival  of  Light,  when  people  throughout  India  set 
off  all  kinds  of  fireworks. 


235Which  is  why  we  are  not  publishing  it. 


interdependence  -  isolation  is  an  illusion.  By  reinforcing  your  own  atmosphere  (Mother  gestures, 
as  if  building  a  wall  around  her),  you  can  hold  these  things  off  TO  A  CERTAIN  EXTENT,  but 
simply  this  effort  to  keep  them  at  a  distance  creates  (I’m  thinking  in  English  and  speaking  in 
French)  ...  disturbances .236  Anyway,  now  all  this  has  been  SEEN. 

But  I  know  in  an  absolute  way  that  once  this  whole  mass  of  the  physical  mind  is  mastered  and 
the  Brahmic  consciousness  is  brought  into  it  in  a  continuous  way,  you  CAN  ...  you  become  the 
MASTER  of  your  health. 

This  is  why  I  tell  people  (not  that  I  expect  them  to  do  it,  at  least  not  now,  but  it’s  good  they 
know)  that  it’s  NOT  a  matter  of  fate,  NOT  something  that  completely  escapes  our  control,  NOT 
some  sort  of  ‘Law  of  Nature’  over  which  we  have  no  power  -  it  is  not  so.  We  are  truly  the  masters 
of  everything  which  has  been  brought  together  to  create  our  transitory  individuality;  we  have  been 
given  the  power  of  control,  if  only  we  knew  how  to  use  it. 

It’s  a  discipline,  a  tremendous  tapasya. 257 

But  it’s  good  to  know  in  order  to  avoid  this  feeling  of  being  crushed  when  things  are  still 
completely  outside  your  control,  this  sense  of  fatality  people  have  -  they’re  born,  they  live,  they 
die:  Nature  is  crushing  and  we  are  the  playthings  of  something  much  bigger,  much  stronger  than  us 
-  that  is  the  Falsehood. 

In  any  case,  for  myself,  in  my  yoga,  only  after  I  KNEW  that  I  AM  the  Master  of  everything 
(provided  I  know  how  to  BE  this  Master  and  LET  myself  be  this  Master  -  provided,  that  is,  that  the 
outer  stupidity  accepts  to  stay  in  its  place),  did  I  know  that  one  could  be  the  Master  of  Nature. 

There’s  also  this  old  idea  rooted  in  religions  of  Chaldean  or  Christian  origin  of  a  God  with 
whom  you  can  have  no  true  contact  -  an  abyss  between  the  two.  That  is  terrible. 

That  absolutely  has  to  stop. 

For  with  that  idea,  the  earth  and  men  will  NEVER  be  able  to  change.  This  is  why  I  have  often 
said  that  this  idea  is  the  work  of  the  Asuras ,238  and  with  it  they  have  ruled  the  earth. 

Whereas  whatever  the  effort,  whatever  the  difficulty,  whatever  time  it  takes,  whatever  number 
of  lives,  you  must  know  that  all  this  doesn’t  matter:  you  KNOW  you  ARE  the  Master,  that  the 
Master  and  you  are  the  same.  All  that’s  necessary  is  ...  to  know  it  INTEGRALLY,  and  nothing  must 
belie  it.  That’s  the  way  out. 

When  I  tell  people  that  their  health  depends  on  their  inner  life  (an  intermediate  inner  life,  not  the 
deepest),  it’s  because  of  this. 

During  the  last  two  years,  I’ve  been  accumulating  experiences  IN  THEIR  MINUTEST 
DETAILS,  things  that  might  seem  most  useless.  You  have  to  consent  to  that  and  not  have  a  mania 
for  greatness;  you  must  know  that  where  the  key  is  found  is  in  the  tiniest  effort  to  create  a  true 
attitude  in  a  few  cells. 

The  problem  is  that  when  you  enter  into  the  ordinary  consciousness,  these  things  become  so 
subtle  and  require  such  a  scrupulous  observance  that  people  are  justified  (they  FEEL  justified)  in 
having  the  attitude,  ‘Oh,  it’s  Nature,  it’s  Fate,  it’s  the  Divine  Will!’  But  with  that  conviction,  the 
‘Yoga  of  Perfection’  is  impossible  and  appears  as  a  mere  utopian  fantasy  -  but  this  is  FALSE.  The 
truth  is  something  else  entirely. 

(long  silence) 


2360riginal  English. 


231Tcipasya:  asceticism,  austerities,  severe  discipline. 


238Asuras:  demons  of  the  mental  plane. 


...  When  I  say  to  someone,  ‘I  shall  take  care  of  you,’  do  you  know  what  I  do?  I  join  his  body  to 
mine.  And  then  all  the  work  is  done  in  me  (as  far  as  possible  -  essentially  it’s  possible,  but  there  is  a 
relativity  because  of  time;  but  as  far  as  possible  ...  ).  So  I  find  it  very  interesting  to  make  cross- 
references  and  find  out  the  results  of  my  intervention  -  not  so  I  can  boast  (there’s  nothing  much  to 
boast  about),  but  for  the  sake  of  the  SCIENTIFIC  study  of  the  problem:  to  know  how  to  proceed, 
how  to  discriminate,  what  is  active  and  what  isn’t,  what  are  the  guide  lines,  etc. 

And  even  if  at  the  moment  you  don’t  feel  very  good,  you  are  able  to  say,  ‘It  doesn’t  matter;  what 
we  have  to  do,  we’ll  do’  (this  fear  of  not  being  able  to  do  what  has  to  be  done  is  the  most  irksome), 
if  at  that  moment  you  can  sincerely  say  to  yourself,  ‘No,  I  trust  in  the  Divine  Grace  ...  no,  I  will  do 
what  I  have  to  do,  and  I’ll  be  given  the  power  to  do  it,  or  the  power  to  do  it  will  be  created  in  me’  - 
then  that  is  the  true  attitude. 

I  feel  that’s  what  you  give  me. 


October  30, 1960 


(After  a  meditation  with  Mother  on  the  occasion  of  the  disciple ’s  birthday.  At  the  outset  of  the 
conversation,  Mother  had  given  the  disciple  a  small  leather  wallet  with  an  Egyptian  fresco  depicted 

on  it.) 

Let  me  see  the  wallet  (Mother  looks  at  it)  ...  Ah,  so  that  has  nothing  to  do  with  it! 

As  soon  as  the  meditation  began,  I  started  seeing  quite  familiar  scenes  from  ancient  Egypt.  And 
you,  you  looked  a  little  different,  but  quite  similar  all  the  same  ...  The  first  thing  I  saw  was  their  god 
with  a  head  like  this  (gesture  of  a  muzzle),  with  a  sun  above  his  head.  A  dark  animal  head  with  ...  I 
know  it  VERY  WELL,  but  I  don’t  remember  exactly  which  animal  it  is.  One  is  a  hawk,  239  but  the 
other  has  a  head  like  ...  (Mother  makes  the  same  gesture) 

Like  a  jackal? 

Yes,  like  a  jackal,  that’s  it.  Yes,  that’s  what  it  was.  With  a  kind  of  lyre  above  its  head,  and  then  a 
sun.240 

And  this  god  was  very  intimately  related  to  you,  as  if  you  were  melted  together;  you  were  like  a 


23i9Horus,  the  sun  god,  child  of  Isis  and  Osiris. 


240According  to  tradition,  Anubis,  the  jackal-headed  god,  helped  Isis  to  rebuild  the  body  of  her  spouse,  Osiris,  who  had 
been  killed  and  dismembered  by  his  brother  Set.  Osiris  was  the  first  god  to  rule  over  men.  Owing  to  certain  special  rites, 
Isis,  helped  by  Anubis,  succeeded  in  bringing  him  back  to  life.  So  we  are  not  very  far  from  the  legend  of  Savitri  and 
Satyavan. 


sacrificial  priest  and  at  the  same  time  he  was  entering  into  you. 

And  this  lasted  quite  long  (it’s  what  I  saw  most  clearly  and  what  I  best  remember).  But  there 
were  many,  many  things  -  old  things  that  I  know  -  and  certainly  a  VERY  INTIMATE  relationship 
which  we  had  in  the  days  of  Egypt,  at  Thebes. 

It’s  the  first  time  I  saw  this  for  you  -  it  was  very,  very  ... 

‘Was  it  by  chance  the  wallet  that  brought  this  to  mind?’  I  wondered  right  at  first.  I  had  the 
impression  of  having  given  you  something  Egyptian,  but  I  could  no  longer  remember  what  it  was  - 
I’m  happy  it  wasn’t  that!  ...  I  hesitated  for  barely  a  moment,  then  said  to  myself,  ‘Why?’  And  what 
came  is  that  everything,  even  apparently  accidental  things,  is  organized  by  the  same  Consciousness 
for  the  same  ends  -  it’s  obvious. 

But  I  found  this  interesting,  so  I  began  looking,  and  I  LIVED  the  scene,  all  kinds  of  scenes  of 
initiation,  worship,  etc.,  for  quite  some  time.  When  that  lifted,  a  light  much  stronger  than  the  last 
time  (during  the  last  meditation)  came  down,  in  a  wonderful  silence.  (I  might  add  that  the  first  thing 
I  did,  at  the  beginning,  was  to  try  to  establish  a  silence  around  you,  to  insulate  you  from  other  things 
so  as  to  keep  your  mind  quiet;  it  kept  jumping  a  little,  but  once  this  light  came  down  ...  )  And  it 
came  down  with  a  very  hieratic  quality  and  ...  (how  can  I  put  this?)  Egyptian  in  character  -  very 
occult,  very  occult,  very,  very  distinct,  very  specific,  like  this  (gesture  indicating  a  block  of  silence 
descending). 

And  then  there  came  a  long  moment  of  absolutely  motionless  contemplation  ...  with  something 
that  now  escapes  me  -  it  may  come  back. 

Then  suddenly  I  went  into  a  little  trance.  And  in  it  I  saw  you,  but  you  were  ...  physically,  you 
were  on  one  plane,  and  then  I  saw  another  man  on  a  different  plane  (I  saw  him  quite  concretely;  he 
was  rather  tall,  broad-shouldered  -  not  so  tall  as  broad,  with  a  dark,  European  suit).  And  he  took 
your  hands  and  started  shaking  them  enthusiastically!  -  but  you  were  quite  indifferent,  just  as  you 
are  now,  dressed  in  Indian  fashion  and  sitting  cross-legged.  He  took  both  your  hands  and  started 
shaking  them!  And  then  I  distinctly  heard  the  words:  ‘Congratulations,  it’s  a  great  success!’  -  it  had 
to  do  with  your  book.241  And  at  the  same  time,  I  saw  all  sorts  of  people  and  things  who  were 
touched  by  your  book  -  all  kinds  of  people,  obviously  French,  or  Westerners  in  any  case  ...  women, 
men.  There  was  even  one  woman  (she  must  have  been  an  actress  or  a  singer  or  ...  anyway,  someone 
whose  life  was  ...  she  was  even  dressed  for  the  stage,  with  some  kind  of  tights  -  a  beautiful  girl!) 
and  she  said  to  someone,  ‘Ah,  it  has  even  given  me  a  taste  for  the  spiritual  life!’  It  was  extremely 
interesting  ...  All  kinds  of  things  of  this  nature.  And  then  once  again  I  came  out  of  this  trance  and  ... 
In  the  end,  I  tried  to  do  some  certain  thing  for  you  and  it  turned  out  well.  It  turned  out  quite  well. 

But  then,  just  before  that,  there  was  this  powdering  of  golden  light  coming  down.  And  as  it 
descended,  it  was  white  with  a  touch  of  gold  (but  it  was  white)  and  it  came  down  in  a  column,  with 
such  POWER!  ...  And  then,  just  at  the  end,  this  powdering  of  gold  came  and  settled  into  this  white 
light  which  had  remained  there  the  whole  time  -  oh,  it  was  so  ...  abundant.  A  great  power  of 
realization.  I  had  a  hard  time  coming  out  of  it!  At  the  start,  I  had  decided  to  come  out  of  it  at  half 
past,  so  I  came  out,  but  still  not  completely  ... 

So  there,  my  child.  And  you,  what  did  you  feel? 

When  I  meditate  with  you  ...  When  I’m  alone,  there  is  never  this  power,  this  ...  It’s  something 

else  ...  Sometimes  it’s  strong  but  it  always  lacks  this  particular  quality.  There  are  powerful 

moments  when  I’m  alone,  but  not  like  this. 

Of  course!  I’m  also  with  you  there  in  your  room  when  you  meditate,  but  it  does  make  a 
difference  ... 


241 L  'Orpailleur,  which  had  just  been  published.  The  man’s  description,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  bears  a  striking 
resemblance  to  the  publisher. 


The  physical  vibration  is  important.  The  circumstances  relating  to  the  work  of  transfonnation 
make  the  physical  vibration  important.  I  feel  it,  for  as  soon  as  I  want  to  do  something  with  someone 
on  the  physical  plane  (physical,  mind  you),  it  all  comes  into  the  body.  And  the  body  is  simply 
seized  ...  I  see  that  absolutely  physical  vibrations  are  being  used  all  the  time.  It’s  really  so  different. 
All  the  work  which  is  done  at  a  distance  (gesture  indicating  action  stemming  from  the  mind)  -  it 
acts,  of  course,  but ... 

You  know,  even  now,  all  this  (Mother  touches  her  body,  her  hands)  feels  so  vibrant  and  alive 
that  it’s  difficult  to  sense  its  limits  ...  as  if  it  extends  beyond  the  body  in  all  directions.  It  no  longer 
has  any  limits. 

But  it’s  still  not  luminous  in  the  dark.  What  is  normally  luminous  in  the  dark  is  something 
else  ...  I  had  that  when  I  was  working  with  Theon  (after  returning  to  France,  we  had  group 
meditations  -  though  he  didn’t  call  it  ‘meditation,’  he  called  it  ‘repose,’  and  we  used  to  do  this  in  a 
darkened  room),  and  there  was  ...  it  was  like  phosphorescence,  exactly  the  color  of  phosphorescent 
light,  like  certain  fish  in  the  water  at  night.  It  would  come  out  [of  the  body],  spread  forth,  move 
about.  But  that  is  the  vital,  it  originates  in  the  vital.  It  is  a  force  from  above,  but  what  manifests  is 
vital.  Whereas  now  it  is  absolutely,  clearly  the  golden  supramental  light  in  ...  an  extraordinary 
pulsation,  vibrant  in  intensity  ...  But  probably  it  still  lacks  a  ...  what  Theon  used  to  call  ‘density,’  an 
agent  that  enables  it  to  be  seen  in  the  dark  -  and  then  it  would  be  visibly  gold,  not  phosphorescent. 

But  it  is  very,  very  concrete,  very  material. 

I  wonder  if  at  night  ...  Sometimes  it’s  so  intense  that  I  wonder  if  it  doesn’t  radiate.  But  I  can’t 
see  as  my  eyes  are  closed! 

Again  last  night,  for  a  large  part  of  the  night,  it  was  ...  the  body  has  no  more  limits  -  it’s  only  a 
great  MASS  of  vibrations. 

And  the  experience  just  now  (during  meditation)  was  somehow  mixed  with  what  I  usually  see  at 
night  (it  was  not  a  combination  -  or  maybe  it  was  a  combination  ...  ),  for  it  had  that  same  light  ...  It 
was  a  kind  of  powdering,  even  finer  than  tiny  dots  -  a  powdering  like  an  atomic  dust,  but  with  an 
EXTREMELY  intense  vibration  ...  but  without  any  shifting  of  place.  And  yet  it’s  in  constant 
motion  ...  Something  shifting  about  within  something  that  vibrates  on  the  same  spot  without  moving 
(something  does  move,  but  it’s  subtler,  like  a  current  of  tremendous  power  which  passes  through  a 
milieu  that  doesn’t  move  at  all:  rather,  it  vibrates  on  the  same  spot  with  an  extreme  intensity).  But  I 
don’t  exactly  know  how  it  is  different  from  the  present  experience  ...  It  becomes  less  golden  at 
night,  the  gold  is  less  visible,  whereas  the  other  colors  -  white,  blue  and  a  sort  of  pink  -  are  much 
more  visible. 

Oh,  now  I  remember!  It  was  PINK  during  the  second  phase,  just  afterwards,  after  Egypt!  Oh,  it 
was  like  ...  like  at  the  end  of  a  sunrise  when  it  gets  very  clear  and  luminous.  A  magnificent  color. 
And  it  kept  coming  down  and  down,  in  a  flood  ...  that  part  was  new.  It’s  something  I  see  very 
rarely.  It  was  not  there  at  all  the  last  time  we  meditated  together.  And  it  came  filled  with  such  a  joy! 
Oh!  ...  It  was  absolutely  ecstatic.  It  lasted  quite  a  long  time.  And  from  there  I  went  into  this  trance 
where  I  saw  (laughing)  that  man  congratulating  you!  I  heard  him  say  (his  voice  is  what  roused  me 
from  my  trance,  and  then  I  saw  him),  ‘Congratulations,  it’s  a  great  success!’  (Mother  laughs) 

It’s  good.  We’ll  have  these  little  meditations  from  time  to  time.  For  me,  it’s  pleasant,  for  I  have 
neither  to  restrict  nor  contain  nor  veil  myself.  It’s  nice. 

And  I  see  what’s  coming  down;  it’s  good. 

And  there  is  something  very  happy,  very  happy,  which  keeps  repeating,  ‘It’s  good,  it’s  good!’ 
Happy  ...  and  rather  satisfied  because  of  that. 

My  impression  is  that  in  a  while,  maybe  not  in  such  a  distant  future,  we’ll  be  able  to  do 
something,  a  sort  of ...  it  will  no  longer  be  personal.  We  should  be  able  to  establish  something.242 


242The  terrestrial  work  to  be  accomplished  through  the  Agenda. 


*  *  * 


(soon  afterwards,  when  leaving) 


Is  that  all?  You  have  nothing  to  tell  me,  nothing  to  ask? 

I’m  counting  above  all  on  your  force  to  put  my  body  back  in  order. 

Yes,  of  course!  But  to  be  put  back  in  order,  it  must  become  a  bit  stronger.  The  more  fragile  you  are, 
the  more  it  breaks  down. 

All  I  know  is  that  HERE  you  must  be  very  careful  not  to  weaken  the  body’s  resistance  (I  don’t 
just  mean  in  India,  but  here  in  the  Ashram).  Here,  it’s  important  -  the  base  must  be  solid,  for 
otherwise  it’s  difficult.  The  more  the  Force  descends  -  as  it  has  just  now  descended  -  the  more  the 
body  must  be  ...  rather  square.  It’s  important. 

I’ve  tried  everything,  you  know,  from  complete  fasting  to  a  meat  diet  -  everything,  everything. 
Well,  I  noticed  that  you  can  have  pleasant  experiences  while  fasting,  but  it’s  not  good,  it  shouldn’t 
be  done  -  these  are  all  old  ideas.  No,  the  body  must  be  solid,  solid  ...  otherwise  ... 

(Mother  gives  the  disciple  a  carnation,  named  by  her  ‘Collaboration  ) 

So,  I  won’t  see  you  again?  ...  No,  too  many  people  come  in  the  afternoon,  it’s  not  pleasant ... 


November  5, 1960 

These  things  from  the  past  ...  it’s  rather  odd  -  now,  once  they  come  and  I’ve  spoken  of  them,  they 
get  erased.  As  if  they  were  returning  one  last  time  to  say  goodbye  before  going  for  good. 

All  these  ‘memories’  (actually  they’re  rather  pictures)  seem  to  be  coming  forward  to  show 
themselves  with  all  the  knowledge,  truth  and  HELP  they  represent;  they  come  to  say,  ‘There!  You 
see,  this  is  the  origin  of  that’  -  a  whole  curve.  Then  once  I’ve  seen  it,  it’s  gone. 

One  day,  as  an  experiment,  I  tried  to  remember  something  from  the  past,  for  I  was  interested  in 
what  it  contained;  I  tried  -  impossible!  It  had  been  cleaned  out,  it  was  gone.  So  I  understood  that 
these  things  come,  they  show  themselves  (you  have  to  be  ATTENTIVE  and  know  what  purpose 
they  have  served)  and  then  they  go  away. 

I  have  so  totally  forgotten  a  whole  world  of  incidents  and  events  that  when  someone  reminds  me 
of  something  (the  people  around  me  have  lived  with  me,  so  they’ve  seen  things  and  remember 
them),  I  get  the  feeling  that  they  are  speaking  of  someone  or  something  else  -  it  no  longer  has  any 
connection  with  me  at  all.  And  it’s  the  same  with  everything,  whether  near  or  far,  which  has 
brought  to  my  consciousness  whatever  it  had  to  bring,  lost  its  utility  and  -  disappeared.  Only,  these 
memories  probably  still  have  some  utility  for  the  others,  so  they  remain.  But  for  me  it’s  completely 
erased,  absolutely,  as  if  it  had  never  been. 


It’s  the  only  way  to  forget. 

People  often  try  to  forget  the  past,  but  it  doesn’t  work.  Only  once  it  has  brought  all  the  lessons 
that  it  was  meant  to  bring  into  your  life  (it’s  decanted,  so  you  see  the  thing  in  its  deepest  truth),  is  its 
utility  finished,  and  it  disappears. 

I  am  convinced  that  at  heart  Karma  is  simply  all  the  things  we  haven’t  used  in  the  true  way  that 
we  drag  along  behind  us  ...  If  totally  and  clearly  we  have  learned  the  lesson  which  each  event  or 
each  circumstance  ought  to  have  brought,  then  it’s  finished,  its  utility  is  gone  and  it  dissolves. 

It’s  an  interesting  experience  to  follow  and  observe. 

*  *  * 


(soon  afterwards) 

I  went  down  into  a  place  ...  a  place  simply  in  the  human  consciousness,  thus  necessarily  in  my  body 
...  I  have  never  seen  anything  more  timorous,  fearful,  feeble  and  mean!  It’s  ...  it  must  be  a  part  of 
the  cells,  part  of  the  consciousness,  something  that  lives  in  apprehension,  fear,  dread,  anxiety  ...  It 
was  truly,  truly  dreadful. 

And  we  carry  that  within  us!  We  aren’t  aware  of  it,  it’s  almost  subconscious  -  for  you  see,  the 
consciousness  is  there  to  prevent  us  from  yielding  to  that  -  it’s  cowardly,  and  it  can  make  you  fall 
sick  IN  A  MINUTE.  I  saw  it,  I  saw  things  that  had  been  cured  and  overcome  in  myself  (cured  in  the 
true  manner,  not  in  an  outer  way),  and  then  they  return!  It’s  cured,  but  then  it  begins  again. 

So  then  I  went  in  search  of  its  origin.  It’s  something  in  the  subconscient  -  in  the  cells’ 
subconscient.  Its  roots  are  there,  and  on  the  least  occasion  ...  And  it’s  so  very,  very  ingrained  that ... 
For  example,  you  can  be  feeling  very  good,  the  body  can  be  perfectly  harmonious  (and  when  the 
body  is  perfectly  harmonious,  its  motions  are  harmonious,  things  are  in  their  true  places,  everything 
works  exactly  as  it  should  without  needing  the  least  attention  -  a  general  harmony),  when  suddenly 
the  clock  strikes,  for  example,  or  someone  utters  a  word,  and  you  have  just  the  faint  impression 
‘Oh,  it’s  late,  I’m  not  going  to  be  on  time’  -  a  second,  a  split  second,  and  ...  the  whole  working  of 
the  body  falls  apart.  You  suddenly  feel  feeble,  drained,  uneasy.  And  you  have  to  intervene.  It’s 
terrible.  And  we’re  at  the  mercy  of  such  things! 

To  change  it,  you  have  to  descend  into  it  -  which  is  what  I’m  in  the  midst  of  doing.  But  you 
know,  it  makes  for  painful  moments.  Anyway,  once  it’s  done,  it  will  be  something.  When  that  is 
done,  I’ll  explain  it  to  you.  And  then  I’ll  have  the  power  to  restore  you  to  health. 


November  8, 1960 


(After  a  conversation  with  Z,  a  distant  ‘disciple  ’  reputed  for  his  loose  morals  and  the  object  of 
numerous  ‘moralistic  ’  or  even  so-called  ‘yogic  ’  criticisms  among  the  ‘true  disciples  ’  in  the 

Ashram) 


He  lives  in  a  region  which  is  largely  a  kind  of  vital  vibration  which  penetrates  the  mind  and  makes 
use  of  the  imagination  (essentially  it’s  the  same  region  most  so-called  cultured  men  live  in).  I  don’t 
mean  to  be  severe  or  critical,  but  it’s  a  world  that  likes  to  play  to  itself.  It’s  not  really  what  we  could 
call  histrionics,  not  that  -  it’s  rather  a  need  to  dramatize  to  oneself.  So  it  can  be  an  heroic  drama,  it 
can  be  a  musical  drama,  it  can  be  a  tragic  drama,  or  quite  simply  a  poetic  drama  -  and  ninety-nine 
times  out  of  a  hundred,  it’s  a  romantic  drama.  And  then,  these  ‘soul  states’  (!)  come  replete  with 
certain  spoken  expressions  ...  (laughing)  I’m  holding  myself  back  from  saying  certain  things!  -  You 
know,  it’s  like  a  theatricals  store  where  you  rent  scenery  and  costumes.  It’s  all  ready  and  waiting  -  a 
little  call,  and  there  it  comes,  ready-made.  For  a  particular  occasion,  they  say,  ‘You’re  the  woman 
of  my  life’  (to  be  repeated  as  often  as  necessary),  and  for  another  they  say  ...  It’s  a  whole  world,  a 
whole  mode  of  human  life  which  I  suddenly  felt  I  was  holding  in  my  arms.  Yes,  like  a  decoration, 
an  ornament,  a  nicety  -  an  ornament  of  existence,  to  keep  it  from  being  flat  and  dull  -  and  the  best 
means  the  human  mind  has  found  to  get  out  of  its  tamas.  It’s  a  kind  of  artifice. 

So  for  persons  who  are  severe  and  grave  (there  are  two  such  examples  here,  but  it’s  not 
necessary  to  name  them)  ...  There  are  beings  who  are  grave,  so  serious,  so  sincere,  who  find  it 
hypocritical;  and  when  it  borders  on  certain  (how  shall  I  put  it?)  vital  excesses,  they  call  it  vice. 
There  are  others  who  have  lived  their  entire  lives  in  a  yogic  or  religious  discipline,  and  they  see  this 
as  an  obstacle,  illusion,  dirtyness  (Mother  makes  a  gesture  of  rejecting  with  disgust),  but  above  all, 
it’s  this  ‘terrible  illusion  that  prevents  you  from  nearing  the  Divine.’  And  when  I  saw  the  way  these 
two  people  here  reacted,  in  fact,  I  said  to  myself,  ‘but ...’  -  you  see,  I  FELT  So  strongly  that  this  too 
is  the  Divine,  it  too  is  a  way  of  getting  out  of  something  that  has  had  its  place  in  evolution,  and  still 
has  a  place,  individually,  for  certain  individuals.  Naturally,  if  you  remain  there,  you  keep  turning  in 
circles;  it  will  always  be  (not  eternally,  but  indefinitely)’  the  woman  of  my  life,’  to  take  that  as  a 
symbol.  But  once  you’re  out  of  it,  you  see  that  this  had  its  place,  its  utility  -  it  made  you  emerge 
from  a  kind  of  very  animal-like  wisdom  and  quietude  -  that  of  the  herd  or  of  the  being  who  sees  no 
further  than  his  daily  round.  It  was  necessary.  We  mustn’t  condemn  it,  we  mustn’t  use  harsh  words. 

The  mistake  we  make  is  to  remain  there  too  long,  for  if  you  spend  your  whole  life  in  that,  well, 
you’ll  probably  need  many  more  lifetimes.  But  once  the  chance  to  get  out  of  it  comes,  you  can  look 
at  it  with  a  smile  and  say,  ‘Yes,  it’s  really  a  sort  of  love  for  fiction!’  -  people  love  fiction,  they  want 
fiction,  they  need  fiction!  Otherwise  it’s  boring  and  all  much  too  flat. 

All  this  came  to  me  yesterday.  I  kept  Z  with  me  for  more  than  half  an  hour,  nearly  45  minutes. 
He  told  me  some  very  interesting  things.  What  he  said  was  quite  good  and  I  encouraged  him  a  great 
deal  -  some  action  on  the  right  lines  which  will  be  quite  useful,  and  then  a  book  ...  unfortunately 
mixed  with  an  influence  from  that  artificial  world  (but  actually,  even  that  can  be  used  as  a  link  to 
attract  people).  He  must  have  spoken  to  you  about  this.  He  wants  to  write  a  kind  of  dialogue  to 
introduce  Sri  Aurobindo’s  ideas  -  it’s  a  good  idea  -  like  the  conversations  in  Les  Homines  de 
Bonne  Volonte  by  Jules  Romain.  He  wants  to  do  it,  and  I  told  him  it  was  an  excellent  idea.  And  not 
only  one  type  -  he  should  take  all  types  of  people  who  for  the  moment  are  closed  to  this  vision  of 
life,  from  the  Catholic,  the  fervent  believer,  right  to  the  utmost  materialist,  men  of  science,  etc.  It 
could  be  very  interesting. 

This  is  what  you  see  in  life,  it’s  all  like  that  -  each  thing  has  its  place  and  its  necessity.  This  has 
made  me  see  a  whole  current  of  life  ...  I  was  very,  very  involved  with  people  from  this  milieu 
during  a  whole  period  of  my  existence  -  and  in  fact,  it’s  the  first  approach  to  Beauty.  But  it  gets 
mixed. 

(Mother  remains  silent  a  moment) 

Symbolically,  in  life,  we  might  think  of  tamas  as  the  earth  (the  solid  and  obdurate  earth),  and  this 
intervention  of  the  vital  is  water  flowing  onto  it.  But  when  first  it  touches  the  earth,  it  stirs  up  mud! 
There’s  no  reason  to  protest,  for  it’s  like  that.  And  thereby  the  earth  becomes  less  hard  and  resistant, 
and  it  begins  receiving. 

It’s  an  approach  which  is  not  at  all  mental  nor  intellectual  nor  (God  knows!)  moral  in  the  least  - 


no  notion  of  Good  or  Evil  nor  any  of  those  things,  absolutely  none  of  that.  There’s  a  moment  in  life 
when  you  begin  thinking  a  little  and  you  see  all  this  from  an  overall  or  universal  point  of  view  in 
which  all  moral  notions  completely  disappear  -  FOR  ANOTHER  REASON.  This  experience  with 
Z  reminded  me  of  a  certain  way  of  approaching  Beauty  that  enables  you  even  to  find  it  in  what 
appears  dirty  and  ugly  to  the  common  vision.  It  is  She  trying  to  express  herself  in  this  something 
which  to  the  common  vision  is  ugly,  dirty,  hypocritical.  But  of  course,  if  you  yourself  have  striven 
assiduously  and  have  greatly  held  yourself  in,  then  you  look  at  it  reprovingly. 

From  my  earliest  childhood,  instinctively,  I  have  never  felt  the  slightest  contempt  or  ...  how 
should  I  say  ...  (well,  well!  I  was  thinking  in  English)  shrinking  or  disapproval,  severe  criticism  or 
disgust  for  the  things  people  call  vice. 

(silence) 

I  have  experienced  all  kinds  of  things  in  life,  but  I  have  always  felt  a  sort  of  light  -  so 
INTANGIBLE,  So  perfectly  pure  (not  in  the  moral  sense,  but  pure  light!)  -  and  it  could  go 
anywhere,  mix  everywhere  without  ever  really  getting  mixed  with  anything.  I  felt  this  flame  as  a 
young  child  -  a  white  flame.  And  NEVER  have  I  felt  disgust,  contempt,  recoil,  the  sense  of  being 
dirtied  -  by  anything  or  anyone.  There  was  always  this  flame  -  white,  white,  so  white  that  nothing 
could  make  it  other  than  white.  And  I  started  feeling  it  long  ago  in  the  past  (now  my  approach  is 
entirely  different  -  it  comes  straight  from  above,  and  I  have  other  reasons  for  seeing  the  Purity  in 
everything).  But  it  came  back  when  I  met  Z  (because  of  the  contact  with  him)  -  and  I  felt  nothing 
negative,  absolutely  nothing.  Afterwards,  people  said,  ‘Oh,  how  he  used  to  be  this,  how  he  used  to 
be  that!  ...  And  now  look  at  him!  See  what  he’s  become!  ...’  Someone  even  used  the  word  ‘rotten’  - 
that  made  me  smile.  Because,  you  see,  that  doesn’t  exist  for  me. 

What  I  saw  is  this  world,  this  realm  where  people  are  like  that,  they  live  that,  for  it’s  necessary 
to  get  out  from  below  and  this  is  a  way  -  it’s  a  way,  the  only  way.  It  was  the  only  way  for  the  vital 
fonnation  and  the  vital  creation  to  enter  into  the  material  world,  into  inert  matter.  An 
intellectualized  vital,  a  vital  of  ideas,  an  ‘artist’;  it  even  fringes  upon  or  has  the  first  drops  of  Poetry 
-  this  Poetry  which  upon  its  peaks  goes  beyond  the  mind  and  becomes  an  expression  of  the  Spirit. 
Well,  when  these  first  drops  fall  on  earth,  it  stirs  up  mud. 

And  I  wondered  why  people  are  so  rigid  and  severe,  why  they  condemn  others  (but  one  day  I’ll 
understand  this  as  well).  I  say  this  because  very  often  I  run  into  these  two  states  of  mind  in  my 
activities  (the  grave  and  serious  mind  which  sees  hypocrisy  and  vice,  and  the  religious  and  yogic 
mind  which  sees  the  illusion  that  prevents  you  from  nearing  the  Divine)  -  and  without  being  openly 
criticized,  I’m  criticized  ...  I’ll  tell  you  about  this  one  day  ... 

You  ’re  criticized? 

Yes,  but  naturally  without  daring  to  criticize  me  openly.  But  I’m  aware  of  it.  On  the  one  hand,  they 
see  it  as  a  kind  of  looseness  on  my  part  (oh,  not  only  for  that  -  many  things!).  And  on  the  other 
hand,243  you  know  well  enough;  it  applies  to  other  things,  slightly  different  areas,  it’s  not  exactly  the 
same,  but  in  this  area  they’re  also  severe.  I’m  even  told  that  there  are  some  people  who  shouldn’t  be 
in  the  Ashram. 

My  reply  is  that  the  whole  world  should  be  in  the  Ashram! 

But  as  I  cannot  contain  the  whole  world,  I  have  to  contain  at  least  one  representative  of  each 
type. 

They  also  find  I  give  too  much  time  and  too  much  force  (and  maybe  too  much  attention)  to 
people  and  things  that  should  be  regarded  with  more  severity.  That  never  bothered  me  much.  It 
doesn’t  matter,  they  can  say  what  they  like. 


243Mother  is  referring  to  traditional  tantrism. 


But  since  Z’s  visit  yesterday,  and  this  morning  on  the  balcony  ...  Oh,  it’s  so  ...  I  had  already  seen 
this  long  ago  -  this  whole  milieu  that  is  not  very  pretty  -  and  I  had  said,  ‘Well,  it’s  all  right,  that’s 
how  it  is,’  and  I  didn’t  discuss  it  further:  ‘That’s  how  it  is,  and  absolutely  the  whole  world  belongs 
to  the  Lord  -  IS  the  Lord!  And  the  Lord  made  it  so,  and  the  Lord  wants  it  so,  and  it’s  quite  all 
right.’  Then  I  put  it  aside.  But  with  his  visit  yesterday,  it  found  its  place  -  such  a  smiling  place.  And 
there’s  a  whole  world  of  things  of  life  which  have  found  their  true  place  in  this  way  -  with  a  smile! 

(silence) 

As  if  suddenly  something  were  opening  in  a  marvelous  way  -  it  has  classified  a  whole  part  of 
terrestrial  life.  It  was  truly  interesting. 

(silence) 

How  strange  it  is!  ...  You  have  the  feeling  of  ascending,  of  a  progress  in  consciousness,  and 
everything,  all  the  events  and  circumstances  of  life  follow  one  another  with  an  unquestioning  logic. 
You  see  the  Divine  Will  unfolding  with  a  wonderful  logic.  Then,  from  time  to  time,  there  appears  a 
little  ‘set’  of  circumstances  (either  isolated  or  repeated),  which  are  like  snags  on  the  way;  you  can’t 
explain  them,  so  you  put  them  aside  ‘for  later  on.’  Some  such  ‘accidents’  have  been  quite 
significant,  but  they  don’t  seem  to  follow  this  ascending  line  of  the  present  individuality.  They’re 
scattered  along  the  way,  sometimes  repeated,  sometimes  only  once,  and  then  they  vanish.  And  when 
you  go  through  such  an  experience,  you  sense  that  they  are  things  put  aside  for  later  on.  And  then, 
all  of  a  sudden  (especially  during  these  last  two  years  when  I  have  again  descended  to  take  all  that 
up),  all  of  a  sudden,  one  after  another,  all  these  snags  return.  And  they  don’t  follow  the  same  curve; 
rather,  it’s  as  if  suddenly  you  reach  a  certain  state  and  a  certain  impersonal  breadth  that  far 
surpasses  the  individual,  and  this  new  state  enters  into  contact  with  one  of  those  old  ‘accidents’  that 
had  remained  in  the  deepest  part  of  the  subconscient  -  and  that  makes  it  rise  up  again,  the  two 
meet  ...  in  an  explosion  of  light.  Everything  is  explained,  everything  is  understood,  everything  is 
clear!  No  explanation  is  needed:  it  has  become  OBVIOUS. 

This  is  entirely  another  way  of  understanding  -  it’s  not  an  ascent,  not  even  a  descent  nor  an 
inspiration  ...  it  must  be  what  Sri  Aurobindo  calls  a’  revelation.’  It’s  the  meeting  of  this 
subconscious  notation  -  this  something  which  has  remained  buried  within,  held  down  so  as  not  to 
manifest,  but  which  suddenly  surges  forth  to  meet  the  light  streaming  down  from  above,  this  very 
vast  state  of  consciousness  that  excludes  nothing  ...  and  from  it  springs  forth  a  light  -  oh,  a 
resplendence  of  light!  -  like  a  new  explanation  of  the  world,  or  of  that  part  of  the  world  not  yet 
explained. 

And  this  is  the  true  way  of  knowing. 

These  things  are  like  landmarks  along  the  ascending  path:  you  go  forward  step  by  step,  and 
sometimes  it’s  painful,  sometimes  joyful,  or  with  a  certain  amount  of  toil  that  bears  witness  still  to 
the  presence  of  the  personality  or  the  individuality  and  its  limitations  (the  Questions  and  Answers 
are  full  of  this)  -  but  the  other  thing  is  different,  completely  different:  the  other  thing  is  an 
overflowing  joy,  and  not  only  the  joy  of  knowing  but  the  joy  of  BEING.  An  overflowing  joy.244 

There,  my  child. 

...  If  you  weren’t  there,  all  these  things  would  never  get  said. 

I  don’t  know  why.  I  don’t  know  why  I  wouldn’t  say  them.  But  I  know  why  I  say  them  to  you  -  I 
already  gave  you  a  hint.245  1  told  you,  didn’t  I,  that  there  was  a  reason. 

244Later  coming  back  to  the  experience  She  has  just  described,  Mother  added  the  following:  ‘It’s  a  very  interesting 
experience.  It’s  a  very  powerful  lever  for  abolishing  the  moral  point  of  view  in  its  narrowest  forms.  And  this  is  precisely 
what  I  encounter  all  the  time  in  people  -  you  see,  all  those  who  make  a  spiritual  effort  bring  me  truckloads  of  morality!  ’ 


2450riginal  English. 


Yes,  but  you  didn  7  tell  me  what  it  was! 

( Mother  laughs)  Because  it’s  not  that  kind  of  reason,  not  a  reason  that  can  be  explained!!  No,  it’s 
a  ...  it’s  the  same  thing,  a  contact. 

I  know  - 1  told  you  that  I  had  had  a  vision,  but  you  didn’t  understand  what  I  told  you  that  day.  It 
was  a  vision  of  the  place  you  occupy  in  my  being  and  of  the  work  we  have  to  do  together.  That’s 
really  how  it  is.  These  things  [that  I  tell  you]  have  their  utility  and  a  concrete  life,  and  I  see  them  as 
very  powerful  for  world  transformation  -  they’re  what  I  call  ‘experiences’  (which  is  much  more 
than  an  experience  because  it  extends  far  beyond  the  individual)  -  and  it’s  the  same  whether  it’s 
said  or  not  said:  the  Action  is  done.  But  the  fact  that  it  is  said,  that  it  is  fonnulated  here  and 
preserved,  is  exclusively  for  you,  because  you  were  made  for  this  and  this  is  why  we  met. 

It  doesn’t  need  a  lot  of  explaining. 

And,  even  with  Sri  Aurobindo,  even  with  him  I  didn’t  speak  of  these  things  for  I  wouldn’t  waste 
his  time,  and  I  found  it  quite  useless  to  burden  him  with  all  this.  I  would  tell  him  ...  I  always 
described  my  visions  and  experiences  at  night  -  I  always  recounted  that  to  him.  And  he  would 
remember  (I  myself  would  forget;  the  next  day,  the  whole  thing  would  be  gone),  he  would 
remember;  then  sometimes,  long  afterwards,  even  years  afterwards,  he  would  say,  ‘Ah,  yes!  You 
had  seen  that  back  then.’  He  had  a  wonderful  memory.  While  myself,  I  would  already  have 
forgotten.  But  those  were  the  only  things  I  told  him,  and  even  then  only  when  I  saw  that  it  had  a 
very  sure,  very  superior  quality.  I  didn’t  bother  him  with  a  whole  jumble  of  words.  But  otherwise... 
even  Nolini,246  who  understands  well  ...  I  never,  never  felt  even  the  ...  (it’s  not  the  need)  not  even 
the  POSSIBILITY. 

I  don’t  want  to  tell  you  this  too  precisely,  to  expand  on  it,  for  these  things  cannot  be  explained.  I 
want  you  to  -  not  know  nor  think  it,  but  feel  it  suddenly,  like  a  little  electric  shock  within  that  leaps 
forth. 

It  will  come. 

I’m  really  so  thick,  you  know  ... 

It’s  the  mind  that’s  terrible.  It’s  a  nuisance.  To  have  an  experience  like  the  one  I  told  you  about  a 
little  while  ago  you  have  to  tell  it,  ‘Okay,  be  quiet;  be  quiet  now,  be  calm.’  But  if  it’s  left  on  its  own 
and  you’re  unfortunate  enough  to  listen  to  it,  it  spoils  everything.  This  is  what  you  must  learn  to  do. 

But  effort  is  not  of  much  use,  my  child,  it’s  ...  (long  silence)  it’s  ...  you  can  call  it  grace,  or  you 
can  call  it  a  ‘knack’  -  two  very  different  things,  yet  it  has  something  of  each. 

If  I  could  only  make  my  head  quiet! 

That  is  horrible.  It’s  painful,  exhausting. 

And  the  more  you  try,  the  more  fidgety  it  gets. 

That’s  it,  exactly.  It’s  what  I  was  telling  you,  that  it’s  not  the  result  of  any  effort  ...  In  fact, 
sometimes  it  comes  all  by  itself  when  you’re  no  longer  thinking  about  it.  Maybe  I’ll  be  able  to  help 
you  one  day. 


246The  most  senior  disciple  in  the  Ashram. 


Undated,  1960 


(Handwritten  note  from  Mother  to  Satprem) 


At  the  moment 
when 

you  least  expect  it. 


November  12, 1960 


(It  has  not  stopped  raining  for  the  last  20  days  ... ) 

Chittagong  was  hit  by  a  cyclone,  there  were  tidal  waves  somewhere  else  ...  The  cyclone  went  up  the 
wrong  side!  -  for  according  to  X’s  predictions,  it  was  Karachi  that  should  have  disappeared. 

He  said  only  in  1962  or  1963  would  Karachi  totally  disappear.  And  three-fourths  of  Bombay 
underwater! 

And  just  a  while  ago  some  volcanoes  erupted,  so  the  sea  rose  and  swept  away  all  kinds  of  things  in 
Japan  and  all  along  its  path,  but  it  didn’t  come  all  the  way  to  India.  When  I  was  in  Japan,  one  island 
was  swallowed  up  just  like  that,  along  with  its  30,000  inhabitants,  glub! 

You  see,  it  amuses  them;  it’s  the  way  these  beings  amuse  themselves  -  only  it’s  on  another 
scale,  that’s  all.  They  look  at  us  like  ants,  so  what’s  it  matter  to  them!  ‘If  they  don’t  like  it,  too  bad 
for  them.’  Only,  ants  can’t  protest,  or  at  least  we  don’t  understand  their  protests!  Whereas  when  we 
ourselves  protest,  we  can  make  ourselves  heard.  We  have  the  means  to  make  ourselves  heard. 

We  can  be  heard? 

Certainly,  we  CAN  be  heard.  So  far  I  never  said  anything.  It  even  surprised  me,  for  I  had  never  paid 
it  any  attention,  I  was  quite  away  from  all  that:  it’s  raining?  -  so  what,  it’s  raining,  it  happens.  It’s 
not  raining?  -  so  what,  it’s  not  raining,  it’s  the  same  thing.  And  then  gradually  people  started 
mentioning  that  should  it  continue,  they  wouldn’t  be  able  to  do  their  exercises,  and  they  wouldn’t  be 


ready  for  December  2. 247  Then  I  started  receiving  desperate  letters  -  one  person  even  told  me  he  was 
doing  his  puja  underwater!  So  I  answered  by  saying,  ‘Take  it  as  the  Lord’s  blessing’  but  I’m  not 
sure  he  appreciated  it!  And  then  I  learned  that  200  houses  [in  the  Ashram]  -  200!  -  are  leaking. 
Naturally,  each  one  is  in  a  great  hurry  -  it’s  terribly  urgent!  So  perhaps  I  shall  file  a  complaint  and 
ask  them  what  they  mean  by  this! 

Actually,  if  communications  are  interrupted,  it  can  be  troublesome  ...  Let  us  see. 

(After  a  moment  of  silence)  We  don’t  have  time  now  to  work,  it’s  too  late.  And  anyway,  we 
can’t  see  properly.  Did  you  bring  anything? 

Yes,  some  ‘Questions  and  Answers.  ’ 

More  small  talk! 

Speaking  of  which,  I  looked  at  T’s  most  recent  questions  on  the  Aphorisms  again.  All  these 
children  haven’t  the  least  sense  of  humor,  so  Sri  Aurobindo’s  paradoxes  throw  them  into  a  kind  of 
despair!  ...  The  last  aphorism  went  something  like  this:  ‘When  I  could  read  a  wearisome  book  from 
one  end  to  the  other  with  pleasure,  then  I  knew  I  had  conquered  my  mind.’248  So  T  asked  me  ‘How 
can  you  read  a  wearisome  book  with  pleasure?’!!  I  had  to  explain  it  to  her.  And  on  top  of  that,  I 
have  to  take  on  a  rather  serious  tone,  for  were  I  to  reply  in  the  same  ironic  fashion,  they  would  be 
totally  drowned!  It  throws  them  into  a  terrible  confusion! 

It’s  a  lack  of  plasticity  in  the  mind,  and  they  are  bound  by  the  expression  of  things;  for  them, 
words  are  rigid.  Sri  Aurobindo  explained  it  so  well  in  The  Secret  of  the  Veda,  he  shows  how 
language  evolves  and  how,  before,  it  was  very  supple  and  evocative.  For  example,  one  could  at 
once  think  of  a  river  and  of  inspiration. 

Sri  Aurobindo  also  gives  the  example  of  a  sailboat  and  the  forward  march  of  life.  And  he  says 
that  for  those  of  the  Vedic  age  it  was  quite  natural,  the  two  could  go  together,  superimposed;  it  was 
merely  a  way  of  looking  at  the  same  thing  from  two  sides,  whereas  now,  when  a  word  is  said,  we 
think  only  of  this  word  all  by  itself,  and  to  get  a  clear  picture  we  need  a  whole  literary  or  poetic 
imagery  (with  explanations  to  boot!).  That’s  exactly  the  case  with  these  children;  they’re  at  a  stage 
where  everything  is  rigid.  Such  is  the  product  of  modern  education.  It  even  extracts  the  subtlest 
nuance  between  two  words  and  FIXES  it:  ‘And  above  all,  don’t  make  any  mistake,  don’t  use  this 
word  for  that  word,  for  otherwise  your  writing’s  no  good.’  But  it’s  just  the  opposite. 

(silence) 


So,  are  you  sleeping  in  water? 

It ’s  not  that  bad! 

Yes,  everything  is  getting  mildewed,  everything  you  touch.  I’m  sleeping  in  a  damp  bed;  to  walk  on 
the  woolen  carpets  upstairs  is  like  walking  on  moss  -  in  the  forest!  For  myself,  I  don’t  mind. 

There’s  a  certain  sensibility  which  makes  any  increase  in  humidity  felt.  Before  it  starts  raining, 
even  several  hours  before,  it  feels  like  there  are  drops  falling  on  my  body.  I  can  always  say  when 
it’s  going  to  rain.  It’s  entirely  physical,  actually,  merely  a  heightened  sensitivity.  It  feels  like  very 
tiny  drops  (you  know,  like  drizzle),  the  feeling  of  a  very  fine  spray  falling  on  the  body.  And  yet  the 
sky  is  clear;  I  say,  ‘Hmm,  it’s  going  to  rain.’  And  it  rains  -  I  felt  it.  I  feel  the  water,  and  it  never 
fails  to  come  a  few  hours  later. 


247The  Ashram’s  annual  physical  education  demonstration  at  the  Sportsground. 


248The  actual  aphorism  reads:  ‘When  I  read  a  wearisome  book  through  and  with  pleasure,  yet  perceived  all  the 
perfection  of  its  wearisomeness,  then  I  knew  that  my  mind  was  conquered.’ 


(silence) 


You  asked  me  just  now  if  we  have  a  say  in  the  matter.  Well,  last  year  I  didn’t  go  out;  I  had  no 
intention  of  going  to  the  Sportsground  or  to  the  theater  for  the  December  2  program,  but  I  was  often 
asked  to  see  that  the  weather  be  good.  So  while  I  was  doing  my  japa  upstairs,  I  started  saying  that  it 
shouldn’t  rain.  But  ‘they’  weren’t  in  a  very  good  mood!  (When  I  used  to  go  out  myself,  it  had  an 
effect,  for  it  kept  the  thing  in  check,  and  even  if  it  had  been  raining  earlier,  that  day  it  would  stop.) 
So  they  said,  ‘But  you  aren’t  going  out,  so  what  does  it  matter.’  I  said  I  was  counting  on  it.  Then 
they  answered,  ‘Are  you  prepared  to  have  it  rain  the  next  time  you  go  out?’  -  ‘Do  what  you  like,’  I 
replied.  And  when  I  went  out  on  November  24  for  the  prize  distribution,  there  was  a  deluge.  It  came 
pouring  down  and  we  had  to  run  for  shelter  in  the  gymnasium  -  everyone  was  splashing  around,  the 
band  playing  on  the  verandah  was  half- drenched,  it  was  dreadful!  -  the  day  before  it  hadn’t  rained, 
the  day  after  it  didn’t  rain.  But  on  that  day  they  had  their  revenge! 

I  don’t  want  that  to  happen  this  time.  Once  is  enough.  So  I’m  going  to  see  about  it. 

(silence) 

But  it’s  explained  very  well  in  Savitri!  All  these  things  have  their  laws  and  their  conventions  (and 
truly  speaking,  a  really  FORMIDABLE  power  is  needed  to  change  anything  of  their  rights,  for  they 
have  rights  -  what  they  call  Taws’)  ...  Sri  Aurobindo  explains  this  very  well  when  Savitri,  following 
Satyavan  into  death,  argues  with  the  god  of  Death.249  ‘It’s  the  Law,  and  who  has  the  right  to  change 
the  Law?’  he  says.  And  then  comes  this  wonderful  passage  at  the  end  where  she  replies,  ‘My  God 
can  change  it.  And  my  God  is  a  God  of  Love.’  Oh,  how  magnificent! 

And  by  force  of  repeating  this  to  him,  he  yields  ...  She  replies  in  this  way  to  EVERYTHING. 

It’s  all  right  for  winning  a  Victory,  but  not  for  stopping  the  rain  for  one  day! 

So  I’m  trying  to  come  to  an  understanding,  to  reach  an  agreement  -  these  are  very  complicated 
matters  (!).  For  it’s  a  whole  totality  ...  You  see,  we  are  trying  something  here  which  really  is 
contrary  to  all  those  laws  and  practices,  something  which  disturbs  everything.  So  ‘they’  propose 
things  that  have  me  advancing  like  this  (sinuous  motion),  without  disturbing  things  too  much,  and 
without  having  to  call  in  forces  ...  (Mother  makes  a  gesture  of  a  lance  thrust  into  the  pack)  forces  a 
bit  too  great,  which  may  disturb  things  too  much.  Like  that,  we  can  keep  tacking  back  and  forth. 

A  while  ago  ...  You  know  that  I  have  TREMENDOUS  financial  difficulties.  In  fact,  I  have 
handed  the  whole  matter  over  to  the  Lord,  telling  Him,  ‘It’s  your  affair;  if  you  want  us  to  continue 
this  experience,  well,  you  must  provide  the  means.’  But  this  upsets  some  of  ‘them,’  so  they  come 
along  with  all  kinds  of  suggestions  to  keep  me  from  having  to  ...  to  resort  to  something  so  drastic. 
They  suggest  all  kinds  of  things;  some  time  ago  they  said,  ‘What  about  a  good  cyclone,  or  a  good 
earthquake?  A  lot  of  damage  to  the  Ashram,  a  public  appeal  -  that  would  bring  in  some  funds!’ 
(Mother  laughs)  Yes,  it’s  of  this  order!  And  it’s  all  quite  clear  and  definite  -  we  have  veritable 
‘conversations’! 

I  listen,  I  answer.  ‘It’s  not  satisfactory!’  I  told  them.  But  they’ve  kept  to  their  idea,  they  like  it. 
When  that  first  storm  came  some  time  back  (you  remember,  with  those  terrible  bolts  of  lightning 
and  that  asuric  being  P.K.  saw  and  sketched):  ‘Don’t  you  want  us  to  destroy  something?  ...’  I  got 
angry.  But  it  was  ...  This  influence  was  so  close  and  acute  that  it  gave  you  goose  bumps!  The  whole 
time  the  storm  lasted,  I  had  to  hold  on  tight  in  my  bed,  like  this  (Mother  closes  her  fists  tight  as  in  a 
trance  or  deep  concentration),  and  I  didn’t  move  -  didn’t  move  -  like  a  ...  a  rock  during  the  entire 
storm,  until  he  consented  to  go  a  bit  further  away.  Then  I  moved.  And  even  now,  it  comes  -  from 
others  (there’s  not  just  one,  you  see,  there  are  many):  ‘How  about  a  good  flood?’  A  roof  collapsed 
the  other  day  with  someone  underneath,  but  he  was  able  to  escape.  So  roofs  are  collapsing, 
houses  ...  ‘Arouse  public  sympathy,  we  must  help  the  Ashram!’  ‘It’s  no  good,’  I  said.  But  maybe 


249Yama:  the  god  of  Death.  He  is  also  the  guardian  of  the  Law. 


that’s  what’s  responsible  for  this  intenninable  rain.  And  they  offer  so  many  other  things  ...  oh,  what 
they  parade  past  me!  You  could  write  books  on  all  this! 

But  generally  -  and  this  is  something  Theon  had  told  me  (Theon  was  very  qualified  on  the 
subject  of  hostile  forces  and  the  workings  of  all  that  ‘resists’  the  divine  influence,  and  he  was  a 
great  fighter  -  as  you  might  imagine!  He  himself  was  an  incarnation  of  an  asura,  so  he  knew  how  to 
tackle  these  things!);  he  was  always  saying,  If  you  make  a  VERY  SMALL  concession  or  suffer  a 
minor  defeat,  it  gives  you  the  right  to  a  very  great  victory.’  It’s  a  very  good  trick.  And  I  have 
observed,  in  practice,  that  for  all  things,  even  for  the  very  little  things  of  everyday  life,  it’s  true  -  if 
you  yield  on  one  point  (if,  even  though  you  see  what  should  be,  you  yield  on  a  very  secondary  and 
unimportant  point),  it  immediately  gives  you  the  power  to  impose  your  will  for  something  much 
more  important.  I  mentioned  this  to  Sri  Aurobindo  and  he  said  that  it  was  true.  It  is  true  in  the  world 
as  it  is  today,  but  it’s  not  what  we  want;  we  want  it  to  change,  really  change. 

He  wrote  this  in  a  letter,  I  believe,  and  he  spoke  of  this  system  of  compensation  -  for  example, 
those  who  take  an  illness  on  themselves  in  order  to  have  the  power  to  cure;  and  then  there’s  the 
symbolic  story  of  Christ  dying  on  the  cross  to  set  men  free.  And  Sri  Aurobindo  said,  ‘That’s  fine  for 
a  certain  age,  but  we  must  now  go  beyond  that.’  As  he  told  me  (it’s  even  one  of  the  first  things  he 
told  me),  ‘We  are  no  longer  at  the  time  of  Christ  when,  to  be  victorious,  it  was  necessary  to  die.’ 

I  have  always  remembered  this. 

But  things  are  PULLING  backwards  -  phew,  how  they  pull!  ...  ‘The  Law,  the  Law,  it’s  a  Law. 
Don’t  you  understand,  it’s  a  LAW,  you  can’t  change  the  Law.’ 

-  ‘But  I  CAME  to  change  the  Law.’ 

-  ‘Then  pay  the  price.’ 

(silence) 


What  can  make  them  yield? 

Divine  Love. 

It’s  the  only  thing. 

Sri  Aurobindo  has  explained  it  in  Savitri.  Only  when  Divine  Love  has  manifested  in  all  its 
purity  will  everything  yield,  will  it  all  yield  -  it  will  then  be  done. 

It’s  the  only  thing  that  can  do  it. 

It  will  be  the  great  Victory. 

(silence) 

On  a  small  scale,  in  very  small  details,  I  feel  that  of  all  the  forces,  this  is  the  strongest.  And  it’s  the 
only  one  with  a  power  over  hostile  wills.  Only  ...  for  the  world  to  change,  it  must  manifest  here  in 
all  its  fullness.  We  have  to  be  up  to  it ... 

Sri  Aurobindo  had  also  written  to  the  effect,  ‘If  Divine  Love  were  to  manifest  now  in  all  its 
fullness  and  totality,  not  a  single  material  organism  would  but  burst.’  So  we  must  leam  to  widen, 
widen,  widen  not  only  the  inner  consciousness  (that  is  relatively  easy  -  at  least  feasible),  but  even 
this  conglomeration  of  cells.  And  I’ve  experienced  this:  you  have  to  be  able  to  widen  this  sort  of 
crystallization  if  you  want  to  be  able  to  hold  this  Force.  I  know.  Two  or  three  times,  upstairs  (in 
Mother ’s  room),  I  felt  the  body  about  to  burst.  Actually,  I  was  on  the  verge  of  saying,  ‘burst  and  be 
done  with.’  But  Sri  Aurobindo  always  intervened  -  all  three  times  he  intervened  in  an  entirely 
tangible,  living  and  concrete  way  ...  and  he  arranged  everything  so  that  I  was  forced  to  wait. 

Then  weeks  go  by,  sometimes  even  months,  between  one  thing  and  another,  so  that  some 
elasticity  may  come  into  these  stupid  cells. 


So  much  time  is  wasted.  We  are  ...  oh!  We  are  so  hard!  (Mother  hits  her  body)  As  hard  as  a 
rock. 

But  three  times  now,  I’ve  really  felt  that  I  was  on  the  verge  of ...  falling  apart.  The  first  time  it 
brought  a  fever,  a  fever  so  ...  I  don’t  know,  as  if  I  had  at  least  115°!  -  I  was  roasting  from  head  to 
toe;  everything  became  red  hot,  and  then  ...  it  was  over.  That  was  the  day  when  suddenly  -  suddenly 
-  I  was  ...  You  see,  I  had  said  to  myself,  ‘All  right,  you  must  be  peaceful,  let’s  see  what  happens,’ 
so  then  I  brought  down  the  Peace,  and  immediately  I  was  able  to  pass  into  a  ‘second  of 
unconsciousness  -  and  I  woke  up  in  the  subtle  physical,  in  Sri  Aurobindo’s  abode.250  There  he  was. 
And  then  I  spent  some  time  with  him,  explaining  the  problem. 

But  that  was  really  an  experience,  a  decisive  experience  (it  was  many  months  ago,  perhaps  more 
than  a  year  ago). 

So  I  explained  the  problem  to  Sri  Aurobindo,  and  he  replied  (by  his  expression,  not  with  words, 
but  it  was  clear),  ‘Patience,  patience  -  patience,  it  will  come.’  And  a  few  days  after  this  experience, 
‘by  chance’  I  came  upon  something  he  had  written  where  precisely  he  explained  that  we  are  much 
too  rigid,  coagulated,  clenched  for  these  things  to  be  able  to  manifest  -  we  must  widen,  relax, 
become  plastic. 

But  this  takes  time. 

I  don ’t  really  see  what  we  can  do  ...  I  mean,  it’s  you  who  does,  of  course,  but  I  don ’t  see  what 

we  can  do  to  help  change  things. 

Nor  do  I! 

I  have  quite  the  feeling  that  I  myself  ‘do’  nothing  at  all,  absolutely  nothing.  The  only  thing  I  do 
is  this  (gesture  of  offering  upwards),  constantly  this,  in  everything  -  in  thoughts,  feelings, 
sensations,  in  the  body’s  cells,  all  the  time:  ‘You,  You,  You.  It’s  You,  it’s  You,  it’s  You  ...’  That’s 
all.  And  nothing  else. 

In  other  words,  a  more  and  more  complete,  a  more  and  more  integral  assent,  more  and  more  like 
this  (gesture  of  letting  herself  be  carried).  That’s  when  you  have  the  feeling  that  you  must  be 
ABSOLUTELY  like  a  child. 

If  you  start  thinking,  ‘Oh,  I  want  to  be  like  this!  Oh,  I  ought  to  be  like  that!’  you  waste  your 
time. 


November  15, 1960 

I  don’t  know  if  it’s  due  to  Z’s  visit251  or  simply  if  the  time  had  come  and  things  converged  (because 
250Night  of  July  24,  1959. 


251  Conversation  of  November  8,  the  ‘artist’  disciple  with  loose  morals. 


that’s  what  generally  happens),  but  a  whole  period  of  the  past  is  coming  up  again  -  and  it’s  not  a 
purely  personal  past,  for  it  includes  all  the  acquaintances  I  used  to  have,  a  whole  collection  of  things 
that  represents  not  only  my  individual  life  but  something  rather  collective  (as  it  always  is;  each  of 
us  is  always  a  collectivity  but  we  aren’t  aware  of  it,  and  if  anything  were  taken  away,  it  would 
unbalance  the  whole).  A  whole  set  of  things  that  were  absolutely  wiped  clean  from  the  memory  (it 
must  have  been  buried  somewhere  in  the  subconscient  or  the  semi-conscient  -  in  any  case, 
something  more  unconscious  than  the  subconscient),  and  it  has  all  come  back  up.  Oh,  things  ...  such 
things  ...  If  just  two  weeks  ago  someone  had  asked  me,  ‘Do  you  remember  that?’  I  would  have 
replied,  ‘No,  not  at  all!’  And  it’s  coming  from  every  side.  Oh,  such  mediocrity!  (mediocre  in  the 
way  of  consciousness,  experiences  and  activities)  and  so  gray,  so  dull,  so  flat!  Only  this  morning, 
while  getting  ready  for  the  balcony,  I  thought,  ‘Is  it  possible  to  live  like  that?!’ 

And  then  it  became  so  clear  that  behind  all  this  there  was  always  the  same  luminous  Presence, 
this  Presence  that  is  everywhere,  always,  watching  over  everything. 

And  as  I  look  now  at  the  things  of  life,  at  people,  at  this  totality,  I  see  that  it’s  identically  the 
same  thing  when  seen  from  there,  from  that  consciousness  -  it’s  so  drab,  dull,  insipid,  gray, 
uninteresting,  lifeless  ...  Oh,  all  of  life,  WHATEVER  IT  IS,  is  like  that  when  seen  from  that 
consciousness! 

So  I  understood  that  this  must  correspond  to  a  certain  realm  of  experience;  I  understood  all  those 
who  say,  ‘If  it  has  to  be  like  this,  if  it  can  never  be  otherwise,  then  ...’  (this  opposition,  this  abyss 
between  a  TRUE  life,  a  TRUE  consciousness,  a  TRUE  activity,  something  living,  powerful, 
fulfilling  ...  and  life  as  it  now  is),  ‘if  there  must  always  be  this  difference  between  the  physical 
expression  as  it  is  or  as  it  can  be  in  the  present  circumstances,  and  the  true  life,  then  ...’  For  if 
despite  everything  -  despite  this  tremendous  distance  I’ve  covered  in  my  life  (these  memories  go 
back  more  than  sixty  years)  and  all  the  evolutionary  effort  upwards  I  have  made  since  that  time  IN 
MATTER  (I’m  not  speaking  of  leaving  Matter  behind,  but  IN  MATTER,  IN  action)  -  if  that 
doesn’t  further  reduce  this  gap  between  the  true  consciousness  and  the  possible  material  realization, 
then  I  understand  ...  I  understand  why  people  say,  ‘It’s  hopeless.’  (Of  course,  this  ‘hopeless’  is 
meaningless  to  me.) 

But  I  ...  (how  can  I  put  this?)  I  lived  their  experience,  I  lived  it;  and  even  events  which  seem 
quite  extraordinary  when  seen  from  afar,  which  is  the  way  they  appear  to  most  people,  even 
historical  things  which  have  furthered  the  earth’s  transformation  and  its  upheavals  -  the  crucial 
events,  the  great  works,  you  might  say  -  are  woven  from  the  SAME  fabric,  they  are  the  SAME 
thing!  When  you  look  at  all  this  from  afar,  on  the  whole  it  can  make  an  impression,  but  the  life  of 
each  minute,  of  each  hour,  of  each  second  is  woven  from  this  SAME  fabric,  drab,  dull,  insipid, 
WITHOUT  ANY  TRUE  LIFE  -  a  mere  reflection  of  life,  an  illusion  of  life  -  powerless,  void  of 
any  light  or  anything  that  resembles  joy  in  the  least.  Oh!  ...  if  it  has  always  to  remain  like  that,  then 
we  don’t  want  any  of  it. 

Such  is  the  feeling  it  gives. 

For  me  it’s  different,  because  I  KNOW  that  it  can  and  must  become  something  else.  But  then  all 
this  Consciousness  which  is  there  and  in  which  I  live  and  which  has  this  world  vision  must  come 
forward  and  manifest  in  the  vibration  of  EACH  second  -  not  in  a  whole  which  looks  interesting 
when  seen  from  afar;  it  must  enter  the  vibration  of  each  second,  the  consciousness  of  each  minute, 
otherwise  ... 

(silence) 

How  well  I  understand  all  those  who  don’t  know  or  to  whom  it  hasn’t  been  shown  or  revealed  that 
we  are  GOING  towards  something  else,  that  it  WILL  BE  something  else!  ...  Such  a  feeling  of 
futility,  stupidity,  uselessness,  and  absolutely  devoid  of  any  ...  any  intensity,  any  life,  any  reality, 
any  ardor,  any  soul  -  bah!  It’s  disgusting. 

While  it  was  all  coming  up,  I  thought,’  How  is  this  possible?  ...’  For  during  those  years  of  my 


life  (I’m  now  outside  things;  I  do  them  but  I’m  entirely  outside,  so  they  don’t  involve  me  -  whether 
it’s  like  this  or  like  that  makes  no  difference  to  me;  I’m  only  doing  my  work,  that’s  all),  I  was 
already  conscious,  but  nevertheless  I  was  IN  what  I  was  doing  to  a  certain  extent;  I  was  this  web  of 
social  life  (but  thank  God  it  wasn’t  here  in  India,  for  had  it  been  here  I  could  not  have  withstood  it!  I 
think  that  even  as  a  child  I  would  have  smashed  everything,  because  here  it’s  even  worse  than  over 
there).  You  see,  there  it’s  ...  it’s  a  bit  less  constricting,  a  bit  looser,  you  can  slip  through  the  mesh 
from  time  to  time  to  breathe  some  air.  But  here,  according  to  what  I’ve  learned  from  people  and 
what  Sri  Aurobindo  told  me,  it’s  absolutely  unbearable  (it’s  the  same  in  Japan,  absolutely 
unbearable).  In  other  words,  you  can’t  help  but  smash  everything.  Over  there,  you  sometimes  get  a 
breath  of  air,  but  still  it’s  quite  relative.  And  this  morning  I  wondered  ...  (you  see,  for  years  I  lived 
in  that  way  ...  for  years  and  years)  just  as  I  was  wondering,  ‘How  was  I  AsLE  to  live  that  and  not 
kick  out  in  every  direction?’,  just  as  I  was  looking  at  it,  I  saw  up  above,  above  this  ...  (it  is  worse 
than  horrible,  it  is  a  kind  of ...  Oh,  not  despair,  for  there  isn’t  even  any  sense  of  feeling  -  there  is 
NOTHING!  It  is  dull,  dull,  dull  ...  gray,  gray,  gray,  clenched  tight,  a  closed  web  that  lets  through 
neither  air  nor  life  nor  light  -  there  is  nothing)  and  just  then  I  saw  a  splendor  of  such  sweet  light 
above  it  -  so  sweet,  so  full  of  true  love,  true  compassion  something  so  warm,  so  warm  ...  the  relief, 
the  solace  of  an  eternity  of  sweetness,  light,  beauty,  in  an  eternity  of  patience  which  feels  neither  the 
past  nor  the  inanity  and  imbecility  of  things  -  it  was  so  wonderful!  That  was  entirely  the  feeling  it 
gave,  and  I  said  to  myself,  ‘THAT  is  what  made  you  live,  without  THAT  it  would  not  have  been 
possible.’  Oh,  it  would  not  have  been  possible  -  I  would  not  have  lived  even  three  days!  THAT  is 
there,  ALWAYS  there,  awaiting  its  hour,  if  we  would  only  let  it  in. 

(silence) 

And  it’s  still  the  same  thing;  only  now  I’m  up  here  (Mother  gestures  above  the  head),  I’m  here,  so 
it’s  quite  another  matter. 

I  am  no  longer  looking  out  at  the  sky  from  below,  but  from  up  above  ...  I  am  looking,  as  if  each 
look  at  each  thing  seen  established  the  Contact. 

It  was  like  that  this  morning  at  the  balcony. 

The  rainy  season  expresses  this  state  of  things  so  well:  a  constant  descent  of  luminous  sweetness 
(sweetness  is  not  the  right  word  -  there  must  be  a  Sanskrit  word  for  it,  but  this  is  all  we  have!  ...  )  in 
this  endless  gloom. 


(Soon  afterwards,  Mother  comes  back  to  the  same  theme) 

It  all  began  the  day  I  received  the  news  of  Z’s  arrival.  ‘All  right,’  I  thought,  ‘here’s  a  chunk  of  life 
sent  back  to  me  for  clarifying.  I  must  work  on  it.’  But  it  didn’t  stop  there  ...  It’s  strange  how  all  this 
past  had  been  swept  clean  -  I  could  no  longer  remember  dates,  I  couldn’t  even  remember  when  Z 
had  been  here  before,  I  no  longer  knew  what  had  happened,  it  had  all  been  wiped  clean  -  which 
means  that  it  had  all  been  pushed  down  into  the  subconscient.  I  didn’t  even  know  how  I  used  to 
speak  to  him  when  I  saw  him,  nothing,  it  was  all  gone.  All  that  had  remained  alive  were  one  or  two 
movements  or  facts  which  were  clearly  connected  to  the  psychic  life,  the  psychic  consciousness  - 
but  just  one  or  two  or  three  such  memories;  all  the  rest  was  gone. 

So  a  whole  slice  of  my  life  came  back,  but  it  didn’t  stop  there!  It  keeps  extending  back  further 
and  further,  and  memories  keep  on  coming,  things  that  go  back  sixty  years  now,  even  beyond, 
seventy,  seventy-five  years  -  they  are  all  coming  back.  And  so  it  all  has  to  be  put  in  order. 

It’s  quite  odd,  for  this  was  not  a  personal  consciousness,  it  was  not  ‘someone  remembering  his 
life’  -  this  is  what  I  found  most  interesting;  what  came  were  pieces,  little  chunks  of  life’s 
construction,  a  collection  of  people  and  circumstances.  And  it  is  impossible  to  separate  the 


individual  from  all  that  is  around  him,  it’s  clear!  It  all  holds  together  like  ...  (if  you  change  one 
thing,  everything  is  changed)  it  holds  together  like  an  agglomerated  mass. 

I  had  seen  this  earlier  from  another  angle.  In  the  beginning,  when  I  started  having  the 
consciousness  of  immortality  and  when  I  brought  together  this  true  consciousness  of  immortality 
and  the  human  conception  of  it  (which  is  entirely  different),  I  saw  so  clearly  that  when  a  human 
(even  quite  an  ordinary  human,  one  who  is  not  a  collectivity  in  himself  -  as  is  a  writer,  for  example, 
or  a  philosopher  or  statesman)  projects  himself  through  his  imagination  into  what  he  calls 
‘immortality’  (meaning  an  indefinite  duration  of  time)  he  doesn’t  project  himself  alone  but  rather, 
inevitably  and  always,  what  is  projected  along  with  himself  is  a  whole  agglomeration,  a  collectivity 
or  totality  of  things  which  represent  the  life  and  the  consciousness  of  his  present  existence.  And 
then  I  made  the  following  experiment  on  a  number  of  people;  I  said  to  them,  ‘Excuse  me,  but  let’s 
say  that  through  a  special  discipline  or  a  special  grace  your  life  were  to  continue  indefinitely.  What 
you  would  most  likely  extend  into  this  indefinite  future  are  the  circumstances  of  your  life,  this 
fonnation  you  have  built  around  yourself  that  is  made  up  of  people,  relationships,  activities,  a  whole 
collection  of  more  or  less  living  or  inert  things.  But  that  CANNOT  be  extended  as  it  is,  for 
everything  is  constantly  changing!  And  to  be  immortal,  you  have  to  follow  this  perpetual  change; 
otherwise,  what  will  naturally  happen  is  what  now  happens  -  one  day  you  will  die  because  you  can 
no  longer  follow  the  change.  But  if  you  can  follow  it,  then  all  this  will  fall  from  you!  Understand 
that  what  will  survive  in  you  is  something  you  don’t  know  very  well,  but  it’s  the  only  thing  that  can 
survive  -  and  all  the  rest  will  keep  falling  off  all  the  time  ...  Do  you  still  want  to  be  immortal?’  - 
Not  one  in  ten  said  yes!  ...  Once  you  are  able  to  make  them  feel  the  thing  concretely,  they  tell  you, 
‘Oh  no!  Oh  no!  Since  everything  else  is  changing,  the  body  might  as  well  change  too!  What 
difference  would  it  make!’  But  what  remains  is  THAT;  THAT  is  what  you  must  truly  hold  on  to  - 
but  then  you  must  BE  THAT,  not  this  whole  agglomeration.  What  you  now  call  ‘you’  is  not  THAT, 
it’s  a  whole  collection  of  things.. 

Formerly,  that  was  my  first  step  -  a  long  time  ago.  Now  it’s  so  very  different ...  I  wonder  how  it 
was  possible  to  have  been  so  totally  blind  as  to  call  that  ‘oneself  at  any  moment  in  one’s  life!  If  s  a 
collection  of  things.  And  what  was  the  link  by  which  that  could  be  called  ‘oneself?  That’s  more 
difficult  to  find  out.  Only  when  you  climb  above  do  you  come  to  realize  that  THAT  is  at  work  here, 
but  it  could  work  there  as  well,  or  as  well  here,  or  here,  or  here  ...  At  times  there  is  suddenly  a  drop 
of  something  (Oh,  I  saw  that  this  morning  -  it  was  like  a  drop,  a  little  drop,  but  with  SUCH  an 
intense  and  perfect  light ...  ),  and  where  THAT  falls  it  makes  its  center  and  begins  radiating  out  and 
acting.  THAT  is  what  can  be  called  ‘oneself  -  nothing  else.  And  THAT  precisely  is  what  enabled 
me  to  live  in  such  dreadfully  uninteresting,  such  nonexistent  circumstances.  And  at  the  moment 
when  you  ARE  that,  you  see  how  that  has  lived  and  how  that  has  used  everything,  not  only  in  this 
body  but  in  all  bodies  and  through  all  time. 

At  the  core,  this  is  the  experience;  it  is  no  longer  knowledge.  I  now  understand  quite  clearly  the 
difference  between  the  knowledge  of  the  eternal  soul,  of  life  eternal  through  all  its  changes,  and  this 
CONCRETE  experience  of  the  thing. 

It’s  very  moving. 

It  was  strange,  this  morning  ...  I  came  a  few  minutes  late.  (I  blamed  the  clocks  which  weren’t 
working,  but  it  wasn’t  the  clocks  which  were  to  blame!)  I  was  getting  dressed  when  suddenly  all 
this  came  upon  me  -  I  had  a  moment  of  ...  it  may  have  lasted  one  or  two  minutes,  just  a  few 
minutes,  not  long.  -  Oh,  the  emotion  I  had  during  the  experience  was  ...  it  was  very  absorbing. 

It  was  no  longer  this  (that  is,  life  as  it  is  on  earth)  becoming  conscious  of  That  (the  eternal  soul, 
this  ‘portion  of  the  Supreme’  as  Sri  Aurobindo  said);  it  was  the  eternal  soul  seeing  life  ...  in  its  own 
way  -  but  without  separation,  without  any  separation,  not  like  something  looking  from  above  that 
feels  itself  to  be  different ...  How  strange  it  is!  It’s  not  something  else,  it’s  NOT  something  else,  it’s 
not  even  a  distortion,  not  even  ...  It’s  losing  its  illusory  quality  as  described  in  the  old  spiritualities  - 
that’s  not  what  it  is!  In  my  experience,  there  was  ...  there  was  clearly  an  ...  emotion  -  I  can’t 


describe  it,  there  are  no  words.  It  wasn’t  a  feeling,  it  was  something  like  an  emotion,  a  vibration  ... 
of  such  TOTAL  closeness  and  at  the  same  time  of  compassion,  a  compassion  of  love.  (Oh,  words 
are  so  pitiful!  ...  )  One  was  this  outer  thing,  which  was  the  total  negation  of  the  other  and  AT  THE 
SAME  TIME  the  other,  without  the  least  separation  between  them.  It  WAS  the  other.  So  what  was 
born  in  one  was  born  in  the  other  as  well,  in  this  eternal  light.  A  sweetness  of  identity,  precisely,  an 
identity  that  was  necessarily  such  total  understanding  with  such  perfect  love  -  but  ‘love’  says  it 
poorly,  all  words  are  poor!  It’s  not  that;  it’s  something  else!  It’s  something  that  cannot  be 
expressed. 

I  lived  that  this  morning,  upstairs. 

And  this  body  is  ...  oh,  how  feeble  and  how  poor  it  is.  All  it  finds  to  express  itself  are  the  tears 
that  come  to  its  eyes!  Why?  -  I  don’t  know. 

It  has  a  lot  to  do  before  it  is  strong  enough  to  LIVE  that. 

This  was  still  there,  like  a  sweetness,  when  I  came  to  the  balcony  ...  And  the  notion  that  people, 
objects,  life,  that  all  that  are  ‘different’  ...  is  unthinkable!  It  is  not  possible.  Even  thought  is  so 
strange! 

(silence) 

I  often  find  leaving  the  balcony  difficult.  And  it’s  only  this  same  gentleman  ...  (you  know,  the 
‘censor’)  who  starts  telling  me,’  You’re  keeping  them  there  in  the  rain  just  because  you’re  in 
ecstasy;  you’re  just  letting  them  stand  there  drenched  and  getting  a  crick  in  the  neck  looking  up  in 
the  air.  Aren’t  you  going  to  let  them  go?’  -  When  he  insists  too  much,  I  go  back  inside. 

Maybe  that’s  why  he’s  still  there.  Otherwise,  if  I  forgot ...  (Mother  laughs) 


November  26, 1960 


(Mother  had  wanted  this  personal  conversation  to  be  erased  and  remain  untranscribed,  but 
considering  its  importance,  we  thought  it  better  to  preserve  it.) 


Your  force  cured  me  in  one  hour  in  a  spectacular  way.  I  would  understand  if  you  had  merely 
cured  my  flu,  for  that’s  something  more  general,  and  with  a  good  general  vibration  it  can  be 
removed;  but  the  force  acted  with  an  astonishing  precision  and  accuracy:  first  it  wiped  out  my 
flu,  then  it  touched  a  toothache  that’s  been  hurting  for  the  last  three  days,  and  in  five  minutes 
that  was  gone.  Finally,  I  had  a  pulled  ligament  which  for  three  or  four  years  now  has 
periodically  given  me  pain  (a  thigh  ligament  where  it  joins  the  pelvis,  to  be  precise)  and  this 
last  week  it  was  hurting  so  much  that  I found  it  difficult  to  sit  cross-legged  for  meditation.  And 
then  I felt  the  force  come  and  touch  just  there,  exactly  at  this  point,  and  the  pain  vanished.  And 
yet  the  problem  was  of  an  organic  nature,  not  some  general  illness! ... 


(Mother  remains  silent  a  moment, 


then  says:) 


Not  last  night  but  the  night  before,  I  touched  at  least  one  of  the  causes  (at  that  time  it  felt  like  THE 
cause)  of  a  certain  powerlessness  to  act  directly  on  Matter  ...  You  see,  when  the  Will  and  the  Power 
come,  they  are  extremely  effective  everywhere  UP  TO  A  CERTAIN  REGION  (in  other  words, 
whether  people  are  receptive  or  not,  open  or  not,  makes  no  difference  -  when  the  Will  is  applied  it 
is  all-powerful  UP  TO  a  certain  region)  but  once  it  arrives  here,  at  the  most  material  material,  its 
efficacy  depends  on  many  things  -  and  a  power  which  depends  on  something  is  no  power!  For  a 
long,  long  time  I  have  been  searching  for  the  reasons  behind  this  powerlessness.  Eve  located  a  few, 
one  after  another,  and  upon  these  points  there  was  an  immediate  effect.  But  some  things  resisted 
(oh,  quite  a  number,  in  a  number  of  ways),  for  example  it  had  difficulty  acting  on  illnesses,  on  the 
cells,  on  doubt  (not  mental  doubt,  but  rather  the  doubt  of  the  physical  consciousness  which  can’t 
accept  certain  things  that  seem  impossible  to  it  -  what  Sri  Aurobindo  calls  disbelief,251  not  a  mental 
doubt,  but  the  disbelief  of  the  physical  consciousness  which  can’t  accept  what  is  contrary  to  its  own 
nature  and  its  own  working).  And  as  for  illnesses,  sometimes  it  has  an  immediate  effect,  but 
sometimes  it  drags  on  and  has  to  follow  its  so-called  nonnal  course.  On  all  these  three  points,  I 
clearly  felt  that  something  was  hampering  it.  These  are  the  Enemy’s  strongholds;  all  that  doesn’t 
want  the  Divine  seizes  upon  it  and  even  the  working  of  the  Power  coming  from  above  is  obstructed, 
for  when  it  must  work  here  in  the  body,  it  is  stopped  or  deformed  or  altered  or  diminished. 

All  this  goes  on  in  the  subconscient;  these  are  things  that  were  pushed  out  of  the  physical 
consciousness  down  into  the  subconscient,  so  they’re  there  and  they  come  back  up  whenever  they 
please. 

Two  nights  ago  (no,  three  -  the  night  before  Darshan),  I  had  one  of  those  experiences  that ...  that 
leaves  you  pensive  the  whole  day  ... 

(silence) 

It  was  still  there  when  I  went  down  for  Darshan,  and  in  spite  of  all  my  will  to  be  friendly  and 
pleasant,  I  was  like  a  rock,  looking  at  that  ...  I  can’t  speak  of  it  now,  for  it’s  the  key  to 
SOMETHING  VERY  GREAT. 

(silence) 

It’s  the  very  point  where  Nature  (I  mean  the  passive  side  of  the  force  of  manifestation)  is  a  slave  to 
the  hostile  forces.  There  is  a  point  where  She  is  dominated  by  them.  And  this  must  be  cured  before 
the  Power  from  above,  the  Power  of  the  Shakti,  can  pass  through  everything,  dominate  everything, 
and  be  infallible  ... 

I  saw  the  thing,  the  experience  took  place,  but  sometimes  it  takes  long  for  all  the  consequences 
to  be  ...  worked  out .253 

But  immediately,  the  following  day  -  Darshan  day  -  as  the  thing  developed  (you  see,  something 
was  working  inside),  I  could  again  turn  my  attention  to  the  people  who  were  there.  And  oddly 
enough,  just  when  you  came,  there  was  suddenly  a  kind  of  little  shock,  like  an  electric  shock,  and  a 
spark  leapt  out.  And  at  that  moment  the  Power  acted  for  perhaps  a  split  second  ...  You  see,  there  has 
been  this  bad  karma,  this  old  fonnation  around  you  for  a  very  long  time,  and  it  hadn’t  ...  I  recall 
telling  you  several  years  ago,  ‘I  shall  be  able  to  cure  such  cases  as  yours  only  when  the  Supramental 
descends.’  And  this  feeling  of  incapacity,  of  something  resisting,  was  still  present,  still  alive  -  of 
not  having  the  right  power  to  dominate  it.  But  just  as  you  went  by,  for  a  second,  there  was  this  flash 
of  ...  like  a  spark  when  two  electric  wires  touch.  It  was  a  golden  spark,  a  resplendent  light  -  zzzt! 


2520riginal  English. 


2530riginal  English. 


And  it  leapt  out.  ‘Ah!’  I  thought;  ‘it’s  good.’ 

That  was  it. 

Then  afterwards,  when  you  wrote  that  you  were  sick,  I  thought,  ‘Well,  well!  What  does  it 
mean?’  I  didn’t  answer,  I  didn’t  say  a  thing,  but  when  I  went  back  upstairs  and  started  walking  for 
my  japa,  I  brought  back  this  experience  of  the  Darshan  -  this  moment  during  the  Darshan  -  and  I 
felt  that  it  had  left  something  behind  (the  effect  was  not  total  or  absolute,  but  something  had  been 
left),  and  I  decided  that  through  this  I  would  try  to  make  you  feel  better. 

I felt  your  intervention  very  clearly.  I  was  really  in  a  bad  way,  but  when  I  came  out  of  the  japa,  I 
knew  it  was  cured.  There  is  still  something  in  the  leg  that  pulls  a  little,  but  it  has  practically 
disappeared. 

It’s  the  memory,  the  memory  in  the  cells.  Good;  it’s  good.  I’m  happy.  It’s  the  first  such  experience. 

Before  I  fell  sick,  I  had  a  peculiar  dream.  I  was  here  in  the  corridor,  and  someone  quite  dark 
came  to  tell  me  that  Mother  wanted  me  to  change  my  work.  And  I  recall  trying  with  all  my  might 
to  ask  him,  ‘But  why,  why?  ’  Finally  you  arrived.  You  were  there  at  a  table  with  some  others.  I 
was  quite  annoyed  because  all  these  people  upset  me,  they  were  hindering  me  from  being  with 
you.  And  you  said  to  me  very  clearly,  ‘It’s  time  this  gentleman  goes,  ’perhaps  this  gentleman 
represented  a  part  of  my  being  which  had  to  disappear  or  change,  but  anyway  you  asked  me  to 
do  something  extremely  difficult  -  l  felt  a  very  great  difficulty  doing  it.  I  even  remember,  in  my 
dream,  having  left  you  for  an  instant,  as  if  I  wanted  to  leave  the  Ashram,  then  I  must  have 
walked  up  and  down  for  a  while.  Finally,  I  must  have  made  an  enormous  effort  to  come  back 
and  sit  next  to  you  on  a  bench  which  symbolically  was  very  hard . . .  The  next  morning  I  woke  up 
with  the  flu. 

So,  it’s  very  simple.  The  sickness  was  due  to  one  part  of  your  being  going  faster  than  the  rest.  A 
part  of  the  physical  consciousness  probably  remained  behind,  and  that  created  this  imbalance  and 
triggered  the  sickness. 

It  took  a  huge  effort  in  my  dream. 

Yes,  it’s  good.  It’s  working  as  it  should.  It  may  not  be  very  nice  to  tell  someone  it’s  good  he  was 
sick,  but  it’s  good! 

(silence) 

You  see,  I’m  doing  the  sadhana  really  along  a  ...  a  path  that  has  never  been  trod  by  anyone.  Sri 
Aurobindo  did  it ...  in  principle.  But  he  gave  the  charge  of  doing  it  in  the  body  to  me. 

That  was  the  wonderful  thing  when  we  were  together  and  all  these  hostile  forces  were 
fighting  ...  (they  tried  to  kill  me  any  number  of  times.  He  always  saved  me  in  an  absolutely 
miraculous  and  marvelous  way).  But  you  see,  this  seemed  to  create  very  great  BODILY  difficulties 
for  him.  We  discussed  this  a  great  deal,  and  I  told  him,  ‘If  one  of  us  must  go,  I  want  that  it  should 
be  me.  ’ 

‘It  can ’t  be  you,  ’  he  replied,  ‘because  you  alone  can  do  the  material  thing.  ’254 
And  that  was  all. 

He  said  nothing  more.  He  forbade  me  to  leave  my  body.  That’s  all.  ‘It  is  absolutely  forbidden.’ 
he  said.  ‘You  can ’t,  you  must  remain.  ’255 

After  that  (this  took  place  early  in  1950),  he  gradually  ...  You  see,  he  let  himself  fall  ill.  For  he 


2540riginal  English. 


knew  quite  well  that  should  he  say  ‘I  must  go,  ’256  /  would  not  have  obeyed  him,  and  I  would  have 
gone.  For  according  to  the  way  I  felt,  he  was  much  more  indispensable  than  I.  But  he  saw  the  matter 
from  the  other  side.  And  he  knew  that  I  had  the  power  to  leave  my  body  at  will.  So  he  didn’t  say  a 
thing,  he  didn’t  say  a  thing  right  to  the  very  last  minute  ... 

(silence) 

Once  or  twice  I  ‘heard’  certain  things  about  him  and  I  told  him  (for  I  told  him  all  I  saw  or  heard), 
and  I  said  that  I  was  ...  that  these  suggestions  were  coming  from  the  Enemy  and  that  I  was  violently 
fighting  against  them.  Then  he  looked  at  me  -  twice  -  he  looked  at  me,  nodded  his  head  and  smiled. 
And  that’s  all.  Nothing  more  was  said.  ‘How  strange!’  I  thought.  And  that’s  all.  Then  I  myself  must 
have  forgotten.  You  see,  he  wanted  me  to  forget. 

I  only  remembered  afterwards. 

(silence) 


But ... 


(silence) 


This  path  is  very  hard. 

(silence) 

And  then  things  don’t  happen  at  all  as  they  do  in  ordinary  life  ...  for  three  or  four  minutes, 
sometimes  five  or  ten  minutes,  I’m  a-bo-minably  sick,  with  every  sign  that  it’s  all  over. 

(silence) 

But  it’s  only  to  make  me  find  the  ...  to  make  me  go  through  the  experience  and  to  find  the  strength. 
And  also  to  give  the  body  this  absolute  faith  in  its  Divine  Reality  -  to  show  it  that  the  Divine  is 
there  and  that  He  wants  to  be  there  and  that  He  shall  be  there.  And  it’s  only  at  such  ‘moments’  as 
these  -  when  logically,  according  to  the  ordinary  physical  logic,  it’s  all  over  -  that  you  can  seize  the 
key. 

You  have  to  go  right  through  everything  without  flinching. 

I  haven’t  told  this  to  anyone  until  now,  especially  not  to  those  who  take  care  and  watch  over  me, 
for  I  don’t  want  to  ...  terrify  them.  Besides,  I’m  not  so  sure  of  their  reactions  -  you  understand,  if 
they  started  getting  frightened,  it  would  be  terrible.  So  I  don’t  tell  them.  But  it  has  happened  at  least 
five  or  six  times,  usually  in  the  morning  before  going  down  to  the  balcony,  just  when  I  don’t  have 
the  time  ...  And  it  has  to  be  done  quickly,  for  I  have  to  be  ready  on  time! 

It’s  very,  very  interesting.  But  then,  you  see,  at  such  moments  the  ...  concreteness  of  the 
Presence 257  -  concrete  to  the  touch,  really  to  the  material  touch  -  is  extraordinary! 

How  many  more  such  experiences  will  be  necessary?  I  don’t  know,  you  see,  I’m  only  building 
the  path. 

(silence) 

Don’t  write  all  this  down,  erase  it,  because  ...  I’ll  speak  of  it  later  -  once  it’s  over,  when  I’ve 
reached  the  end.  I  don’t  want  it  to  fall  into  anyone’s  hands  by  accident.  And  for  you,  keep  it  in  your 


2550riginal  English. 


2560riginal  English. 


2570riginal  English. 


consciousness. 


(silence) 

I’m  telling  you  all  this  because  of  what  happened  the  other  day.  It’s  with  such  experiences  that 
the  ...  the  true  Power  is  acquired. 

And  then,  at  the  same  time,  some  rather  interesting  things  are  happening.  Imagine,  X  is  starting 
to  understand  certain  things  -  that  is,  in  his  own  way  he  is  discovering  the  progress  I  am  making; 
he’s  discovering  it  as  a  received  teaching  (through  subtle  channels).  He  wrote  a  letter  to  Amrita  two 
or  three  days  ago  in  which  he  translates  in  his  own  language,  with  his  own  words  and  his  own  way 
of  speaking,  exactly  my  most  recent  experiences  -  things  that  I  have  conquered  in  a  general  way. 

This  interests  me,  for  these  things  do  not  at  all  enter  through  the  mind  (he  doesn’t  receive  a  thing 
there,  he’s  closed  there).  So  in  his  letter  he  says  that  this  thing  or  that  is  necessary  (he  describes  it  in 
his  own  words),  and  he  adds,  ‘This  is  why  we  must  be  so  grateful  to  have  among  us  the  ...  the  great 
Mother 258  (as  he  puts  it),  the  great  Mother  who  knows  these  things.’  -  ‘Good!’  I  said  to  myself.  (It 
had  to  do  with  something  specific  concerning  the  capacity  for  discrimination  in  the  outside  world, 
the  different  qualities  and  different  functions  of  different  beings,  all  of  which  depends  on  one’s 
inner  construction,  as  it  were.)  So  I  see  that  even  this,  even  these  physical  experiences,  is  received 
(and  yet  I  hadn’t  tried,  I  had  never  tried  to  make  him  receive  it);  it  merely  works  like  this,  you  see 
(gesture  of  a  widespread  diffusion),  and  the  experience  is  very  -  how  should  I  say?  -  drastic,  with  a 
kind  of...  (power  of  radiation).  Imperative. 


December  2, 1960 


(After  meditating  together) 

A  sort  of  unification  is  taking  place  [in  you],  as  if  you  had  become  a  more  uniform  whole  within- 
without.  I  don’t  know  how  to  explain  this  -  it  feels  more  unified,  more  organized  -  uniform.  Not 
some  parts  more  developed  and  others  less  so,  some  more  luminous  and  others  less  so;  it’s  much 
more  uniform,  and  uniform  even  in  the  vibration,  a  kind  of  ...  really  a  uniformity  in  all  its 
movements,  responses,  vibrations,  light.  And  this  kind  of  powdering  of  the  new  light  which  I  see  is 
much  more  widespread.  It’s  as  if  everything,  everything  ...  what  is  happening  is  really  a  work  of 
unifying  -  stabilizing,  unifying.  And  this  powdering  of  golden  light  has  completely  enveloped  you, 
with  this  same  blue  light  in  your  japa,  with  different  intensities  of  power  -  both  are  there.  Like  a 
unifying  of  the  consciousness,  as  if  all  the  less  receptive  elements  were  starting  to  open,  thereby 
creating  a  much  more  homogeneous  whole.  I  don’t  know  how  your  nights  are,  but ... 

Not  very  conscious. 


2580riginal  English. 


December  13, 1960 

During  these  last  days,  I  was  face  to  face  with  a  problem  as  old  as  the  world  which  had  taken  on  an 
extraordinary  intensity. 

It’s  what  Sri  Aurobindo  calls  disbelief,  and  it’s  located  in  the  most  material  physical 
consciousness  -  it  isn’t  doubt  (which  mainly  belongs  to  the  mind),  it  is  almost  like  a  refusal  to 
accept  the  obvious  as  soon  as  it  doesn’t  belong  to  the  little  daily  routine  of  ordinary  sensations  and 
reactions  -  a  sort  of  incapacity  to  accept  and  recognize  the  exceptional. 

This  disbelief  is  the  bedrock  of  the  consciousness.  And  it  comes  with  a  ...  (‘thought’  is  too  big  a 
word  for  such  an  ordinary  thing)  a  mental-physical  activity  which  makes  you  ...  (I  am  forced  to  use 
the  word)  ‘think’  things  and  which  always  foresees,  imagines  or  draws  conclusions  (depending  on 
the  case)  in  a  way  which  I  myself  call  DEFEATIST.  In  other  words,  it  automatically  leads  you  to 
imagine  all  the  bad  things  that  can  happen.  And  this  occurs  in  a  realm  which  is  absolutely  run-of- 
the-mill,  in  the  most  ordinary,  restricted,  banal  activities  of  life  -  such  as  eating,  moving  ...  in  short, 
the  coarsest  of  things. 

It’s  fairly  easy  to  manage  and  control  this  in  the  realm  of  thought,  but  when  it  comes  to  those 
reactions  that  rise  up  from  the  very  bottom  ...  they’re  so  petty  that  you  can  barely  express  them  to 
yourself.  For  example,  if  someone  mentions  that  so-and-so  ate  such-and-such  a  thing,  immediately 
something  somewhere  starts  stealing  in:  ‘Ah,  he’s  going  to  get  a  stomach-ache!’  Or  you  hear  that 
someone  is  going  somewhere  -  ‘Oh,  he’s  going  to  have  an  accident!’  ...  And  it  applies  to 
everything;  it’s  swarming  down  below.  Nothing  to  do  with  thought  as  such! 

It’s  quite  a  nasty  habit,  for  it  keeps  the  most  material  state  in  a  condition  of  disharmony, 
disorder,  ugliness  and  difficulty. 

I  tried  every  possible  way  ...  To  get  out  of  it  is  relatively  easy.  But  then  it  doesn’t  change. 

The  problem  appeared  again  to  me  very  intensely  when  I  read  Sri  Aurobindo ’s  The  Yoga  of 
Self-Perfection.  I  was  confronted  with  a  whole  formidable  world  to  be  transformed  -  to  transform 
what  is  already  luminous  is  quite  easy,  but  to  transform  that!  ...  ugh  -  this  stuff  of  life,  so  low  and 
so  coarse,  so  ordinary  ...  it’s  much  more  difficult.259 

For  the  last  several  days,  I’ve  been  at  grips  lighting  with  it.  How  can  I  stop  this  idiotic,  coarse 
and  above  all  defeatist  automatism  from  constantly  manifesting?  It’s  truly  an  automatism;  it  doesn’t 
respond  to  any  conscious  will,  nothing.  So  what  will  it  take  to  ...  ?  And  it’s  QUITE  INTIMATEEY 
related  to  the  body’s  illnesses  (the  old  habits  the  body  has  of  coming  out  of  its  rhythmic  movement, 
of  entering  into  confusion)  -  the  two  things  are  very  intimately  linked. 

I’m  deep  in  the  problem. 

259Later,  Mother  added  the  following:  ‘In  this  regard  - 1  don’t  know  where,  but  somewhere  -  Sri  Aurobindo  spoke  of 
this  physical  mind,  and  he  said  that  there  was  nothing  you  could  do  with  it;  it  must  only  be  destroyed.’ 

Mother  may  be  alluding  to  the  following  passage  from  The  Synthesis  of  Yoga:  ‘There  is  nothing  to  be 
done  with  this  fickle,  restless,  violent  and  disturbing  factor  but  to  get  rid  of  it  whether  by  detaching  it  and  then  reducing 
it  to  stillness  or  by  giving  a  concentration  and  singleness  to  the  thought  by  which  it  will  of  itself  reject  this  alien  and 
confusing  clement.’  (sent.  Ed.,  Vol.  XX,  p.  300.) 


For  me,  ‘the  problem’  doesn’t  mean  explaining  the  thing  (it’s  easy  to  explain),  but  controlling, 
mastering  and  transforming  it.  That  will  take  some  time. 

We  shall  see. 

Now  X  is  coming,  and  these  days  of  meditation  with  trim.260  What  is  going  to  happen?  ...  By  the 
way,  he  no  longer  writes  that  he’s  coming  to  ‘help  the  Ashram.’  He  wrote  to  Amrita  that  he’s 
coming  to  have  the  opportunity  (I  can’t  exactly  remember  his  words)  ...  anyway,  to  take  advantage 
of  his  meditations  with  me  so  that  he  can  make  the  necessary  transformations!  ...  Quite  a  changed 
attitude.  I  had  several  visions  concerning  him  which  I’ll  tell  you  later. 


December  17, 1960 


(Mother  gives  the  disciple  a  cadamba  flower  which  she  has  named  ‘Supramental  Sun  ’  -  a  striking 

orange  ball  consisting  of  innumerable  stamens) 

It’s  beautiful,  isn’t  it?  It’s  all  together,  but  it’s  innumerable.  It’s  ONE  thing  going  in  all  directions. 
And  what  a  color!  The  tree  is  glorious. 

Nature  is  a  marvelous  inventor  -  everything  She  does  is  beautiful.  I  don’t  believe  that  man  has 
succeeded  in  producing  anything  so  perfect.  Later,  it’s  true,  some  new  species  were  developed  by 
him,  but  nevertheless  Nature  still  remains  the  origin. 

Yes,  ugliness  seems  to  begin  with  man. 

I  think  that  even  what  seems  to  us  ugly  in  animal  and  vegetal  nature  appears  so  only  because  of  the 
limitations  of  our  own  understanding.  But  really,  as  soon  as  man  enters  the  scene  ...  phew! 

Yes,  I  have  always  felt  that  in  Nature  one  can  live  in  beauty,  always.  But  then  once  man  shows 
up,  something  gets  thrown  out  of  joint.  It’s  the  mind,  actually.  What  gives  birth  to  ugliness  is  really 
the  intrusion  of  the  mind  in  life.  I  wonder  if  it  was  necessary,  if  it  could  not  have  been  immediately 
harmonious.  But  it  appears  not. 

Even  stones  are  beautiful;  they  are  always  beautiful  in  one  way  or  another.  When  life  appeared, 
there  were  some  forms  that  were  a  little  ‘difficult,’  but  not  to  that  extent,  not  like  certain  human 
mental  creations.  Of  course,  there  may  have  been  some  animal  species  which  were  rather  ...  but 
they  were  more  monstrous  than  actually  ugly.  And  most  probably,  it  only  seems  like  that  to  our 
consciousness.  But  the  mind  ...  And  it’s  the  same  for  all  these  ideas  of  sin,  of  wrong,  of ...  all  that  - 
it’s  a  falsehood.  But  it  was  man  who  invented  falsehood,  wasn’t  it?  The  mind  invented  falsehood:  to 
deceive!  to  deceive!  And  it’s  a  curious  fact  that  animals  domesticated  by  man  have  also  learned  to 
lie! 

The  curve  ... 


260The  tantric  guru.  During  his  periodic  visits  to  the  Ashram,  Mother  used  to  give  him  almost  daily  meditations. 


Anyway,  we  have  to  go  beyond  all  that. 


Beyond?  ...  That’s  quite  a  task! 

So  many  people  are  satisfied  with  their  falsehood,  their  ugliness,  their  narrowness,  all  of  it.  They’re 
quite  satisfied.  When  they’re  asked  to  be  something  else  ... 

This  realm  that  I’m  now  investigating,  oh!  ...  I  spend  whole  nights  visiting  certain  places,  and 
there  I  meet  people  I  know  here  materially  [in  the  Ashram].  So  many  are  PERFECTLY  satisfied 
with  their  ...  their  infirmities,  their  incapacities,  their  ugliness,  their  powerlessness. 

And  they  protest  when  you  want  them  to  change! 

Even  last  night  I  went  down  into  it ...  It  was  so  gray  and  dull  and  ...  phew!  Banal,  lifeless.  When 
they  are  told  that,  they  retort,  ‘No,  not  at  all!  Things  are  quite  all  right  as  they  are,  it’s  you  who  is 
living  in  a  dreamland!  ’ 

We’ll  get  out  of  it  one  day. 

But  you  cannot  get  out  as  long  as  it  all  seems  quite  natural  to  you.  What’s  most  unfortunate  is 
when  you  resign  yourself  to  it.  You  realize  this  when  you  go  back  to  earlier  states  of  consciousness; 
you  see  that  it  all  seemed,  if  not  quite  natural,  at  least  almost  inevitable  -  ‘that’s  how  things  are,  you 
must  take  them  as  they  are.’  And  you  don’t  even  think  about  it;  you  take  things  as  they  are,  you 
EXPECT  them  to  be  what  they  are;  it’s  the  stuff  of  our  daily  lives,  and  it  keeps  repeating  itself 
endlessly.  And  the  only  thing  you  leam  is  to  hold  on,  hold  on,  not  let  yourself  be  shaken,  to  go  right 
through  it  all  -  and  it  feels  endless,  interminable,  almost  eternal.  (However,  once  you  understand 
what  eternal  is,  you  see  that  this  CANNOT  be  eternal,  for  otherwise  ...  ) 

But  this  particular  state  of  endurance  -  this  endurance  that  nothing  can  upset  -  is  very 
dangerous.  And  yet  it’s  indispensable;  for  you  must  first  accept  everything  before  having  the  power 
to  transform  anything. 

It’s  what  Sri  Aurobindo  always  said:  FIRST  you  must  accept  EVERYTHING  -  accept  it  as 
coming  from  the  Divine,  as  the  Divine  Will;  accept  without  disgust,  without  regret,  without  getting 
upset  or  impatient.  Accept  with  a  perfect  equanimity;  and  only  AFTER  that  can  you  say,  ‘Now  let’s 
get  to  work  to  change  it.  ’ 

But  to  work  to  change  it  before  having  attained  a  perfect  equanimity  is  impossible.  That’s  what  I 
have  learned  during  these  last  years. 

And  for  every  detail,  it’s  the  same.  First,  ‘May  Thy  Will  be  done’;  then,  afterwards,  ‘The  Will  of 
tomorrow’  -  and  then  those  things  will  disappear.  But  first,  one  must  accept. 

That’s  why  it  takes  so  long.  Because  those  who  readily  accept  are  ...  they  get  encrusted  and 
buried  under  it;  they  no  longer  move.  And  those  who  see  the  future  and  what  must  be  have  a  hard 
time  accepting;  they  pull  back,  they  kick  and  protest  -  so  they  don’t  have  any  power. 

*  *  * 


(Soon  afterwards,  concerning  the  conversation  of  November  5  on  the  subconscious  roots  in  the 
cells  that  can  make  everything  fall  apart  in  a  second:  ‘To  change  it,  you  have  to  descend  into  it ...  it 
makes  for  painful  moments  ...  Once  it’s  done,  I’ll  have  the  power  ...’) 

When  was  this?  November  5?  And  now  it’s  December  17  ... 

Well,  it’s  still  continuing! 

There  should  be  machines  to  graph  the  curves,  for  it’s  so  ...  sometimes  it  goes  like  this  (gesture 
of  a  very  steep  ascent)  and  at  such  moments  you  feel,  ‘Ah!  now  I’ve  caught  the  thing.’  And  then 
back  it  falls  -  toil.  Sometimes  it  even  feels  like  you’re  falling  in  a  hole,  really  a  hole  -  and  how  are 


you  ever  going  to  get  out?  But  that  ALWAYS  precedes  a  rapid  ascent  and  a  revelation  or 
illumination:  ‘Ah,  how  wonderful!  I’ve  finally  got  it!’ 

And  that  goes  on  for  weeks  and  weeks. 

To  have  the  exact  curve  or  the  REAL  history,  we’d  have  to  note  down  everything  at  each 
minute,  for  it’s  a  CONSTANT  work  that’s  taking  place.  You  see,  the  outer  activities  are  becoming 
almost  automatic,  whereas  this  goes  on  behind  -  I’m  speaking,  yet  at  the  same  time  this  is  going  on 
behind. 

It’s  a  sort  of  oscillation  -  really,  it’s  so  interesting  -  between  two  extremes,  one  of  which  is  the 
all-powerfulness  and  capital  or  primordial  importance  of  the  Physical,  and  the  other  its  utter 
unreality. 

And  it’s  constantly  going  back  and  forth  between  the  two  (seesaw  motion).  And  both  are  equally 
false,  equally  true. 

It  goes  back  and  forth  between  the  two  all  the  time  -  a  kind  of  curve  like  an  electric  arc  between 
them;  it  goes  up,  it  goes  down,  it  falls  and  then  climbs  back  up.  In  a  flash  comes  the  clear  vision  that 
the  universal  realization  will  be  achieved  along  with  the  perfection  of  the  material,  TERRESTRIAL 
world.  (I  say  ‘terrestrial,  for  the  earth  is  still  something  unique;  the  rest  of  the  universe  is  different  - 
so  this  blown  up  speck  of  dust  becomes  of  capital  importance!)  Then,  at  another  moment,  eternity  - 
for  which  all  the  universes  are  simply  ...  the  expression  of  a  second,  and  in  which  all  this  is  a  sort  of 
-  not  even  an  interesting  game,  but  rather  ...  a  breathing  in  and  out,  in  and  out  ...  And  at  such  a 
moment,  all  the  importance  we  give  to  material  things  seems  so  fantastically  idiotic !  And  it  goes  in 
and  out ...  In  this  state,  everything  is  obvious  and  indisputable.  And  in  the  other  state,  everything  is 
obvious  and  indisputable.  But  between  the  two  there  is  EVERY  combination  and  every  possibility. 

(silence) 

And  the  problem  is  to  hold  both  of  them  so  PERFECTLY  together  that  they  are  no  longer  in 
opposition.  For  one  second,  it  comes  -  ah!  -  just  a  thousandth  of  a  second  -  ah,  yes!  -  and  then  it’s 
over,  it’s  gone.  And  you  have  to  begin  again. 

(silence) 

And  particularly,  this  sense  of  what’s  ‘important’  and  ‘not  important’  is  something  which  vanishes, 
leaving  no  trace  at  all.  You  are  left  like  that,  with  ...  nothing.  There  is  no  SCALE  in  importance  - 
that  is  entirely  our  mental  imbecility.  Either  nothing  is  important  or  EVERYTHING  is  EQUALLY 
important. 

The  speck  of  dust,  there,  which  you  sweep  away,  or  ecstatic  contemplation  -  it’s  ALL  THE 
SAME. 


December  20, 1960 

Regarding  Christmas,  I’ll  tell  you  a  curious  story. 


For  a  while,  there  was  a  Muslim  girl  close  to  me  (not  a  believer,  but  her  origins  were  Muslim;  in 
other  words,  she  wasn’t  at  all  Christian)  who  had  a  special  fondness  for  Santa  Claus!  She  had  seen 
pictures  of  him,  read  some  books,  etc.  Then  one  year  while  she  was  here,  she  got  it  into  her  head 
that  Santa  Claus  had  to  bring  me  something.  ‘He  has  to  bring  you  something  for  Christmas,’  she 
told  me. 

‘Try,’  I  replied. 

I  don’t  know  what  all  she  did,  but  she  prayed  to  him  to  bring  me  money.  She  fixed  a  certain 
sum.  And  on  Christmas  Eve,  exactly  this  sum  was  given  to  me!  And  it  was  a  large  sum,  several 
thousand  rupees.  Exactly  the  amount  she  had  specified.  And  it  came  on  that  very  day  in  quite  an 
unexpected  way. 

I  found  it  very  interesting. 


*  *  * 


(Soon  afterwards,  concerning  the  last  conversation  of  December  17  -  a  speck  of  dust  which  you 
sweep  away,  or  ecstatic  contemplation,  ‘It’s  all  the  same’) 

If  I  could  only  note  all  this  down  ...  It’s  been  so  interesting  all  morning,  right  from  the  start  -  on  the 
balcony,  then  upstairs  while  walking  for  my  japa!  And  it  was  on  this  same  theme  (experience  of  the 
speck  of  dust)  ...  This  habit  people  have  (especially  in  India,  but  more  or  less  everywhere  among 
those  who  have  a  religious  nature),  this  habit  of  doing  all  things  religious  with  respect  and 
compunction  -  and  no  mixing  of  things,  above  all  there  should  be  no  mixing;  in  some 
circumstances,  at  certain  times,  you  MUST  NOT  think  of  God,  for  then  it  would  be  a  kind  of 
blasphemy. 

There’s  the  religious  attitude,  and  then  there’s  ordinary  life  where  people  do  things  -  working, 
living,  eating,  enjoying  life;  they  regard  these  as  the  essentials,  and  as  for  the  rest,  well,  when 
there’s  time  they  think  about  it.  But  what  Sri  Aurobindo  brought  down,  precisely  ...  I  remember  at 
Tlemcen,  Theon  used  to  say  that  there  was  a  whole  world  of  things,  such  as  eating,  for  example,  or 
taking  care  of  your  body,  that  should  be  done  automatically,  without  giving  it  any  importance  -  ‘it’s 
not  the  time  to  think  of  things  divine. ’(!)  That’s  what  he  preached.  So  you  have  the  religious 
attitude  of  all  the  religious  types,  and  then  ordinary  life  -  I  found  both  of  them  equally 
unsatisfactory.  Then  I  came  here  and  told  Sri  Aurobindo  my  feeling;  I  said  that  if  someone  is  truly 
in  union  with  the  Divine,  it  CANNOT  change  no  matter  what  he  does  (the  quality  of  what  you’re 
doing  may  change,  but  the  union  can’t  change  no  matter  what  you’re  doing).  And  when  he  said  that 
this  was  the  truth,  I  felt  a  relief.  And  that  feeling  has  stayed  with  me  all  through  my  life. 

And  now,  all  these  different  attitudes  which  individuals,  groups  and  categories  of  men  hold  are 
coming  from  every  direction  (while  I’m  walking  upstairs)  to  assert  their  own  points  of  view  as  the 
true  thing.  And  I  see  that  for  myself,  I’m  being  forced  to  deal  with  a  whole  mass  of  things,  most  of 
which  are  quite  futile  from  an  ordinary  point  of  view  -  not  to  mention  the  things  of  which  these 
moral  or  religious  types  disapprove.  Quite  interestingly,  all  kinds  of  mental  formations  come  like 
arrows  while  I’m  walking  for  my  japa  upstairs  (Mother  makes  a  gesture  of  little  arrows  in  the  air 
coming  into  her  mental  atmosphere  from  every  direction);  and  yet,  I’m  entirely  in  what  I  could  call 
the  joy  and  happiness  of  my  japa,  full  of  the  energy  of  walking  (the  purpose  of  walking  is  to  give  a 
material  energy  to  the  experience,  in  all  the  body’s  cells).  Yet  in  spite  of  this,  one  thing  after 
another  comes,  like  this,  like  that  (Mother  draws  little  arrows  in  the  air):  what  I  must  do,  what  I 
must  answer  to  this  person,  what  I  must  say  to  that  one,  what  has  to  be  done  ...  All  kinds  of  things, 
most  of  which  might  be  considered  most  futile!  And  I  see  that  all  this  is  SITUATED  in  a  totality, 
and  this  totality  ...  I  could  say  that  it’s  nothing  but  the  body  of  the  Divine.  I  FEEL  it,  actually,  I  feel 
it  as  if  I  were  touching  it  everywhere  (Mother  touches  her  arms,  her  hands,  her  body).  And  all  these 
things  neither  veil  nor  destroy  nor  divert  this  feeling  of  being  entirely  this  ...  a  movement,  an  action 


in  the  body  of  the  Divine.  And  it’s  increasing  from  day  to  day,  for  it  seems  that  He  is  plunging  me 
more  and  more  into  entirely  material  things  with  the  will  that  THERE  TOO  it  must  be  done  -  that 
all  these  things  must  be  consciously  full  of  Him;  they  are  full  of  Him,  in  actual  fact,  but  it  must 
become  conscious,  with  the  perception  that  it  is  all  the  very  substance  of  His  being  which  is  moving 
in  everything  ... 

It  was  quite  beautiful  on  the  balcony  this  morning  ... 

A  sweetness,  a  sensation  ...  (both  together)  a  sensation  of  eternity,  and  a  sweetness!  I  wonder  if 
it’s  even  possible  for  anything  to  escape  That! 

(silence) 


Of  course,  if  one  is  so  unfortunate  as  to  start  thinking,  it’s  all  over. 


(silence) 


It’s  a  FACT.  It’s  not  a  thought,  not  something  you  observe  -  you  aren’t  a  witness:  it’s  A  FACT 
which  is  LIVED.  So  if  you  want  to  translate  the  experience,  you’d  have  to  say  the  most  paradoxical 
of  things,  like  Sri  Aurobindo  -  so  paradoxical  that  they  are  almost  offensive  to  reason!  Yes,  more, 
far  more  than  paradoxical. 


December  23, 1960 


(Mother  arrives  from  a  meditation  with  X,  the  tantric  guru) 

I  come  empty-handed  ... 

(Mother  remains  absorbed  for  a  long  time) 

I  sat  down  shortly  before  ten  o’clock  for  meditation.  I  was  in  my  normal  state  and  I  was  interested 
to  see  if  there  would  be  any  difference  from  earlier  times.  And  really,  at  first  there  was  no 
difference  at  all.  Then  slowly,  slowly,  I  felt  this  type  of  smiling  and  serene  peace  that  I  live  in 
entering  into  the  body.  The  cells  are  still  not  always  conscious  of  it  (sometimes  they  feel  a  sort  of ... 
tension  of  life  -  I  don’t  know  what  to  call  it).  They’re  conscious  of  their  existence  and  of  what  it 
means  and  of  the  Energy  that  is  acting  (yes,  conscious  of  the  Action  and  the  Energy  that  acts),  but 
during  the  meditation  THAT  descended  and  there  was  an  extraordinary  relaxation.  Not  the 
relaxation  that  comes  with  surrender ,261  which  I  normally  feel  before  sleeping,  but  the  relaxation 
that  comes  from  a  kind  of  serene,  immutable  and  eternal  joy.  At  that  moment  the  body  felt  it  could 
remain  like  that  forever!  ‘Oh,  how  nice  I  feel!  ...’  it  said.  And  as  a  matter  of  fact,  I’m  not  sure  but  I 
think  he  felt  the  meditation  was  over,  whereas  I  was  still ...  I  felt  him  stirring,  so  I  stopped. 

There  was  a  marked  difference. 


261  Original  English. 


For  when  something  isn’t  right,  a  pressure  always  comes  down  on  the  body  from  above,  the 
pressure  of  the  descending  Force.  But  in  this  case  it  wasn’t  that  at  all;  rather,  it  was  like  this 
(Mother  holds  her  palms  upwards  in  an  attitude  of  total  surrender),  but  beatific  in  that  it  lives  in 
itself,  it  is  existence  in  itself  -  and  that’s  all. 

I  came  here  in  that  state  directly  after  the  meditation,  and  when  I  sat  down  ...  You  see,  I  didn’t 
even  have  the  ...  (naturally  there  is  no  question  of  ‘idea’)  I  don’t  know,  not  even  the  instinct  to  pick 
up  a  flower  for  you,  you  understand?  And  when  I  sat  down  here,  the  consciousness  of  the  column  of 
Light  started  coming.  There  was  no  more  personality,  no  more  individuality:  there  was  only  a 
column  of  Light  descending  right  into  the  very  cells  of  the  body  -  and  that’s  all. 

Then  it  gradually  became  conscious  of  itself,  conscious  of  BEING  this  column  of  Light.  And 
then  the  ordinary  consciousness  slowly  returned. 

(silence) 

It’s  interesting  for  me  to  come  here  soon  after  the  meditation,  for  it’s  as  if  I  were  objectivizing 
my  experience.  Otherwise  I’d  be  within,  like  that  (gesture),  and  there’s  no  longer  any  ...  (you  see,  I 
say  ‘I’  -  but  at  that  moment  it  doesn’t  exist!)  and  even  THE  BODY  feels  this  way,  a  kind  of 
immutable  and  beatific  eternity,  and  that’s  all. 

I  tell  you,  not  even  ...  When  I  arrived,  I  said  to  you,  ‘My  hands  are  empty’;  merely  the  contact 
with  your  atmosphere  made  me  say  it.  But  otherwise  the  ‘my,’  the  ‘hands’  -  none  of  it  had  any 
meaning. 

It’s  interesting. 


December  25,  1960 


(Letter  to  Mother  from  Satprem) 


Pondicherry,  December  25,  I960 


Sweet  Mother, 

I  want  to  tell  you  that  X  completely  changed  my  japa  this  morning.  Instead  of  ten  hours  a  day,  I 
now  have  only  about  half  an  hour  to  do  three  times  a  day! 

He  told  me  that  ‘everything’  is  in  this  new  japa. 

And  I  want  also  to  tell  you  how  grateful  I  am.  You  think  of  us  even  in  the  smallest  human 
details  -  grateful  is  not  even  the  word.  Simply,  may  I  serve  you  better,  may  I  better  give  of  myself. 

With  love. 


Signed:  Satprem 


December  31, 1960 


(Mother  usually  improvised  on  the  harmonium  the  morning  of  January  1  before  reading  the  New 
Year ’s  Message.  She  has  come  the  day  before  to  try  out  the  instrument.) 

Let’s  see  ...  How  many  months  has  it  been?  I  haven’t  touched  this  instrument  for  at  least  eight 
months!  And  now  tomorrow  I  have  to  play  -  don’t  feel  like  it.  Anyway,  since  I  must,  I  must!  ... 
We’ll  meditate  on  it  (the  New  Year’s  Message262  )  -  you  know  what  it  is,  for  we  worked  on  it 
together  -  and  then  I’ll  see  if  something  comes. 

(silence) 

This  throng  looks  more  like  a  chaos.  A  dreadful  confusion.  But  from  next  week  people  will  start 
leaving.  The  crowning  day  will  be  January  6,  which  is  Epiphany  (but  we  have  made  it  into  a  day  for 
the  offering  of  the  material  world  to  the  Divine:  the  material  world  giving  itself  to  the  Divine)  -  it 
will  be  the  climax,263  and  I  shall  then  see  you  on  the  7th.  After  that,  we’ll  work  hard!  But  until  then, 
no  work  -  my  head’s  in  a  kind  of  soup  ...  Oh,  if  you  only  knew!  It’s  dreadful  what  people  bring  me, 
what  they  ask  ... 

(Mother  sits  at  the  harmonium) 

Oh,  my  dress  is  caught  under  one  of  the  stool  legs.  Are  you  strong? 

Oh  yes! 

Can  you  lift  me  up?  I’m  very  heavy,  you  know!  ... 

No,  I 'm  afraid  of  making  you  capsize. 

95  pounds. 

95  pounds! 

Yes,  I  was  joking  when  I  said  that  I  was  very  heavy. 

I  thought  as  much! 

I  weigh  95  pounds.  I  should  normally  weigh  130  pounds. 

(After  playing) 


It’ll  be  something  like  that ...  or  something  else  -  I’ve  no  idea! 


262‘This  wonderful  world  of  Delight  waiting  at  our  gates  for  our  call,  to  come  down  upon  earth.’ 


2630riginal  English. 


X  seemed  happy  about  his  visit  this  time.  We  had  long  meditations  of  half  an  hour  -  he  never 
seemed  to  want  to  leave  at  all!  There  was  above  all  a  kind  of  extremely  calm  universalization.  An 
absolute  and  universal  calm  in  all  the  cells  of  the  body.  I  don’t  know  if  it  was  only  me,  but  it 
seemed  he  was  in  the  same  state  -  unable  to  move,  quite  content,  smiling.  Once  I  heard  the  clock 
chime,  and  as  I  thought  it  was  time  and  that  perhaps  he  was  ready  to  leave,  I  looked;  he  had 
removed  the  mala264  that  he  wears  around  his  neck  and  I  found  him  doing  japa.  As  soon  as  he  saw 
me  looking,  he  quickly  put  it  back  on! 

But  what’s  most  surprising  is  that  with  me,  not  a  word,  nothing,  neither  he  nor  I.  And  it  seems  to 
be  just  as  comfortable  for  him  as  it  is  for  me! 

(silence) 

On  the  6th,  everyone  will  finally  be  gone.  But  tomorrow  is  going  to  be  dreadful;  I  have  to  sit  there 
for  at  least  two  hours  distributing  calendars.  And  on  top  of  that,  there  are  all  these  controversies 
over  the  music  they  play  at  the  library  each  week.  Some  say  that  it’s  very  good,  others  that  it’s  very 
bad  (the  usual  things).  And  each  party  has  pleaded  his  case.  They  told  me  that  they’ll  give  me  a 
concert  at  Prosperity 265  so  that  I  may  judge  for  myself.  It’s  all  recorded.  I’m  afraid  it  will  be  rather 
noisy  ...  For  myself,  I  know  quite  well  how  to  get  out  of  it  -  I  ‘think’  of  something  else!  But  it’s 
going  to  ...  I  can  see  it  already.  Didn’t  I  tell  you  we’re  in  a  chaos?  Well,  I  have  the  feeling  that  this 
is  going  to  beat  all. 

How  do  you  mean  a  chaos? 

Noise,  movement,  confusion,  people  ...  Noise  always  gives  me  the  impression  of  chaos,  always. 

I  must  say  that  downstairs  on  Darshan  days  people  chat,  look  each  other  over,  see  how  he  or 

she  is  dressed  -  it’s  like  a  county  fair  around  the  Samadhi. 

Yes,  it’s  true  -  who’s  there,  who  isn’t,  how  he  looks,  who’s  he  with  ...  Oh! 

(silence) 


And  you?  What  news? 

It’s  not  always  easy. 

Why  isn’t  it  easy!? 

Oh,  but  you  know,  night  after  night,  night  after  night,  I  SEE  how  things  which  in  their  truth  are 
so  simple  become  complicated  here  in  the  human  atmosphere.  Really,  it’s  so  interesting;  I  have 
visions  ...  you  see,  the  thing  in  its  truth  is  so  simple  it’s  stupefying,  and  then  here  it  becomes  so 
complicated,  painful,  exhausting,  upsetting. 

But  it’s  enough  to  take  one  step  behind  to  come  out  of  it  all. 

I’ll  tell  you  about  that  ...  Wait,  we  still  have  three  minutes;  I  want  to  tell  you  one  of  my  most 
recent  visions  (but  it’s  almost  the  same  thing  every  night): 

I  was  in  my  home,  somewhere  -  a  world  whose  light  is  like  a  sun  (golden  with  scarlet 
reflections);  it  was  very  beautiful.  It  was  in  a  town,  and  my  house  was  in  that  town.  I  wanted  to  take 
to  someone  some  ...  not  presents,  but  things  he  needed.  So  I  got  everything  together,  prepared  it  all, 
and  then  loaded  my  arms  with  all  the  packages  (I  had  taken  my  own  time  to  arrange  everything 


264 Mala:  a  kind  of  necklace  of  wooden  beads  with  which  one  repeats  a  mantra. 


265The  room  where  Mother  distributed  to  the  disciples  their  needs  (soap,  paper,  etc.)  on  the  first  of  each  month. 


nicely),  and  I  went  out  when  the  whole  town  was  completely  deserted  -  there  was  not  a  soul  on  the 
streets.  A  complete  solitude.  And  such  a  sense  of  well-being,  of  light  and  force!  Yes,  really  a  kind 
of  felicity,  for  no  reason.  And  instead  of  weighing  me  down,  it  seemed  as  if  my  packages  were 
pulling  me!  They  pulled  me  on  in  such  a  way  that  each  step  was  a  joy,  like  a  dance. 

This  lasted  the  whole  time  I  was  crossing  the  town.  Then  I  came  to  a  border,  right  at  the 
beginning  of  another  part  where  I  was  to  take  my  packages;  there,  just  a  little  below  me,  I  saw  a 
house  under  construction  -  the  house  belonging  to  the  person  to  whom  I  had  to  deliver  these 
presents  (the  symbolism  in  all  this,  of  course,  is  quite  clear). 

As  I  approached  the  house,  but  still  from  some  distance,  I  suddenly  saw  some  men  busy  at  work. 
Then  instantly  ...  instantly  this  road  which  was  so  vast,  sunlit  and  smooth  -  so  smooth  to  the  feet ... 
oh,  it  became  the  top  level  of  a  scaffolding.  And  what  is  more,  this  scaffolding  was  not  very  well 
made,  and  the  closer  I  came  the  more  complicated  it  got  -  there  were  planks  jutting  out,  beams  off 
balance.  In  short,  you  had  to  watch  every  single  step  to  keep  from  breaking  your  neck.  I  began 
getting  annoyed.  Moreover,  my  packages  were  heavy.  They  were  heavy  and  they  so  saddled  my 
arms  that  I  was  unable  to  hold  onto  anything  and  had  constantly  to  do  a  balancing  act.  Then  I  began 
thinking,  ‘My  God,  how  complicated  this  world  is!’  And  just  at  that  moment,  I  saw  a  young  person 
coming  along,  like  a  young  girl  dressed  in  European  clothes,  with  a  hat  on  her  head  ...  all  black! 
This  young  person  had  white  skin,  but  her  clothes  were  black,  and  she  wore  black  shoes  on  her 
small  white  feet.  She  was  dressed  all  in  black  -  black,  all  in  black.  Like  complete  unconsciousness. 
She  also  came  carrying  packages  (many  more  than  me),  and  she  came  hopping  along  the  whole 
length  of  the  scaffolding,  putting  her  feet  just  anywhere!  ‘My  God,’  I  said  to  myself,  ‘she’s  going  to 
break  her  neck!’  -  But  not  at  all!  She  was  totally  unconscious;  she  wasn’t  even  aware  that  it  was 
dangerous  or  complicated  -  a  total  unconsciousness.  But  her  unconsciousness  is  what  allowed  her 
to  go  on  like  that!  I  watched  it  all.  ‘Well,  sometimes  it’s  good  to  be  unconscious!’  Then  she 
disappeared;  she  had  only  come  to  give  me  a  demonstration  (she  neither  saw  me  nor  looked  at  me). 
And  looking  down  at  the  workers,  I  saw  that  everything  was  getting  more  and  more  complicated, 
more  and  more,  more  and  more  -  and  there  wasn’t  even  any  ladder  by  which  to  get  down.  In  other 
words,  it  was  getting  unbearable.  Then  something  in  me  rebelled:  ‘Ah,  no!  I’ve  had  enough  of  all 
this  -  it’s  too  stupid!’ 

And  IMMEDIATELY,  I  found  myself  down  below,  relieved  of  my  packages.  And  everything 
was  perfectly  simple.  (I  had  even  brought  the  packages  along  without  realizing  it.)  All,  all  was  in 
order,  very  neat,  very  luminous,  very  simple  -  simply  because  I  had  said,  ‘Ah,  no!  I’ve  had  enough 
of  this  business!  Why  all  these  stupid  complications!’266 

But  these  are  not  ‘dreams,’  they  are  types  of  activity  -  more  real,  more  concrete  than  material 
life;  the  experience  is  much  more  concrete  than  ordinary  life. 

I  have  had  hundreds  of  such  examples  ...  It’s  not  always  the  same  scene.  The  scenes  are 
different,  but  the  story  is  always  the  same  -  the  thing,  in  its  truth,  is  absolutely  luminous,  pleasant, 
charming;  then  as  soon  as  men  get  involved,  it  becomes  an  abominable  complication.  And  once  you 
say,  ‘No!  I’ve  had  enough  of  all  this  -  it’s  NOT  TRUE!  it  goes  away. 

There  have  been  similar  stories  in  ‘dreams’  with  X.  I  saw  him  when  he  was  very  young  (his 
education,  the  ideas  he  had,  how  he  was  trained).  And  the  same  thing  happened.  I  was  with  him  ... 
but  I’ll  tell  you  that  another  time  ...267  And  then  at  the  end,  I’d  had  enough  and  I  said,  ‘Oh,  no!  It’s 
too  ridiculous!’  and  with  that  I  left  the  house.  At  the  door  was  a  little  squirrel  sitting  on  his 
haunches  making  friendly  little  gestures  towards  me.  ‘Oh!’  I  said,  ‘here’s  someone  who  understands 
better!’ 

But  later  I  observed,  I  saw  that  this  had  helped  drain  him  of  all  the  weight  of  his  past  education. 
266Mother  later  discovered  that  this  world  of  complications  is  the  symbol  of  the  physical  mind. 


267Mother  later  narrated  the  end  of  her  ‘dream’  with  X: 


Very  interesting  ...  Night  after  night,  night  after  night,  night  after  night  -  plenty  of  things!  You 
could  write  novels  about  it  all. 


‘It  was  his  house,  and  it  was  rather  complicated  to  enter.  I  was  saying  a  mantra  or  japa  when  X  came  along;  he  had  a  ... 
a  terribly  reproachful  air!  Then  he  smelled  my  hands:  ‘It’s  a  bad  habit  to  wear  perfume.  (Mother  laughs )  You  cannot 
live  a  spiritual  life  when  you  wear  perfume.’  then  1  looked  at  him  and  thought,  ‘My  God,  does  he  have  to  be  so 
backward!’  But  it  annoyed  me,  so  I  said,  ‘Very  well,  I’m  going.’  When  I  got  near  the  door,  he  started  saying,  ‘Is  it  true 
you  have  been  married  several  times,  and  that  you’ve  been  divorced?’  Then  a  kind  of  anger  entered  me  (laughing)  and  I 
told  him,  ‘No,  not  just  once,  but  twice!’  Thereupon,  I  left.  All  the  old  ideas  ... 


After  that  was  when  I  saw  the  little  squirrel.’ 


