=== SOURCE METADATA ===
Title: Studies in Philosophy Vol 1
Author: K. C. Bhattacharyya
Strategy used: A
Recovery notes: Replaced corrupt local PDF with Internet Archive text-PDF derivative from studiesinphiloso030936mbp; extracted with pypdf.
=== END METADATA ===

=== PAGE 1 ===

=== PAGE 2 ===
TEXT FLY WITHIN 
THE BOOK ONLY

=== PAGE 3 ===
UNIVERSAL 
LIBRARY 
OU_158358 
AdVayd | I IWSdSAINA

=== PAGE 4 ===

=== PAGE 5 ===
OUP-—557-—-13-7-71—3,000. 
OSMANIA UNIVE LIBRARY 
Call No. » ὅς Accession Ἃ P G 66 
puter 3.1 Heachov Title S ἐμοί: ζω υὰ th S “δ. hd Yo } 
This book should-be returned on or before the date last marked we)

=== PAGE 6 ===

=== PAGE 7 ===
STUDIES IN PHILOSOPHY

=== PAGE 8 ===

=== PAGE 9 ===

=== PAGE 10 ===
ΟΞ δ = 
a 
ΤΙ 
fe 
eo 
ae 
eed oe 
lane 
᾿ a o ᾿ : 
a 
ce ἢ ᾿ ὅπ = τ ᾿ : 
ol a 
Hau 
ef ie oe ae i ᾿ς 
᾿ 
a 
oe 
ae 
es Stl 
ae Pane i ic Le 
: 
Spill 
τ opie 
oe 
τ:

=== PAGE 11 ===
STUDIES IN PHILOSOPHY 
By 
KRISHNACHANDRA BHATTACHARYYA 
Vol. I 
Edited By 
GoPINATH BHATTACHARYYA 
Presidency College, Calcutta 
PROGRESSIVE PUBLISHERS 
31 College Street $$ Calcutta~12

=== PAGE 12 ===
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED 
First impression 
August 15, 1956 
Published by 5. K. Basu of Progressive Publishers, 37 College Street, 
Calcutta-12 and Printed by J. C. Sarkhel, at the Calcutta Oriental 
Press Private Ltd. 9, Panchanan Ghose Lane, Calcutta —9.

=== PAGE 13 ===
EDITOR’S PREFACE 
These ‘Studies in Philosophy’ represent all the published and 
only a few of the unpublished philosophical writings of Krishna- 
chandra Bhattacharyya. There remains over an immense mass 
of manuscripts which will, perhaps, remain unpublished for all 
time to come. 
The present volumes comprise the following tracts: —- 
NN MP YN Ὁ 
aM Ss 
wo ὦ 
10, 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
Vol. I 
Studies in Vedantism (Published in 1907) 
Sankara’s doctrine of Maya ( , 1925) 
The Advaita and its spiritual significance ( ,, 1936) 
Studies in SAmkhya Philosophy ( Unpublished ) 
Studies in Yoga Philosophy ( "  ) 
The Jaina theory of Anekanta (Published in 1925) 
The Concept of Rasa ( Unpublished ) 
Vol. U 
The Subject as Freedom (Published in 1930) 
The Concept of Philosophy ( , 1936) 
The Concept of the Absolute and its 
alternative forms ( ,, 1934) 
Studies in Kant ( Unpublished ) 
Some aspects of negation (Published in 1914) 
The place of the indefinite in Logic ( , 1916) 
Definition of ‘ Relation’ as a category 
of existence ( Unpublished ) 
Fact and thought of fact (Published in 1931) 
Knowledge and Truth ( , 1928) 
Correction of error as a logical process ( ., 1931) 
The false and the subjective ( , 1932) 
The objective interpretation of percept 
and image ( , 1936) 
The Concept of Value ( , 1934) 
The reality of the future ( Unpublished )

=== PAGE 14 ===
vil 
Each of the above tracts is preceded by an Analysis. The first 
one was made by the author himself and the others have been 
done by the editor. Of the foot notes, those marked in numerals 
are by the editor. 
In presenting these studies the editor is happy to offer his most 
grateful thanks to the enterprising publisher, Sree Sushil Kumar 
Basu, the proprietor of Messrs. Progressive Publishers. It was he 
who very generously volunteered to undertake the publication of the 
book and see it through the press. 
My warm thanks are also due to Professor G. αὶ, Malkani, 
the Director of the Indian Institute of Philosophy, Amalner 
(Bombay ) for his ready permission to reprint ‘The Subject as 
Freedom’ which was originally published by the Institute; to 
Dr. 5. Radhakrishnan and Messrs. George Allen ἃ Union Ltd. 
for their kind permission to reprint from their ‘Contemporary 
Indian Philosophy’ the essay ‘The Concept of Philosophy’; and 
to the R. K. Mission for their permission to reprint ‘ The Advaita 
and its spiritual significance’ which first appeared in their ‘ Cul- 
tural heritage of India’. The editor is also obliged to a pupil of 
his and to his daughter for their assistance in preparing the copy 
for the press. 
It is very much regretted that a number of typographical errors 
have crept in in spite of earnest endeavours to avoid them. In the 
‘Errata’ at the end of the volume, only the major errors have 
been listed and corrected . 
THE EDITOR

=== PAGE 15 ===
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
VOL. I 
EDITOR’S PREFACE 
ABBREVIATIONS 
EDITOR’S INTRODUCTION TO VOL. I 
STUDIES IN VEDANTISM 
INTRODUCTION Κ΄. 
ANALYSIS *« " νον vee 
TEXT: CH. I. AN APPROACH THROUGH 
PSYCHOLOGY . 
CH. II. VEDANTIC METAPHYSICS 
CH. 1. VEDANTIC LOGIC 
SANKARA’S DOCTRINE OF MAYA 
* ANALYSIS X 
TEXT xX 
THE ADVAITA AND ITS SPIRITUAL 
SIGNIFICANCE 
ANALYSIS 
TEXT ves eee ‘eee 
STUDIES IN SANKHYA PHILOSOPHY 
PREFACE Χὶ 
ANALYSIS . νων 
TEXT: CH. I, PAIN AS EVIL 
CH. ¥ Mi. REFLECTION AS A SPIRITUAL 
FUNCTION νον 
cH .*” ΠΙ. THE BODY OF THE SELF 
CH. IV. CAUSAL AND NON-CAUSAL 
MANIFESTATION 
CH. V. TIME, SPACE AND CAUSALITY 
CH. VI. THE OBJECTIVE TATTVAS 
CH. VII. THE OBJECTIVE TATTVAS 
(CONTD.) 
CH. VIII. THE SELF OR PURUSA 
CH, “ IX. PRAKRTI νον 
CH. ΚΧ. RELATION OF THE GUNAS 
109 
113 
127 
129 
135 
143 
151 
158 
165 
173 
181 
190 
198 
207

=== PAGE 16 ===
5. STUDIES IN YOGA PHILOSOPHY 
ANALYSIS - ves vee 215 
TEXT: CH. “I. SANKHYA AND YOGA ον 22] 
CH. Ii. ” ” (CONTD.) ... 231 
CH. Ill. ” ” (CONTD.) ... 240 
CH. IV. BUDDHI-VRTTI we 251 
CH. Vv. ” ” (CONTD.) ... 262 
CH. VI. FIVE LEVELS OF BUDDHI we 273 
CH. VII. THE NATURE OF YOGA ve 283 
CH.’VVIII. THE KINDS OF YOGA .. 293 
CH. Y IX. THE PROCEDURE OF YOGA ... 305 
CH.“ X. THE NOTION OF ISVARA .. 317 
6. THE JAINA THEORY OF ANEKANTA 
“\ ANALYSIS νων νον νον ὦν 329 
Z TEXT ves es νὸς \.. 33] 
7. THE CONCEPT OF RASA 
ANALYSIS vee aes was we. 347 
TEXT wee wee vee .. 349 
ABBREVIATIONS 
BV =Bhoja-Vrtti 
SK =Samkhya-Karika 
SPB =Samkhya-Pravacana-Bhasyam 
SS =Sawkhya-Stitram 
STK =Samkhya-Tattva-Kaumudi 
TV =Tattva-VaiSsaradi 
YB =Yoga-Bhasyam 
YV =Yoga-Vartikam

=== PAGE 17 ===
EDITOR’S INTRODUCTION TO VOL. I 
Krishnachandra Bhattacharyya was born in a Brahmana family 
of Serampur (Bengal) on the 12th of May, 1875. The grand- 
father, Umakanta Tarkalankara was a Sanskrit scholar trained in 
the indigenous seminaries of learning. ‘The father Kedarnath had 
not much of academic education and was employed in a mercan- 
tile house at Calcutta. He was a man of slender means with 
a numerous family to maintain and was hardly in a position 
to bear the educational expenses of his children. Krishnachandra 
was sent to the local school at the usual age and after passing 
the Entrance Examination of the Calcutta University in 1891, he 
entered the Presidency College at Calcutta. He graduated with 
triple Honours in 1896 and was awarded the P. R. S. of the Uni- 
versity in 1901. The academic record during the school and 
college periods was uniformly brilliant. 
Krishnachandra joined the Education Department of the Govern- 
ment of Bengal as a Lecturer in Philosophy in 1898, and after 
serving with great distinction as a teacher of Philosophy in almost 
all the Government Colleges in Bengal, he retired from service as 
the Officiating Principal of Hughly College in 1930. He joined the 
Indian Institute of Philosophy at Amalner (Bombay ) as its Direc- 
tor and remained there from 1933 to 1935. He also acted as the 
George V Professor of Mental and Moral Philosophy at the Cal- 
cutta University from 1935 to 1937. 
Krishnachandra Bhattacharyya was warm and generous in his 
temperament but was rather shy and was almost ‘afraid’ of 
publicity. He was nevertheless a man of very strong principles 
and also of strong likes and dislikes. He had great independence 
of spirit and he never submitted to official bullying. He was a 
genial personality and those who came in close contact with him 
were profoundly attracted towards him. He was an admirer of 
classical Indian music and study of good literature was one of his 
recreations for a long time. He spoke moderately but always 
impressively and had a keen sense of humour. His relations 
to his students were extremely cordial and many of them 
almost adore his memory. He was of a medium build, had a 
fairly strong constitution and was a man of active habits for the 
greater part of his life. In his later years, however, when he was

=== PAGE 18 ===
Χ 
afflicted with asthma, he developed complete sedentariness. He 
was generally abstemious in his habits. His private life was one 
of austere purity and he was a conspicuous example of the Hindu 
ideal of plain-living and high thinking. He died on the 11th of 
December, 1949. 
Krishnachandra was deeply interested in current Indian affairs 
and though his office debarred him from taking an active part in 
politics, he was ever since the Swadeshi Movement an ardent 
champion of extreme nationalism. In socio-religious matters, 
he was a conservative Hindu, both in his habits and in his out- 
look. He had unmixed contempt for the exponents of ‘liberal ° 
Hinduism and he looked upon the so-called ‘social reform’ 
movements in Hindu society as unmitigated evils. He was a firm 
believer in the Hindu code of values and was a bitter opponent 
of all who maligned it. 
Krishnachandra possessed a profoundly original mind. He 
had an acute analytic intellect combined with imagination and 
insight of a very high order. Though he was widely read in 
Indian and Western philosophies, classical German philosophy and 
Advaita Vedanta were the two forces that exercised a major 
influence on his intellectual development. He had great intellec- 
tual energy and almost upto the end of his life he used to revel 
in sustained philosophical discussions. He wrote extensively. 
But his writings present a striking contrast to his oral disquisi- 
tions. When he spoke, even his serious discourses were used to 
be interspersed with quips and sallies; they were remarkable for 
their lucidity and thoroughness and he would develop his points 
without any reserve. But when he wrote, he often became almost 
a different man. He seemed to lose his expansiveness, became 
reserved and instead of lucidity he tried almost to be aphoristic in 
his expression. Far from developing a point he was content just 
to set down a cryptic thesis leaving the bewildered reader to 
elucidate for himself as best as he could. Though he wrote vastly , 
he published little. And this was due to the fact that he 
would complete very few of his writings. The present editor has 
with him an immense mass of unpublished documents containing 
reflections, studies, fragments, notes etc. on a large variety of 
subjects and at different stages of completion . 
The philosophical writings of Krishnachandra Bhattacharyya 
are mainly of two kinds: (a) constructive interpretation of other

=== PAGE 19 ===
χὶ 
systems and (b) construction of ἃ new system of his own. The 
two are not indeed unconnected; but in giving an account of his 
philosophical contributions, it seems desirable to keep the two 
apart. The author’s philosophical position will be analysed in 
some detail in the Introduction to Vol. 11 which will contain all 
the basic writings in which his philosophy has been formulated . 
In the present Introduction, an attempt will be made to bring out 
the distinctive features of the interpretational writings which form 
the contents of the first volume. 
In his ‘Studies in Vedantism’ the author suggests that 
his method is one of constructive interpretation and disclaims 
that it is an ‘exposition’ in the ordinary sense of the term. A 
perusal of the contents of the present volume will go to show that 
this method is also the one which the author has employed par 
excellence in all his studies in Indian philosophy. ‘The method 
has also been described as ‘speculative’. But the author has 
not anywhere indicated its precise nature. From a consideration of 
his actual procedure it would appear that by ‘constructive inter- 
pretation’ the author means much more of construction than of 
interpretation, and the method in substance amounts to specula- 
tive re-construction based on a few pivotal tenets rather than an 
objective exposition based on a detailed study of the more im- 
portant texts of the particular school of philosophy that is claimed 
to be interpreted. The method is apparently a risky one and may 
easily be taken to be a fanciful reading of one’s own thought into 
others’ thinking. The author was quite conscious of this risk, 
but then he was of the opinion that it could be eliminated if the 
construction were not repelled by the letter or spirit of the sys- 
tem to be interpreted; or, in other words, if it could be made to 
fit without any disharmony into the general frame-work of that 
system. And this is exactly what the author used to claim for his 
interpretational writings. It is to be noted, again, that the cons- 
tructive effort is prominent more specially in connection with those 
doctrines which are prima facie the most removed from the com- 
mon consciousness. The major task of this kind of interpreta- 
tion was, in the author’s view, to render esoteric doctrines in- 
telligible in terms of the contents of common consciousness . 
Much of what the author has here said of Vedanta. 
Samkhya and Yoga is not to be found in the extant original 
literature on these subjects. It is an extension or a development in

=== PAGE 20 ===
xii 
new directions of some fundamental tenets of the several schools. 
It is development not in the sense of necessary amplification of 
what is potential therein: it is rather the discovery of new poten- 
tialities and is in that sense a genuine addition to the existing cor- 
pus of the philosophy of the relevant schools. The extension, 
again, is always the result of the application of certain principles 
which constitute the fundamentals of the author’s own philo- 
sophy. It would be unfair to suggest that this is nothing but 
subjectivism in the sphere of interpretation. For, the so-called 
‘objective’ interpretation is as much ‘subjective’ in this sense as 
‘constructive’ interpretation. The mind that interprets is not a 
tabula rasa; neither is it just a calculating machine or an electro- 
nic brain. The interpreter is a thinking being and as such he 
will have to interpret with a mind having a system of beliefs and 
from a stand-point which he happens to occupy at the time of his 
interpretative activity. Subjectivism in this sense is inevitable in 
all human thinking. It is not any blemish either unless, indeed, 
the belief-system is proved to be unfounded or the perspective 
distorted , or, again, unless its application turns out to be wrong 
or illegitimate . 
It is to be expected that in such an interpretation as the present 
one, there would be improvisations and deviations from the 
standard interpretations holding the field. In the first tract on 
Vedanta, viz., ‘Studies in Vedantism’ some of the inno- 
vations are as follows:—(a) the conception of ‘levels of consci- 
ousness’; (Ὁ) the conception of dream-experience as constituting 
a new ‘dimension’ of existence ; (c) the exhibition , on the strength 
of conscious dream, self-conscious dream and dreamless sleep res- 
pectively , of ‘the objective possibility of perception without sen- 
sation , of the self-conscious knowledge of all space as one object 
and of all time as one unfolded panorama, and of the self swoon- 
ing into the realisation of noumena’; (d) the re-interpretation of 
the conceptions of adhyatma, adhibhiita etc.:; (6) the 
re-interpretation of the concept of devata as the absolute unity 
of subject and object; (f) the interpretation of the concept of 
loka as the absolute intuition-medium for this unity ; (g) the re- 
interpretation of the concepts of. para-prakrti, §akti and 
apara-prakrti; (h) the ethico-theological elucidation of the 
concept of jivan-mukti; and (i) the interpretation of some 
cosmogonic myths.

=== PAGE 21 ===
ΧΙ 
In the second tract, viz., ‘Sankara’s doctrine of 
maya’, the writer has tried to understand the doctrine of 
acosmism from the common phenomenon of illusion. The im- 
provisations relate to the concept of ma&y&. The interpretation 
of the phrase ‘sad-asat-vilakgana’ is, no doubt, more 
in accordance with the detractors of the concept of maya, but 
it is remarkable that the author has tried to make the concept of 
‘neither sat nor asat’ intelligible from an analysis of the 
different aspects of the experience of illusion. The second inno- 
vation concerns the analysis of the three stages in the pheno- 
menon of correction of perceptual error, correlating them to the 
three aspects of maya as vastavi, anirvacya and 
tuccha and connecting them with the different aspects of creative 
and destructive activities of the Lord. 
In the third tract. viz., ‘The Advaita and its spiritual 
significance’, an attempt has been made to elucidate the doctrine 
of the illusoriness of individuality from the ethical experience of 
repentance. It is to be remarked here that the author has not gene- 
tally tried to establish the Vedantic doctrines with the help of 
arguments. He has rather sought to understand them with the aid 
of the contents of common consciousness . 
In the SAashkhya and Yoga studies, the innovations are 
as follows:—(a) the conceptian of ‘reflection as a kind of intros- 
pective insight to unravel the nature of the Sathkhya tattvas 
and also as a freeing process from aviveka: (b) the distinc- 
tion drawn between the causal and the non-causal manifestations 
of prakrti and some of its evolutes: (c) the theory of the 
phenomenality of the world of experience in regard to its charac- 
ter and not being: (d) the re-interpretation of the concept of 
bhava as the referential funclion of the mind; (6) the inter- 
pretation of the concepts of buddhi. ahamk4@ra and tan- 
matra as self-knowing. self-willing and self-feeling respectively ; 
(f) the interpretation of the tanmatras as at once mind-stuff 
and the matrix of the bhiittas: (g) the characterisation of 
Samkhya as a religion of ‘spiritual naturalness’; (h) the dis- 
tinction drawn between causality in the phenomenal world and cau- 
sality in the world of tattvas; (i) the conception of qualita- 
tive combination in SAamkhya; (j) the theory of anticipatory 
response of buddhi and the lower tattvas; (k) the theory 
of the gunas as the absolutes of the three modes of feeling

=== PAGE 22 ===
XIV 
which are to be understood in terms of freedom; (1) the con- 
ception of 4kaga as the functional form of prakrti distin- 
guished from ἃ Κᾶ 68 as bhita; (m) the re-interpretation of 
the conceptions of time and causality in Samkhya and Yoga; 
(n) the enumeration of as many as thirty major points of difference 
between the Samnkhya and the Yoga schools. 
In the tract on ‘Anekainta’. the author tries to show that 
neither the category of ‘identity’ nor that of ‘difference’ can be 
regarded as fundamental in philosophy, that the alternation of 
identity and difference is a more satisfactory conception than 
either pure identity or pure difference. and that a new interpre- 
tation of the Jaina theory of anekinta is possible in the 
light of the concept of alternation. 
In ‘The concept of Rasa’ an attempt has been made to 
assign the exact ‘level of consciousness’ on which aesthetic ex- 
perience stands: and according to the author’s analysis . artistic 
enjoyment stands on a par with ‘duplicated sympathy ’ which is on 
a level higher than that of common sympathy which. in its turn. 
is higher in level than the ordinary experience of joy. The 
writer also seeks to give a new account of the genesis of bi- 
bhatsa-rasa. 
The above will give an idea of the wide range of improvisa- 
tions which the author has presented in these Studies. It is for 
the competent reader to judge whether they are legitimate or not. 
But to come to a right decision on the point, it is necessary to 
have a fair acquaintance with the writer’s own philosophy which . 
however, is not reported in the present volume and which the 
editor hopes to analyse in some detail in his Introduction to 
Volume II.

=== PAGE 23 ===
STUDIES IN VEDANTISM

=== PAGE 24 ===

=== PAGE 25 ===
INTRODUCTION 
The following studies in Vedantism are not so much ex- 
positions of the traditional Vedanta as problematic constructions 
on Vedantic lines intended to bring out the relations of the 
system to modern philosophical systems. The work of construction 
has, however, been subordinated to ths work of interpretation. 
A wide latitude of interpretation has been claimed throughout. 
The studies follow the traditional authorities. the Upani- 
sads, the Brahma-sitras, and Bhagavad-gita, and 
confine themselves to the monistic interpretations of Sankara. 
They draw on treatises like Paficadasi, Vedanta-sid- 
dhanta-muktavali, etc., propounding what may be called 
the late Vedanta. for such definite views as may be re- 
garded to be legitimate systematisations of the earlier but looser 
Vedanta. No attempt has been made here to trace the his- 
torical evolution of the Vedantic school. 
The historical study of a school of thought must have methods 
and aims different from those of a philosophical study, though 
the studies are mutually supplementary. The philosophical study 
should come first in the order of time; the historical study of an 
ancient system of philosophy, to be of any use at all, must be 
preceded by an earnest study of the philosophy. in the expositions 
traditionally accepted as authoritative. The correctness of these 
expositions—at any rate, the perspective—may be impugned after- 
wards by historic research. But the historian here cannot begin 
his work at all unless he can live in sympathy into the details of an 
apparently outworn creed and recognise the truth in the first im- 
perfect adumbrations of it. The attitude of the mere narrator has, 
in the case of the historian of philosophy . to be exchanged as far 
as possible , for that of the sympathetic interpreter. There is the 
danger , no doubt. of too easily reading one’s philosophic creed into 
the history, but the opposite danger is more serious still. It is 
the danger of taking the philosophic type studied as a historic 
curiosity rather than a recipe for the human soul. and of seeking to 
explain the curiosity by natural causes instead of seriously examin- 
ing its merits as philosophy. This unfortunately 1s sometimes the 
defect of Western expositions of Eastern philosophy and religion ,

=== PAGE 26 ===
2 STUDIES IN VEDANTISM 
It springs from a tacit conviction , which , to say the least , bespeaks 
a lack of historic sense, that the common-sense evolved at the 
present day is absolutely infallible ; though if the history of philo- 
sophy were rightly studied , it would show that many of the modern 
speculative discoveries are but reaffirmations of old truths, and 
that the present-day common-sense itself is a complex structure in 
which are imbedded types of thought which are ordinarily taken 
to be completely outworn and superseded. We have heard of 
Indian pessimism and fatalism disposed of by a sapient reference 
to the climatic and political conditions of the country ; and the very 
name of philosophy has sometimes been denied to Indian specu- 
lation on the ground, apparently established historically . that the 
Oriental intellect is not sufficient dry and has not masculine 
virility enough to rise to anything higher than grotesque imagina- 
tive cosmogonies. When history thus sits in judgment on philo- 
sophy , an Indian student of Vedanta may well be excused if 
to him a reproduction of the philosophy. such as may bring it 
into contact with modern problems. appears far more important 
than any mere historical dissertation . 
A fair instance of how principles of historical research are some- 
times allowed to prejudice a right appreciation of philosophy is 
afforded by Dr. Thibaut’s otherwise valuable introduction to his 
translation of the Vedanta-sitras, with Sankara’s com- 
mentary (Sacred Books of the East, vol. xxxiv). Referring to the 
attempts of Sankara and other scholiasts to evolve a complete 
philosophic system from the Upanisads. he says: “On later 
generations . to which the whole body of texts came down as re- 
vealed truth, there devolved the inevitable task of establishing 
systems on which no exception could be taken to any of the texts ; 
but that the task was, strictly speaking . an impossible one. 1.6... 
one which it was impossible to accomplish fairly and honestly . 
there really is no reason to deny” (p. cvi). The texts “do not allow 
themselves to be systematised because they were never meant to 
form a system” (p. cxiv). “...... But the task of systematising 
once given, we are quite ready to admit that Sai kara’s system 
is the best that can be devised” (p. cxxii). The contention here 
apparently is that the task is not given, except to one who believes 
the texts to embody revealed truth. 
Now. what precisely is the task to which Sankara has 
addressed himself ? It is not that of the critical historian, it is the

=== PAGE 27 ===
INTRODUCTION 3 
task of piecing together the several texts into a philosophical sys- 
tem, of developing a hypothesis on a necessary basis which will 
cover all the texts. But it may be asked , why should it be assumed 
that all the texts should find place in a necessary system? May not 
some of them embody false speculations altogether? Here, then. 
we have to consider the special nature of the Upanisad texts. 
They may or may not have been revealed; but as they are. they 
are presented not as mere guesses from the outside to explain the 
facts of the Universe, nor even as leisurely philosophisings con- 
ducted on a necessary basis. but as embodying mystic intuitions . 
often the products of what has been called the mythologic ima- 
gination which sees philosophy in poetic symbols. There are 
sometimes attempts at reasoning. too. but then by themselves they 
are hardly logically convincing. having not unoften an almost in- 
fantine naiveté about them. Now. the question here is. what should 
be our attitude towards these texts which. apparently at any 
rate. embody intuitions ? So long as no obvious mark of spurious- 
ness is discovered , they are to be regarded as genuine. though even 
a genuine intuition may be false in its content. The falsity . how- 
ever. is not to be judged apriori but only after a strenuous 
endeavour to reproduce, if possible, the intuitions through such 
means as may have been laid down, in the $4stras. or, what we 
understand better. after an attempt to systematise all the texts in- 
to a well-rounded philosophy. The latter is the task which San - 
kara and other commentators have set themselves to accomplish . 
Hence admitting that the texts were never meant to be strung to- 
gether into a system. it can still be held that the task of syste- 
matising is inevitably given to every student of the Upanisads. 
Dr. Thibaut does not appear to have sufficiently distinguished 
the role of the philosophic systematiser from that of the critical 
or historical scholar when he lays down the caution that “we 
must refrain from using unhesitatingly and without careful con- 
sideration of the merits of each individual case. the teachings 
direct or inferred, of any passage to the end of determining 
the drift of the teaching of other passages”. A commentator is 
certainly open to severe censure when he asserts that a text bears 
a certain meaning which it cannot bear in a particular context. 
But when he simply means that the truth embodied in a parti- 
cular text is inadequately expressed and should be developed or 
rendered more explicit in the light of other texts. or when he in-

=== PAGE 28 ===
ή STUDIES IN VEDANTISM 
terprets a mythologic metaphor differently in different passages 
under the conviction that it is a natural symbol of many corres- 
pondent truths of different potencies or grades, he is to be deemed 
as perfectly within his rights as a philosophic interpreter and 
systematiser. A philosophic commentator , especially on unsystema- 
tised texts embodying speculative truths, has a far wider latitude 
than a literary commentator. Exegetical interpretation here in- 
evitably shades off into philosophic construction; and this need 
not involve any intellectual dishonesty. We may readily admit 
that “what he (the commentator) from his advanced standpoint 
looks upon as an inferior kind of cognition” was not “viewed in 
the same way by the authors of the Upanisads”, but that may 
have been because the teacher of the inferior wisdom had not in 
view the antithesis between it and the superior wisdom. Sandi- 
lya, the teacher of the SAndilya-vidya in the Chan- 
dogya-Upanisad, may not have “ looked upon it as anything 
else but a statement of the highest truth accessible to man”. but 
that is no reason why Sankara may not look upon it as the 
inferior wisdom. It would appear, too, as though the distinction 
between the higher and the lower wisdom was taken by Dr. Thibaut 
and some others to be wider than what Sankara _ himself 
intended; to Sankara, the Saguna (determinate)-Brah- 
man and the Nirguna (indeterminate)-Brahman were not 
so much distinct gods as the contrasted aspects of the same reality . 
A misconception of the latitude allowed to philosophic systenia- 
tisation may be traced in Dr. Thibaut’s remarks on Sankara’s 
doctrine of Maya. He tries to demonstrate that Sankara’s 
doctrine of Maya is nowhere to be found in the Upanisads 
except probably in an undeveloped form in a few doubtful pas- 
sages. and contends that the doctrine should not, therefore. be 
read into other passages which are intelligible without it. Let it 
be granted for the present that the demonstration is satisfactory . 
Later on he admits that the doctrine of “the final absolute identi- 
fication of the individual self with the universal self is indicated in 
terms of unmistakable plain-ness ” (p. cxxii) in the Upanisads. 
Now if the point were discussed as one of philosophy rather than of 
historical scholarship, it would not be difficult to perceive that 
the doctrine of May4 is a necessary corollary of this doctrine of 
the individual being Brahman in Moksa (absolute liberation ): 
for it is only in this identification that he realises that individuality

=== PAGE 29 ===
INTRODUCTION 5 
was an illusion and that the distinction of subject. object, etc., 
possible only through this individuality, was an illusion too. 
In a reproduction of Veda@ntism such as we have proposed , 
no attempt need be made to distinguish the points common to the 
Indian systems from those which are specifically Vediantic. 
Special care, however , should be taken to develop from first prin- 
ciples such Ved antic positions as being distinctively Indian pre- 
sent a marked contrast to European habits of thought. There are 
sundry deep-seated differences between Eastern and Western 
speculation. To European common-sense, certain forms of Indian 
speculation may appear absurd or puerile at the best; while now 
and then there are presented heights and depths of thought which 
take away and stifle one’s breath, and which an all too comfor- 
table rationalism designates hyper-subtle and mystical. An attempt 
should be made to show that in some cases at least the contradic- 
tion to European common-sense or scientific thought is only 
apparent , and that the Indian position. properly understood . whe- 
ther true or false. is a development of thought in an unsuspected 
direction , though by no means incompatible with Western thought : 
while in certain other cases where there is real contradiction to 
European common sense, an analysis of this apparently absolute 
standard may. peradventure. yield dissolving views in which the 
Eastern thought is found to alternate with its Western counter- 
part with the naiveté of a summer dream. As to what is vaguely 
called the mysticism of Vedanta a clearing-up should be attemp- 
ted in a more than ordinarily strenuous spirit of rationalism . Only 
it should content itself with a problematic indication of the direc- 
tion in which the dark truths lie without pretending to furnish 
omniscient explanations . 
The attitude to be borne towards the present subject should 
be neither that of the apologist nor that of the academic compiler 
but that of the interpreter which involves, to a certain extent. 
that of the constructor, too. It is too late in the day to defend a 
system like the Vedanta with a theologian’s animus : it is hardly 
necessary, except probably to silence a class of persons whose 
ignorance of the system is matched only by their zeal in combat- 
ing it. And it is, to say the least, unwise, even for one who has 
implicit faith in the system, for, to drag it into the theological 
arena is to effectually scare away all open-minded men from it 
and relegate it for good to the limbo of oblivion. The Vedantic

=== PAGE 30 ===
6 STUDIES IN VEDANTISM 
propagandist cannot do better than appeal through a literature 
wholly expository, without a word of dogmatic lecturing in it, 
which will invite readers—it may be, a select class of them—to 
contemplate with something of an aesthetic sympathy an ancient 
life-ideal animating an organised body of ancient thought, just to 
quicken, it may be for a moment, the consciousness , always very 
torpid , that the dominating ideal of the day is only one among many 
possibles ; and then if Vedanta has any real vitality in it, it will 
set them thinking till it leads to a real division of the spirit. A true. 
philosophic system is not to be looked upon as a soulless jointing 
of hypotheses ; it is a living fabric which , with all its endeavour to 
be objective, must have a well-marked individuality. Hence it is 
not to be regarded as the special property of academic philosophy- 
mongers , to be hacked up by them into technical views, but is to 
be regarded as a form of life and is to be treated as a theme of 
literature of infinite interest to humanity.

=== PAGE 31 ===
ANALYSIS 
CH .I. AN APPROACH THROUGH PSYCHOLOGY (SEC . 1-31 ) 
Importance of the psychology of waking, dream and dream- 
less sleep (1). Empirical account of a dream; no_ sensa- 
tion: consciousness of the body at a minimum (2-3). Does it 
demand a new dimension of psychical existence ? Impression and 
idea qualitatively distinct. Dreams as pure ideas turned into per- 
cepts (4-5). Which is more real, dream or waking ὁ Not sensa- 
tion but idea gives truth, though idea in presence of sensation is 
felt to be less real. Dreams, though illusory, have wider possi- 
bilities than waking (6-9). 
Possibilities of self-conscious dream and dreamless sleep (10-11). 
Timeless synthetic concepts behind concrete knowledge on the 
same level as dreamless sleep, where the self is immediately self- 
conscious (12-14). Vedantic discussion of this state (15-16). 
Parallelism between different views about this state and those 
about self-consciousness in European philosophy. Kant, Hegel and 
Vedinta on self-consciousness (17-19). Difference between 
Kant’s self and Vedantic atman (20). Spencer and Kant on 
indeterminate consciousness of the Unknowable (21-22). Ve- 
dantic view of knowledge (23). 
Samadhi (two forms), the concrete form of this indeter- 
minate consciousness; actualised states of waking, dream and 
dreamless sleep (24-25). Difference between dreamless sleep and 
samadhi (26-27). Samadhi and discursive reason compared 
(28). Relation between savikalpa and nirvikalpa 
samadhi (29). 
Waking, dream, dreamless sleep and ecstasy constitute the 
gradation of existence; gradation between subject and object, 
truth and untruth (30). Projections of dream, etc., on waking 
plane; parallelism with empircal and aprioti psychology (31). 
CH. I. VEDANTIC METAPHYSICS (SEC. 32-83) 
The theory of adhyadtma, adhibhiita. etc., dimly 
traceable in the Upanisads, brought out (32-38). Devata 
the absolute unity of subject and object (33). Loka, the abso-

=== PAGE 32 ===
8 STUDIES IN VEDANTISM 
lute intuition-medium for this unity (34). Necessity of loka de- 
fended against possible objections. Relation of the theory to 
Absolute Idealism (35-38). 
Are the devatis universalia ante rem? Is Vedanta realis- 
tic (39)? Yes; the sun the unity of the particular eyes and the 
visible things (40). But is not this aspect-realism rather than 
class-realism ? Yes. but these sense-aspects are substantial reali- 
ties or primal matters. Reconciliation of empiricism and ration- 
alism (41). Grades of matter; formless matter one pole and full- 
blown reality the other. The full-blown reality minus the form- 
less matter is may 4. the matrix of eternal ‘names and forms’ or 
principia individuationis (42). Realistic class is also admitted. 
Vedanta versus Nyaéya on Jati. Jati not co-ordinate 
with vyakti (43-44). Three (five) systems of eternal entities in 
Vedanta (45). 
Vedanta versus Hegel on the identity of contradictories . 
Vedantic discussions bearing on the law of contradiction 
(46-47). Does Vediantic Realism furnish a principle of 
change (48)? Sankara’s discussion of causality (49-51). 
Paficada$i on Sakti or power (52-53). 
Brahman and maya, by mutual reflection, become I$ - 
vara with para-prakrti,Sakti,apara-prakrti, (54). 
These the archetypal concretes of sattva,rajas,tamas (55). 
Para-prakrti is the active buddhi of the Lord (56). Dis- 
cussion of buddhi, ahamwkadra, manas. citta (57). 
Buddhi both the object and the (determinate but undifferentiated ) 
body of Isvara. Parallelism of sattva and tamas 
with Aristotle’s actuality and potentiality. Difference between 
Vedanta and Aristotle (58). 
Two forms of ISvara: trigunatita and stiiddha- 
sattva-upadhi. Their relation to Brahman (59-60). Dis- 
tinction between the higher god and the lower god misleading ( 61-62). 
Why Brahman becomes determinate, an illegitimate question 
( 63-64). Difficulties in the conception of Isvara as creator (65). 
A preliminary discussion of the relation between moral discipline 
and absolute consciousness (66) necessary to understand Isvara 
_(in His two aspects ) as the Absolute of both. the unity of the indivi- 
dual spirits (67). A further discussion of the progressive realisation 
of individual spirits necessary (68-69) to understand [vara as

=== PAGE 33 ===
ANALYSIS 9 
the Good, the Just, as exercising $akti or power, as in grace 
maturing the Karma of individual spirits (70). Stha- 
varatva,. the extreme punishment (70). Fate of sthivara 
bound up with jivan-mukta souls (72), through whom as 
deputies. να δ creates. Creation and dissolution. Trinity of 
Brahma, Visnu, MaheSvara (73-74). 
Onward course of creation (75). Discussion of the five 
Kosas and the three bodies of the individual. to introduce the 
universal emanations Hiranya-garbha. etc. (76-77). Ve- 
danta on the five primal matters; their relation to the elements 
of chemistry ; ‘ quintupling’ of these matters (78-81). 
Interpretation of two cosmogonic myths to illustrate the above 
( 82-83). 
CH. IIT. VEDANTIC LOGIC (SEC. 84-126). 
Vedantic truths said to be revealed: do they admit of proof? 
Necessity of revelation (84). Pcsition of manana in Ve- 
danta (85). Six pramadnas (86). Two kinds of knowledge (87). 
Pratyaksa:—Perception is Brahman; knowledge time- 
less . its empirical mode in time (88). Conditions of perception ex- 
plained (89-95). Perceptual judgment (96). Perception of object 
as object (97). Perception of the self (98). Discussion ‘of 
illusory perception (99-101 ) 
Anumiana:—Nyaya account.of svartha inference (102- 
103). Four Vedantic objections connected with European 
Logic (104-106). Major premise reached through positive in- 
stances (107). Number of the instances inessential (108). 
Nyaya versus Vedanta on parartha inference; deduction 
of Vedanta’s position from its position on svartha inference 
(109). The absolute syllogism after Hegel (110). 
Upamana (111). 
Agama:—How vakya is a pramana explained by the 
identity of thought and language (words, sentences. mantras) 
(112-115). Objection of N y 4ya to this identity (116). Vedanta 
on eternity of the Word (117). Sakti (meaning) of the Word 
like the ¢akti (power) of Ifvara (118). Two kinds of 
meaning (119-120). Conditions of valid vaikya (121). A sen- 
tence by itself induces belief (122).

=== PAGE 34 ===
10 STUDIES IN VEDANTISM 
Arthapatti connected with hypothesis in Inductive Logic 
(123). 
Anupalabdhi:—Abhaiva a percept but not the result 
of a perceptive process directed towards it (124). What is im- 
plicit perception from the point of view of the self? Anupalab- 
dhi a positive function of the mind (125). Discussion of the 
illusion of abhava (126).

=== PAGE 35 ===
CHAPTER I 
AN APPROACH THROUGH PSYCHOLOGY 
1. The psychology of waking, dream, and dreamless sleep 
constitutes the pivot of the Vedantic system and of certain 
other systems like the Yoga, which may be regarded as anciilary 
to it. It is to be regarded as a clear addition to ordinary psycho- 
logy, the importance of which is not a whit exaggerated if it is 
claimed that it recognises a new dimension of existence altogether . 
Its importance will be appreciated by connecting it with kindred 
Western speculations on the one hand, and with Vedantic 
speculations in Metaphysics on the other. 
2. What would be the empirical account of a dream? 
Physiological speculation on the point has hardly anything to 
offer except certain platitudes which do not touch the speciality of 
the phenomenon: and so the psychological exlIpanation alone is 
worth referring to here. When a man goes to sleep. images are 
roused in his mind, sometimes by sensory presentations , but most 
often with apparent spontaneity , although even in such cases the 
absence of an ideal suggestion, continuous with a sensory presen- 
tation, cannot be absolutely proved. In waking perceptions, illu- 
sions, and hallucinations, the ideational elements are generally 
copies of previous percepts (sometimes involving new construction 
also); but these do not appear at random, being attracted into 
definite grooves of suggestion by the presentative elements and by 
attention as determined by practical interests. In dreams, too, 
we have copies of waking percepts, but imaginative construction 
is here far freer, there being normally no restrictive and directive 
action of sensation on the one hand, and of connective attention 
on the other. Many events and combinations of events which 
would be at once deemed to be impossible waking life would not 
be questioned at all in a dream. In waking life, many associa- 
tions or constructions are ruled out, prevented from even appearing 
in consciousness, by certain beliefs determined by our practical 
necessities. Even sensations and percepts are occasionally so ruled 
out. At the same time, in waking life, there are different degrees 
of seriousness or concentration of attention on what directly sub- 
serves life ; there are stages of listlessness , play , aesthetic and philo-

=== PAGE 36 ===
12 STUDIES IN VEDANTISM 
sophic consciousness. So long, however, as the consciousness of 
a body is there we cannot ‘become a living soul’; the body al- 
ways demands a measure of attention, while outer stimuli are conti- 
nually stirring it up and starting ever-renewed trains of associa- 
tions. In dreams, the distractions of this ‘ heavy’ body are re- 
duced to a minimum, sometimes disappearing altogether ; the neces- 
sity of practical life is not so tyrannic, and hence there is unres- 
trained credulity. But why should there be a belief at all? Objecti- 
fication carries a naive belief with it, unless it is definitely can- 
tradicted by some other belief. The idea of the object is not 
known to be a mere idea, unless contradicted by some percep- 
tion or by a more vivid or coherent idea. 
3. We may conceive a stage of dream proper—there being 
transitional stages between waking and dreaming—where there are 
no sensations and the consciousness of the body is at a minimum. 
Here the object-consciousness must be purer than in the waking 
stage. i.e., freer from reference to body; the self, too, is not 
mere idea of body but is theseer of ideas cf. Drster drasta 
or seer of seeing). So in a dream, things appear to come in and 
go out without startling or surprising us: they are recognised as 
matters of course. Space and time tend to lose their reference 
to the body. and so violations of continuity occasion no surprise 
at all. There is no tyrannic continuous memory, no rigid de- 
mand for uniformity, no compunction for not being in a line 
with truth—a glorious life of thoughtless thoughtfulness . 
4. Does this account of a dream justify us in taking it to 
belong to a new dimension of psychical existence ? The continuous 
gradations from waking consciousness to dream proper need not 
preclude us from admitting such a new dimension. Dreams may 
be described as perceptions without sensation. Is there’ any dif- 
ference in kind between perception with sensation and perception 
without sensation? The question would roughly resolve itself 
into the old question about the existence of a qualitative difference 
between impression and idea. The differentiae of impression and 
idea that are ordinarily proposed are not really satisfactory. As 
to the criterion of vividness, it is altogether adventitious to know- 
ledge as knowledge; besides, ideas appear less vivid than sensa- 
tions only when they coexist, and that, too, not in all cases. 
The criterion of being affected by movement is unsatisfactory , for 
in dreams where we have admittedly nothing but ideas, objects

=== PAGE 37 ===
AN APPROACH THROUGH PSYCHOLOGY is 
are affected by our dream-movements; here, too, the test is use- 
ful only when impression and idea coexist. As to the other 
criterion, inner coherence, it may be pointed out that the in- 
coherence of a dream is not felt as such within the dream; be- 
sides , sensations as sensations have no coherence , and we may have 
incoherent perceptions riding roughshod over all our expectations. 
There is nothing left but the felt abruptness or given-ness ( inde- 
pendence of self would be going too far, as_ self-consciousness 
may not have been developed ) of the impression , as distinct from 
the freedom , the play-like easy , unquestioning movement of atten- 
tion in ideas and dreams. In framing to ourselves a difficult com- 
bination of ideas, in introspection, in the eftort to recollect, a 
resistance no doubt is offered by percepts or habits of thought 
generated by sense-experience ; but as the self prevails against it. 
the ideal functioning is felt to be free. the easiest to the self. 
5. This shows that sensation and idea are not co-ordinate in 
reality’ , and to overlook this is a fundamental vice of Empirical 
Psychology. The idea may unconsciously animate the sensation 
(perception is a ‘ presentative-representative’ cognition); but this 
unconscious working is absolutely different from its conscious 
existence. The conscious idea. while recognising itself to have 
been operative in the percept, absolutely disown its unconscious 
sensuous character; e.g., when an illusion is corrected by care- 
ful observation, the idea simulating a percept is known to be a 
mere idea, but the illusory percept vanishes altogether without 
caring to court a comparison with the true percept. Thus we 
have three distinct mental states throwing light on one another: 
(1) perception in which idea unconsciously works. (2) such per- 
ception coexisting with a conscious idea, where the idea is re- 
garded as inferior in reality to the percept, and (3) the pure idea. 
hardly ever realised in waking consciousness (except probably in 
the fluid transparency of the poet’s intuition. in spontaneous 
clairvoyance, or in the settled vision of the Yogin), to which 
the waking world would appear unsubstantial. The last state is 
one to which all have not access, and would be disbelieved al- 
together, were it not for the fact that we have a daily illustra- 
tion of its possibility in our dreams. In dreams, the ideas do 
not consciously remember the corresponding waking percepts: 
they are at once percepts. 
1 Because the one is free while the other is constrained or given.

=== PAGE 38 ===
14 STUDIES IN VEDANTISM 
6. Not that dream is truer than waking percept. Each is true 
within itself; but while ‘the former is daily sublated, the latter 
is sublated only under exceptional circumstances’ (Sankara). 
The truth of this or that waking percept may sometimes be denied 
in a dream as it may be denied in waking life itself; but dreams 
do not deny the truth of waking life as a whole, for they never 
doubt their own waking character. Waking, however, always 
denies the truth of dreams. 
7. We have already, however, found reason to believe that 
the dream-world is wider in possibility than the waking world. 
The dependence of waking perception on sensation shows its 
limitation. Sensation, far from being the final standard of truth. 
is by itself the farthest from the truth’; belief is easiest in self- 
consciousness. Internal perception is prior to external , logically 
if not chronologically. The sensation is felt to give us reality. 
only because the idea’ unconsciously animates it. The element 
of representation in perception is the element of interpretation or 
knowledge. But then it must be borne in mind that this un- 
conscious working of the idea is known only when we have come 
to be reflective or self-conscious. Even then the sense-conditioned 
consciousness informed with the idea is felt to be higher in point 
of truth than the mere idea set over against it. But that is be- 
cause practical attention or the self is not yet dissociated from 
the body; anything not directly ministering to the life of the 
body is taken to be unreal. With the development of the mind. 
the self and its interests come to be more and more dissociated 
from the body—we come to infer and deliberate and have abs- 
tract interests ; still, except in very rare cases, the imperious call 
of the body is not silenced, and the body-dissociated mental pro- 
cesses are still felt to be rational only when ministering to the 
bodily life, though it may be indirectly. A solemn, but often 
ineffective , protest is recorded by our moral. aesthetic, religious, 
and speculative aspirations, though they, too. sometimes appear 
to accept bribes of the emissaries of this body. 
8. Will is essentially a denial of the existing sense-order ; 
knowledge, too, by its very nature. is an emergence from the 
body, i.e., from sense-homogeneity. Yet both are ordinarily for 
the life of the body. But the moral will, on the one hand, and 
2 This seems to be written under Hegel’s influence. It is to be noted 
that the author completely outgrew this influence in his later years.

=== PAGE 39 ===
AN APPROACH THROUGH PSYCHOLOGY 15 
aesthetic intuition on the other (not to speak of other forms of 
absolute consciousness?) disown this slavery and affirm the inde- 
pendence of the idea. The body , however, does its best to ignore 
their protest. They are felt to be only aspirations for pure know- 
ledge, not knowledge; they tell us only that the body ought not 
to be the truth, though it unhappily seems to be the truth. The 
ineffectiveness of their protest is explained from our present point 
of view by the contrast felt between the sense-percept and the 
idca when they coexist, it being erroneously supposed that our 
ideas always coexist with some sense-percept. with the presenta- 
tion of the body at least. if no other presentation is forthcoming . 
That with mere idea, we may have what may be called a ‘ feeling 
of knowledge’. the consciousness of knowing as distinct from 
thinking or imagining . is brought out, however. in dreams. This 
explains the importance that is attached in Indian Philosophy to 
this unique psychological phenomenon. There is no other pheno- 
menon in our ordinary psychic life like it; even in hallucination, 
as has been recently pointed out, there is some real sense-objec- 
tive and some real peripheral excitation from within. 
9. Dreams are, however, illusory. An idea is felt to be true 
so long as it is not contradicted by sense-perception. For though 
sensations do not produce knowledge, they signalise the occasions , 
cosmically determined , when breaches are effected in the leaden 
walls of insensibility. when the idea, in fact, unconsciously 
follows the law of truth’. The ideal of knowledge is, however, 
attained when the idea freely or consciously follows law. without 
being drawn down to interpret a sensation. Dreams. no doubt. 
are illusory: but then if only we possessed ourselves in dreams ; 
if only we could exercise the control of attention over the riotous 
dance of the images which there comport themselves as percepts 
without sensations, if only. having cut away from the moorings 
of this oppressively constant presentation of this body, we could 
find secure anchorage in a freer. purer. more comprehensive 
self, we could assure ourselves of a far more complete vision 
of the truth than we could conceive ourselves to attain in this 
waking life. We could then transcend this space and time which 
3 i.e., consciousness umreferred to the body. 
4 Cp. Hegel.

=== PAGE 40 ===
16 STUDIES IN VEDANTISM 
have the body and the present moment as their points of re- 
ference , this space and time which coop us up and cabin us in; we 
could, then, not only intuitively perceive the distant, the past, 
and the future, take in at a glance what we have now to explore 
piecemeal—dimly , slowly . laboriously—, we could aspire to know 
noumenon , life, self. 
10. All this may be entertained as a hypothesis, if not as a 
demonstrated fact. That. however, it may not be deemed in- 
admissible even as hypothesis , its ‘ objective possibility ’ has to be 
exhibited by tracing its vera causa. There are three suppositions: 
(1) perception without sensation ; (2) the self-conscious knowledge 
of all space as one object. and of all time as one unfolded pano- 
rama; (3) the swooning into the realisation of noumenon, life. 
self. The verae causae respectively are (1) conscious dream. (2) 
self-conscious dream, and (3) dreamless sleep. That the conscious 
dream explains the possibility of perception without sensation has 
already been explained. The other two require elucidation. 
11. Most of our dreams are self-conscious. Here the self’s 
relation with the object is peculiarly different from its relation in 
waking life. In waking life, as has already been indicated. the 
object reports itself by a sensational shock; here, however. the 
object comes in and goes out unquestioned without startling us. 
Besides . here the self is, or seems at least to be. free from the 
body ; sometimes it even sees the body lying asleep; it is not 
located anywhere and yet it books at space. Violations of con- 
tinuity do not surprise it at all (section 3). though the objects 
are stili in space. This could be understood in the merely con- 
scious dream, where each isolated image. as it floats up. turns 
into a percept; but how can there be self-conscious knowledge of 
such spatial objects violating the laws of space-conntinuity , unless 
we suppose that the self sees here with the whole of space as one 
function? Similarly with time. Besides, here sceing is apparently 
creating (for here is no given abrupt sensation); the self seems 
to freely create its world , its space and time, its joys and sorrows. 
No doubt it only seems; really these creations are the images of 
waking percepts now freely accepted and so apparently created. 
12. But why should there be this or that specific combina- 
tion of images rather than any other? That implies the function- 
ing of certain synthetic ® concepts from behind, i.e. concepts on 
5 i.e., synthesising.

=== PAGE 41 ===
AN APPROACH THROUGH PSYCHOLOGY 17 
the sauic 1¢vel as the self®. We lave here to admit, therefore, a 
new level or ‘plane’ of consciousness, These synthetic concepts 
might have been generated by individual experience or inherited 
as the capitalised value of ancestral experience—anyway they are 
now timeless’ psychic forces ordering the distribution of the 
images. 
13. A similar question may be asked with regard to sense- 
experience also. The sensations have been described as_ the 
cosmically determined occasions on which knowledge is permitted 
to manifest itself from within. But why should the right inter- 
preting idea materialise itself on the occasion of ἃ sensation? 
There must be some correspondence hetween the life within that 
supplies the right idea and the life without that supplies the sen- 
sation. It reminds one of the objection sometimes taken to Kant’s 
doctrine of the forms that it does not explain why the manifold 
of intuition does not get into wrong forms. Dualism of subject 
and object has to be admitted. at least sc long as we conceive 
ourselves to be individuals: only this correspondence between 
them is mysterious. It will not do to say that the object not only 
gives the sensation hut also begets the association-traccs which 
bring the right idea to the interpretation of the sensation. For 
so long as we admit that to know anything is to assimilate it, 
the primum cognituim cannot be explained by the causality of 
the object. We must admit an idea behind all presentation: a 
regressus in infinitum has to be accepted. So why a person 
should have certain sense-experiences rather than any other can 
only be understood in ihe light of the principle that every 
man freely accepts. if not makes. his circumstances. Every man 
is born with the seed of all his future psycho-physical existence, 
with instincts for action and original dispositions for certain forms 
of cognition. How these themselves have been generated is an 
enquiry which will lead us away from our present topic. It will 
suffice here to indicate that the knowledge-seeds and the action- 
seeds are not absolutely distinct, and that it is a community of 
these Karma-seeds, as they might be called, of different persons, 
that gets manifested into this common phenomenal world. 
14, Can we rise in knowledge above these functioning con- 
cepts or Karma-seeds? In self-conscious dream, there is time, 
6 Because they are timeless. 
7 i..,, not having any specific time-location. 
3

=== PAGE 42 ===
18 STUDIES IN VEDANTISM 
though it is apparently created at every moment. But the hidden 
springs of these creations cannot themselves be in time. They 
are in timeless unity with the self. How, then, can knowledge 
transcend them? This. however, is shown to be possible by 
dreamless sleep or susupti as it is called. In this stage, the 
self, dissociated not only from the body but also from the mind’*, 
rests in itself. It is then immediately conscious of itself, not 
conscious of itself as returning to itself, in reflection. It is then 
identical with what Kant calls ‘transcendental unity of appercep- 
tion’; only it is then not the mere ‘fringe’ of determinate empiri- 
cal consciousness but is in complete isolation. It is not a mere 
thought, an unreal abstraction, but a concrete reality. 
15. Here we meet with an objection from ordinary psycho- 
logy. Admitting the existence of the self as an entity behind 
the mental states, one may hold that in dreamless sleep, the self 
is unconscious, not self-conscious. Let us dwell on the stock 
Vedantic argument on the point. When a man rises from 
dreamless sleep, he becomes aware that he had a blissful sleep 
during which he was conscious of nothing. This he knows 
directly from memory. Now memory is only of a presentation. 
Therefore the bliss and the consciousness of nothing must have 
been presented during the sleep. If it be objected that only the 
absence during sleep of disquiet and knowledge is inferred from 
a memory of the state before the sleep and the perception of 
the state after the sleep, it is asked in reply: can we infer any- 
thing, the Jike of which was never presented? If reasoning is 
only a manipulation of rarefied images, the images can have 
been derived only from percepts. But it may be urged that the 
negative concept, at any rate, could not have had any percept 
corresponding to it. and therefore one may justifiably hold the 
absence of knowledge and disquiet during sleep to have been 
inferred. To this it is replied that absence cannot be inferred, 
unless it be conceivable. The absence of knowledge cannot be 
referred to, unless the absence be the object of a direct conscious- 
ness of it during the absence. Like knowledge, the absence of 
knowledge cannot be known by external perception or any form 
of inference founded on it, but by internal perception or self- 
feeling. No inference can ever warrant us in attributing absence 
8 ‘mind’= empirical consciousness,

=== PAGE 43 ===
AN APPROACH THROUGH PSYCHOLOGY 19 
of consciousness to δὴν object. If the paradox were allowed, 
a psychic thing or absence of a psychic thing, if conceived, is 
actual: its esse is its concipi—a peculiarity of hypothesis in 
Psychology which deserves to be noticed. Not that the absence 
of determinate knowledge need be known explicitly during the 
absence ; one who is born blind is not conscious of not seeing. 
But if such a man comes to see, like Cheselden’s patient, he will 
have an explicit perception of the previous absence of seeing 
which will at the same time be a recognition of the absence as 
that implicitly cognised during the absence. 
16. If, then, the direct consciousness during the absence be 
granted, then the consciousness of the absence immediately after 
the absence, 1.6., immediately on waking, would be called 
memory rather than inference. Now what is the direct consci- 
ousness of the absence of knowledge and disquiet during deep 
sleep? It can only be the ‘undifferenced knowledge and bliss’ 
set over against negation. The mind or empirical consciousness 
lapses here altogether; we have pure consciousness against a 
‘dark ground’. pure consciousness of a blank objectivity’ or 
‘object in general’ (Kant). All sensation and all concrete image 
then lapse into a blank homogeneity. Through a right under- 
standing of this susupti state, we reach the conceptions of 
caitanya or the pure self. and of avidya or the primal 
blank which is rendered definite by the self; so that to say that 
the pure self is immediately conscious of itself in deep sleep is only 
to state a verbal proposition. 
17. The nature of the self, as pure consciousness, is often 
disputed, and the dispute turns on the way in which this 
Susupti is understood. It has been variously held against the 
foregoing view that in this state, the self is (1) non-existent, or 
(2) unconscious, or (3) both conscious and unconscious. All these 
views find their parallel in the views which have been held about 
self-consciousness. To know is to recognise: when the self first 
comes to know itself, it recognises itself. But recognition means 
a previous moment of self-forgetfulness. Now when the self for- 
got itself. was it non-existent or only non-intelligent? (1) If the 
esse of the self is its percipi, the unknown self would be the non- 
9 ie, of some object though not of any object in particular,

=== PAGE 44 ===
20 STUDIES IN VEDANTISM 
existent self. (2) But if the present self-consciousness be taken as 
a proof of the eternal existence of the self. then the self should 
be taken as sometimes unconscicus, sometimes conscious—uncon- 
scious when dissociated from the empirical mird. conscious when 
associated with it. (3) Or if self-consciousness means conscious- 
ness of the self as having been operative, not merely existent. in 
the consciousness preceding it (and giving the whole truth to it), 
then when the self forgot itself, it was both conscious and un- 
conscious. Finally, if the self, as it comes back to itself, feels 
that its self-alienated stage was utterly illusory, then it 1s not 
only eternally existent and consciously operative, but eternally 
self-conscious, too. 
18. The empiricist, of whom the dogmatic nihilist and the 
absolute sceptic are the logical descendants, holds the self before 
self-consciousness to be immediate negation. The abstract con- 
ceptualist holds it to be immediate position. and that essentially, 
even during self-consciousness, as to him “being cognised’ is 
adventitious to the being of an object. The Kantian takes the 
self before self-consciousness to have been immanently operative 
in consciousness; yet when the self comes back to itself in empi- 
τίς] self-consciousness, in recognising itself it still feels that 
it does not know its essential nature, for the same thing cannot be 
at once subject and object. The self, as it comes back, just gives 
a flash of recognition, but anon it shoots forward, by its inertia, as 
it were, in a spiral rather than in a circular orbit. The self cons- 
tantly aspires to catch itself and as constantly slips from itself. 
As long as self-consciousness is a process—and no determinate 
knowledge that is not a process is conceivable—it is thus a spiral 
motion, apparently beginningless and endless. The rapidly inter- 
mittent flashes of recognition appear to give a continuous line of 
light or a knowledge of the self, which is, however, only a 
‘paralogism of the pure reason’. The Hegelian takes the motion 
to be an eternal circular or perfect motion, consciousness before 
self-consciousness being only an arc of the circle setting up for 
itself, each minute arc itself a straight line; but when the circle is 
completed (i.e., when self-consciousness arises), the self recog- 
nises that these straight lines are only for the circle, that the circle 
is the truth that contains in itself the ideality of the straight lines. 
Here the Ved antist will, however, hold that the self at each point 
only illusorily fancies itself to be moving in a straight line; and

=== PAGE 45 ===
AN APPROACH THROUGH PSYCHOLOGY 21 
as long as it moves, it can never take in the entire circle at once: 
and so even when it recognises itself, the illusion does not com- 
pletely disappear. The blind impulse forward is real by reason 
of its very imperiousness ; the flashes of self-recognition appearing 
now occasionally, now frequently, and at last continuously, the 
self feels at once in triumph and in humility that it is moving in 
a spiral inwards towards the centre of light (the true self), though 
the centre is still infinitely remote, content only to have more and 
more light; and ever as it presses forward with accelerated speed. 
it takes the past dimness as due only to his limitation of ignorance, 
till behold, it has reached the centre of light itself where it quies- 
cently spins a circular motion. Who could have imagined that 
the spiral had the centre within a finite distance? This quiescent 
circular motion was all along the ideal of the process of know- 
ledge: this was the contentless aspiration towards the thing-in- 
itself, this the formless indefinable sense of the Beyond in all 
determinate knowledge. Nor was the circle of light. constituted 
by the flashes of self-recognition, ever becoming more and more 
refulgent, altogether a ‘paralogism’; for though the spread- 
out character of the process was false. the light was the reflection 
of this central self-manifesting light. Thus Vedanta _ recon- 
ciles Kant and Hegel by admitting the impossibility of the 
self being caught in a process of self-consciousness: and yet hold- 
‘ing the process to be a self-manifestation of the self. 
19. Does not, however, Hegel too admit that the self’s move- 
ment in a circle is illusorily self-alienated in consciousness and that 
it is self-contained in self-consciousness? Does not Vedanta 
admit that even at the centre, the self. though quiescent, is spinn- 
ing a circular process? The difference, as will be more fully 
explained afterwards. is that whereas Vedanta takes even this 
central motion to be the reflection of the self on the negation which 
falls beyond it, 1.6. to be absolutely free self-creation, Hegel 
takes this reflection on the negation to be the ultimate reality. 
Not that even Hegel takes it to be necessity or God’s given nature. 
No one is a more strenuous advocate of freedom: but then free- 
dom has two sides, the quiescence of self beyond will and its 
quiescence in pure will. The former is Vedantic Brahman, 
the latter is Vedantic ISvara. a point to be cleared up later 
on. The latter is also Hegel’s Absolute Idea, to which will and 
intellect are the same.

=== PAGE 46 ===
22 STUDIES IN VEDANTISM 
20. This difference between Hegel and Vedanta is connected 
with a fundamental difference regarding the conception of self be- 
tween Kant’s synthetic unity of apperception and the Vedantic 
atman or caitanya. They are generally regarded as the 
same, and in fact there is a good deal of similarity between them. 
Kant’s self, though transcending empirical consciousness, is indi- 
vidualised in a sense, for it is this which becomes practical as will, 
emerging as a postulate directly implied by morality. Even if 
we do not allow the conclusions of the practical reason to preju- 
dice those of pure reason, even if we take the self to be the form- 
less prefix of all cognition, transcending even the categories and 
forms through which it works in knowledge. we have yet to admit 
that in Kant, this self is for knowledge of the thing-in-itself, is 
relative to a constant something, has the thing-in-itself constantly 
before it; its very nature is aspiring to know the thing-in-itself, 
the ‘object-in-general’ being the obverse of this aspiration, the 
blank canvas on which it wants to have the thing-in-itself pictured 
(what, however, is never accomplished). So whether individualis- 
ed or not. it is still agent, the form of knowing rather than of 
knowledge. In Vedanta. however, the self is the breath of 
this knowledge, the light of consciousness, somcthing eternally ac- 
complished rather than being accomplished. The accomplishing 
self cannot be said to have finally triumphed over empiricism or 
absolute scepticism. This seems to be the trend of Spencer’s 
views also. He would not admit the current argument against 
absolute scepticism, that it is proving the falsity of reason by 
reason ; that, he would say, at best shows that within the sphere 
of determinate cognition, the self (or rather the dominating cohe- 
sion of the ideas of subject and object) is the highest truth; but 
then this cognition itself tells us that it is a cohesion generated 
by experience. and that, therefore, we cannot pronounce it to be 
absolutely necessary. Who knows that even this cohesion may 
not break down with further experience? That it cannot be 
conceived is no argument, for the moment something is said to 
be inconceivable, it is pronounced to be conceivable by implica- 
tion. The subject of the proposition, ‘this cannot be conceived’ 
is in fact a conceived inconceivability. ‘This is only a negative 
conceivability, however. It is only an ‘indefinable sense of the 
Beyond’, mere matter of knowledge without positive form. In 
the very humility of accepting absolute scepticism as a possible

=== PAGE 47 ===
AN APPROACH THROUGH PSYCHOLOGY 43 
view, there is the transcendence of it, in which, however, there 
is no differenced self to enjoy the triumph. 
21. Hegel does not admit the possibility of an absolute scep- 
ticism impugning the reality of the self or reason, and therefore 
does not recognise an undifferenced consciousness. Kant’s pro- 
nouncements are rather uncertain on the point; but then his ‘Re- 
futation of Idealism’ may be taken as founded essentially on the 
recognition of a form of cognition other than the determinate. 
Much has been made, ever since Schopenhauer’s unfortunate 
pronouncement on the point, of the so-called inconsequence in 
Kant of taking causality to be a category of the self and yet 
riding out on this category beyond the self to the thing-in-itself 
as the cause of our sensations. Kant, it should be remembered, 
expressly points out a fundamental difference in applicability be- 
tween the dynamical and the mathematical categories. The 
difference comes out again in the different solutions he has given 
of the first two cosmological antinomies on the one hand and 
the last two on the other. The mathematical categories have 
no reference except to phenomena in space and time, but the 
dynamical categories while referring to phenomena refer essen- 
tially beyond them to the free and the self-existent, although 
this reference cannot be concreted by intuition. The thing-in- 
itself in Kant is not, however, to be confounded with his noumena 
or Ideas of the Reason, which are only the reason-pictures of 
the essentially unknowable. The self, as causality imbedded in 
all determinate cognition, asks for the cause of itself. Experience 
demands its own cause; the causal aspiration is like a flame in- 
forming the fuel of experience and yet freely existing by itself. 
This demand of the self is not satisfied by the idea of the reason, 
for that is only the way in which the cause of the self, i.e., 
of causality, i.e., of experience, would be known, if it could 
be known at all. This difficulty with regard to causality applies 
more or less to the whole of the understanding, 1.6., the self as 
knowing objects; for even when the self recognises itself, it is 
puzzled to find itself unconsciously informing objects. It asks 
‘Why did I know object at all?’, just as it might ask in another 
connexion, ‘Why did I sin at all?. It feels the ground insecure 
beneath its feet. So Spencer finds that the cohesion within our 
knowledge of subject and object demands itself an object beyond 
knowledge, the Unknowable, from both the points, object-cons-

=== PAGE 48 ===
24 STUDIES IN VEDANTISM 
ciousness and subject-consciousness. Now this demand. alike in 
Kant and in Spencer, is indeterminate but none the less real. 
22. Neither Kant nor Spencer has brought out in full the 
implications of this indeterminate consciousness. They have not 
made it clear whether it is a subjective process only or the abso- 
lute reality. As indeterminate, can it be said to be different from 
the thing-in-itself or the Unknowable? It seems to have equal 
relations with the self and the Unknowable. The self itself be- 
comes real in it. Jt is the undifferenced consciousness that plays 
on all determinate cognition. Beyond the will. there is the self- 
affirmation of the intellect; but beyond this self-affirming pulsa- 
tion. there is the pure undifterenced self or Caitanya. The 
thing-in-itself cannot be said to be different from this undif- 
ferenced Caitanya, cannot be said to be its reference. Yet 
it is significant that neither Kant nor Spencer calls this un- 
differenced sclf-doubting consciousness the self or the subject. 
This vacillation on their part is explained by the fact that when 
this consciousness and the determinate consciousness (which is 
always accompanied by the former) coexist, the former, though 
felt to give all the reality that the latter has, still appears to be 
a formless shadow in comparison with the latter which is in- 
formed by it. It is in fact the old difficulty about the percept 
and idea reappearing on a higher plane. Schelling and Hegel dis- 
regarded the contrast and imagined they found, in the aesthetic and 
religious consciousness especially, the consciousness negating indi- 
viduality to be much more real than determinate experience. Kant, 
however, would have argued against them that these coloured con- 
ciousnesses, the aesthetic and the religious, can never warrant us 
in taking the de-individualised consciousness as more than a mere 
aspiration, i.e.. as knowledge, as the absolute self, as an eter- 
nally accomplished cognition. If Hegel argues that his Absolute 
Idea is not accomplished only—for then there would be no 
difference between him and Schelling--but that it is eternally 
accomplishing itself also, that it eternally mediates itself through 
that absolute consciousness which denies individuality, it is re- 
plied that this, too, is only thought, only the shadowy fringe of 
determinate consciousness. 
23. It may, accordingly, be asked : does not this argument of 
a Kantian against Schelling and Hegel press against Vedanta 
too? Knowledge, according to Vedanta, is not only different

=== PAGE 49 ===
AN APPROACH THROUGH PSYCHOLOGY 25 
from the knowing activity. it cannot even be described as the 
(contingent) result of the activity. Its essential character is its 
eternity, its self-manifestation (Svayam-prakasatva), The 
mental mode, however, in which knowledge manifests itself is con- 
tingent, being the result of mental activity. So, too, in the case of 
such knowledge as leads to moksa or ‘libtration’, there is first a 
hearing of the Scriptural texts, a reflecting on them, a refutation 
of doubts, and a final fixing of the mind on the texts—all this 
repeated times without number, till the transparency of the mind 
is secured. and then knowledge shines through and is recognised 
to have been eternally complete. So, too, the Mokga that is 
reached is taken to be Brahman itself, ‘unchangingly eternal’ 
(Kitasthanitya): it is not only quiescence itself: as just 
passing into it, one feels all the past strife’? after it to have 
been utterly illusory, and, what would sound paradoxical, the 
feeling of illusion itself lapses. there being nothing left but the 
self shining by itself. Of knowledge, not of Brahman only, 
but of any object. the object is not the cause in any sense. The 
knowledge. as it shines forth, is felt to shine as it were in free 
grace. So neither the activity of the self nor the activity of the 
object can be said to be a means to it; as Sankara charac- 
teristically declares there is no claim to knowledge. All this is 
expressed in another way by saying that perception’’ as an 
(apparently) processless accomplished cognition is Brahman or 
the self itself—-of course in the murky atmosphere of sensation 
which, however, is only cur limitation. Yet so long as we seek 
to know this self, this breath of knowledge, as a determinate 
object, it necessarily eludes our grasp. It is only to be charac- 
terised as neti neti. ‘not that.’ ‘not that’. 
24. Yet is not this suicidal, one might ask. to call this breath 
of knowledge the absolute self and yet to deny ifs positive con- 
ceivability? One fecls as if the triumph gained over absolute 
scepticism was more imaginary than real, only a fond hope, not 
an accomplished reality. But here Vedanta points out that as 
the objective possibility of ‘perception without sensation’ and of 
knowledge of noumenon was demonstrated by dream and dreamless 
sleep, so the objective possibility (which is here indistinguishable 
10 ie. striving. 
11 See Sec. 88. 
4

=== PAGE 50 ===
26 STUDIES IN VEDANTISM 
from actuality) of this undifferenced consciousness of the absolute 
lies in a concrete psychological state called the turiya or 
samadhi state where this consciousness is isolated and is not 
a mere fringe of determinate consciousness. 
25. The discussion of susupti or dreamless sleep has 
thus brought us over to the consideration of this samadhi or 
ecstatic consciousncss. Waking, dream, and dreamless sleep are 
intelligible facts easily performing the role of vere cause, but 
this samadhi seems to explain obscurum per obscurius. It 
accordingly requires an elucidation. In the susupti_ state, 
the mind is dissociated wholly from the self which is then in 
the immediately conscious attitude. It is conscious, but conscious 
of a blank only. It has then the direct cognition of the absence 
of specific cognition, the consciousness of a positive nothing, and 
hence it flashes back on itself. Jt is the light flashing in circu: 
mambient gloom, revealing nothing but the gloom. The susupti 
state. however, gives the possibility only but not the actuality of 
the knowledge of noumena; the self does not here swoon into 
the knowledge of noumena. Like the dream-state, it is a state 
in which the self has no control over itself. not a state to which 
the self rises by a continuous effort. So if we could control our- 
selves in this state, we could promise ourselves the attainment of 
a far more potent and comprehensive species of knowledge than 
we could attain even in the actualised dream-state. The progress 
of knowledge in the waking state might be conceived to be in a 
line stretching away from us to infinity, and the end 1s the 
knowledge of all finite phenomena in their relations to one ano. 
ther. The progress of knowledge in the actualised dream-state as 
distinct from the passive uncontrolled state, is in infinity, though 
the knowledge is still phenomenal; the end here is the knowledge 
of the infinite of phenomenon getting determined into finites. 
The progress of knowledge in the actualised susupti-state is 
from infinite to infinite and not phenomenal. The phenomenal 
infinite is turned by noumenal screws which are fixed like the 
axle of a revolving wheel. We may distinguish three stages here 
(1) the objective possibility of the self being isolated in susu- 
pti, (2) the actualised but determinate self-isolation in what 
has been called savikalpa-samadhi or determinate ecstasy, 
(3) the actualised indeterminate self-isolation in nirvikalpa- 
samadhi or indeterminate ecstasy. These stages are often not

=== PAGE 51 ===
AN APPROACH] THROUGH PSYCHOLOGY 27 
distinguished, especially in earlier Vedantic literature. They 
are all absolute stages where the sense of duality is non-existent. 
26. Now what is the difference between susupti and 
savikalpa-samadhi? The difference, as ordinarily given, 
is that in the former the (empirical) mind with all its modes 
lapses altogether, whereas in the latter it does not lapse but only 
gets concentrated into one absolute irrelative mode which thus 
becomes actualised in the highest degree. The one represents 
the greatest dispersion'* of attention, the cther its utmost concen- 
tration. In both, the consciousness of duality lapses; in both, the 
self enjoys undiffcrenced bliss; in both, the timeless seeds of 
knowledge and action (vidya-karma) persist, accounting 
for the recognition of the past on awaking from them. But 
whereas on awaking from susupti. the self remembers that 
it was in the attitude of knowing object though the object was 
there a blank. on rising from samadhi it ought to remember 
it was the object in that state and not in the object-knowing 
attitude at all. In the former, the self as always limited was 
simply isolated: in the latter, it burst its bonds, destroyed the 
barrier between subject and object. and became the absolute. 
27. The ecstasy. far from being unconsciousness or bare 
consciousness, is supra-consciousness. If Hegel's ‘speculative con- 
sciousness’ or ‘notion’ be the truth of discursive understanding, 
this intellectual or ecstatic intuition of Vedanta is the truth of 
the speculative consciousness. If Hegel's thought is concrete and 
creative, it is not so as thought but as reality or being, 1.e., as 
ecstatic identity of thought and being. 
28. The method of attaining this ecstasy is not the method 
of scientific investigation. A phenomenon has not only a rela- 
tional aspect but also an intrinsic aesthetic aspect merging into a 
mystic aspect. The former aspect is caught by our discursive reason, 
the Jatter by imagimation which is in fact intuitive reason. Here, 
too, as in the case of the moral intuition, it has been objected 
that the notions reached through this imagination are “heuristic 
rather than determinative” (Kant). But the consideration of the 
dream-state has already demonsirated the possibility of these 
notions being isolated and so turned into eternal percepts. This 
12 Because there is no determinate object to which the attention may 
be directed.

=== PAGE 52 ===
28 STUDIES IN VEDANTISM 
imaginative isolation is effected by prolonged attention. Discur- 
sive thought about the relations of an object may no doubt help 
in this imaginative isolation, for it means a detaining of the as- 
pects of the object in the mind, an oscillation of the mind round 
ft, though it may not always be followed by a definite settling of 
the mind on it. Generally the mind buzzes round an object, and 
then moves on to another and then returns to it: and thus if mak- 
ing progress at all, it moves in wider and more complicated figures, 
but still never effectually settles on any object. While science or 
philosophy is thus ever and anon moving in its figures, with or 
without a consciousness of the whole, one quite loses sight of 
the other discipline, viz., that of contemplating an individual 
object, of getting glued down to it, of sinking into the heart of 
jt, by suppressing within us the urgency of distracting desires 
and the subtle caprices of thought, and by tranquilising the sur- 
face of the mind while holding before it a symbol of the object 
we are secking to know, instead of struggling to catch the object 
with a self-stultifying eagerness. 
29. There are different grades of noumena (devata) which 
the self may realise in ecstasy. From the ccstatic intuition of 
all other determinate objects, there is waking; but there is no 
waking from the ecstatic intuition of God, for the simple reason 
that so long as there is limitation or the slightest trace of in- 
dividuality, there can be no intuition of this Infinite Determina- 
tion, no becoming infinite. This is the highest stage of savi- 
kalpa-samadhi. The mind-capsule of the self, persisting 
in all such samadhi, and ever expanding, reaches here its 
utmost tension and utmost tenuity. This perfectly transparent 
envelope still constitutes the determinateness of God as ISvara. 
He is the actualised ‘Ideal of Pure Reason’ of Kant, the ‘Absolute 
Idea’ of Hegel, self-realised not in thought but in ecstasy. Al- 
though, said Kant, this is the most adequate reason-picture of 
the thing-in-itself, the thing-in-itself is the real, negating even 
this picture; of the thing-in-itself, as Spencer would have put it, 
there is only an indeterminate consciousness, an ‘ indefinable 
sense’. Vedanta’s addition to this is the suggestion that both 
the reason-picture and the indeterminate consciousness are capable 
of being isolated and actualised in the concrete states, savi- 
kalpa-samadhi (intuition of determinate noumena), and 
nirvikalpa-samadhi (intuition of the reality transcending

=== PAGE 53 ===
AN APPRGACH THROUGH PSYCHOLOGY 29 
all determinateness). The latter is undifferenced not only in the 
sense that the consciousness of duality is absent, as it is even 
in susupti, not only in the sense that the unconscious ring 
of the Unknown constituting the limitation of all noumena lower 
than God is removed, as it may be in Savikalpa-sama- 
dhi, but also in the sense that even the consciousness of this 
removal is absent. This is the highest stage, this is the truth, 
this is Brahman. . 
30. Waking. dream. dreamless sleep, and ecstasy with the 
intermediate stages constitute. then. a mew dimension of the 
mind. This is not only ὦ dimension of the mind but the one 
dimension of existence in which even the deepest of all distinc- 
tions, viz.. that between the subject and object. has place. 
The ordinarily conceived duality between them gives place in 
Vedanta to the conception of a gradation of existences. one 
pole of which is the lowest waking stage in which the self com- 
pletely forgets itself, the stage of the mere object. and the other 
pole, the ecstatic stage in which the self not only denies the 
existence of everything else but denies the denial itself, the stage 
of the pure subject. The gradation is not eternally spread out: 
the samadhi state is not only a stage among stages, it is the 
truth of the other stages. So, too, in the series, each stage is the 
truth of the preceding stage. The gradation between subject and 
object is also the gradation between truth and untruth, between 
good and evil. The self, as identified with any stage, feels the 
stage below it to be illusory; thus there is a reconciliation between 
the absolute distinction of truth and untruth on the one hand, 
and the continuous gradations of truth on the other. The final 
duality of Brahman and Avidy ἃ (illusion) which at the same 
time is no duality of positives, 1s the exemplar of the relation 
between truth and untruth. 
31. It remains to recogmise the fact that each stage is not 
only present in its isolation but also unconsciously informs the 
lower stage. In fact on the waking plane we can trace the pro- 
jections of all the other planes. Psychology recognises the stages, 
perception, imagination (reproductive and productive), thought 
(understanding) with the explicit consciousness of subject and 
object, and the indefinable consciousness of the beyond (Spencer). 
Now the last three, as we have pointed out, might be regarded as 
the projections of dream, dreamless sleep, and ecstasy on the

=== PAGE 54 ===
30 STUDIES IN VEDANTISM 
waking plane. Of these, the earlier stages adumbrate the later, 
and the later react on the earlier. This is the empirical counter- 
part of Kant’s apriori psychology. In the perception of object, 
there is the given matter of the sensations, fitted, partly as re- 
produced ideas, into the forms of space and time (generated, it 
may be, out of ideas; this time again shooting forth the rays of 
productive imagination, the schemata, to touch the categories 
which are the eyes of the self or the synthetic unity of apperception: 
this self all the while feels the pressure of the thing-in-itself and 
so thinks the object under the form of infinity, i.e., in relation 
to the infinite world, to the subject, and the ens realissimum, still 
failing, however, to catch the thing-in-itself and having only a 
contentless aspiration towards it. Vedantism finds the con- 
cretes of these apriori elements which all operate in waking per- 
ception, in the distinguishable internal characters of the several 
stages, waking, dreaming. etc. The general correspondence be- 
tween the Vedantic stages and the Kantian elements has 
been sufficiently made out; a more detailed correspondence can 
be exhibited only after a modified presentation of Kantianism. 
This, however, space will not permit.

=== PAGE 55 ===
CHAPTER II 
Vedantic Metaphysics 
32. The position of the pure subject and the material object in 
the Vedantic system has been indicated. ‘The primary duality 
of self and negation, which is no duality of positives, has been 
found to transfigure every stage of existence. As a consequence 
of this unconscious transfiguration, each stage in the series, 
waking, dream, etc., in its unconscious form, becomes co-ordinate 
with the lower stage. This is particularly apparent in the waking 
stage whcre the distinctions among the several aspects of existence. 
adhyitma, adhibhita, adhideva. adhiloka, etc.. come 
out explicitly as co-ordinate with each other. These distinctions 
are intelligible only in the light of a metaphysical view which is 
dimly traceable in the Upanisads and which can hardly be said 
to have been completely brought out even by the commentators 
The exposition of it, to be attempted presently, would therefore 
require to be justified by an elaborate discussion of all passages in 
the Upanisads which lend colour to it. For the present it is 
set forth only as a hypothesis. 
33. In the waking stage, the sentient body is the adhyatma 
Or subjective aspect, and the objects of sense-experience consti- 
tute the adhibtta or objective aspect. They are so distinct 
here that language is strained in calling them aspects of the same 
thing. But they are related to one another. The self as identified 
with the body takes the object to be .‘useful’, to be subservient 
to its pleasure and pain. The experience of the object rouses 
desire, desire again begets experience—a restless whirl of relation. 
In the aesthetic consciousness, however, such as is roused in rapt 
contemplation or upasana, one rises to a universal standpoint 
from which is witnessed the identity of the ditkerent sentient ele- 
ments of the body with the different aspects of the object. The 
restless relations, the attractions and repulsions between the body 
and the object, are then felt to be tllusory differentiations of quies- 
cent unities. The eye and the visible aspect of things, for example. 
constitute a unity. The Upanisads bristle with aesthetic in- 
tuitions of such unities, ranging from the most profound to the 
most superficial, viewed as devatas or objects for upasania.

=== PAGE 56 ===
32 STUDIES IN VEDANTISM 
This Ὁ Ρ ἃ 8 ἃ ἢ consists in a continuous direction of the attention 
to an aesthetic symbol revealed by the $astras,i.e., by some 
seer. The attitude in it is quite the reverse of the attitude of that 
cheap rationalism which makes a parade of its independence of 
authority ; the existence of the devata or the aspect of the object 
worshipped may not have been proved by reason or may not have 
at once appealed to one’s leaden aesthetic sensibility, but through 
the will to believe or ¢raddha. through prolonged contempla- 
tion, the de vata may be seen to be gradually shining out. 
34. The adhideva aspect is to be understood in relation 
to the adhiloka aspect, which requires an elucidation. Every 
devata demands a loka. _ Psychologically put, an absolute 
unity, to be real, must be not only thought but realised in some 
sort of intuition. In aesthetic (visual) intuition, for example, 
we realise a devata, like the sun, the unity of secing and the 
visible world. Now as here the realised object ceases to be an 
object and gets manifested as the absolute identity that it eternally 
was, though unrecognised because of the individual’s limitations, 
so the intuition, too, is divested of its merely subjective aspect and 
appears as an eternal shining world (div) with which the limited 
subject is raised to identity. The distinction between the subject 
and object in ordinary knowledge appears in the absolute sphere 
as a distinction between loka and devat ἃ. Only in ordinary 
knowledge, the subject takes the lead, whereas here the devata 
which corresponds to the object. is the higher reality. What is 
from the lower standpoint my intuition of an object is from the 
higher standpoint, a devata shining, revealing himself in a 
loka. 
35. It may be urged, however, that the distinction between 
subject and object is altogether annulled ir the absolute sphere 
and therefore ἃ devata must be conceived to shine by itself. 
The demand for a locus for such intelligible entities springs from 
a feebleness of the mind which will have sensuous symbols where 
it ought to entertain pure concepts of the reason; it springs in 
fact from that hypostasising tendency with which Plato has been 
charged with regard to his Ideas. 
36. To this it is replied that an existence that is nowhere 15 
unintelligible and that the demand for a locus even in the sensuous 
sphere springs from a necessity of the reason. The locus of an 
extended object involves the conception of the attribute of

=== PAGE 57 ===
VEDANTIC METAPHYSICS. 33 
extension (which is nothing but the whole of space) being in space. 
The sensuous conception of an cbject in space would thus be 
utterly unintelligible unless a relation be conceived to be dual— 
a being and a process—the being transcending the process and 
yet resting on the process. 
37. This necessity of the reason applies not only to such a 
sensuous relation, it applies to the highest relation, the relation of 
subject and object. To Absolute Idealism, the Self is the absolute 
identity of subject and object. It is self-relation. the being and 
the relation being here identical; and so far it is self-existent, it 
might be deemed absurd to demand any locus or external relation. 
To this, Vedanta will reply that such an absolute or irrelative 
reality is, or is realisable only in, an ecstatic consciousness (which 
Hegel does not admit) and that to us who have not reached it, 
who only think of it, this has to be thought of as resting on the 
relation to an individual. To ecstatic consciousness, such relation 
is not; but mere thought has to postulate a dual absolute-—the 
absolute for the absolute consciousness as resting on the absolute 
for the individual, the unknowable absolute on the Knowable ab- 
solute. The self that cxcludes the obiect as absolute negation 15 
at once the same as and higher than the self that has the negation 
within it as a moment. Jf the self be but relation,’ as Hegel 
takes it, it must be taken to depend on the nature or the limitation 
οἱ the terms of the relation; even in the self-relation of the self, 
the selves that arc reluted to each other are bounded by negation'* 
and hence their relution cannot be wholly free. If it be said that 
the relation is prior in reality, that it 1s the universal which freely 
particularises itself, it is replied that such a particularising is in- 
explicable in the last resort and thercfore the universal that is in 
and through particulars is a fact to be accepted, not a free func- 
tion of the reason. The last principle of philosophy for us must 
be a necessity of the reason founded on a given fact, though the 
aspiration of philosophy must ever be to reach a principle that is 
wholly rational. Brahman, the self-existent, must therefore be 
conceived by us to rest on His own glory (sve mahimni 
tisthati). So lower down, every devata is to be conceived 
to be in a loka. 
1 Of identity of subject and object. Sce above. 
14_.Because ‘nature’ =limitation=negation. 
9

=== PAGE 58 ===
34 STUDIES IN VEDANTISM 
38. The necessity of the several aspects. adhyatma, etc. 
has been vindicated at what might appcar to be a disproportionate 
length, were it not for the fact that these are just the conceptions 
which require to be raised above the mythologic region in which 
they are supposed to ve. Given a loka or intuition-ground, we 
have agains: it a devata or an absolute unity of subject and 
object. A concrete intuition-medium, a Platonic heaven in neces- 
sary to ensure to these dc vatds or Ideas reality, ἴὰ will not do 
to say that they exist in thought or reason: that appears from the 
waking standpoint to be too thin to support reality. 
39. The doctrine of adhyatma. etc., is thus capable of 
being affiliated on Absolute Idealism. as modified by Vedantic 
transcendentalism. The devatis have the character of absolute 
identitics but do they resemble the Platonic ideas in being unt- 
versalia ante rem? Is the Vedantic view one of (concep- 
tual) realism? The fact that Schopenhauer’s view finds room for 
the eternal ideas, the grades of the obicctification of the will, 
encourages us to look forward to something like them in Ve- 
dinta. 
40. A devata is differentiated transversely’? into adhy- 
atma and adhibhita, but is it also longitudinally’® differen- 
tiated into particular individuals? It would appear to be so, for 
a devata like the sun is suid to be the unity of the senscs of 
sight supposed to be severally possessed by different persons and 
of the visible aspects of things.” There is an instructive difference 
in this respect between Vedanta and Sankhya; according to 
the latter, each sensc. as sense, i.c , as adhyatma., is one, and 
different souls partake (by icflection) of this one sense; but accord- 
ing to the former, a scnse as sense is many, being different in 
different individuals. but then these many are only the illusory 
differentiations of one devata which corresponds to the parti- 
cular sense. (The difference is explained by the SAnkhya view 
that the individual soul is real and that there is no such thing as 
one cosmic illusion but only individual illusions of separate 
eyes, separate minds. ctc., there being one real prakrti which 
eternally and really cvolves into mahat, etc, including the arche- 
typal senses. The Vedantic vicw is that this prakrti is but 
May ἃ or cosmic illusion, and that therefore not only the indivi- 
15 ie. element-wise or aspect-wise. 
16 ie. as recurrent.

=== PAGE 59 ===
VEDANTIC METAPHYSICS. 35 
dual illusions but also the archetypal senses and the correlated 
primal matters are but its differentiations). In any case, the many 
particular senses of sight and the many visible aspects of things 
are said to find their unity in the Sun-deity. 
41. But still this would be aspect-realism rather than true 
class-realism. The aspects. visibility. audibility, etc, have their 
Ideas. concrete basal devatas as they might be called; but are 
not these only superficial aspects of things? What of the natural 
kinds like man. gold, οἷς.) Have not they, too. their Ideas? Ve- 
danta, while admitting that not only the class but every indivi- 
dual has got its eternal ‘name and form’ (nima-riipa) will 
demur at first to an implication of the objection. These sense- 
aspects in Vedinta are the primal matters, the absolutes of the 
senses, hearing. touch, sight, taste. and smell. Thev constitute no 
superficial aspect but the central substance, and ‘names and forms’ 
are but the illusory differentiations of this substance. When, by 
means like upasani, we have risen to the absolute conscious- 
ness in the waking state, these external sensuous aspects are 
viewed as the basal devatas (they themselves are the illusory 
differentiations of still higher, more substantial realities, as we 
shall see presently): they are viewed as the substance (relatively 
speaking) of the object of which the form (taken in its widest 
sense) is only the manifestation or illusory differentiation. Within 
the form. there are again relations of matter and form, for each 
stage of the form is matter im relation to a further differentiation 
of it. Now each of the stages is capable of being actualised into 
devatas by ecstatic contemplation. Now when a rationalist 
takes the sensation to be lapsed thought or thought become uncons- 
cious, and when an empiricist holds that our thoughts are only 
the complex manufactures out of sense-material, by themselves, 
only illusory refinements and useful only in reference to sense-reality, 
their antagonism is transcended by the Ved intist who reinstates 
both by pointing out that without an absolute intuition-continuum, 
the thought cannot be real and that the devatda is therefore the 
sense reality. divested of its limitation of unconsciousness. 
42. These devatas again have an order among them—an 
order really of emanation but capable also of being viewed as of 
evolution from the human standpoint—the absolutely formless in- 
determinate matter being one pole, and the full-blown waking 
reality the other pole. We may notice two orders of differences,

=== PAGE 60 ===
36 STUDIES IN VEDANTISM 
the one comprising the several grades of matter, the other com- 
prising the forms as manifested in each grade. Yet the grades 
themselves are formed or determinate matter. The same (formless) 
matter persists through all the grades in all the forms; so, too, each 
formed matter persists in its differentiations in the grades below it, 
the grades corresponding to dreamless sleep, dream, etc., the succes- 
sive materialisations of the same reality. This then is the dif- 
ference between ordinary realism and Vedantic realism; the 
Ideas are not only concrete universals but substantial matters of dif- 
ferent grades from the pure subject to the grossest material object. 
The pure subject is the formless matter, the sole reality, the truth 
of the grades of materialisation, and of all the determinate objects 
therein. The full-blown reality minus this formless matter is 
absolute negation. the very principle of illusion. Yet what are 
the multitudinous ‘names and forms’ of this full-bloom reality? 
These empty husks of reality are not reality: but they get filled 
in with the formless matter. Why does the reality enter these 
unreal forms? It shows that these forms are neither real nor 
unreal. Such a contradictory thing can only be the principle of 
illusion; it is darkness only that can be at once revealed and 
destroyed by light. This is the famous principle of Maya. which 
is one yet manifold. the matrix of all ‘names and forms.’ These, 
too. must be eternal, coeternal with the pure subject. Yet this 
does not necessarily argue a despair of explanation. Of the forms 
which constitute individuality, no explanation is possible except 
that illusion is at its root. No universal can exhaust the infinite 
variety of the individual. If even we could trace a consecutive 
differentiation from the highest universal downwards, each step 
of the differentiation would be unintelligible. It 1s the very 
essence of differentiation to escape the universal. To recognise 
the necessity of this unknowability is to recognise the principle 
of maya. 
43. Not that universals among these shadowy names and 
forms, concatenating them. are unknown in Vedanta. The rea- 
listic j4ti or universal is admitted both in Ny4aya and Ve- 
danta, though the latter emphatically disclaims the eternal 
jati of the former. According to Nyaya, this jati is an 
eternal reality inhering in the vyakti or individual things and 
is eternally connected with it. Vedanta denies both its eternal 
reality and its being co-ordinate with individual things. As has

=== PAGE 61 ===
VEDANTIC METAPHYSICS. 37 
been already indicated, to Vedanta nothing is an eternal reality 
except the pure self. As to the cther point. if an individual and 
its j4ti be taken to be distinct (and co-ordinate in reality), they 
cannot be unified in any way. The inherence. according to 
Vedanta, is a fiction. (This recalls the famous criticism of the 
Platonic doctrine of Ideas by Aristotle in his Nicomachean 
Ethics). In ‘A is B’, if B the concept is distinct from A, their 
copular relation is a fiction; for it is asked, what connects A or 
B with the relation? If another relation, what connects that 
with its members? And so there is a regress to infinity. Once 
you set up two utterly distinct things. you cannot bridge over 
the gulf: only you may pronounce the effort to combine to be 
itself illusory. Without an admission of idcntity-in-difference, not 
only this inherence. but also any kind of connexion even space 
connexion, would be inconceivable. What vicw. then, does Ve- 
danta itself hold? It understands the j4ti not as the denota- 
tional real but as the connotational real, not as co-ordinate with 
and distinct from the vyakti or individual, but identical with 
it on the one hand and of a different grade of reality on the 
other. The identity between attribute and substance dharma- 
dharmin is characteristic of the hylozoistic speculations of 
Vedanta and Sankhya (regardnig m4iy4 which is one yet 
many, or regarding prakrti which really cvolves), following logi- 
cally on the denial of inherence as a distinctive principle. This 
dharma or attribute is again the essence. the persisting matter in 
relation to the dharmin or thing, infinite in every individual, 
having the whole of the phenomenality behind it. 
44. Vedanta might very well admit the co-ordinateness of 
j4ti and vyakti in the sphere of the pure ‘names and forms’, that 
realm of shadows. The relation between j4ti and vyakti, 
which has already been discussed. is in the region of formed 
matter where the more differentiated is less in reality. The realm 
of shadows or may@ may be compared to space, the principle 
of separation or ‘spread-out-ness’, the nearest determinate symbol 
of the principle of difference. in which a mode may be said to 
be different from another in which it is included. 
45. We have thus to recognise three systems of eternal en- 
tities in Vedanta: (1) in regard to matter, formless matter and 
its several emanatory grades corresponding to the stages. sama- 
dhi, susupti, etc., including the intermediaries; (2) in re-

=== PAGE 62 ===
38 STUDIES IN VEDANTISM 
gard to formed matter. the basal devatas, corresponding to 
the primal matters, and also the essences like ‘cow-ness’, ‘horse- 
ness’ (gotva, aSvatva) incarnated in the above grades: (3) in 
regard to the ‘names and forms’, the abstract differences. which 
are neither real nor unreal. We have still to recognise two other 
orders, (4) the Karma-unities or will-unities in the several 
grades, and (5) the universal unitics of these with their cosmic 
reactions. the universal emanations of Brahman, including the 
lesser gods, the inquiry into which is for the present postponed. 
46. Lest the identity-in-difference implied in Veddntic 
realism be taken to be an unwarranted importation of Hegelianism, 
it is necessary to refer to discussions bearing on the law of con- 
tradiction in Vedantic philosophy. It may be noted at the out- 
set that in this Vedantic conception of identity-in-difference, as 
distinct from a simliar conception in Hegel. the identity is the 
truth and the difference is illusory and even the negation of the 
difference through which the identity is affirmed is illusory. In 
connexion with the discussion of illusory perception. as of the 
nacre taken for silver, the point is raised: when the appearance 
of the silver is corrected and the nacre in its real nature known, 
can it not be held that the thing is sometimes silver and some- 
times nacre? The reply given is that it is the very nature of 
the later or correcting perception to deny the truth of the former 
perception once for all. When the illusion of silver ceases, one 
is not conscious of the real silver being absent but oniy of the 
illusory silver having disappeared. But a further difficulty may 
be raised: when the silver is known to be illusory, is not the 
knowledge itself self-contradictory, as expressible in the form ‘the 
(existent) silver is non-existent’? ‘The reply is: the knowledge is 
rather expressible in the form, ‘the illusory silver is absent’. The 
very perception of the illusory character of a thing is the percep- 
tion of the illusory thing being absent: to light up the darkness 
is to destroy it. The question really is: if illusion is known 
through contradiction, is not contradiction itself conceivable? The 
Vedantic reply appears to be that the contradicting perception 
completely destroys the phenomenal reality of the contradicted 
percept. ‘The contradiction is therefore not real'’, We have 
really two cognitions here, (a) this phenomenally real silver, (Ὁ) 
17 Because one of the terms is non-est.

=== PAGE 63 ===
VEDANTIC METAPHYSICS. 39 
that illusory silver is absent. The cognition of this phenomenally 
real silver, plus the contradicting percept of the nacre amounts 
to the cognition of the illusory silver being absent. In identity 
of contradictories, the identity is known through recognition: the 
relation of identity is nothing but the identical thing. The union 
of contradictories is uncritically accepted at first, only to be re- 
jected when it is known to be a union of contradictories. This 
view of illusory perception is only the reappearance in a lower 
plane of the dualism of Brahman and m4ya4 which yet 
is no dualism of positives. 
47. In this connexion, we may refer to a discussion of San- 
kara in his commentary on Brhadéranyaka Upanisad 
V—i, where he combats Bhartr-prapafica’s views of 
Brahman being at once one and dual (dvaita-advaita, the 
causal Brahman different from the effect Brahman. though 
identical at the retraction of the world). Sat:kara argues that 
although rules of action may admit of exceptions or alternatives, 
a truth does not; truth does not depend on any onc’s choice. Two 
contradictory attributes, dvaita and advaita, dual and single, 
cannot both be true of the same thing. The Vedantic doctrine 
of adhikaéri-bheda (accommodation), that the truth to be 
taught must be relative to the students’ capacities or qualifications, 
is not only a practical principle of pcdagogy, secular and reli- 
gious,—it is founded on an epistemological truth. The duality of 
Brahman and the world is true to one steeped in desires, and 
encased in individuality ; their unity is true to one who has come to 
know, to transcend individuality. Truth is relative to the knower. 
This, however, 1s no Protagorean subjectivisrn. So long as the indi- 
vidual is an individual, there is duality between teacher and taught, 
the teaching appearing to be something foreign, imposed from with- 
out ; but when there is a flashing from below, there is one homo- 
gencous flame of advaita-jnana or monistic knowledge, when, 
however, the individual does not remain an individual to recog- 
nise the contradiction between it and the previous dvaita- 
jana or dualistic knowledge. To us, from the outside, dvaita 
and advaita are both true, as possible stages of knowledge, 
but dvaita is inferior in reality to advaita; they are not 
co-ordinate. In every act of knowledge, the duality between sub- 
ject and object presents itself only to give way to their identifi- 
cation.

=== PAGE 64 ===
40 STUDIES IN VEDANTISM 
48. It may be urged against the foregoing account of Vedan- 
tic realism that it does not provide for a principle of change, as 
distinct from one of mere difference, whether change is regarded 
as emanation (vivarta) or as evolution (parinama). The 
three orders of eternal entities which we have recognised are all 
static; where is the dynamic principle? 
49. One would imagine such a principle is likely to be met 
with in a discussion of causality. Referring, however, to an 
elaborate and acute discussion of the subject in Sankara’s 
commentary on Brhadaranyaka Upaniead I, ii, we find 
only a clearer enunciation of the static view of the world which 
we have already presented, but the dynamic principle appears to 
be nowhere. Jt would not be, however, quite out of place here 
to present, in a slightly modcrn garb, the salient features of 
Sankara’s argument, both as a specimen of his reasoning and 
as a further explication of the foregoing views. 
50. Before the world began, no diflerence was manifest; every- 
thing was shrouded by death. Not that there was a mere void. 
for then causes and cflects were in their seminal unmanifested 
condition. (To justify this, he proves first that the cause, meaning 
by it only material causc, and next that the effect. meaning by 
it the effect-form, arc eternally existent.) (1) Eternity of cause. 
That effects are possible only when the causes are present is a 
matter of experience. It might be objected that when a pot 15 
fashioned out of a lump of clay, the lump is first destroyed and 
then the pot comes into being and so the cause is not immediately 
antecedent to the effect. But it is replied that not the lump-form 
but the clay is the cause. All causes in their causation destroy 
their previous manifestation in introducing their present manifesta- 
tion, for the same cause cannot exist in two diflerent forms at 
the same time. But the cessation of the previous manifestation 
does not mean the cessation of the cause itself. Yet why not 
take the lump-form also to be a cause, seeing that the clay can- 
not exist except in some form? Because the form 15 variable but 
the matter is persistent. But still must it not have some form? 
No: in the production of the pot, the clay for a moment has 
left the lump-form and is passing over to the pot-form. (That 
is the mystery of production. Change means the conflict of mani- 
festation and the consequent momentary nakedness of the sub- 
stance.) But is this naked substance perceived? May it not be

=== PAGE 65 ===
VEDANTIC METAPHYSICS. 41] 
that the lump of clay only resembles the pot that is made out 
of it without the clay persisting identically in the change? No; 
the identity is perceived but the similarity is only inferred. In- 
ference is based on perception, and if perception were to be ques- 
tioned by inference here, there would be an illicit regress to 
infinity. The denial of identity would mean the rapid succession 
of momentary acts, which means the denial of knowledge of any 
object. For where is the evidence for the object? If in another 
uct of knowledge, where is the evidence for this again? And 
so on. Similarly if you do not trust in your immediate perception 
of identity and ask ‘what is the evidence for it’ and reply ‘be- 
cause there is the felt similarity’, you must ask for the evidence 
for that again, and so on. which means that you cannot affirm 
anything. Besides, the consciousness ‘this is like that’ is possi- 
ble if the same self or knower is present to both the momentary 
cognitions, ‘this’ and ‘that’, which, howeve1, cannot be admitted 
by one who denies identity. Is it replied that whether there be 
a self or not, the likeness is a fecling (itself an event of the mind)? 
But it is no blind feeling; ‘this’ and ‘that’ refer to each other; 
it is an objective assertion If it were only a subjective feeling, 
‘this’ and ‘that? also, being individually known by assimilation 
with their likes, would be merely subjective, false: and then the 
knowledge of this subjectivity or falsity would itself be merely 
subjective or false. (Such a sceptical suicide then is the only al- 
ternative to the view that the cause is perceived to be persisting 
self-identically in the effect.) (2) Ezernty of effect. The effect- 
form. too, docs not accidentally emerge into existence but is 
eternally existent (i) As an object hidden under darkness or 
behind an opaque wall manifests itself when a lamp is lighted 
or when the wall is removed, so is the form of the pot hidden 
under the previous form of the clay, the lump-form, and 15 
manifested when the previous form is removed by appropriate 
means. Objections:—{a) In order to prove that all that is 
manifested was previously existent, it is necessary to know that 
what was previously non-existent is not manifested, but the 
absence of manifestation cannot be perceived. Hence it can only 
be said that a thing is existent when manifested Reply:—-It can- 
not be held either that it is existent only when manifested, for 
that amounts to saying that all existents are manifested. which. 
however, is not true. (b) The previous form, lump-form, as 
6

=== PAGE 66 ===
42 STUDIES IN VEDANTISM 
agent producifig manifestation, is different in nature from the 
darkness or the opaque wall; for the wall occupies a space-posi- 
tion distinct from that of the object hidden by it, but the 
lump-form does not do so. Reply:—This diiterence is not im- 
portant; in milk, the milk-form prevents the munifestation of the 
water-form and yet occupics the same position as the latter. (c) 
But there is another difference: to see the pot hidden under dark- 
ness, one has to make an exertion (light a lamp, etc.), but to 
see the pot emerging from the lump of clay. no such exertion is 
required (though it is required in the production of it). Reply: — 
In both cases, to see does not require any exertion: the exertion 
put forth is for production only—-in the former case for investing 
the pot with the attribute of lightcdness, in the latter case, for 
destroying the Jump-form, etc. 
(ii) The past being of the future being of an object miay 
be peculiarly distinct from the present being, but it is still being. 
Knowledge of the future is knowledge of some existent object, 
for otherwise how is the future wiled? Willing (as distinct from 
merely desiring) means dircctly an objectification of the future. 
The Yogin in his clairvoyance is said to see the past and the 
future as we sce the present. Besides, God’s foreknowledge would 
be meaningless, if the future object were not eternally existent 
(cf. Anselm’s reconciliation between divine foreknowledge and 
man’s free will). (Existence or reality immediately means ‘trans- 
cendang time.’) Again, what does non-existence of the future object, 
‘pot? mcan? Only that some other object is now present. Non- 
existence of pot itself is not existent positively: it is not defined 
by being distinguished from other non-existences, as that of the 
cloth. And what is non-existence of pot? Is non-existence an 
attribute of pot? Then it means non-existence of non-cxistent. 
pot, not of the positive pot. Finally, if we say, ‘A is produced 
or comes into being’, A. the subject, must be alrcady existent 
in order to have the predicate, ‘comes into being’. 
51. This elaborate discussion of causality Icads to the 1ccogni- 
tion of Brahman as the material cause of the universe and of 
the primal hiding principle, co-eternal with Brahman, viz., 
γᾷ which by itself is nothing, like the blue tint which secms 
to pervade objects viewed through blue glasses. Still therefore 
the dynamic principle remains undiscovered. 
52. What is sakti or power? It is sometimes identified

=== PAGE 67 ===
VEDANTIC METAPHYSICS, 43 
with the principle of illusion or maya. In Paficadasi, for 
example (Chapter II, slokas 47 seq.), we have pronouncements 
to the following effect:—maya, or the power of the Lord, is 
no reality (in the presence of Brahman), is inferrible from its 
effects, and only from these. The power of the Existent is not 
the Existent, even as the power of the fire is not the fire. What, 
then, is it apart from the Existent? Jt cannot be called the 
void, as that is taken to be the effect of maya; it is some- 
thing then which is neither the void nor the existent. Yet it 
exists only as through the Existent, for substance and attribute 
are not separate entities. It may, no doubt. be manifested in 
effects, but before creation, such manifested power did not exist, 
and so power cannot be a principle separate from Brahman. 
(Yet to show that Brahman transcends it, it is added) this power 
does not pervade all Brahman but only a portion or aspect of 
Him (it), This Universe is only a quarter of Him; full three 
quarters are self-luminous. So in Bhagavad-gita Krsna 
says, ‘by a portion of myself, do I pervade the Universe’. So 
too §ruti, ‘having pervaded the universe, He extends a space bey- 
ond’ (atyatisthad daéangulam); and there is the Ve- 
danta-sitra., ‘Also there is a form of the Lord not abiding in 
effected things’ (Thibaut’s translation). (It is admitted, however. that 
this attribution of parts to the Indiscerptible is only provisional). 
‘That power, as residing in the Existent. produces effects’. The 
power that creates ik ἃ ὁ a (space or ether, its first effect) creates also 
its identity with the Existent and thus (in the inverse order) makes 
the existent an attribute of 4 k 4 § a; as substance. It is really 
the Existent that becomes 4kasSa; to take the existence as 
of Akasa is what might be expected of maya or the princi- 
ple of illusion. 
53. We have to note four points in the above passage :—- 
(1) that this power, by itself, is only maya: (2) that it exists and 
functions only as residing in Brahman, i.e., only as Brah- 
man informing maya; (3) that though thus informed, it is trans- 
cended by Brahman; and (4) that Brahman existing in the 
power becomes the effect: the effect is thus not non-existent. 
The passage presents both sides of the Vedantic doctrine of 
maya—the world being unreal apart fom Brahman and 
real in the reality of Brahman. The latter side is frequently 
overlooked.

=== PAGE 68 ===
44 STUDIES IN VEDANTISM 
54. Power then as existent is the Existent assuming forms, 
i.e., making the unreal real. The One FExistent Blissful IJntelli- 
gence, entering m&@ya4 becomes self-dirempted into ISvara and 
apara-prakrti, i.e., the Determinate God (and the ‘object 
in general’, the primordial matter in which God) is to energise. 
Brahman against the ‘dark ground οἱ may @aisigvara, 
maya against the light of the self is apara-prakrti. Yet 
I§vara is said to be free, to be related to the dark ground, yet 
floating on it, to have conquered it once for all, employing it ‘only 
as a servant’, This attribute of freely rclating Himself to the dark 
ground, being itself absolute (for in Him attributes and aspects are 
concrete realities), is to be viewed as an entity by itself, viz.. as 
para-prakrti, and the nisus of this again towards apara- 
prakrti is to be taken as a third entity $akti. or power of the 
Lord. 
35. This para-prakrti is the intelligence of ISvara, 
appearing in its determinate form only as reflected from the 
apara. As Brahman, the undifferenced intelligence, shines 
on this maya; it turns it into an object and forthwith becomes 
the Determinate Subject of this object, functioning towards the 
object. This triply stratified maya with the reflection of the 
Lord. viz., as comprising para-prakrti, Sakti of the 
Lord, and apara-prakrti, may be considered to be the 
concrete archetype of the abstractions. sattva, rajas, and 
tamas (light, intelligence, or goodness; activity; darkness, in- 
sentiency, heaviness, evil), those universal aspects of existence to 
understand which is to understand the differential genius of Hin- 
duism itself. Conformably to the general trend of Vedantism, one 
would expect a projection of parad-prakiti and gakti on 
apara-prakrti: thus aparad-prakrti is of the three 
. gunas (attributes, elements), sattva, rajas, and tamas, 
all compact. The Sankhya principle pradhana, is this 
apara-prakrti, a stage more determinate than mere maya, 
differing from it much as Aristotle’s matter as potentiality differs 
from Plato’s me on, the negation-soil in which he plants his Ideas. 
Sankhya, however, takes it to be an ultimate reality incapable 
of being derived from higher principles. 
56. The para-prakrti has been taken to be the deter- 
minate intelligence (buddhi) of the Lord, but it should be 
noticed that this buddhi is also taken to be an evolute of

=== PAGE 69 ===
VEDANTIC METAPHYSICS. 45 
the apara-prakrti, in fact its first and most perfect evolute. 
So we have to understand the para as the buddhi in its 
subject-aspect, i.e... as informed with Brahman; _ the other 
buddhi is its passive aspect, its object aspect. for active 
buddhi knows passive buddhi. as the eve sees light. But 
what is this buddhi. active and passive, as distinct from 
Brahman? Here an understanding of the psychology of the 
faculties recognised in Vedanta. viz. buddhi. manas, 
ahankadra. and citta is necessary. 
57. All knowledge is self-affirmation. The Vedantic self is 
as we have seen already, beyond this self-affirmation, something 
transcending determination. the indeterminate. the unknown and 
unknowable, that which being presupposed in all knowledge is 
incapable of being caught in any determinate mode of knowledge. 
This determinate self-affirmation. too, as (eternally) completed or 
accomplished, is beyond the self-afhrming activity. This activity im- 
plies the consciousness of a limited, unrealised agent proceeding 
or functioning towards an object. The consciousness of such a 
limited agent or subject as (illusorily) indentified with the self 
(which is really absolute, not only in the sense of being above 
duality but above all determination also) is what Kant calls em- 
pirical self-consciousness. This activity itself is to be conceived 
as manifested in two grades. the intellectual and sensory, the syn- 
thesis of concepts and the synthesis of apprehension. The self 
is manifested in self-affrmation or knowledge: knowledge is mani- 
fested by the self-affirming activity of the self-conscious indivi- 
dualised self; the activity is that of the interpretation of the sense- 
manifold, given as one apprehension. The relation of the senses 
to the objects will be discussed later on. The senses are only 
blind receivers and incapable of being themselves perceived (atin - 
driya). The essential character of the four faculties of antah- 
karana here discussd—manas, citta, etc. (manas in its 
widest sense comprising all the four) is that they have both spon- 
taneity and receptivity and are capable of being self-perceived. 
Manas in the narrower sense is the faculty of simple appre- 
hension (not a mere sense). It has for its specific function, 
samsaya (doubt), samkalpa and vikalpa (assertion and 
negation, intellectual or conative). These functions, so widely 
different, are capable of being connected with one another. As 
an organ of simple apprehension, manas just raises the ques-

=== PAGE 70 ===
46 STUDIES IN VEDANTISM 
tion, ‘what is it’ (sensation), but answers it not, just gives a start 
to attention; so its function on the intellectual side is to doubt. 
Samkalpa is mental impulse (manasa karma), cona- 
tion as it appears in desire or motor impulse, in attention, even 
in objectification. This blind spontaneity is essentially that ele- 
ment in an assertion which goes out beyond the mere judgment, 
the element of free will in intellection to which Descartes attributed 
error. Vikalpa is just the negation of this samkalpa, a 
mental impasse, attention as homeless, not as fixing itself on an 
object but as moving away from it or in its transition from one 
object to another, will in the air appearing as aversion, hesitation, 
doubt or as consciousness of difference, the stress of the will in 
and beyond the negative judgment. Citta is the faculty of in- 
tellectual synthesis as distinct from mere apprehension, intellec- 
tual, in a wide sense including smarana (remembering), anu- 
sandhiana (inquiring, seeking to know what), etc. Citta 
thus is intellectual pravrtti or self-affirming activity directed 
outwards, 1.6., towards the object; the consciousness which is 
directed inwards, i.e., the consciousness of self as agent or sub- 
ject being ahamkadra. Buddhii is the faculty of knowledge 
(as distinct from knowing), intellectual synthesis ( niScaya_ or 
adhyavasaya) not as activity but as an eternally accomplish- 
ed (parinisthita) affair, the unquestioning , quiescent self- 
affirmation in the copula of a judgment, in belief, in the feelings 
of pleasure and pain. The relation of knowing to knowledge is 
peculiar; the latter is manifested, eternally accomplished, not effec- 
ted as a contingent product or result. In knowledge, however, 
two elements may be distinguished, the vrtti or mental mode 
(section 88), and the light of cit or self playing on it and in- 
vesting it with its timeless or eternal character. The former can 
be described as the result of the knowing activity, of the ripen- 
ing of the seeds of vidya-karma or the samsk§aras; 
and so buddhi or mahat in this aspect—the completed orga- 
nism of knowledge—has been sometimes described as the adhi- 
bhiita aspect of citta, the knowing activity, which is thus the 
corresponding adhyatma_ or limited subjective aspect. Bud- 
dhi then as the faculty of determinate knowledge is the imme- 
diate home of the self. which is the light of knowledge trans- 
cending all determination and yet transfiguring all determinate 
mental modes.

=== PAGE 71 ===
VEDANTIC METAPHYSICS. 44 
58. This buddhi is either the immediate reflector of the 
self or the immediate envelope or body of the self. As ‘reflector 
or object, it is the finest evolute of apara-prakrti. As the 
body with which the self is identified, it is para-prakrti. 
The two prakrtis, therefore, interpenetrate one another; they 
have been described as the prima! male and female principles, a 
division which appears at different stages in Hindu cosmogony but 
does not, therefore, necessarily involve confusion of thought. The 
light of the self not only gets reficcted from the surface of 
may ἃ, turning it into apara-prakrti, it transfigures maya 
in all its strata, everywhere differentiating it into sattva and 
tamas, itself getting next identified with the sattva and then 
functioning (rajas) towards the tamas. Thus it is that the 
Sattva aspect of apara-prakrti is at the samc time the 
adhyatma or subjective aspect, tamas being the adhi- 
bhita or objective aspect. One is tempted to identify this dis- 
tinction between sattvika and tamasika in Vedinta 
with the distinction between actual and potential in the Aristote- 
lian system; there is a good deal of agreement, too, between the 
systems in respect of the connected doctrines, viz., that matter is 
unredeemed potentiality, that the soul is the entelechy of the body, 
and that God is noesis noeseus, the purest actuality (cf. ISvara 
having the transparent garment, Suddha-sattva-upadhi 
of buddhi). But it must be remembered that whereas all the 
differentiation is taken to be ultimately real by Aristotle, Ve- 
danta takes it to be real only within the sphere of maya or illu- 
sion. In fact, as has already been poinied out, Aristotle’s matter is 
apara-prakrti but not maya; and although he recognises 
that there are different grades of reality, that actuality is the truth 
of potentiality, and that God though pure actuality still contains 
in Himself ideally all potentiality, yet he does not rise to the 
conception of Brahman to whom ‘being the truth or actuality 
of anything’ is itself an upadhi or envelope, who is absolute in 
being devoid not only of all external relation but also of all in- 
ternal relation, who is said to be ekamevadvitiyam, one 
without a second, transcending svagata-bheda (having parts), 
sajatiya-bheda (having something similar), and vijatiya 
bheda, (having something different from it). He rises as far 
as the Vedantic ISvara, the first emanation of Brahman, 
Brahman in the attitude of creation. This IS vara, though the

=== PAGE 72 ===
48 STUDIES IN VEDANTISM 
determinate God as distinct from the indeterminate Brahman, 
is still undifferentiated within Himself. This follows from the very 
nature of buddhi,. which is pure self-affirmation, which is dis- 
tinct alike from pure caitanya on the one hand, and from 
citta and ahamkadra on the other. This buddhi, has 
been identified with the state of the self as in susupti, or better 
still. as in savikalpa-samidhi which is its actualised state. 
Yet buddhi is not an abstract state but rather the concrete 
faculty or body in which the self is inclosed. The undifferenced 
character of buddhi appears still more explicitly when we con- 
sider that it is the faculty of feeling pleasure and pain. which is 
most intimately related to the self though different from it. 
59. I§vara, then is the self as shining on and in maya 
which has the three gunas (attributes or elements) of sattva, 
rajas, and tamas, and is accordingly both trigunatita 
{transcending these gunas). and Suddha-sattva-upadhi 
(invested with a transparent body of sattva). Of Him as 
trigundtita, pard-prakrti or the determinate actualised 
intelligence is the immediate prakrti or nature; or rather as 
intelligence itself is an evolute of apara, taking on two aspects 
(male and female) in the light of Brahman, He as tri- 
gundtita is the unity of para (intelligence as facing the self) 
and apara (the same intelligence in its objective or passive 
aspect, the sattva aspect of apara facing its tamas aspect) 
and yet prior to it. This unity next gets identified with and thus 
contracted into the para or the transparent garment of sattva 
which thus has before it the apara, with tamas as the pre- 
dominant, though not the sole element. Hence comes the pecu- 
liarity that the para-prakrti is both different from Brah- 
man and an aspect of Brahman. Hence, too, the possi- 
bility of sattva being here absolutely pure, though every- 
where else the three gunas imply one another. It is the lighted 
surface of maya, as reflected from which Brahman is 16 - 
vara; to this lighted surface, all the interior is darkness, negation. 
On the outer confines of maya, the ‘sacred influence of light’ 
appears, and as ‘chaos retires’, ‘dim night? toc retires. rendered 
dimmer by contrast. The alchemy of light turns that which it 
shines on into light. What was dark, negative, utterly false, be- 
comes light, existent, para-prakrti which again shoots in- 
ward, stratifying apara-prakrti which is the equipoise of the

=== PAGE 73 ===
VEDANTIC: METAPHYSICS. 49 
gunas into its sattva and tamas aspects, and getting at every 
stage identified with the sattva-aspect, while the tamas- 
aspect is for ever retiring. 
“But now at last the sacred influence 
Of light appears, and from the walls of Heaven 
Shoots far into the bosom of dim Night 
A glimmering dawn. Here Nature first begins 
Her farthest verge and Chaos to retire.” 
60. From the standpoint of Brahman, all this transfigured 
maya is false. From the standpoint of IS vara, as invested 
with the transparent body of sattva. sattva alone is real. 
tamas is unreal—they are not co-ordinate. The ‘glimmering 
dawn’ shot inwards is only the promise of the conquest of the 
entire realm of chaos. promise of the ultimate perishableness of 
tamas. 
61. Brahman and isvara have sometimes been called 
the higher god and the lower god. The distinction is, to say the 
least, misleading, and probably the over-definite language of some 
of the systematising scholiasts is responsible for it. No doubt there 
is a distinction between the conceptions. Yct ISvara is not in 
reality different from Brahman. As has been already indicated. 
Isévara is the absolute of savikalpa-samadhi, whereas 
Brahman is of nirvikalpa-samadhi, these statcs being 
continuous yet different. As a conception, however, Ifvara as 
trigunatita is different from Brahman. 
62. An image will make it clear—a light-sphere in circumam- 
bient darkness. From the centre of it, the fulness of light radiates 
all around, without a thought of the darkness: it is the indetermi- 
nate infinite Brahman. At the circumference. however. it 
reaches its limit (not a resistance) and retires into itself, the limit- 
ing darkness falling outside of it; the sphere, as viewed from the 
circumference inwards, is the determinate Infinite or the closed-in 
Absolute, IS vara. The limit, however, determines its quality, 
not as darkness but as darkness lighted up. which again defines 
the darkness (thus the darkness gets stratified). Let us view all 
this from the standpoint of the individual. In the dim light of 
reason, in that ‘glimmering dawn’ in the bosom of night, the in- 
dividual is lulled by the bright dreams of the morn, not un- 
accompanied by frightful nightmares; this is the soul-clearing 
work of morality (sattva-Ssuddhi), with its lapses and its 
7

=== PAGE 74 ===
50 STUDIES IN VEDANTISM 
despairs, with its toilsome march and its intervals of serenity. At 
length he wakes up to the glory of a sunrise, is lifted up to abso- 
lute consciousness when all the dreams which constituted life and 
the world he feels to be illusory, for he has now reached his true 
self which he always was but knew not. Still the dreams are there 
remembered, though now known to be dreams. He exclaims, ‘Lo! 
the Sun (I$ vara) is there; He has revealed Himself unto me in 
grace and I am absolute in the Absolute. All that past indivi- 
duality of mine was but a dream’. Forthwith the duality vanishes 
in the rapt feeling, ‘I am the Sun’, which still means ‘] am nothing 
and the Sun is all. 1 am no longer the limit outside the object; 
the limit is but the determination of the object the object which 
is conscious of the limit’. Both these stages are the aspects of 
Igvara. the former being the Suddha-sattva-upadhi 
aspect, the latter the trigunatita aspect. ‘In the former. He 
reveals Himself in me, in my absolute consciousness, puts on my 
absolute consciousness as a garment; in the latter. I become His 
very self—He not only shines in me but passes out unimpeded 
and I am dissolved in Him’. In the former, the light of that sphere 
passing outwards impinges on darkness. lighting it up; in the 
latter, the lighi retires backwards to the centre. But in either 
case, the light is determinate ; 1n both, there is an awareness of the 
darkness; the light at first makes it an object and then unites 
ecstatically with it. ISvara as trigunatita still remembers 
His feat of transcending maya; the self is conscious of its 
difference from Iisvara_ being illusory. It is just the passing 
into the indifference of Brahman, not the indifference itself. 
It is the indifference rendered conceivable; yet such is the nature 
of the conception that its content spurns the form. proclaims its 
own inconceivability. This conceived inconceivability is the ul- 
timate formula; as conceived, it is the trigunatita ISvara 
the inconceivability that is conceived beng trigunatita 
Brahman. They constitute one unit, one scintillating star; 
that noble verse in the Chandogya Upanisad, Syamit 
Savalam prapadye Svalat syimam prapadye, 
‘May I pass from the dark blank to the figured determinate and 
from thence to the blank again’ points to this mystic scintillation of 
the One reality. No wonder, therefore, that the highest epithets 
should be applied to IS vara, as for example, in the Sandi- 
lya-vidya in the Chandogya, such as one would expect

=== PAGE 75 ===
VEDANTIC METAPHYSICS. δὶ 
to be applied to Brahman from the characterisations, lower 
Brahman and higher Brahman, the misleadingness of 
which must be now apparent. 
63. Yet after all it may be asked, why this limitation of a 
darkness at all? Why the illusion of an individuality at all? As 
we have seen already, the question itself is illegitimate, for while 
the individuality is there, it necessarily sees no beginning or end 
of itself, for all that it knows, it knows under the form of indivi- 
duality ; and when the individuality is transcended, not only is it 
felt to be an illusion ; even its having been illusorily present in the 
past is felt to be so; so nowhere does it appear as a contingent 
reality of which only we can demand an explanation. 
64. But then how should the inconceivable be thought of. 
referred to at all? It must be because it reveals itself in a form 
which it at the same time condemns. But are not those to whom 
it reveals illusory also? Why then this illusory revelation in an 
illusory form to illusory subjects? Once again. this ‘why is an 
illegitimate demand, an atiprasgna, as it has sometimes been 
called. As the individual is just passing into Brahman, it feels 
all this to be illusory and then the illusion vanishes. The highest 
consciousness then for the individual as individual is this con- 
sciousness of the illusoriness of his own individuality. This has 
to be simply accepted; there is no ‘why’ for this or for Brah- 
man. 
65. Before the moment of passing into Brahman, the ind- 
vidual is raised to absolute consciousness (para-prakrti. as 
invested with which Ifvara is §Suddha-sattva-upadhi), 
when 1§vara is known to be knowing the world as His reflex, 
i.e, as created by His will. Not that the world is created out of 
nothing; for IS$vara assuming Suddha-sattva-upadhi, 
i.e., knowing attitude, means at once having apara- 
prakrti before Him as object and material for His will to 
mould. But certain old difficulties at once start up. How does 
this will meet the matter? How does it actualise particular 
groupings of ‘names and forms’ potentially contained in this 
matter, and this in time, according to law? Why does He will 
at all, seeing that he, as perfectly actualised, cannot have any- 
thing to attain or avoid? The will meets the matter as identical 
with it, just as the energising body can act on the object, the body 
being, as we saw, but sentient space continuing itself in its move-

=== PAGE 76 ===
52 STUDIES IN VEDANTISM 
ment through space. As to the other questions, a preliminary 
discussion is required to introduce the Vedantic solutions. 
66. The absolute consciousness in which ISvara is re- 
vealed is reached only when there is a perfect chastening of the 
spirit, when it is made the still mirror of truth, not simply by a 
discipline of the intellect but by an ethical discipline of the will, 
when all the desires of the individual self have been completely 
eliminated and the spirit is broadened out so as to comprehend 
the truest interests of all beings. Ignorance is but the intellectual 
reflex of evil willing , the shadow of which again deepens the evil, 
and thus it goes on ad infinitum. We have already introduced 
the notion of every man being born with the seed of all his spiritual 
life, intellective and conative. Each such seed of vidya- 
karma (knowledge and action) has a measure of ignorance or 
evil in it, and the self as embodied in this seed sees no beginning 
of itself, for it can explain its evil or sin only as due to an 
jgnorance which is not a temporary cloud but is ingrained in the 
character which constitutes its body, and further it can explain 
this ignorance only as due to self-imposition, i.e., free sinning, 
for the self cannot have anything imposed upon it from without. 
The absolute consciousness is reached only when this substantial 
ignorance has been dispelled by good willing. So when Fichte 
said that every man could, if he would, i.e., if he had not a 
sinning will, rise to intellectual perception and when Schelling 
thought the very reverse, that ‘the capacity for it. like the poetic 
talent, is possessed by a select few, that the truc philosopher, like 
the true poet, is born, not made, they held views which are re- 
conciled in the Vedantic doctrine which has already been pre- 
sented. The ignorance that is ingrained in the seed of vidya- 
karma with which a man is born shuts out certain forms or 
planes of thought ab initio from his mental horizon, which no 
effort of mere thinking can make accessible, just as an instinctive 
tendency or an ingrained habit cannot be annulled by a single fiat 
of the will. At the same time there are rational elements or good 
tendencies in that seed or ‘noumenal character’ which the will 
primarily, and the intellect secondarily (with the help of the will), 
can help to develop, gradually working out the ignorance and the 
evil. Accordingly when Hegel holds, as against both Fichte and 
Schelling, that the ‘wonderful power of the understanding’ alone 
can be trusted to lead us to every level of thought by a necessary

=== PAGE 77 ===
VEDANTIC METAPHYSICS. 53 
dialectic development, that therefore a bad man can rise step by 
step up the thought-ladder alone to the highest conceptions of 
philosophy, Vedanta will press against him the old objection 
that thought is not knowledge, that cven the large range of 
thought to which the bad man has access is due to the fact that 
he is not all bad, and that though the thought is continuous with 
absolute knowledge or intellectual perception, yet at every step 
this thought, necessary as it is, has the alternative of absolute 
scepticism beyond it. The smoky flickering flame of mere 
thought clears up only when the moisture of evil and ignorance 
in the ‘noumenal character’ (Schopenhauer) is completely burnt off 
in the fire of morality. 
67. This Vedantic view may now be made the indivi- 
dualistic platform from which we may view the question already 
suggested , ‘Why does If vara will at all’. ISvara is the crown 
of the moral consciousness, the unity of all the ‘noumenal charac- 
ters’ or the unities of vidya-karma (including not only 
human spirits but spirits above and below. as is apparent from the 
Vedantic doctrines of the continuity of spiritual gradations 
and of metempsychosis). He is again the organism, not only of 
the spirits—for ignorance, the mother of Karma, cannot have 
place in Him—but of nature, too, furnishing the experiences 
appropriate to their Karma (the malum poena to their malum 
culpa). He is the joint organism of moral law and natural law, 
the latter being only the obverse of the former, the two being 
the differentiations, mainly sattvikha and tamasika, of 
apara-prakrti as interpenctrated by para-prakrti. 
Were it not for the ignorance begetting karma and be- 
gotten of karma, every one would see the unity of moral 
law and natural law, see that he is the architect of his own fortune, 
though now ‘virtue and happiness seem to be synthetically con- 
nected’ (Kant) with each other]. ISvara, however, is not he 
immanent unity but the transcendent, the latter being his true 
nature. There are grades of transcendence, too. As primarily 
transcendent or trigunatita, He is in dreamless sleep, with 
the homogeneous unity of pari and apara-prakrti as 
the objective blank before Him, the primal glory in which He rests 
(sve mahimni tisthati). This unity is the avyakrta 
4kaé6a, the unmanifested archetype of space and matter, the 
absolute buddhi (though sometimes taken as only objective, as

=== PAGE 78 ===
44 STUDIES IN VEDANTISM 
the first objectivity of buddhi), the Vedantic substitute for 
the pradhadna of Saarkhya. It is the home of all ‘names 
and forms’, ‘unevolved but about to be evolved’ (avyakrta- 
vyacikirgita) because of its being in immediate unity with 
the individual wills or noumenal characters; which last in the 
reflection of ISvara are the jivas or individual souls, called 
prajfias in this connexion, who rest, unconscious of their in- 
dividualities in this dreamless sleep of the Universal Spirit 
(ParameSsvaraSraya mayamayt mahasusuptih 
yasyam svaripa-pratibodha-rahitah Serate 
Samsarinojivah-—Sankara’s commentary to 
Brahma-sitras). Next ISvara becomes invested with 
para-prakrti, and as such transcends the processes of this 
unity of para and apara. The individual will-selves have 
here as much a dual nature as I§vara himself. In dreamless 
sleep, their mind dissolves into maya and they attain their 
eternally free (mukta) state, their identity with the triguna- 
tita; the same souls, in relation to their life-processes and re- 
incarnations, are viewed as invested with the first individualising 
sheath, the ‘noumenal character’ (the K4rana-Sarira or the 
will-self). But a difference emerges here; for whereas the envelope 
of ISvara in this aspect is §uddha-sattva or __ transpa- 
rent, that of the jiva is malina-sattva or impure, partly 
opaque, dimming the light that shines through it. The impurity 
is the limitation that constitutes the individuality. But just ds 
the apara-prakrti has buddhi as its evolute, so too 
these malina-sattva individual souls gradually move towards 
the Suddha-sattva type, the jivan-mukta souls (i.e., 
those who have burst their bonds of individuality and ignorance 
in this life) being just a stage removed from the §uddha- 
sattva Isvara. 
68. Α further understanding . somewhat after Schopenhauer of 
the progressive realisation of these individual spirits is necessary 
‘for a clearer explication of the nature of Ifvara. The indi- 
vidual wills , asserts himself against the world, nature and society: 
and as his will spends itself, the world recoils on him. As his 
willing necessarily means a limitation of vision, the recoil seems 
to be foreign to him; hence all the misery and apparent injustice 
of the world. He sets it down to blind nature (or unjust selfish 
society). This rough tussle with nature and society, however, de-

=== PAGE 79 ===
VEDANTIC METAPHYSICS. 55 
velops in some spirits a generalised and moralised reason, whereas 
in others it deepens unreason, leading them through impotent 
strife gradually, through a diminution of life, to the level of stocks 
and stones. Those in whom reason is developed come to perceive 
that the recoil is their own work, that a punishment as well as 
a reward is something that is thetrr due, something to which they 
have a claim. But the Universe is not quite so simple, and 
it puzzles the reason to lead it pceradventure to serener heights 
or to hurl it down again. For are not the rewards and punish- 
ments, notoriously the latter, very often disproportionate to one’s 
Karma in this life? What is stranger still, why should evil 
Karma be acquired at all? Why should reason every now and 
then lapse into irrationality which is the essence of sin? Why 
again should there be the sudden conversions . the lightning flashes 
of good inclinations. now and again bursting forth from the lead- 
en cloud of habits? It is only the ‘noumenal character’ that can 
explain all this. the character which may not get completely mani- 
fested in any one stage of the phenomenal life, not even in one’s 
whole life. The self as identified with it moves freely in the 
(knowing and), willing process; at every stage, the self recognises 
the character then manifested to have been pre-existent, unconsci- 
ously constituting his individuality. This noumenal seed is not 
explained by heredity and accidental variations which explain only 
the outward, naturalistic side of it. The individual self sees no 
beginning of itself and looks out beyond its life-processes to an 
uninterrupted existence before birth. The existence of a life be- 
fore this is intelligible in the light of the relation between the 
(naturalistic) evolutionary view and the apriori view on the one 
hand and the Vedantic view on the other. The concrete 
self or the noumenal character is known apriori, at any rate re- 
cognised in empirical consciousncss to have been beginninglessly 
operative. The empirical acccunt of the origin of this concrete 
self does not prejudice the validity of the notion of its eternal 
pre-existence. Jf its pre-existence is admitted, is it (1) timelessly 
transcendent, or (2) timelessly immanent in expcrience or rather in 
the most concrete experience-system, the whole species regarded 
as one? Vedanta will hold that it is both. <A doctrine some- 
what like traducianism is traceable in a passage in Brhad- 
AZranyaka-Upanigad (I, V. 17-8) on the relation between 
father and son; other passages may also be referred to. At the

=== PAGE 80 ===
56 STUDIES IN VEDANTISM 
same time just as every object and evcry combination of objects 
were found to presuppose eternal ‘names and forms’, so every in- 
dividual soul has its individuating principle in a distinctive Kara- 
na-Sarira. This Sarira is timeless by itself, though its 
concrete nature, viz., its being the matrix of specific instincts and 
unconscious cognition-traces points to the experiences of this dis- 
tinctive body before the present life. Every such will-self, itself 
only a name apart from Brahman—the name being what alone 
is said to persist after death, after the body has relapsed into 
the elements, gross and subtile—is a centre of many names and 
forms, the shadows of the objects of its experience in all time, 
with which, however, it is at this height in immediate unity. Such 
a will-self then, ranging as it does over many lives of the same 
individual, furnishes us with a solution that considerably lightens 
the heavy unintelligibility of the Karma-system. 
69. From the stage, therefore in which the individual feels 
himself freely claiming his rewards and punishments, he passes 
again to the stage in which the recoil is felt to be foreign to him 
till that mist, too, clears up in the recognition in a far wider sense 
than before of himself being the eternal architect of his own for- 
tune. Here, however the difficulty comes back in an accentuated 
form. He does not indeed ask himself, ‘why was I cursed with 
such a noumenal character-—that would be the voice of the ‘devil 
that is an ass’—for to ask this, one should first be dissociated from 
the noumenal character which, however, in this dissociation would 
be illusory. But in the light of the moralised reason that has been 
developed in him, he will cry out in Augustinian despair. ‘Am 1 
then never to escape from this self-imposed self, this radical evil in 
me? Is final liberation or Moksa impossible for me?’. In this 
stage of deep vairagya (denial of the will, repentance), he 
learns, emotionally and intellectuaily, of a higher soul (a guru) 
from the revealed Scriptures, or sometimes by spontaneous intui- 
tion (sources which are identical in the last resort), that Ifvara 
is the Truth and that his individuality is a lie, that it is only through 
His light, in His grace (Karuna) that he has been hungering and 
thirsting for moksa (liberation) so long, that he, the unregenerate 
self, has not learnt the blissful truth by an effort establishing claim 
to it, but that his knowledge is but God knowing in him. 
70. We are now prepared to understand why I§vara is said 
to will, i,e., to actualise in grace the Karma of individual souls

=== PAGE 81 ===
VEDANTIC METAPHYSICS. $7 
in order that they may reach moksa or identity with Himself. By 
Himself, He is trigunatita; but as the individual necessarily 
takes himself to have been beginninglessly existent, IS vara is to 
him the good person, willing this evolving world into existence out 
of compassion for him, in order that he, by himself, may work out 
the evil in him. In this stage of duality, he at first takes his ex- 
periences of pleasure and pain as the 1eward and punishment 
meted out to him by a Just God; but as he comes to recognise 
that they are the necessary reflections of his own nature, he realises 
that justice is but mercy as viewed through the ignorance which 
separates him from God, the good principle that has led to this 
realisation being felt to be the inshining of Gcd Himseli. This 
mercy, then, does not conflict with justice; neither vaisamya 
(injustice) nor nairghrnya (heartlessness) can be predicated 
of 1§vara. In mercy, He becomes the good principle in indi- 
vidual spirits, He actualises them, He neutralises the evil in them 
by inflicting on them punishments (or, as Christians put it, by in- 
flicting on Himself their punishments). Yet his mercy is not 
indiscriminate ; it descends on them according to the measure of 
their Karma. In reality, however, He docs not work at all. He 
docs not suffer at all, except in their persons : Karma and pain 
are to Him alike illusory. His willing to actualise them is but the 
evolution of their sattva, through the dynamic of _ their 
Karma. He is but the breath of the Karma system, the orga- 
nism of justice which is at the same time the organism of grace. 
His $akti or power is but the Karma of individual spirits 
pressing outwards towards fruition. His icch4 or will to create 
is no bondage to Him. To Him, it is a glorious divine disport or 
lila; to us, individual spirits, the influx of grace or Karuna. 
71. ISvara, as Justice, has His dread aspect, too. Through 
Him, those in whom sattva is dominant rise higher and higher, 
but those in whom tamas is dominant sink deeper and deeper. 
Facilis descensus Averni. Yet if He is universal reality, why is 
He specially identified with goodness. with all that is ‘glorious and 
beautiful and potent’? It is the old problem of evil—is evil 
positive in Vedanta? As in Schelling. it is ultimately but the 
‘dark ground’ of goodness. As indicated already, sattva is but 
[ἃ Τῇ ἃ actualised. To most men. however, in whom sattva is 
but imperfectly developed, the evil is co-ordinate with the good, 
and therefore positive. But as the evil deepens, spiritual vision

=== PAGE 82 ===
48 STUDIES IN VEDANTISM 
also gets dimmed; and the misery that follows drags the sinner 
lower and lower; instead of chastening his soul there is an in- 
creasing helplessness till the struggle between s a t t v a and 
tamas ceases, sattva getting completely involved in one dull 
cloud of unconsciousness (sthivaratva). But, apparently, 
this does not serve the ends of Divine Justice, far less of 
Divine mercy. For to whom is the unconsciousness a punishment 
at all? It may be replied that to the individual left with the last 
spark of freedom, the passage to this sthA4varatva will appear 
like a sinking into ‘eternal perdition’. But how is Divine mercy 
vindicated? The last fury of the Divine wrath is followed by un- 
consciousness. The last embrace of Divine love means. too, a 
lapse of differenced consciousness. Extremes tend to meet. 
72. Let us now consider the state of the jivanmukta 
which is just the antipodes of the state of sthivaratva. The 
jivanmukta is one who after repeated births, repeated terms 
of probation passed successfully, at last kills off all ignorance, all 
Karma, all evil, and reaches absolute knowledge. How does he 
still remain jivat, living, embodied, the body being only a mate- 
realisation of Karma (‘objectification of the will’—Schopen- 
hauer)? Karma is divided by Indian philosophers into three 
sections, saficita, 4rabdha, and kriyumadna. Not all 
the Karma acquired in previous lives receives fruition in this 
life. The noumenal character does noi become fully phenomena- 
lised in one life. The part that is manifested , that has started on 
its course of fruition in this life, is called 4rabdha (that which 
has begun), the part that is unmanifested is called saficita 
(hoarded) and the new Karma which is being generated in this 
life is the Kriyamana. Now the Jivanmukta, having 
killed off his ignorance. no longer feels the solicitations of desire, 
and hence acquires no new Karma, The saiicita Karma is 
burnt off in the fire of knowledge, destroyed in its embryonic stage. 
The 4rabdha, being a unity, must run out its course and can- 
not be stopped half-way. As in the case of an arrow shot through 
the air or of the revolving wheel of the potter, the momentum must 
spend itself out. But then it may be asked: while the momentum 
is there in life, how can there be abosolute knowledge or moksa? 
If, too, saficita be destroyed by this knowledge which shows 
forth all Karma to be illusory, how can the momentum of 
@rabdha be there still? It is replied: that to the jivan-

=== PAGE 83 ===
VEDANTIC METAPHYSICS. 59 
mukta himself, the momentum of his bodily life is nothing in 
reality: it is positively existent only to others with dim vision. The 
world, including the bodies of individuals, is but the community 
of the self-energising Karma-unities (energising in the grace of 
God, which is the deepest sense of self-energisinz). Natural law is 
but the obverse face of the moral law. If the body of the jivan- 
mukta were annihilated for others also. there would be violation 
of this law, which is absurd. To the jivan-mukta himself, 
however, the emergence of this knowledge of the illusoriness of 
his body must appear to be abrupt. He seems to be raised tu 
divine grace without any merit of his own. But to I§vara, 
justice does not admit of being baulked. Karma can be killed 
out only by Karma; the will can be denied only by the will 
(Schopenhauer). Yet the will, which has thus completely denied 
itself would stand out in spiritual pride, were it not for the fact 
that it gets at this stage (and even earlier) transfigured by reverence 
(the obverse of grace). In this reverence, in this assurance of free 
forgiveness, these individual souls elect to continue the divine sys- 
tem of justice and grace by remaining in the body, by freely con- 
tinuing in the illusory form in relation to other souls. So the 
jivan-mukta souls assist as the high priests at the cosmic 
yajfia or sacrifice, the incense from which is for ever and for 
ever mounting to the Highest in heaven. They move about like 
the impersonations of the Divine grace that is dimly stirring in the 
bosom of the age, the beacon lights of the universe, the realised 
hopes of the army of the good—never self-assertive, sometimes 
even despondent—fighting out the great battle with the army of 
the evil. The good triumphs; evil is vanquished and reduced to 
sthavaratva (unconsciousness). Peace reigns once again; 
Iévara passes into a deep sleep. This is pralaya, Universal 
Death to the last of the army of the evil just swooning into 
sthavaratva, the ecstasy of life to the resplendent heroes of 
the army of the good. When, at any stage of the world, all the 
jivas come to be ranged under two classes, jivan-mukta 
and sthavara, there comes on this pralaya or dissolution; 
i.e., the system of Karma- forces that started on the course of 
fruition, the cosmic arabdha, as it might be cailed, becomes 
completely dissipated; the mukta or liberated need not work, 
the sthavara cannot work. The cycle closes; there comes the 
turn: for the cosmic saficita (it may be, only a part of it) to

=== PAGE 84 ===
60 STUDIES IN VEDANTISM 
mature itself; this includes not only the saficita of those who 
have been reduced to sthavaratva in this cycle, but also of 
those so reduced in other cycles. I§vara, the soul of the 
Karma-organism, awakes; there is begun srsti or creation 
Over again. 
73. And how does he create? He matures this saficita. 
He proceeds according to law, according to the Vedas. The uni- 
formity of the course of Karma-fruition is but the reflection of 
the Impersonal Reason, which is an emanation of Brahman 
co-eternal with the creative I§$vara. [Svara, having recog- 
nised it, has breathed it out m the form of Revelation (vak or 
veda). The mukta (free) souls, who have had their saficita 
all burnt off by knowledge (or, it may be conceived, only those of 
them whose saficita was acquired in 1cciprocity with the cosmic 
saficita, going to be actualised in this creation), now freely, joy- 
ously get incarnated as deputy-creators of I§va1a,. as the strands 
of His creative buddhi or grace, as His manasa-putras 
(sons begotten of buddhi), as the Vedic seers (Β 915 who see 
the mantras constituting Impersonal Reason), to quicken the 
sthavaras once again into life. who now look out with young 
eyes of wonder on the renovated world. 
74. Thus srsti (creation) succeeds pralaya (dissolution) 
and pralaya succeeds srsti. Sreti, as through Buddhi 
(the will and the imeilect being the same to Him), is the func- 
tion of Iisvara in rajas-envelope, i.e., of Brahma. 
Pralaya, its obverse. is the function of 1S$vara in tamas- 
envelope (envelope of unconsciousness), i.e., of Mahes- 
vara; while sthiti (or subsistence of the world) with its up- 
ward and downward trends is of I§vara in the envelope of 
sattva as Providence or Visnu. The alternation of the 
Trinity is eternal ; it is only the nothingness of K ar ma artistically 
exhibited on the stage of ume, the empirical picture of ISvara 
being trigunatita an emanation, from His being. It may also 
be viewed as evolution from the point of view of individual souls 
who, in their moralised reason as evolved with the procession of 
cycles, recognise an increasing moral purpose in the procession, 
assured of their progress towards moksa along this “eddying yet 
advancing stream” of Kama. 
75. The nature of Brahman and I§vara has been explicat- 
ed at some length. It will suffice now only to indicate the main

=== PAGE 85 ===
VEDANTIC METAPHYSICS. 6] 
stages in the onward course of creation, along the three lines 
(1) IS vara (as invested with para-prakrti). (2) imdividual 
souls as embedded in this para and constituting the forces or the 
weapons of ISvara’s activity, and (3) apara-prakrti as 
gradualiy diflerentiated in response to this activity. 
76. (1) and (2). In nirvikalpa-samadhi, the indivi- 
dual is no longer an individual, he is unditierenced Brahman. 
In susupti, he is like I$ vara, dual; IS vara in one aspect is 
trigunatita and in another aspect invested with Ssuddha- 
sattva-upadhi or transparent envelope of sattva (section 
10). and so the individual is merged in Brahman on the one 
hand (cf. svamapiti, attains his self) and is invested with an 
envelope of undiflerenced buddhi on the other. On waking from 
deep sleep, the individual recognises that he has slept blissfully. 
This constitutes evidence for the envelope of buddhi and ex- 
plains why it is called A4nandamaya-kosa or envelope of 
bliss. This anandamaya 15 called the puccha or tail of 
Brahman who is 4nanda or bliss itself without an envelope. 
As having limitation in the individual, it is said to bo malina- 
sattva or partly opaque, as opposed to the Suddha-sattva 
or transparent envelope of Is vara. 1115 opacity or limitation is 
due to the sainsk4aras or the timeless traces of the vidya- 
karma (knowledge and action) of a past life which constitute the 
dormant individuality in susupti, making up what is called 
the Kirana-Sarira (will-self) which is viewed as merged in 
anandamaya. These traces again in their kinetic aspect, 
i.e., viewed as operative functions, constitute the ν]]} ἢ ἃ ἢ ἃ 
maya kosa, the envelope constituted by the original springs of 
thought and volition, the tendencies which may be indifferently re- 
garded as inherited habits or as ‘reminiscences of a life before this’ 
Thus these sainskdras or vijfiinas, too, are double-faced 
like Janus, and lie as it were in the borderland between sugupti 
and dream, ‘Manomaya’ is the name applied to the body 
constituted by manas, the receiver or unity of presentations, 
images and desires (as distinct from the instinctive springs which 
belong to vijidnamaya). Pranamaya is the unity of the 
five sense-organs (not the bodily sites but the supersensuous prin- 
ciples of seeing . hearing, etc..), the five organs of action (not the 
limbs supplied with muscles. but rathcr the radical ‘kinaesthetic’ 
presentations—articulation, locomotion, prehension, etc., and

=== PAGE 86 ===
62 STUDIES IN VEDANTISM 
lastly the five pranas (not ‘airs’ as they are often translated, but 
rather the five strands or currents of vital functions in the body). 
(Without attempting a detailed explanation of prana, apana, 
etc., we may point out that these are eaplicitly distinguished from 
air,eg., in the Brahma-sitra‘navayu-kriye prthag- 
upadesat, where δὰ ἡ Καὶ ἃ describes these as the adhya- 
tma counterparts of air. In fact it would appear from other con- 
texts that air is taken to be life instead of life being taken to be 
air) Linga-Sarira or the subtile body is the name given to 
the complex of the three envelopes. vijhanamaya, mano- 
maya and pranamaya. which thus comprises seventeen 
elements (buddhi, manas, five sense-organs, five organs 
of action, and five vital functions). Another name is suksma- 
§arira, called also ὁϊόι and madhyama-prana in the 
Upanisads, where it is not often distinguished from ihe 
Kadrana-Sarira. The next body or envelope is the anna- 
maya or sthila-Ssarira, the material body which the soul 
enters in waking life but abandons in dream etc., and after death. 
77. The individual soul, as identified with the material body is 
the jiva or dehin; the unity of all these jivas, the collective 
or cosmic self in the waking state is Viraj or VaiSvanara. 
As identified with the subtile body. the individual is the lingin 
or taijasa, and the unity of all taijasas is Hiranya- 
garbha or Sitratman. Lastly, as identified with the 
Karana-Sarira, the individual is praifia, and the unity of 
all prajfias is ISvara. From Isvara to Viraj, from 
prajfia to dehin, is the order of srsti or progressive mate 
rialisation, the reverse being that of pralaya or progressive 
idealisation or deindividualisation. As the progress is continuous 
each stage is double-faced, and so what is predicated of I$vara 
is sometimes predicated of Hiranyagarbha, and so on. 
78. (3). We have already traced the stages of (a) maya as 
co-ordinate with Brahman, (b) the unity of para and apara- 
prakrti as co-ordinate with the trigunatita I$vara, and 
(Ὁ apara with tamas predominant as co-ordinate with ὁ ἃ - 
dha-sattva f§vara. Ak4aSa in the strictly adhibhita 
aspect is the last, for the second, though called avyakrta 
akaga (Section 67), is the indifference of adhyatma and 
adhibhiita. This 4k4@s8a, then, is the obverse face of bud- 
dhi, the first evolute of apara, the blank of objectivity, the

=== PAGE 87 ===
VEDANTIC METAPHYSICS. 63 
prius of space and matter. Next comes vayu, more determinate 
in character than 4kaéa, the primordial force or motion filling 
this &kasa and poising the heavenly bodies cach in its proper 
sphere, force conceived not in its mechanical aspect but as the 
cosmic life-force, that which constitutes the ¢akti or power of 
the prajinias, binding the samskaras, individual and cos- 
mic, to the buddhi-units and which. Jower down in the course 
of materialisation, is the nerve-force and the objective face of un- 
differentiated sensitivity (touch). The attribute of ἃ Κἃ 884 is said 
to be not only emptiness or blank objectivity, but also sound. 
This sensuous sound, though generated by air-wave, is not air- 
wave; the sense of hearing (not the bodily apparatus) apprehends 
the sensuous sound (as distinct from the air-wave): the locus of 
this sound is akasa. Sound again is the necessary sensuous 
basis for even the most abstract thoughts; so IS§vara has been 
said to apprehend the Impersonal Reason co-eternal with Him 
and to breathe it out in the shape of that potent sound-system, 
the Vedas. Vayu or air has not only these attributes of 
4k asa-—blankness and sound—but also touch. It is thus more 
determinate than ἃ Κα 68, although both are said to be amurta 
(without form), amrta (imperishable), yat ( going in every direc- 
tion, 1.e., infinite) and tya (invisible or paroksa), in contra- 
distinction from the three other primal matters, tejas, ap. and 
prthivi (fire, water, earth), which are said to be finite and 
perishable (Brhadaranyaka Upanisad. 11, ἢ. Here, 
then. is a nodal point in the gradual procession or emanation of 
the five primal matters, the V e d ἃ n tic analogues of the San- 
khya tanmatras (though with a difference), the probable 
explanation why very often the Upanisads speak of three 
the (last three) primal matters instead of five. Of the three, tejas 
has riuipa or colour in addition to the attributes of vayu; ap 
has rasa or taste (which goes with liquidity in all its variations) 
in addition to those of tejas; and prthivi has smell in 
addition to those of ap. 
79. It may be pointed out that the theory of these five primal 
matters does not, in any way, conflict with the theory of the ele- 
ments in Chemistry. The principle of classification is altogether 
different. The five matters are the concretes or objectives corres- 
ponding to the five kinds of sensation, the sensations’® being taken 
18. ie. the sensa. 
Ν

=== PAGE 88 ===
64 STUDIES IN VEDANTISM: 
as the attributes of objects (and attributes in Vedanta are 
identical with substance). Whether such a classification is fruitful 
of results or not is a different enquiry; at any rate it fits in with 
the peculiar idealism of Vedanta. One is tempted to con- 
nect it with Mill’s dictum that the number of primary laws of 
nature cannot be less numerous than the distinguishable feelings 
of the human mind; only what is regarded as a mere abstract 
concept or law by the empiricist is taken in Vedanta to be 
substantial matter (Section 42). 
80. Besides, it is to be noticed that if akasa is conceived 
to stand on the level of susupti, and vayu on the borderland 
between susupti and dream, the three other elements stand 
on the level of dream, while the elements of Chemistry are all on 
the level of waking or the level of gross matter. On this waking 
level Vedanta would introduce these primal matters, not in 
their simplicity but as compounded or paficikrta (quintupled). 
Paiicikarana is the name given to the process of the combi- 
nation of the matters according to a formula like 4a, 4b, jc, 4d. 
je where a, b, c, d, e, stand for the matters. Sometimes when the 
last three matters are alone taken, the process is called trivrt- 
karana or tripling (Ja, 10, jc). The akasa, vayu etc. 
which are perceived by our senses, are only the modes of this 
compounded matter, the primal matters being supersensuous. 
81. The shadowy ‘names and forms’ imbedded in the primal 
maya get actualised as material objects in this paficikrta 
matter. The noumenal will-self here gets materialised into a 
dehin:; here then is the sphere of Karma-fruition and also 
of moral probation. 
82. We may conclude the preserft study with a paraphrase 
(with interpretations) of two cosmogonic accounts from the 
Upanisads, in illustration of the Vedantic views already 
discussed. The first is from Chindogya Upanisad. 
VI, ii,—This empirical world, diffcrentiated into names and 
forms) was barely existent in the beginning (was the bare ‘that’ as 
distinct from the ‘what’), one without a second (homogeneous 
with it or heterogeneous). It was (aikaata, thought and willed, 
which mean the same thing to it), ‘I shall be many: I shall gene- 
rate’, and accordingly created tejas (fire). Then tejas thought. 
‘I shall be many, I shall generate’, and accordingly created water.

=== PAGE 89 ===
VEDANTIC METAPHYSICS 65 
Water next thought, ‘I shall be many, I shall generate’, and creat- 
ed earth (annam). 
[This one Existent (sat) is then intelligence and not the 
unintelligent pradhana of Sankhya. Yhis creation accord- 
ing to Sankara. is emanation (vivarta), for nothing can 
be distinct from Sat. Fire, water, εἰς... also thought, i.e., as 
embodied in these. Sat thought and instituted the successive 
steps of creation. Each link in the chain of causation is not 
only a medium but a true cause in the reflection of the First 
Cause. This amounts to saying that God creates reasonably, ac- 
cording to Law. ] 
VI. it.—All living beings, whether oviparous. viviparous , ot 
vegetable. generate their respective seeds (These are the Jivas 
or the beginningless units of individuality . ) 
The One God (Sat) willed. “1 shall introduce myself into 
these three gods (fire. water, earth. the basal devatas) through 
this Jiva (these beginningless principia individuationts, 1.¢.. as 
Sankara takes them. the samskiairas. in the buddhi of 
the Sat. of the forms of a past creation) and make ‘names 
and forms’ manifest. I shall render each of these (basal) deva- 
tis three-fold (trivrt) which does not deny pancikrta or 
quintupled , explained already’. So it did. 
83. The next passage is from Brhad-firanyaka-Upa- 
nisad.I1. ii It exhibits the characteristic mystic imagination of 
the Upanisads. Here a large latitude of conjectural inter- 
pretation must be allowed. Sankara’s interpretations have 
been accepted wherever available. 
There was nothing here in the beginning . Everything was shroud- 
ed by Death or Hunger. This Hunger is Death. He created ma- 
nas. in order that He might feel Himself (invested) with a mind. 
(This Death is here identified by Sankara with Hiranya- 
garbha. He is, in fact, Hiranyagarbha as passing into 
Isvara. He is the Universal Hunger which has retracted into 
itself the entire cvolved world. Again, as Hunger is at once th: 
destructive and creative stress of the pranamaya, so the self 
of dissolution or death is the self of creation or life. Thus Death 
wanting to be Life, 1.¢., wanting to create, created to Himself a 
mind to anticipate the creation. The will-self is imbedded in in- 
telligence. We have already explained the alternation of pra- 
Jaya and srsti.) 
7A

=== PAGE 90 ===
66 STUDIES IN VEDANTISM 
He worshipped and was satisfied. As Heé worshipped (fire 
and) water came into being, as the ‘embodied parts of his devotion’ 
(pijanga-bhitah). 
[Death has now passed into the living mind, which now re- 
duplicates itself, becomes self-conscious. Creation here is self- 
consciousness, self-worship. Worshipping a god is becoming that 
god. Nature is sometimes spoken of as the ‘processio of the 
Holy Spirit? or as ‘a sacramental system’. Of the ‘embodied 
parts of the worship’, fire (with special reference to the sacrificial 
fire of the asvamedha sacrifice) is the direct embodiment, 
and water is the indirect embodiment ; for, fire is said to be situat- 
ed both within and outside water. The series from akasa to 
prthivi is one of growing determinateness, and after vayu, 
of descending magnitude, too. ] 
(Fire thus situated) thickened the froth of the waters and 
turned it into Earth. As He thus created Earth, He became fati- 
gued and forth exuded from within his fiery perspiration . 
[ The self-worship of Hiranyagarbha means the en- 
casement of Himself in the primal matters evolved out of tamas 
{i.c., out of the imperfections or Karma of the individual selves) 
and then the irradiation of this cnvelope with the fire of the 
self within, which makes the whole a living, developing ‘mun- 
dane egg’. ‘Self-worship’ means ‘being at once the worshipped and 
the grosser worshipping self’. ] 
Now this fire or life (prana) within this mundane egg 
divided itself into three parts, Aditya (the sun, being the eye 
and soul of akasa), air and fire. without losing its identity. 
(Thus all the five matters are mentioned.) This last (fire) rests 
on water. 
He (Death) wanting a second body (other than manas) 
effected a junction between His mind and vik (the World). 
The generative seed (entering the waters) developed into the year 
(sam-vatsara). 
[This second body is the paficikrta body of Virij. 
V ik is objective or Impersonal Reason, that which is coined into 
words in the Vedas. He united thought with vik, i.e., reflect- 
ed on the order of creation as laid down in the Vedas, on the 
eternal Logos or the Law. The generative seed is the cosmic 
system of vidyi-karma acquired in a previous life of Hi- 
fanyagarbha, the collective self of all individual units of

=== PAGE 91 ===
VEDANTIC METAPHYSICS 67 
vidyi-katma. No creation out of nothing; the matter (fire, 
etc.) is but aparad-prakrti, the ignorance constituting indi- 
viduality. as encasing the self; the forms are the primordial 
principia individuationis, the Karma-units; the law is eternal 
and is only recognised by this mind-endowed (samanaska) 
Hiranyagarbha. He makes Karma fructify . in grace (its 
obverse being self-worship), according to luw, by reflecting on it 
(for His knowing is willing). The Logos, quickened by reflection 
becomes the generative sced (pari-prakrti) planted in the 
waters (in the primal matters generally, in aparidi-prakrti) 
and develops into the year. The year is the eternal Idea of the 
concrete year; the yearly procession of events as a whole, ever re- 
peating itself in the kaleidoscope of sensuous apprehension, re- 
presents a single pulsation (differentiation) of His life. It is the 
prototype of the infinite of waking time, not yet born.] 
It took a year for the cgg to be hatched. Thus came the year 
into being; there was no year before this. When the babe Viraj 
was born. Death opened His jaws to devour it. and viraj 
screamed out in terror. ‘Thus speech came into being. 
[The babe 1s the waking world just beginning to sce hght. 
It is the first waking actuality, the potentiality of all the future. 
The phenomenal world, however, from the moment it comes into 
being, is in the jaws of death (cp. Chaindogya, mrtyuna 
gtrastameva); it is an illusory differentiation. Viraj 
screamed as the babe just born would scream. as its blank con- 
sciousness emerges from the dark unconsciousness which still 
hangs over it. Sound is, in more senses than one, the bridge 
between the visible world and the invisible. 
Death paused and thought. ‘Why devour the babe? (Let it 
have its spell of sensuous development.) So it developed accor- 
ding to νᾶ Κα (impersonal Reason) into the articulate Vedas. 
Yedic metres, sacrifices, men, animals οἷς. 
[Vik has three forms: (1) Objective Reason, (2) this as 
actualised in thought or reflection, (3) this as sensuously developed 
into the Vedas........ The Vecdas are again prior in reality 
to the phenomenal world. The position of sound (ἃ Κα ὁ ἃ.) be- 
tween phenomenon and noumenon is to be noticed .] 
All this sensuous creation He seized to devour. Death de- 
sired to celebrate a second AS§vamedha (horse-sucritice, the 
first being that performed in a previous life by virtue of which

=== PAGE 92 ===
68 STUDIES IN VEDANTISM 
He came to exist at the beginning of the cycle). He becamé 
weary and began to practise susterities (tapas). Forth de- 
parted from His body (the Viraj-body) sentiency and power, 
leaving it ‘turgid and. defiled’. But his mind never lost sight of it. 
(The Viraj-body has to die. to be sacrificed in order to 
live. He was weary. impressed with the nothingness of the sen- 
suous body as such, which is always in the jaws of death. But 
this sensuous life has to be lived through. Let it be a life of self- 
sacrifice then. Let the body be purificd. So His heart was all 
along set on this purification .) 
He thought, “Let this body be medhya first. 1.6... worthy of 
being sacrificed, and then 1 shall get embodied in it’. Mean- 
while the body had become ‘turgescent’? (aSvat), and so as 
He entered it once again. He became an aSva or horse (a 
sensuous body which the higher self fills. but with which it does 
not get confused. May we not trace here something like the stages 
of moderfh Ethics : (i) naive sensuousness , (11) a division in spirit 
and asceticism, the sensuous body to be thoroughly mortified, 
(iii) reinstatement of the sensuous self as conscious of its nothing- 
ness by itself yet justifying its existence as an organ of duty?) 
He let the horse loose for a year (as they do at the ASsva- 
medha ceremony) and then tied it up and offered it as a sacri- 
fice. offered up each animal as a Sacrifice to its proper god 
(offered up Himself as a sacrifice to Himself) and thus attained 
the state of Prajapati. Thus He conquered the second 
death (became the archetypal Life. and is not born again to be 
devoured by death). 
[The year here stands for the cycle of samsara, the wheel 
of Karma from which jivas fly at a tangent into moksa 
(liberation). into a Death which has conquered itself, into Eternal 
Life . ‘Letting Loose’ represents the fact that God lets the indi- 
vidual eliminate his Karma by Karma, till in knowledge the 
individuality lapses altogether .]

=== PAGE 93 ===
CHAPTER III 
VEDANTIC LOGIC 
(Mainly based on Vedinta-paribhisa) 
84, The central truth of the Vedintic system. the pure self 
or Brahman as undifferenced ‘being , consciousness, and bliss’, 
together with other ancillary truths about supersensuous things, 
is taken by Vedanta to be essentially revealed, not ascertained 
by any human evidence like that of perception or inference. The 
self that is immediately perceived, for example. is not known to 
be existent, far less to be existent after death. (Sankara says 
this in his introductory note to Brhadaranyaka-Upani- 
sad, and it is pretty much the same as what Kant says about the 
‘paralogisms of the Pure Reason’.) True. even in Vedanta, 
arguments are advanced in proof of the existence and immorta- 
lity of the soul. but these aie only stigeestions of the Beyond by 
phenomenal signs, not proofs positive , as they have been taken by 
Naiyayikas. If the ecstatic intuition in which alone the super- 
sensuous is knowable is not forthcoming at once. and if the pheno- 
menal world only suggests the noumenon as a thought. though it 
may be necessary thought. how is the enquiry into it to begin at 
all? Some provisional belicf (§raddha4) is required to start 
the enquiry. A mere thought. even though necessary . can never 
induce belief. can never be mistaken for knowledge; for in know- 
ledge there is an unmistakable intuitive or ‘given’ character. 
This provisional belief can only be induced by authoritative state- 
ment (§abda or agama) which may, for aught we know, be 
disproved afterwards. But the statemeni gains in reliability if on 
acting on it or after contemplation of it we attain a progressive 
satisfaction or realisation. That is the only justification which 
we may expect to have of the truth of what is claimed to be 
revelation, from below, i.e.. before we have finally realised its 
truth. Whether metaphysical enquiry necessarily presupposes a 
revelation is an issue which need not be confused with the other 
issue whether the Veda itself is revealed or not. If it be granted 
that spirit can only teach spirit and that truth can only be recog- 
nised and not created by mental activity, it must also be granted 
that revelation is necessary, and that the Word is God, and that

=== PAGE 94 ===
70 STUDIES IN VEDANTISM 
accordingly there should be an eternal succession of omniscient 
teachers . 
85. At the same time Vedanta allows that for the attain- 
ment of the knowledge of Brahman. thete is required not 
only sravana (hearing of revealed texts and trying to under- 
stand them) but also manana and nididhyasana. The 
exact relation of these processes has heen disputed, but the 
processes themselves are recognised in all Vedantic schools. 
Manana is defined as ‘the mental act which generates know- 
Icdge by means of arguments defending the truth embodied in the 
texts against objections preferred by other evidences’ (pra- 
mana). Inference, and the other natural sources of knowledge . 
cannot yield the sacred truths but only point to them. So the 
proofs of the existence of God in European philosophy have some- 
times been pronounced to be no proofs, for the conclusion there 
necessarily transcends the premises. Inference. etc., however . 
show the direction along which one may proceed to the truths. 
They refute heretical objections: and by detaining the thoughts 
about the truths. they cnable the mind to get a tight grip of 
them and thus prepare the way for realising them in_ ecstatic 
intuition . 
86. Hence the position of logic in Vedanta. It considers 
all the pram&anas or sources of knowledge. They are six in 
number: pratyaksa, anumana, upamana, agama, 
arthapatti, anupalabdhi. It is advisable to keep up the 
Sanskrit names, instead of giving the crdinary translations, some 
of which are, to say the least , misleading. Other schools of Indian 
Philosophy give shorter lists, but Vedanta vindicates the neces- 
sity of each of these pramanas. It will be noticed that logic 
here is conceived to have a more extended scope than is ordinarily 
allowed to it, including as it does a consideration not only of 
mediate but also of immediate knowledge. It necessarily com- 
prises a good deal of epistemological matter. 
87. Knowledge is of two kinds: anubhava, reached 
through evidence. which may be both true (when it is prama) 
and false. but which is always something new. previously un- 
attained; and smrti or memory-knowledge which, however, is 
not something new. In the persisting cognition of the same 
object, there is a single unchanging presentation illuminated by. 
i.e., subsumed under the form of the self. Such a persisting

=== PAGE 95 ===
VEDANTIC LOGIC 71 
determinate cognition (as distinct from the presentation) ceases, 
however, when it is contradicted by another cognition standing 
on stronger evidence. The theory of the persistence of the presen- 
tation fits in with the peculiar realism of Vedanta which de- 
mands an intuition-continuum for every grade of abstract thought 
(Section 34). The necessary thought of the identity between a 
presentation and an idea must have its basis in the continuity of 
the presentation in some real medium. Besides. as knowledge is 
viewed in Vedanta from the standpoint of the self as spontaneity 
and not from the empirical standpoint. the logical activity of the 
self (and not the presentation) is taken to determine how lone a 
mode of cognition can be said to endure as one and the same; it 
is said to cease only when contradicted. 
PRATYAKSA 
(EXTERNAL AND INTERNAL PIRCFPTION) 
88. Perception, as has already been explained (Section 23) is 
Brahman itself the immediate identity of knower and known. 
In fact the attitude of nirvikalpa-samadhi is retained in 
the perception of phenomenal objects. There is a difference. no 
doubt. between the timeless knowledge of Brahman and the 
abrupt emergence of the perceptual knowledge; but even in the 
latter the knowledge by itself is timeless and quiescent. its mani- 
festation only being in time. The image of dust-motes getting 
into a quiescent sunbeam will furnish an apt illustration. Presen- 
tations are in time; they manifest the self and limit it at the same 
time. All determinate knowledge is a self-abnegation , involving 
as it does a stratification of the pure consciousness or caitanya 
into three forms: Pramitr-caitanya or determinate self- 
consciousness. vrtti-caitanya or modes of consciousness, 
and visaya-caitanya or empirical object. 
89 In perception the manas (streaming out of the sense- 
orifices of the body in visual and auditory perception and keeping 
at its bodily seat in the other forms of sense-perception) 1s said 
to take the form of the object ,i.e.. get determined into a mode or 
vrtti like the object , occupying the same position in space and 
time as the object, both being pervaded by an identical (deter- 
minate) consciousness or caitanya, provided, of course, the 
object is capable (yogya) of being cognised by the senses. An 
explanation is necessary.

=== PAGE 96 ===
72 STUDIES IN VEDANTISM 
90. That an influence from the object produces sensation in 
us need not be denied by Vedanta. The point, here is the ex- 
planation of that extra-organic localisation which specially marks 
visual and auditory perception. Now in perception, there is a 
tendency to slur over the sensation-sign and pass at once to its 
significate . constituted by motor and cther ideas. What is this 
signifying? Rapid association, mental chemistry may be granted . 
but what is it from the point of view of the self’ From the stand- 
point then of the self. as invested with manazs. as knowing the 
not-self in space viewed through the glasses of the manas. may 
it not be held that the Vedantic account of the mind going 
out to meet the object is truer than the confused physiological 
account that the object or influence from the object comes to meet 
the mind as located in the body? Even in the grossest form of 
consciousness . when the body is taken io be the pcint of reference . 
not being distinguished from the self. Ved4inia recognises in 
this going out the priority of the knower to the object and so still 
keeps the meaning of knowledge intact. If it bc argued that grow- 
ing reflection will shift the point of reference from the body to 
something more spiritual, it is replied that unless one rises to 
levels of consciousness higher than the waking. the self cannot be 
thought of except as located in the body. The objection that the 
streaming out of manas involves a materialistic conception is 
easily disposed of if we remember that Vedanta recognises no 
absolute distinction (Section 42) between the self and material 
object but admits grades of emanatory existences between them, 
each being material in relation to the grade before it, what we 
mean by matter coming last in the series. Ultimately no doubt 
Vedanta will hold that the body is phenomenal, this space also 
is phenomenal, and that this ‘going out’ of the mind is only 
illusory. 
91. ‘The mind takes the form of the object’. It is the idea 
of the conformity of the mental order with a given order. No 
idealisation can completely do without this given element. Below 
ecstatic intuition where this ‘given’-ness completely disappears , 
dualism is inevitable. 
92. The mind and the object occupy the same space-position. 
This distinguishes perception from inference. In inference. the 
mind only «hinks of the inferred object but does not go out to meet 
it. The distinction is practically that drawn in modern psycho-

=== PAGE 97 ===
VEDANTIC LOGIC 73 
logy. only viewed from the point of view of the self’s spontaneity. 
that in perception the given element and its interpretation are 
welded together in a unity, while in inference they are kept dis- 
tinct. In perception, the self as invested with the mental mode 
(the interpretative concept which. relatively to the sensation, is 
the beginningless vasana or samskira, analogous to the 
eternal names and forms actualised in creation) becomes further 
materialised into the particular function of the sense-organ ex- 
cited by the particular stimulus (and this might be regarded as a 
maturation of itt Karma). In inference the self just expects 
to be realised: it descends from its plane to 2 Icwer plane. but 
not to the lowest. (Sometimes the tension is so great that it dis- 
charges itself in the waking plane. in cther words. inference lapses 
into a percept. as in ‘I see my brother’ Does not this show that 
all perception is illusory. as it is always seeming to see. the mind 
forgetting itself and becoming the body )? 
93. The perceptive act and the object occupy the same time- 
position. The object of memory precedes the act of memory. But 
it may be ekadesa with it. 1.c , occupy the same position as 
it. in the same scnse in which, in internal perception , a pleasure is 
said to be ekadeSa with the perception of the pleasure. What 
then is this de $a? It should be remembered that in Vedanta, 
iik @Sa appears in all the stages. waking. dream, etc.. and there 
is the theory of the intermediate existences between self and matter. 
94. One caitanya_ pervades both visaya_ (empirical 
object) and vrtti (apprehending mental mode). This is readily 
understood in the light of Kant’s theory of the self working uncon- 
sciously in the object-consciousness : all consciousness in /mpli- 
citly self-consciousness. This ‘implicitness’, this indistinguishable 
blending of the subject and object. is precisely what is brought out 
in this identity of caitanya (self) covering visaya (object) and 
vrtti (mental mode). 
95. Yogyatva or ‘the object being capable of being per- 
ceived’ distinguishes perception from ὅ ἃ Ὁ ἦ ἃ (knowledge through 
authoritative statement) which last can take cognisance of super- 
sensuous objects as spiritual merit and demerit (dharma- 
dharma). 
96. In the case of a judgment in which the subject is per- 
ceived but the predicate is inferred, or in which the terms are per-

=== PAGE 98 ===
74 STUDIES IN VEDANTISM 
ceived through different senses, if the judgment be one substan- 
tive mental state, the foregoing account of the perceptual process 
is not tenable; for how can manas at once go out of the body 
and be in it, or go out of two different sense-orifices at the same 
time? But then . according to Vedanta, the judgment is not one 
State but rather a process from the subject-thought to the predicate 
thought. It would appear. from its criticism of Nyiya, that a 
judgment. according to it, does not involve a conceptualistic uni- 
versal . co-substantial with the terms and eternally connected with 
them (Section 43). Vedanta might hold that this transition 
from the subject to the predicate is a necessary thought of the union 
of the terms, but then this does not mean their concrete identity-in- 
difference. If the thought be concretely realised (in the Vedin- 
tic sense, 1.6. through the judging self being de-individualised) . 
the relation will cease to be relation; one would see their undiffer- 
enced identity. When the copula is concretely realised , the terms 
are lower in reality; when the copula is only abstract. the terms 
are of higher reality. 
97. The perception of object so long discussed may not 
amount to the knowledge of object as object. i.e.. as distinct 
from the subject and yet related to it. Mere perception of object re- 
quires only the coincidence of vrtti-caitanya with visaya- 
caitanya (Section 88). but the perception of object as object 
requires also their coincidence with pramatr-caitanya. It 
requires that the self should not be a mere logical pre-supposition: 
it should come out as determinate self-consciousness as distinct 
from object-consciousness. The vrtti or mental mode in rela- 
tion to which the object ecxists—for the object is only empirical 
object—is a determination of pramatr cr the determinate self. 
The vrtti then points two ways, towards the self and towards 
the object. At each moment. the whole of manas gets modified 
into vrtti (this being vivarta or emanation, not parinima 
or real modification), by the ripening of some samskara or 
K ar ma- seed, under the stress of the cosmic Καὶ arma- organism 
appearing as stimulus. So on the one hand the samskara gets 
materialised into a percept and the percept into a bodily (cerebral) 
impression; on the other the cosmic stress takes the form of the 
phenomenal object (and that gives the sense-stimulus). (This 
account has to be expanded a little to explain the extra-organic 
localisation in visual and auditory perception.) Thus the

=== PAGE 99 ===
VEDANTIC LOGIC 75 
pramatr-caitanya rests on the visaya-caitanya in 
the perception of the objecc as object. 
98. In the internal perception of the self. the pramiatr- 
caitanya does not rest on visaya-caitanya, but rests 
simply on vrtti. Not that it is then the pure self seeing the 
vrtti as object; it sees, only as invested with vrtti, only as 
determined , i.e., as it sees in a dream. So Sankara, in his 
commentary on Brh. Upanisad IV, iii, points out that in the 
stage of dream the self-luminous (svayain-jy oti) self sees the 
dream-forms as object and therefore is itself revealed: but in the 
stage of susupti, where vrtti or mental mode lapses alto- 
gether, the self-luminosity is not revealed. being present in its 
purity. To be visible, an object must not be perfectly transparent . 
99. So it is held on the one hand that ἃ ἢ ἃ τὰ ΚΓ ἃ (section 
57) requires a vrtti or empirical mode and on the other that even 
in illusory object-consciousness., there is a real matcrialisation of 
the self. The last point requires explanation. When the nacre is 
mistaken for silver. the nacre, a mode of maya (as every pheno- 
menal object is) modifies the mental mode coincident with it by 
the idea of silver which it revives by similarity. The self looking 
through it secs the objective illusory modc, silver. This theory of 
an objective illusory mode or anirvacantiya existence is 
characteristic of Vedanta. 
100. Objections met:—(1) Wf the illusory object, silver, is 
created in the absence of silver, we could see anything of which 
we have an idea, i.e., there could be no difference between image 
and percept. So it is held by the anyatha-khyiti-vidin 
that in such a case, the self freely . perversely applies to the nacre 
a predicate, silver, which does not belong to it but to something 
else. No illusory object, silver, is here cieated. We only think, 
pass intellectually to. the object silver which, however. exists 
somewhere. The reply is that to take the interpretative element 
in perception (true or false) to be merely intellectual or merely 
associational (representative) would be alike wrong: it is really a 
concept based on an associated image. This concept is the 
necessary objective element, the image is the subjective element. 
Yet though the subjective element is there, Vedanta would 
argue against the atma-khyati-vadin that the silver in 
this case is not consciously remembered. Such a subjectivity . un- 
conscious of its subjectivity, is nothing but the anirvacya or

=== PAGE 100 ===
76 STUDIES IN VEDANTISM 
‘inexplicable’, pritibhasika or illusory objectivity. The objec- 
tivity, however, which is contrasted with a conscious subjectivity , 
would be the phenomenal or vyavaharika reality. In the 
presence of the thing-in-itself or paramarthika reality, 
these two realities are just the same. both illusory: but this 
thing-in-itself, is knowable precisely because in the reflection of 
its light, maya itself is differentiated into the (phenomenally) 
real and the illusory. 
101. (2) How to know that this nacre is silver? Through the 
coincidence in position (ekadeSatva) of the two objective 
modes of miiya. the corresponding subjective modes. and pra- 
matr-caitanya. (3) Why is not the illusory silver apparent 
to all? An object-determination is a determination of the parti- 
cular subject who has the illusion. That most things, however , 
appear much the same to all is explained by a community of the 
Karma of different selves. (4) If in all judgments. there is a 
transition from one cognition to another (Section 96). how can 
there be a false perceptual judgment at all? It is replied that 
in the perceptual judgment ‘this nacre is silver’. there is a coinci- 
dence of the determinations of caitanya corresponding to ‘this’ 
and ‘silver’; as a single cognition, therefore, it admits of truth 
and falsehood. (5) Why not say, ‘this is sometimes silver , some- 
times nacre’? —Because when the (apparent) percept of silver ceases , 
one is not conscious of the real silver being absent but only of 
the illusory siver having vanished (Section 46). When a percept 
is contradicted by another percept. there is indeed no final guaran- 
tee that the contradicting percept is not illusory instead of the con- 
tradicted percept—for there can be such a thing as illusion of 
illusion ; still there is the psychological fact that while in the con- 
tradicting perception. one has to believe that it is true and that 
the contradicted perception is false. It is the abrupt disappearance 
of the silver when looked at carefully with the naive belief (coupl- 
ed in many cases with a reflective inferential belief) that what 
is looked at carefully is real, that accounts for our disbelief in 
the persistence of silver. 
ANUMANA (INFERENCE ) 
102. The Vedantic theory of the nature of inference is 
best studied in relation to the Nyiya theory of inference in 
its two aspects, inference as the process of discovering truth for

=== PAGE 101 ===
VEDANTIC LOGIC 77 
oneself (svirtha), and as the form of proving or exhibiting the 
truth to others (parartha). The main contenticn between Ve- 
danta and Nyaya is in regard to the former. 
103. Three stages in the inferential process are recognised in 
Nyaya. In the example, ‘the mountain has fire, because it has 
smoke’, there must have been established, first, a constant con- 
comitance (vyapti) between fire and smoke, from their occur- 
ring together in kitchens, etc.; then this smoke must have been 
perceived in the mountain (paksa-dharmata); and finally 
this last relation 1s combined with the memory of the vyaipti 
(trtiya-linga-paramarsa) in order to get the conclu- 
sion, ‘the mountain has fire’. In other words, the middle term 
is first (inductively) related to the major, then to the minor, and 
then the two relations are related to one another. The three 
processcs may be symbolised thus:—{i} Am connected with Ap, 
Bm—Bp , Cm—Cp...... therefore m-p; (i1) Xm has m (is like Am, 
Bm.... which have p); (11) Xm has m, m-p; (reappearing in 
memory); the two together leading to ‘therefore, Xm has p’. 
104. To this account Vedanta has the following objec- 
tions : (a) The first two stages precede the inference and are 
no part of it; (b) ‘m-p’ in the third stage is more a function 
(samskara or vyapara) than a substantive mental state, 
though it is a conscious function. being quickened with the con- 
sciousness of the middle term; (c) ‘m-p’, the function, though re- 
tained in memory, is not operative as a conscious remembrance. 
(A conscious remembrance of it may sometimes accompany the 
inference though forming no part of it). (4) The whole propo- 
sition, “Xm has p’ is not inferred: p only is inferred, Xm being 
perceived. 
105. The second objection, in a sense, comprehends all the 
others. It is connected with the Ved antic position on jati al- 
ready explicated (Section 43). When Mill holds that the conclusion 
in a syllogism is drawn, not from the premises but according to 
them only , that not rules but facts constitute the evidence , he agrees 
with Vedanta (and Hegel) in disbelieving in the abstract univer- 
sal being co-substantial with things and eternally connected with 
them. How can an eternal thing be eternally connected with non- 
eternal things? The so-called axiom of the syllogism cannot pos- 
sibly subsume particulars under it, for the simple reason that 
no premise is absolutely true. From the purely conceptualistic

=== PAGE 102 ===
78 STUDIES iN VEDANTISM 
point of view (that of Nyaya), the unity of the inferential act 
is never really attained ; the relation of relations, as in trtiya- 
linga-paramaré§a, is unintelligible. So long as the univer- 
sal is regarded as a substantive state of the mind and not a 
spontaneity (a ‘transitive’ state, as James would call it), the 
judgment must be regarded as pieced out of terms and reasoning 
as pieced out of the separate judgments , instead of reasoning being 
regarded as the unity prior to them all. Not that Vedanta 
accepts the Hegelian solution of the identity of contradictories . 
To it, the entire inferential process is summed up in the single 
word ‘function’, which does not constitute a substantive unity with 
the given minor term and the major term. Hence, too, the con- 
clusion is taken to be, not the whole proposition ‘Xm has p’ but 
only p. This accords with the Vediantic view of the judgment, 
already presented under perception (Section 96). This is also in- 
telligible in the light of the general Vedantic position that a 
grade of reality (to which. for cxample, the jati as the connota- 
tional universal belongs) (Scction 42) is unconsciously immanent in 
the next grade (to which the corresponding vyaktis or indivi- 
duals belong ) which it transcends but where, if consciously emcr- 
gent at all, it is taken as an abstract thought lower in point of rea- 
lity. Buddhi which is the self-affirmation in the copula, trans- 
cends manas which is yet informed by it. The axiom of the 
syllogism , like axioms in general, stands on the level of buddhi 
and is a timeless samskara. 
106. It must not be supposed , however. that Vedanta takes 
this process or function to be merely blind expectation, the work- 
ing of an anudbuddha or unawakened samskara. The 
wwaking of it helps on the function (tadudbodhasyapi 
sahakaritvat). It is in fact a conscious function, an intel- 
lectual synthesis and not an imaginative or associational synthesis. 
The major premise, according to Mill, is only a concurrent or 
subsequent justification of the conclusion. But is not the justifi- 
cation essential to inference as distinct from association? So 
Spencer holds in his Psychology (Special Analysis, Reasoning) , 
where he says that though the major premise comes after the con- 
clusion , it is recognised to have been operative before the conclu- 
sion, the recognition being the completion of the reasoning, with- 
out which in fact the reasoning would not be reasoning. In ‘the 
mountain has fire because it has smoke’, the perception of the

=== PAGE 103 ===
VEDANTIC LOGIC 79 
smoke rouses into conscious activity the samskara of the rela- 
tion between smoke and fire. This samskiara, though cons- 
cious , 15 not present as a conscious memory (smrti). The logical 
ground of inference is objective; it is not subjective memory. In 
illusory perception and in dreams, the anirvacaniya object 
(Section 99) is a memory-image, unconscious of its memory- 
character. 
107. As to the major premise itself or vyapti, it is not an 
inference by itself, being only the sasnskara generated by the 
observation of the concomitance (anvaya) between the major 
term and the middle term (and non-observation of non-concomi- 
tance), but not by the observation of the concomitance of the 
absences of the terms (vyatireka). As against Nyaya, it 
is argued that the positive evidence alone generates belief. The 
negative evidence only assures the reason, constitutes a collateral 
justification. It is clear that this criticism of Nyaya is directly 
connected with the Vedaniic position that the major premise 
is only a function, a consciously operative universal, and not an 
abstract reason only. All inference is then anvayiripa, i.e., 
founded on positive concomitance. It is not, however, to be called 
Kevalanvayi, as arguments like ‘this pot is knowable be- 
cause nameable are called, where according to Nyaya, vyati- 
reka-vyapti, 1.e.. concomitance between not-nameable and 
not-knowable 1s not ascertainable. because the terms do not stand 
for anything existent. According to Vedanta, there is no 
Kevalanvavyvi inference; as Brahman 15 the constant 
ground of all differenced reality, the negation of all things is ex- 
istent. According to nominalistic existential logic. the negative 
concept ‘not-A’ which has no positive existent equivalent, it alto- 
gether inadmissible in logic; and therefore a positive concept like 
A, of which the negation is non-existent, is also inadmissible. 
According to conceptualistic logic (including Nyiaya), there is 
a place for all that is conceivable. and therefore there is a place 
for a concept like A, though not-A be non-existent. In realistic 
Vedanta (realistic like Kantianism) . even the self-contradictory , 
not to speak of a mere conceivable, is positive; and what would 
sound paradoxical, the self-contradictory is the only positive both 
in the sense that the phenomenon in which contradiction is im- 
manent is the only thing determinately knowable, Brahman 
being indeterminate, and in the sense that, apart from Brah-

=== PAGE 104 ===
80 STUDIES IN VEDANTISM 
man to which all contradictory predicates aspire, the pheno- 
menal system is a house of cards or mere negation. 
108. Vedanta further holds that the number of the ins- 
tances observed is inessential to the induction or vyapti. How 
to reconcile this with the view of empirical logic that it is the 
one essential point in induction? Spencer, in his discussion of 
the Universal Postulate, holds, as against Mill, that though the 
belief in an axiom is generated by the instances, they are not 
separately registered in the mind but rather operate as a consoli- 
dated function, the inconceivability of the opposite being its nega- 
tive justification. So the positively operative universal is not the 
separate instances but the knowledge of the objective relation bet- 
ween the middle term and the major term. How this knowledge 
or belief is itself generated. how the number of instances affects 
its strength , is a question for psychology rather than for logic. The 
so-called syllogism of inclusion or exclusion is no inference at all 
or is inference only becausc the number leads us to expect some 
necessary connotational connexion. Logic is concerned primarily 
with truth and only secondarily. if at all. with the intensity cf 
the belief and degree of certainty. 
109. So much for the process of inference (svartha). [ὁ 
exhibit its cogency to others (parartha), we require an ideal 
form like the syllogism which is no inference but only the form 
of inference. Here, too. a difference emerges between Nyaya 
and Vedanta. Where Nyadya states five members of the 
syllogism—(i) The mountain has fire; (11) Because of thc smoke; 
(1) Whatever has smoke has fire, as the kitchen: (iv) This moun- 
tain has it; (v) Therefore it has fire—, Vedanta states only 
three, either the first three , (analytical) or the last three (syntheti- 
cal). The third member represents the major premise with the 
statement of an instance (‘the kitchen’), other than the minor term, 
falling under the middle term. which is necessary to obviate the 
appearance of a petitio principii in the syllogism. The second 
or the fourth member represents the minor premise and the first 
or the fifth the conclusion. The two premises, appearing only 
as functions in sviairtha inference, have to be exhibited as 
substantive propositions in parartha inference. The considet- 
ing of them together to secure the unity of the inference, which is 
taken by Nyaya to be a distinct step in svirtha inference, is 
exhibited by it in the parartha inference by presenting the

=== PAGE 105 ===
VEDANTIC LOGIC δι 
minor premise twice, first as the second member which is the bare 
cognition of the middle term, and then as the fourth member 
which is this cognition spread out as a proposition, and sand- 
wiching the vy &4pti-function, here spread out as the major pre- 
mise between them, the conclusion, too, is put both at the 
beginning and at the end. All this. apparently, according to 
Vedanta, is artificial; for in parartha inference, we should 
trust the hearer to function for himself and content ourselves with 
sketching the outlines of the language-picture which might start 
the necessary functioning in his mind. 
110. Hegel has taught us to look beyond logical forms, to the 
absolute realities of which they are shadows. Now the absolute 
of pratyaksa or perception is Brahman (Section 88); it re 
veals Brahman even in a phenomenal object. To admit empiri- 
cal reality is at the same time to admit the concept of reality. 
So inference reveals to us the unreality of the phenomenal uni- 
verse , the members of the absolute inference being, ‘This universe 
is unreal. because different from Brahman; all that is different 
from Brahman is unreal, like the silver in the nacre’. It has 
already been explained that when one is just passing into an intui- 
tion of Brahman, one feels that everything different from Bra h- 
man is unreal. Had it not been for the well-known difference 
between illusion und phenomenon (pratibhiasika and vya- 
vaharika) which gives us the concept of unreality, the unrea- 
lity of phenomenon would have been inconceivable as being abso- 
lutely without analogy; moksa wouid have been an abrupt 
irrational affair. On the other hand, had it not been for the 1m- 
plicit consciousness of Brahman or Reality, there would have 
been no difference between truth and untruth within phenomena. 
Thus the absolute of inference is Brahman informing all know- 
ledge against illusion within the phenomenal region and availing 
Himself of this self-created antithesis to negate the whole pheno- 
menal existence, to work out Karma by Karma, and thus to 
return to His undifferenced self. This process of Brahman is 
Isvara or Hegel’s Absolute Idea. 
UPAMANA 
111. Upamana is the source of the knowledge of similarity. 
It is an independent pramana. Whatever gives us new and 
certain knowledge is prama&na. Now the knowledge of similarity 
7B

=== PAGE 106 ===
a 
82 STUDIES IN VEDANTISM 
is certainly new knowledge, not mere memory. It is direct knows 
ledge , not inferential , for it is felt to be so; besides, what possible 
proof can there be of similarity? Can it be called ‘perception’ of 
similarity? No; two like things may not be both presented at the 
same time. Yet, it may be urged that the idea of the one and 
presentation of the other are synchronous ;- and is not perception 
itself a presentative-representative process ? The reply is, this will 
explain only the perception of the common elements , not the cons- 
ciousness of the relation of similarity. If. however, the relation 
be taken only as a feeling. as it is taken by all thorough-going 
empiricists, e.g., by the Buddhists (cl. Sankara’s reply to 
this, Section 49), by Mill (in his Logic), and by Spencer (in his 
Psychology). it may no doubt be said to be perceived. But 
knowledge is always viewed in Vedanta, not from the em- 
pirical standpoint, but from the standpoint of the self as spon- 
taneity. It may be objected that from this standpoint, the con- 
sciousness of similarity is the same as the recognition of identity 
(knowledge which is mere memory, no new knowledge or anu- 
bhava at all). But they can hardly be taken to be the same. 
It will not do to say with some psychologists that similar things 
have an identical element and that suggestion of a similar is only 
assimilation followed by contiguous association. The artificiality 
of such a view is manifest. Identity is no doubt the truth of 
the similarity, but the psychological difference between the two 
is absolute to us, so long as we are confined to empirical conscious- 
ness. In the ecstatic intuition of Brahman, one is not cons- 
cious of a similarity with (or difference from) other experiences. 
The consciousness of similarity lies midway between the blind 
feeling of familiarity and the ecstatic intuition of identity. In this 
consciousness, there is a process, a swinging of the self backward 
and forward , bespeaking a limitation of its freedom. Hence it is 
a new kind of pramana. First B is felt to be like A and then, 
as a result of it, A is felt to be like B. B at first suggests its simi- 
lar A through the function of similarity (cf. Bradley on Associa- 
tion in his Principles of Logic) , though here, too, as in the case of 
the function of vyapti in inference, it is consciously operative 
(Section 104); and then the self swings back from A to B (i.e., 
the functional activity of similarity is transformed into the subs- 
tantive consciousness of similarity).

=== PAGE 107 ===
VEDANTIC LOGIC 83 
AGAMA 
113. Vakya, a séntence or series of sentences in which there 
is a principal one to which the others are subordinate, is said to 
be a pramana or independent source of knowledge. The right 
appreciation of this pramana will depend on the understanding 
of a certain theory of language with which it is bound up. When 
we say ‘a word means a thing’, we do not mean that the word re- 
minds us of the idea of a thing. We may no doubt consciously 
pause to remember or visualise the ideas, but this remembering is 
not understanding the meaning of the word, any more than any 
irrelevant idea, of which we are reminded by a word. is a part of 
the meaning. The word directly refers to the thing. expresses the 
thing , touches it(Brh. UpanisadI.V,3) ina sense. Psycho- 
logists speak of the primitive tendency to reify names, but have 
we got beyond this reification even now? With the same 
naiveté with which we objectify our ideas in perception, we 
objectify the word. The free concept not only requires the name 
for its support but is identical with it, though transcending it. 
Just as the presentative and representative elements of perception 
are not only associated but identified . being covered by the same 
determination of the self and objectified by it, so too in conception . 
the same determination of the self gives the name and the concept 
an identical object-reference. This unity of the name and the con- 
cept works unconsciously even in perception. 
113. The sentence at once refers to an objective relation. 
The moment it is employed (provided of course it is a complete 
sentence , satisfying certain conditions. to be explained presently ) 
a belief is generated in something objective. So Mill argued 
against the conceptualistic theory of judgment that ‘the sun is 
hot? does not mean that the idea of the sun is the idea of hot. 
The copula of a judgment is the self'® pointing necessarily to an 
object and the unity of the sentence is but this self clothed in 
language. The primordial objective reference of a judgment is 
a provisional belief, a belief ,"it may be, with a certain general 
cautiousness induced by experience; if it is only thought, it ts 
at any rate continuous with knowledge. The mere absence of 
conflict with other evidence is sufficient to turn it into know- 
ledge: we do not require a positive confirmation by other evidence. 
19 The author, perhaps, means to say that the copula represents the 
assertive function of the self.

=== PAGE 108 ===
84 STUDIES IN VEDANTISM 
114. The understanding or the self in judgments transcends 
judgments and points to the Ideas of the Reason or noumena. 
‘They are to be realised only in ecstatic intuition, but till that is 
forthcoming , the necessary thought of them must have some in- 
tuition-basis, viz., a name. Yet just as an Idea of the Reason 
intrinsically spurns all sense-intuition as being completely inade- 
quate, so too ordinary names constitute only the means by which 
such an Idea is pointed to, not its support or expression. Each 
noumenon demands its true expression, and as Schopenhauer re- 
marked, a potent musical sound constitutes its direct objectifica- 
tion whereas other aesthetic symbols are mere imitations of its 
grosser objectifications. Such potent sound-symbols are supplied 
by the mantras, by such mystic syllables as the Om, the power 
of which is not to be judged by any apriori reasoning but only 
through the persistent attempt to realise them by devout into- 
nation. A conventional word comes to meun a thing, to be pro- 
visionally identified with a thing. only through this necessary de- 
mand of the thing for its true sound-symbol. 
115. The same result is reached in another way. Though 
every vuak ya, as having a direct objective intention, has the ap- 
pearance of impersonality, yet as it may be ambiguous or false 
and may have reference to phenomenal truth, a subjective per- 
sonal element has also to be taken into account. It is only in true 
statements about the supersensuous that this personal element is 
wholly eliminated. The supcrsensuous, as has bcen already ex- 
plained ( Section 84), to be thought at all , must have been revealed . 
The Vedas claim to be the repository of all such true statements 
about the supersensuous; and whether the claim is allowed or 
not, the true revelation, wherever it is found, must have also the 
true form, and therefore the perfection or the sacredness of it 
must transfigure every sound (or letter ) composing it. 
116. To this theory of the identity between thought and lan- 
guage, Nyaya takes an objection which easily connects itself 
with the conceptualistic theory of the judgment. The subject and 
predicate of a judgment are, according to it, subsumed under the 
same abstract universal. In modern language, the proposition 
states the ‘congruence or confliction of concepts’. The sentence, 
then, has not an immediate, objective reference ; the objective re- 
ference is mediate, i.e., gained through inference like the follow- 
ing: Sentences (satisfying certain conditions) in the past gave rise

=== PAGE 109 ===
VEDANIIC LOGIC 85 
to thoughts which were found to accord with objective relations ; 
here is a sentence (satisfying these conditions), therefore it is ex- 
pected to accord with objective relations. In the last resort , then, 
a word is taken to be eternally connected with its meaning by mere 
convention (sanketa) or by the will of God (ISvareccha). 
In the case of the Vedas, they are taken to be a system of 
sounds created by the personal author, isvara (paurusgeya). 
117. Vedanta, however, holds that the system of sounds 
is not created but only manifested. When a letter is articulated 
it is not created but only manifested in sensuous form 
(dhvani). Whenever a sound 1s produced, we recognise it as 
‘that sound’. If we are to believe in this recognition. every dis- 
tinctive sound-form must be taken to have a persistence, not as 
air-vibration, but as sound-form (in its immediacy, as sensuous 
objectivity). The manifestation alone is in time but the sound- 
form is eternal. Thus the eternity of ‘names’ (nadma-rutpa) 
and the impersonal reality of the Word are intelligible. The ques- 
tion of the primum cognitum naturally leads to the theory of the 
eternal pre-existence of all differerices that come to be manifested 
(section 42). The Word which is thus manifested to us is to be 
regarded as the Word existent in all previous cycles, now freely 
remembered and manifested by I$vara. So Virayj at birth 
remembered he has Brahman (‘ahamBrahmismi’-Brh. 
Upanisad). To iSvara, who is eternally free in intelli- 
gence and volition, all these remembrances before each creation 
(srsti) are one, and all these srstis are but the timeless 
actualisation of the same Vedas or objective Reason. To the 
individual , however, the manifestation in a particular cycle 15 new. 
118. The Word is co-eternal with I§vara, both being In- 
finite determinations of Brahman, and it is noticeable that the 
same word §akti or power is used to indicate both the relation 
of Ἰένατα to created (manifested) things and the relation of the 
Word (and therefore any word) to its objective meaning. In both 
cases, this Sakti, though but miya investing Brahman 
(Section 52), is turned into an impersonal reality by the irradiation 
of Brahman. 
119. The meaning of a word is two-fold, direct (Sakya) 
and implied (laksya). The object which is directly meant is 
that towards which the word functions through its Sakti. A 
word refers to 8 thing through its [ἃ [1 or class. The reference

=== PAGE 110 ===
86 STUDIES IN VEDANTISM 
to the individual is not independent of the reference to the uni- 
versal (substance and attribute being taken to be identical in 
Vedanta). except in cases where the name directly points to 
the thing. The Sakti is there said to be svarupa-sati,ie., 
functioning in itself but not jfata-hetu, i.e., not function- 
ing as known. No doubt the direct reference of a word to (or 
its identity with) the universal also is unaccountable, but it is still 
jhata-hetu,i.e., self-conscious reference and not a mere point- 
ing out with the finger. Although essence and an existent partaking 
of the essence (viSesana and vigesya) are not different in 
reality. they are absolutely distinct aspects to the judging or dis- 
cursive reason. ‘The self of the understanding is, as Kant said, 
for the objective judgment , is unconsciously immanent in the empi- 
rical object, and at the same time it is an idea of the Reason, a 
noumenon transcending the empirical object. 
120. The reference to the individual through the universal is 
to be taken as only an implied reference or laksana. This 
laksana is not the function of a single word but of the whole 
sentence. The sentence reacts on each word that it contains. 
How is that possible? How do Sakya and laksya blend? 
Just as in perception, the concept unconsciously synthesises the 
intuition, sO in a judgment the copular unity modifies each of 
the terms. ‘A is B’ is really equivalent to ‘AB is AB’. The 
sentence is an organic unity and each word in it partakes of the 
common life. The judgment has a tendency to lapse into a con- 
cept. This is noticeable in eulogistic or abusive sentences which 
are not meant to be literally taken but express simply praise or 
abuse. Ultimately the sentence-unity is only for the knowledge of 
particular objects, and the members of this unity, the concepts, 
also refer to them. 
121. Not every combination of words, however, constitutes a 
true sentence , but only such as has the conditions of Akamksa, 
yogyata, asatti, and tatparya. These might be roughly 
translated as ‘syntactical connexion’ (the mutual demand of the 
essential parts of a sentence for one another, as the demand of a 
verb for its subject of a transitive verb for its object, etc.) , ‘com- 
patibility of meaning’ (of parts of the sentence), ‘proximity of the 
parts’, and the ‘objective intention’. The abstract assertive form of 
a sentence is determined by 4k4ing4, as the self thinks of object 
through the categorics , though sometimes the assertive form appears

=== PAGE 111 ===
VEDANTIC LOGIC 87 
almost in its purity as in the appositional construction (abhe- 
dinvaya) ‘this pot is a blue pot’, where there is no ikimksa 
(‘syntactical connexion’ therefore is too wide a rendering). This 
assertive form, determinate or otherwise, may be perfect, though 
there may not be compatibility of meaning, as in ‘this square is 
round’. This compatibility of meaning is what is ordinarily called 
consistency , though it has a material aspect. too, for in cone sense 
even a self-contradictory sentence is conceivable through the pro- 
positional form. Asatti or the proximity of the parts has 
reference to the articulatory or written form of a sentence rather 
than to the thought-unity , though this form is but the expression 
of the unity. It is that which makes us understand omitted words 
in elliptical constructions and unites the direct meaning of the words 
of a sentence with their implied meaning. Tatparya is the 
capacity of a sentence to produce objective knowledge. It is not 
the subjective intention of the person uttering the sentence. though 
in cases of ambiguity the subjective intention has to be taken into 
account. It is the objective intention which, in cases of ambiguity 
or the like, is not contradicted by the subjective intention. 50 a 
true sentence, even when uttered by one not understanding or 
misunderstanding it, has an intrinsic tatparya. If yogyata 
be the formal compatibility of meaning. tatparya is compatibi- 
lity in a material reference, the unity of the sentence and the 
corresponding objective relation. There might be higher unities , 
too, but these go beyond the sentence form. 
122. The first thought roused by a sentence may be one of 
doubt or misunderstanding. Should it then be said that the objec- 
tive knowledge produced by a sentence is dependent on a prior 
belief induced by other evidences? No, says Vedanta; a sen- 
tence by itself has the objective reference. The knowledge of the 
objective relations through other pramanas may no doubt re- 
move doubts and misunderstanding , but is not necessarily demand- 
ed by the sentence. The sentence shines by its own light. The 
ascertainment of the meaning of a sentence , however, may be aided 
by the knowledge of the topic through other evidences, as in the 
case of sentences having secular reference. In the case of revealed 
texts , however , the meaning is evolved through mimams 5 ἃ of the 
texts themselves, i.e., through their mutual criticism and not 
through any extraneous pramana; for no other pramana can 
speak of the super-sensible.

=== PAGE 112 ===
88 STUDIES IN VEDANTISM 
ARTHAPATTI 
123. Arthapatti is the supposition (or conception) of the 
premises , reason, or cause from the conclusion, consequence, or 
effect. Here is one getting stout though he does not take food 
during the day ; the reason supposed is that he takes food at night. 
It includes all inference through vyatireki-linga, i.e., 
negative mark or middle term which, according to Vedanta, is 
not inference at all. In reference to the stock example given in 
Nyaya of Kevala-vyatireki inference, ‘earth differs from 
other primal matters, for it has smell’, Vedanta would point 
out that here earth, as a new primal matter. is conceived only , not 
inferred. It is like the framing of a hypothesis from given facts. 
So, too, where Nyaya holds that thc maior premise is reached 
both through positive and negative evidences, Vedanta holds 
that inference from it appeals to the positive instances or facts only ; 
the negative instances simply define the positive instances, enable 
us to conceive the major premise clearly. The so-called inductive 
methods are therefore mixtures of nnumiina and arthapatti, 
deduction and hypothesis. In all inductive method there is an 
element of hypothesis, 1.e., an assuring of ourselves, before the 
deductive verification , whether by tact or by conscious method , that 
in the absence of a certain antecedent. a consequent will also be 
absent. In the conscious framing of a hypothesis , our aim (though 
not always accomplished) is to find out something explaining facts 
that no alternative supposition will explain. In fact all hitting at 
the cause, all solving of riddles . all colligation by concepts involve 
a conscious or sub-conscious employment of negative instances, 
suggested by the positive data-—and this is arthapatti. This 
appears clearly in understanding omitted words in a sentence. So, 
too, a negation presupposes an affirmation , the presupposing being 
arthapatti. 
ANUPALABDHI 
124. Abhava is negation, including non-existence relative 
whether to all time, to particular times, or to particular natures. 
How is it known? It can no doubt be inferred but can it be per- 
ceived? It may be a percept, but the percept is then not the effect 
of a process of perception directed towards it. The self sometimes 
may not perceive a thing, even though it exerts the perceptive 
activity , yet the percept of the locus, minus that thing , is therefore - 
the percept of the minus-ness or abhiva. But we cannot say

=== PAGE 113 ===
VEDANTIC LOGIC 89 
that the percept of this abhava is the result of the process of 
perception directed towards it; the perceptive process is directed 
only to the locus of the abhava, not to the abhava or to the 
thing that is non-existent. The non-existence of the thing, there- 
fore, is an accidental percept implicated in the percept of its locus 
and not the intended objective of the actual process. 
125. What is meant by saying that a percept is at once differ- 
entiated from everything else? Does it involve an explicit per- 
ception of the difference? No. In the stage of thought, the rela- 
tion itself is definitely attended to, but in the stage of perception, 
it is only sub-consciously, implicitly present. The substantive 
presentation or percept is alone explicitly petceived. But then what 
is this implicitness of its relations from the point of view of the 
self’s spontaneity? Need we admit a new process. a new pra- 
mina for this implicit percept of difference? Why not call it 
implicit perceptive process only? From the point of view of the 
self knowing or functioning, this ‘implicitness’ is meaningless, 
being only a metaphor borrowed from the unintelligent object. 
So the language of implicit and explicit is not employed in 
Vedanta at all. So in inference, where one might have said 
that the trtiya-linga-parimarsa of Nyiya (Section 
103) gives at any rate the implicit articulations of the inferential act, 
Vedanta prefers to say that there is a single mediating function, 
and no substantive mental state somewhere out of the ken of cons- 
ciousness , as the word ‘implicit? would imply. It marks an essen- 
tial difference between apriorism on the one hand, and intuitionism 
and empiricism on the other Should we not admit a passive or 
presentative side to this functioning? We may. but the self, while 
functioning in a particular way, cannot at the same time appre- 
hend the functioning in its passive aspect as object, for the self is 
identified with the envelope of that passivity (or ignorance). It 
may view it. while shaking it off, as an outworn slough. When we 
speak of pramana or logical evidence, we view the mental pro- 
cess from the point of view of function and not of passivity. Hence 
it will not do to say that implicit perception is the process of which 
the result is the percept of abhava. For implicit perception, we 
have to substitute a distinctive positive function of the mind, 
anupalabdhi. When the abhiva of a thing capable of 
being perceived is cognised where no other pramadna can take 
cognisance of it, it is cognised through this anupalabdhi. It

=== PAGE 114 ===
90 STUDIES IN VEDANTISM 
has for its object not the abseni thing but the absence itself. 
It is the bare awareness of the absence, though what is absent 
may not be known. Again, the thing that is absent must be, 
unlike spiritual merit or demerit (Section 95), capable of being 
perceived, i.e.. it must be of the same order of reality as its 
locus which is perceived; otherwise the percept of its absence 
cannot be implicated in the percept of its locus. ‘The negation 
must not be absolute indeterminate negation : it must be the ne- 
gation of something intuitable. 
126. An objection: If abhiva be a percept. though not 
the result of a perceptive process directed towards it, is it a 
percept even in the illusion of abhiva? In the case of the 
nacre taken for silver, the objectivity of the silver is constituted 
by its implicit subjective existence (Section 99) or anirvaca- 
niyatva. Has the illusory abhiava also this ‘inexplicable’ 
existence? No, it may be replied: here we have anyatha- 
khyati (Section 100). Objectivity is through implicit subjectivity 
in those illusions only in which the mind and the senses are in 
contact with the object mistaken. But here the object mistaken 
being abhava, they are not in contact with it. i.e., although 
the objective appearance is there, it has no subjective counterpart , 
If there is anything at all. it must be the implicit subjectivity 
of the absence of sensation. 1.e., the implicit consciousness of 
the absence. This is only partially similar to the implicit sub- 
jectivity of the silver in the case of the nacre. The consciousness 
of absence is half-way between positive and negative, and be- 
cause knowing comprehends and also transcends the known, it 
is, relatively speaking , phenomenally negative and really positive. 
Not that the illusory objective appearance of abhiava is Brah- 
man, for though Brahman is the substrate or adhisthina 
of maya and so of all phenomenal and illusory existence. it is 
not their upaidana or modifiable material. (Brahman is 
still sometimes spoken of as the material cause of the universe. 
As against the non-intelligent pradhiana of Sankhya, Ve- 
danta proposes a spiritual material, Brahman; but then it 
is not naked Brahman but rather Brahman as informing 
maya.) So the implicit consciousness of the absence of sensa- 
tion is not the same as the implicit consciousness of the pure 
self but rather that of manas (or its objective obverse) which is 
the material capable of being differentiated into the sensation- 
modes though now without them.

=== PAGE 115 ===
SANKARA’S DOCTRINE OF MAYA

=== PAGE 116 ===

=== PAGE 117 ===
ANALYSIS 
(1-3) The doctrine of Maya is the logical pendant to the 
doctrine of Brahman. It is the conceptual formulation of the 
feeling of vanity of life just as the other doctrine is of the de- 
mand for absolute certitude. Both maya and Brahman are 
accepted in faith and only interpreted in thought. The ‘vanity’ 
of life means the lapse of its ‘value’ and does not apparently mean 
the lapse of its ‘reality’. But in Sankara’s acosmism we have 
not merely the denial of value but also of alk given ‘reality’. This 
denial of the given would be unintelligible but for the fact that 
the illusory itself is given in our ordinary experience. (4-6) The 
stock Vedantic example of illusion—mustaking a rope for a 
snake—may be analysed in three stages:—(a) The snake is pre- 
sented and believed to be real. (b) The belief is corrected by the per- 
ception of the rope as rope. After correction the snake continues 
to be a presentation to the mind though it comes to be invested 
with the quality of unreality. The first percept of the snake is 
degraded into an illusion when we have the affirmation of the 
rope. In this stage the snake persists as a possible object and 
the past perception of it as a subjective fact is not yet questioned . 
(c) The snake is contemplated not only as non-existent now but as 
non-existent even when it appeared to be perceived. ‘There is the 
doubt even about the past perception of it as a subjective fact. 
That snake is no possible object. Existence is denied of it absd- 
lutely and the objectivity of the dlusory content is called in ques- 
tion. The objectivity of the unreal snake, as persisting in the, 
second stage, is now reduced to what is determinate neither as 
objective nor as subjective, to bare given-ness. (7-8) That snake 
then, shorn of its objective reality in the second stage and now 
of its reality either as objective or as subjective is still given to 
us aS ἃ positive unthinkable: it cannot yet be rejected as abso- 
lute nought. The indescribable should be nought but is still given 
in absolute mockery of thought. (9-12) The snake in the three 
stages of illusion is. given respectively as implicitly real object, 
as unreal object and as the indescribable. The last stage leads 
to the realisation of absolute nought which is not given at all.

=== PAGE 118 ===
04 SANKARA'’S DOCTRINE OF MAYA 
Corresponding to the stages there are the three processes in illusion 
as presented to uncritical thought, to critical thought and to faith 
respectively. Again, corresponding to the three processes , we have 
the stages of maya as the predicate of the illusory object: (a) 
Vastavi. (b) anirvacaniya, and (c) tuccha. (a) ren- 
ders intelligible the theory of may as cosmic magic turning up 
the unanticipable ; (b) furnishes the clue to the conception of maya 
as the absolute freedom. the unthinkable free power of the Lord 
to put forth and retract objective appearance ; (c) makes intelligible 
the theory that the cosmic appearance is not merely retractable 
but that the retractation itself is unreal. (13-14) What is neither 
sat nor asat is nonsense and yet we have such unthinkable non- 
sense actually presented in the illusion—‘the unreal, unobjective 
snake there’. The illusion has no longer to be logically corrected . 
that correction being finished; there is demand only for the cor- 
rection of the hidden subjective defect through which it is still 
given. The nonsensical here is presented not through any caprice 
of a verbal combination but through a deeper subjective distem- 
per. To say that the snake is nought though not felt as such 
is to express a faith in and a demand for its realisation by a 
cure of this distemper. (15) Though the snake is not an apparent 
object, it is not known for certain to have been perceived. To 
faith there was no perception of it; to reason the past perception 
is unproved; while to immediate belief it is a fact. ‘There is 
belief now in the past perception as a subjective fact without a 
belief through memory in the snake having been perceived. The 
snake as a given unthinkable is but a percept presented as an 
unreal subjective fact to an eternal consciousness. (16-17) In an 
illusion in respect of a subjective fact, the subject knows the object 
through the wrong act of identifving with the Vrtti. Now it 
is only as a subjective illusion is corrected that the distinction 
of pure consciousness from the Vrtti and the unreality of the 
Vrtti are suspected. This suspicion is in some sense a self- 
freeing act of the subject , though it is only incomplete self-freeing. 
Such freedom implies a faith in the spiritual possibility of pro- 
gressively annulling the act of identification and thus attaining 
complete freedom, (18-20) That a given object should be a given 
unthinkable is a standing scandal to human reason. The faith 
that the given-ness is only apparent does not effectively remove 
the felt fact. The consciousness of the practicability of annulling 
the given-ness of a particular illusion is what alone yields the 
conception of truth as not given, as transparent, as self-certified 
or svayamprabha . That the unthinkable is still given though 
it should not be given brings up the thought and faith that the 
Vyavahdrika world is also just given and is not necessary, 
that its ultimate ground is dark and inexplicable i.e., maya 
and that the system of relations is not self-justifying truth.

=== PAGE 119 ===
SANKARA’S DOCTRINE OF MAYA 
1. Sankara’s doctrine of Miya is the logical pendant 
to his doctrine of Brahman as the undifferenced self-shinning 
truth. Both Miya and B1ahman are taken to be incapable 
of being established by reason, by any natural pramiana. They 
are believed to be scripturally revealed, though they are claimed 
as intelligible contents of pure consciousness. They are in fact 
to be accepted in faith and only interpreted by thought. For pur- 
poses of philosophy, we may generally substitute in place of 
faith in scriptures , spiritual experience and, in this connexion, the 
feeling of the vanity of life and the demand for absolute certitude. 
The doctrine of maya and Brahman may be regarded as the 
conceptual formulation of this feeling and demand. The value or 
validity of the experience. feeling or faith is not to be questioned 
within philosophy which should start with it and seek only to in- 
terpret it. The present paper confines itself to the enquiry how far 
the interpreting concepts are inteliigible and at what precise point, 
if at all, logical thought can make room for the faith in the illu- 
soriness of things other than Brahman. 
2. Is the theory of the illusoriness of the world the necessary 
formulation of the feeling of the vanity of life? The feeling implies 
the evanescence of value from the objects that interest us. Does 
the lapse of value mean lapse of reality’ If the value of an object 
lapses to our consciousness , the given form of the object, it may 
be said. need not disappear or change into some other form. 
Even if the given form changes. the formless given-ness of the 
object may be said to persist, for the new form is not felt to be 
separately given. It may be supposcd that the given form is 
turned with the lapse of value into a mere subjective idea but then 
the reality of the idea has to be admitted as given. Or it may 
be that the form is realised to be not a given idea but only the 
subjective activity of forming or constructing it; but even this 
free activity is given as the presented process of the becoming or 
defining out of the idea. The lapse of value does not mean the 
lapse of all given-ness; some given reality has apparently to be 
admitted , whether objective or subjective, determinate or indeter-

=== PAGE 120 ===
96 SANKARA’S DOCTRINE OF MAYA 
minate. The acosmism of Sankara goes beyond both realism 
and idealism by reducing the world to absolute illusion, by in- 
terpreting the vanity of life as implying the denial of all given 
reality. Is such absolute denial of given-ness, with the cor- 
related notion of truth as utterly ungiven, i.e., as self-luminous 
(svayamprabha) intelligible? 
3. The denial or the illusoriness of the given would be in- 
conceivable but for the fact that the illusory itself is given or 
experienced as such. Were it not for the experience of prati- 
bhasika or illusory being, the possible unreality of the 
vyavaharika or empirically real world—-the elimination of its 
given-ness—would be utterly unintelligible. The presentation of 
an object as illusory is. as will appear presently . fundamentally 
different from the presentation of a fact, objective or subjective. 
The difference between the given-ness of the illusory as illusory’ 
and that of fact, objective or subjective, can only be expressed as 
a difference in the felt quality of reality, the former being less real 
than the latter. The quality of reality is explicitly felt only when 
it is experienced as dissipated in an illusion. The experience of 
illusion thus marks an actual step towards the elimination of given- 
ness and is as such a unique datum for epistemology. 
4. The metaphysical doctrine of maya is best approached 
through the epistemology of illusion. We may analyse the stock 
Vedintic cxample of illusion—mistaking a rope for a snake— 
in three stages. The snake is first presented, it is next corrected, 
and then it is contemplated as corrected. It is in the first place 
presented and believed as real. though it is not affirmed or judged 
as real, its reality being only not denied. The belief is next cor- 
rected by the perception of the rope as rope. The correction has 
to be accepted as an ultimate fact of consciousness. It is not yet 
a negative judgment. The rope is indeed affirmed or judged to 
be real but the snake remains a presentation’ though invested with 
a new immediate quality of unreality. The affirmation of the rope 
and the peculiar presentation of the snake presuppose each other. 
The affirmative judgment need not presuppose a negative judg- 
ment: it presupposes only the presentation of immediate un- 
reality . Illusion or the corrected and degraded percept is at least 
one form, if not the sole form, of the presentation of unreality. 
1 i.e. something presented to the mind.

=== PAGE 121 ===
SANKARA’S DOCTRINE OF MAYA 97 
In the present example, the rope is affirmed as real in éxplicit con- 
trast with the illusory snake; and the first percept of the snake 
is degraded into an illusion in reference to the affirmation of the 
rope. The affirmative judgment and the illusion? emerge 
together—as fact and not by any thinking necessity—as mutually 
implicated . Mutual implication is but a name for confusion which , 
however , in this stage is not realised as such. The attitude is still 
objective and the cognition does not appear as confusedly dual be» 
cause the objective content that is knowa—viz., ‘rope not snake’-— 
is a related unity. The relation, it may be noted, is unique: the 
unreal implies the real’ but real does not imply nor is it in any 
way affected by the unreal. The rope is a complete content which 
does not require to reject the content ‘snake’ and is neither the 
better nor the worse for having rejected. The snake, however, in 
the context is there as rejected or corrected by the other content, 
as illusory in its presence. The real has the unreal here as its 
free implication . 
5. In the second stage we are directly concerned only with 
this objective content. The rope is affirmed as real and the snake 
though presented as unreal 1s still regarded as objective. Though 
corrected, the snake is neither forgotten nor presented as a mere 
subjective fact: it persists as an objectively presented no-fact. It 
is still a possible object and the past perception of it as a 5060" 
live fact is not yet questioned. The unreal object, however, here 
is a subordinate or implied element in the known content, the 
real object being the principal element. In the third stage, the 
unreal is made the principal element, the direct object of con- 
templation. The snake is known not only as non-existent now 
but as non-existent even when it appeared to be perceived. It 
is not now felt to be remembered and that means a dcubt even 
about the past perception of it as a subjective fact. As now felt 
to be neither perceived nor remembered, is it a possible object 
at all? Snake, no doubt, is a possible object but that snake appear- 
ing at the previous moment to the particular observer is no possible 
Object, as it never existed, does not exist and will not exist: 
existence is denied of it absolutely. The judgment in fact—‘it 
does not exist’ is inadmissitle: its subject it lacks existential 
2 i.e. the sense of illusion. 
3 i.e the sense of the unreal implies the sense of thé real. 
7C

=== PAGE 122 ===
δὰ SANKARA’S DOCTRINE OF MAYA 
import, standing as it does now for what was only apparently 
existent. The absolute denial of existence annuls the starting 
subject altogether and no judgment about the snake appears to be 
left over. The unreal snake which was still an object in the 
second stage now turns out to be no possible object at all. Not 
that, however, it is known now as a mere subjective image; it is 
known as what appeared to be perceived. The qualitative differ- 
ence between what is perceived and what is imagined does not 
disappear even when the former is known to be perceived wrongly . 
6. But is it still believed that the wrong perception of the 
previous moment was a real subjective fact? If it was a fact it 
must be vouched for by memory which however only tells us here 
that the snake was felt to be perceived, not that it was perceived. 
The past perception is known as a fact, only if its object is now 
felt to be remembered. The snake is not so felt and so the fact- 
hood of the past perception is at least not known. The facthood 
is not denied when the snake is taken to be an unreal object in 
the second stage. But now that its cbjectivity itself is called in 
question, the facthood of its perception becomes open to doubt. 
That is why memory testifies apologetically that it was only felt 
to be perceived. It means on the one hand that it is not felt to 
have been merely imagined and on the other that the facthood of 
the perception cannot be affirmed with certainty. Thus the 
objectivity of the unreal snake, as persisting in the second stage, 
is now reduced to what is determinate neither as objective nor as 
subjective, to bare given-ness. 
7. In the third stage then the implied unreal object of the 
second stage turns out to be no possible object at all, to be in- 
capable of being presented as the subject of a judgment of which 
existence can be denied. While existence is denied of the starting 
subject absolutely,’ non-existence is not now predicable of it, for 
no possible object remains. The snake now is referred to not by a 
negative judgment but by a self-contradictory judgment which is 
no judgment. The judgment ‘that snake is unreal’—the implica- 
tion of the cognition ‘rope, not snake’-—is now realised to be ἃ con- 
tradiction. The contradiction , however, is still felt to be given, un- 
like a contradiction like square circle which is but a verbal or think- 
ing sport. Alli contradiction is, in a sense, given: the failure to 
Ρ 
4 i.e. both as objective and as subjective.

=== PAGE 123 ===
SANKARA’S DOCTRINE OF MAYA 99 
think is not thought but only felt. The idlusion—that unreal snake— 
which is a contradiction in the sense of being indescribable either 
as existent or as mnon-existent (sad-asad-vilaksana)?* 
is given in a deeper sense. Square circle is sought to be only 
imagined , not known, and the feeling of the failure tells us that it 
is absolute nought (tuccha). But ‘that unreal snake’ is sought to 
be known, being felt to be perceived in the first instance. The 
problem of thinking is itself given or forced upon us and it 15 given 
as insoluble in the feeling of the failure to think. That snake 
then , shorn of its reality® in the second stage and now of its bare 
objectivity’ also . is still given to us as a positive (bhava-ruipa) 
unthinkable (anirvicya): it cannot yet be rejected as abso- 
lute nought. 
8. There is a difference between the contradiction betwecn 
existent and non-existent and that between ‘not existent’ and ‘not 
non-existent’. The unreal object of the second stage might be 
taken as at once existent and non-existent but the ‘indescribable’ 
of the third stage is what is neither existent nor non-existent. 
Strictly speaking . the latter is no contradiction at all: the concepts 
‘not existent’ and ‘not non-existent? do ποῖ get related at all to 
contradict one another. being predicable of no assignable subject . 
At the same time they have been brought together not arbitrarily 
or accidentally , but under the constraint of a given presentation . 
They are not indeed thinkingly related but are given as 1elated in 
the way of contradiction. As given, the relation may be regarded 
as a symbolism for thought-contradiction , as a problem or demand 
to realise the given-ness as false. The ‘indescribable’ should be 
nought but is still given in absolute mockery of thought. It marks, 
in a sense, the frontier between thought and faith, being the given 
limit of thought on the one hand and the promise of the annulment 
of given-ness on the other. 
9. The snake in the three stages of illusion is given respec- 
tively as implicitly real object, as unreal odject and as the indcs- 
cribable. The last stage may be regarded as leading to the 
realisation of absolute nought which is not given at all; and each 
of the first two stages may be viewed as leading to the next stage. 
5 Here the concept of ‘sadasad-vilakgsana’ appears to be in- 
terpreted in a novel way. 
6 i.e. reality as objective. 
7 i.e. reality either as objective or as subjective.

=== PAGE 124 ===
100 SANKARA’S ΒΟΟΤΆΙΝΕ OF MAYA 
We may thus speak of three processes in illusion® as presented to 
uncritical thought, critical thought and faith respectively. They 
would roughly correspond to the three views of ἡ ἂν 4—viz., as 
concrete (vastavi), as unthinkable (anirvacaniya) and 
as nought (πος ἢ ἃ). 
10. The first process in illusion is the reduction of an impli- 
citly real object to appearance. The reduction cannot be regarded 
as merely subjective process. If the magic transformation of the 
present snake into an appearance to a particular mind could be 
taken as an objective process, it would mean the opening up of 
a new dimension of becoming in which objects come to acquire or 
lose reality. The hard reality of a world once and for all given 
would give place to a perpetual swing between dream and waking 
manifestation. The world would be intelligible as a system of 
appearances malterialising and dematerialising to individual spirits , 
as a play of cosmic imagination or 1114 . The emergence of the 
new in causality would be understood as the emanation or 
vivarta of an appearance from the timeless cause. the law of 
causality would be a law of appearances-—the effect-appearance 
being as real as the causal appearance and so a parinama of 
it. and causal power would be a name for cosmic magic. Thus 
the first process in illusion renders intelligible the pictorial con- 
ception of vastavi maya, the inexplicable world-ptfocess 
creatively turning up the unanticipable (aghatana-ghatana- 
patiyasi1)—an analogue of the Bergsonian real time. 
11. The second process in illusion, viz., the reduction of 
objective appearance to the given unthinkable, furnishes the clue 
to the conception of maya as unthinkable free power. the free- 
dom to put forth and retract objective appearance. It is because 
we thinkingly reduce objective appearance to the given un-objective 
or unthinkable that we can conceive or intellectually apprehend 
freedom—freedom of willing , for example, which is a process from 
the un-objective to the objective—as real. Maya as the anir- 
vacaniya power of the Lord means His absolute freedom, 
freedom to create or put forth as also to destroy or retract objec- 
tivity. It is the freedom of retractation that we first understand 
through the analogy of the dissipation of objectivity in an illusion. 
Creative freedom is intelligible as the reversed process of the re- 
8 i.e. processes in the correction of an illusion.

=== PAGE 125 ===
SANKARA’S DOCTRINE OF MAYA 101 
tractive freedom. The common conception of creative freedom 
without destroying freedom’, of the Lord being able to put forth 
will but not to retract it is not the conception of absolute freedom. 
12. The third process in illuson is the reduction in faith of 
the given unthinkable to absolute nought, the elimination of the 
indescribable given-ness. The corresponding cosmic conception 
would be that of Tuccha may4 which the Vedantist would 
accept as revealed or presented in faith. The conception of 
τι ἂν ἃ as absolute nought is necessary for the vigorous monism of 
the Sinkarite school. The monism implies not merely that 
the world is an appearance and that this appearance is retractable 
but also that the retraction itself is unreal, is not even real as the 
free nature of Brahman. Brahman is not like 1S§vara 
detached from or free in respect cf a may that is present to him 
but has not may ἃ before him at all. He not only need not ex- 
ercise free power: power is not real to him. Brahman is the 
truth and is not merely real. Neither the real ΠΟΙ the true as con- 
tent requires to deny the opposite to be itself; but while the 
knowledge of the real as such depends on the correction of the 
unreal, the knowledge of the true as such is not dependent on the 
correction of the false. The knowledge of the falsity of the world 
is no necessary element of the knowledge of Brahman. The 
knowledge of Brahman is no mediate affirmation but an 
intuition which is not a result that is reached but is felt when it 
comes to have been eternally there. That means that the ignorance 
of Brahman was itself unreal, to the last vestige of which the 
correction of the world as false and its cosmic obverse, the retrac- 
tion of free power, appeared real. The conception of eternal truth 
implies the falsity or tucchatva of given cosmic unreality, 
the mithyatva of given mithyatva, not only rejection of 
the world as unreal but absence of any reference to it by way of 
rejection. Such a conception is possible only through a considera- 
tion of what we have taken as the third proccss in illusion . 
13. We have shown so far how the consciousness of illusion 
renders the conception of may ἃ intelligible. Our experience of 
‘llusion—as about the snake—supplies in its different stages not 
only an analogy but the only analogy for the conception of cosmic 
maya as magic, as freedom and as nought. It remains however 
9 i.e, freedom to destroy.

=== PAGE 126 ===
102 SANKARA’S DOCTRINE OF MAYA 
to show definitely where the transition is effected from a particular 
illusion to cosmic maya and how the faith in the latter fits in 
with logical thought. For this, a farther analysis is required of 
the consciousness of illusion in the stage where the given unthink- 
able appears to faith as absolute nought. 
14. What 1s neither sat nor asat should be a chimera but 
persists as given in the illusion. It is instructive to ask what this 
persistence implies and whether and how it can be got rid of. It 
was pointed out that when the objective appearance of the snake is 
known to be not objective at all, to be beyond affirmation and 
denial, the subjective facthood of the past perception of it itself 
becomes doubtful. The snake is not felt to be remembered, 1.¢.. 
to have been perceived. At the same time it is not felt to be 
merely imagined but as given. though not to present perception 
or memory. It is given as an unreal but not as being subjectively 
constructed nor as what had but has lost reality. Though not 
objective, it is referred to a reai point in the objective world as 
where it is not. It is not only contradictory but nonsensical to 
say that the square circle is or is not there: and yet we have such 
unthinkable nonsense actually presented in the illusion—‘the unreal 
un-objective snake there’. The illusion has no longer to be logi- 
cally or objectively corrected . that correction being finished; there 
is demand only for the correction of the hidden subjective defect 
through which it is still given. The nonsensical here is presented 
not through the mere caprice of a verbal combination as in the 
case of square-circle but through a deeper subjective distemper. 
To say that the snake is nought though tiot felt as such is to ex- 
press a faith in and a demand for its realisation by a cure of this 
distemper . 
15. If the snake is not even an apparent object, it should be 
known as what was not perceived. It is not actually so known; 
we cannot get rid of the belief that it was perceived, though as 
it is not felt to be remembered, it is not known'® to have been 
perceived. To faith there was no perception of 11, to rea- 
_ gon the past perception is unproved'’ while to immediate belief 
it is a fact. There is belief now in the past perception as a sub- 
jective fact without the object of it being felt to be remembered, 
10 i.e. known for certain, see sec, 6. 
11 Because the indescribable is incapable of being perceived,

=== PAGE 127 ===
SANKARA'S DOCTRINE OF MAYA 103 
i.e., without a belief through memory in the snake having been 
perceived . It means then that the past appears to be now directly 
perceived ; that the snake. as past percept'* and not as a past 
objective fact, is presented to consciousness without an empirical 
psychosis or vrtti. To say. however, that the snake is now 
presented as a past percept is not to admit that it is consciously 
presented as a real subjective fact. A percept is never like an 
image distinguished actually as subjective from the object per- 
ceived , being so distinguished only in name. In the case of an 
illusion indeed, it is actually distinguished but not as an assured 
subjective fact. The pastness of the percept does not mean that 
it was present, i.e., was a fact having a position in the objective 
time-order. Pastness here is but a quality of the percept. a name 
for the presented unreality of the subjective fact, which as time- 
less is presented to a timeless consciousness, is Siksi-bhasya, 
‘lighted up by pure consciousness .’ 
16. We may say then that the snake as a given unthinkable 
is but a percept presented as an unreal subjective fact to an 
eternal consciousness. A subjective fact is but the subject with 
an empirical vrtti. not the vrtti with the form of the sub- 
ject. It is the subjective act of identifying with the vrtti, not 
the presentation of the subject as objectified in it. A subjective 
illusion’ is an ethically (or spiritually) wrong act rather than a 
logically false cognition: it 1s the subject wrongly working through 
the vrtti, not knowing the vrtti, but knowing the object 
through the wrong act of identifying with the vrtti. The iden- 
tifying is a pure act of the self, the heart of will and is implied 
in all knowing short of the ecstatic intuition of the self. Now 
it is only as a subjective illusion is corrected that it is known as 
such, that the identifying act is known, that the distinction of 
pure consciousness from the empirical vrtti and the unreality 
of this vrtti are suspected. That suspicion of the distinction 
is already a distinguishing or self-freeing act of the subject; it 
is only by being free that the subject knows its freedom, detach- 
ment or distinction. 
17. To suspect, however, the distinction of the subject from 
the vrtti is not to get rid of it altogether. It is to be free 
12 Because the snake now is only felt to be perceived. 
13 i.e. as the ‘content’ of a perception. 
14 1.6. illusion in respect of a subjective fact.

=== PAGE 128 ===
104 SANKARA’S DOCTRINE OF MAYA 
in a measure and yet to be identified. A contradiction like this 
is real to the spiritual will but not to thought, being intelligible 
only as a subjective act of incomplete self-freeing or realisation. 
Such freedom , however, as is already realised in the suspicion of 
distinction implies a faith in continued realisation, in the spiritual 
possibility of progressively retracting the act of identification. Now 
the snake as a given unthinkable corresponds to the suspicion of 
the self being free from the perception of it, a suspicion that 
does not yet exclude a belief in or identification with the per- 
ception as past or unreal. The given unthinkable again is in 
faith absolute nought. The faith corresponds on the subjective 
side to the faith in the practicability of progressively realising 
the subject’s freedom from the past perception and of annulling 
the identification that the belief in it implies. But for the faith 
in subjective or spiritual practicability , that the given unreal should 
be nought would be no living faith but only a dreamy suggestion 
of it; and absolute certitude would be deemed unattainable. 
18. That a given object. stripped first of its reality and then 
of its objectivity. should still be a given unthinkable is a stand- 
ing scandal to human reason. The faith that the given-ness is 
only apparent does not effectively remove the felt fact. So long 
as it is not removed, absolute truth is only conceived but not 
known. It is possible however to go at least one stage beyond 
this Kantian impasse. The annulment of the objectivity of a 
given illusory object implies a doubt about the subjective reality 
of its perception—the starting experience of getting freed from 
empirical subjectivity. The unthinkable no-object is accordingly 
felt to be only non-empirically given to the pure self, the given- 
ness is felt to be removed one step from a merely blind impo- 
sition and the persisting though enfeebled identification of the 
self with empiricality already presented as illusory is believed to 
be progressively retractable. That is how absolute truth, though 
unknown, is believed to be not unknowable but as demanding 
to be known. The faith emerges not only in truth but also in 
the knowability of truth. 
19. Here then we have the transition from a particular illu- 
sion to the thought of and faith in absolute illusion or maya. 
The consciousness of the practicability of annulling the given-ness 
of a particular illusion is what alone yields the conception of truth 
as not given, as transparent , as self-certified or svayampra-

=== PAGE 129 ===
SANKARA’S DOCTRINE OF MAYA 105 
bha. Such conception of truth is at once a faith in the know- 
ability of truth. lf in one case—viz., the case of a particular 
illusion, truth is believed to be attainable by the practicable 
spiritual process of freeing oneself from empiricality, absolute 
iruth—absolute freedom of the self with the reduction of all em- 
piricality to ilusion—is conceived to be attainable. For what 
does the act of freeing in the particular case imply? If a given 
object turns into illusion, it is by fact and not by any necessity 
of thought. If the perception of it is suspected to be only a 
subjective illusion. it means that the self or pure consciousness 
has so far freed itself. that the conception of and faith in the 
self as truth has emerged. That implies the consciousness not 
only that the self is not identified with this perception, this parti- 
cular empiricality. but that being unconsciously identified cannot 
be predicated of the self at all. The accomplished act of freeing 
from any empiricality is the consciousness of the act itself as free, 
j.e., of the self as not affected by the act, as ever free, trans- 
parent or svayamprabha and not merely making itself free 
or repenting of a previous helpless lapse. 
20. A single act of freeing from an empirical subjectivity 
implies thus a faith that all such subjectivity and identification 
with it are illusory. The same faith is reached in another way. 
When the snake appears as an illusory object, the rope is taken 
to be real as against it. When the snake appears as a given 
unthinkable , the rope in contrast with it is believed not only to 
be real but as justifiable by reason or pramina, as in a world 
of vyivahdarika,i e., thinkable and practical reality, as con- 
formable to Veda or Objective Reason or—what amounts to 
the same thing—as in a world of laws or system of relations . That 
the unthinkable is still given though it should not be given brings 
up the thought and faith that the vya@vaharika world—with 
Veda itself as objective reason—is also given and is not neces- 
sary. that it is a free revelation, that its ultimate ground is dark 
or inexplicable, i.e., is maya, that the system of relations is not 
self-justifying truth. What is given and justified by something 
else. i.e., logically thought is still only real. not true’>. The 
15 Here, ‘real’ is that which is justified by something else; and ‘true’ 
is that which is self-justifying.

=== PAGE 130 ===
106 SANKARA’S DOCTRINE OF MAYA 
Absolute must be the self-evidencing truth, not given to any 
pramana but enjoyingly intuited. 
21. How this enjoying intuition is to be reached, how the 
freedom of the self from empiricality is to be progressively 
achieved , how, in other words, the given-ness of illusion is to be 
finally eliminated are questions of metapsychological sadhana 
or discipline which bring out the spiritual aspect of may. This 
aspect is not discussed in the present paper.

=== PAGE 131 ===
THE ADVAITA AND ITS SPIRITUAL 
SIGNIFICANCE

=== PAGE 132 ===

=== PAGE 133 ===
ANALYSIS. 
(1-4) Adhydsa and spiritual detachment-—-The illusoriness of 
the individual self is the central notion of Advaita Vedanta. 
Individuality which involves an identification of self with the body 
is never, however, felt to be illusory in our secular life. It is 
at bes! thought and accepted in faith. But this notion would not 
occur to a person who has no experience of himself as a spirit and 
of the object as distinct from the subject. That experience is fur- 
nished by a deepening of the moral consciousness in which we 
not only repent of our past actions but find it hard to imagine how 
we could perform them. In such a state one is aware of the self 
that is castigated as not merely ‘me’ but also as ‘I’. In a further 
deepening of this stage, the past ‘I’ is not only sought to be dis- 
owned but is cognitively viewed as a sort of ‘You’ that is yet ‘I’. 
One is aware here of the individual self as somiehow at once true 
and false, true as the unobjective subject and false in so far as it 
appears as ‘you’. The individual self means the self feeling itself 
embodied and the illusoriness of the embodiment is the illusoriness 
of the bodily self and not merely of the self’s identity with it. 
(5-6) Two illusions—There are apparently two illusions—(i) of the 
‘I’ appearing as ‘you’ (objective subject) and therefore also as ‘me’ 
(object), and (ii) of the ‘you’ appearing as ‘I’. Under the first 
illusion one is aware of the ‘me’ or the body as only felt, as one’s 
embodiment; and the correction is the realisation that such a body 
was only his individual illusion. In the other illusion that conti- 
nues, the body appears to be distinct from him and yet as some- 
how ‘he’. With the correction of the first illusion, he sees that this 
appearance should also be illusory, but still he does not actually 
disbelieve it. To be conscious of oneself as individual or ‘me’ is 
to be conscious of the ‘me’ as illusory and of the subject or ‘I’ as 
the truth. It is the illusion of the individuality that suggests the 
theory of objective illusion called anirvacaniya-khyati- 
vada. 
(7) The Concept of Mdya—This brings in the concept of 
Miya which is neither real nor unreal. Maya is the begin- 
ningless nescience that! conditions the individuality of a finite 
self as also his subjective ignorance. Since there are many indi- 
viduals , may ἃ may be’ taken as the corpus of the many beginning:

=== PAGE 134 ===
110 THE ADVAITA AND ITS SPIRITUAL SIGNIFICANCE 
less individualities and may be characterised as the manifold of 
nama-ripa. (811) Brahman and 1 ὅν ara—This last con- 
ception of May ἃ is intelligible only as the cosmic principle of illu- 
sory individuality. As cosmic, May ἃ is to be understood as what 
is not Brahman. Brahman, however, can but need not be 
understood as what is not Maya . He is igvara, the Lord of 
individual selves and the creator of the world. Creation is under- 
stood as manifestation in the soil of Maya. Brahman, ina 
sense, becomes the world without losing His transcendence. 
Brahman does not, however, become the Jiva: the Jiva 15 
Brahman but wrongly views himself as other than Brahman. 
I§vara is conceived as an absolute emanation of Brahman and 
not as merely relative to the individual’s thinking. The creativity of 
Isvara is like that of the magician. His §akti is neither ab- 
solutely real nor absolutely unreal]. As absolutely free with his 
Maya-sakti, ISvara is not only not a false idea of the 
Jiva, He is not also an absolute appearance like the world. 
Isvara has a dual form, as wielding maiya-Sakti and thus 
immanent in the world (vikdra-vartin), and as dissociated 
from it , transcendent (trigunatita). As transcendent, ISvara 
is conceived as what is not Maya: while Brahman is under- 
stood without reference to Miya and the world. iSvara and 
Brahman are characterised by the same epithcts--nitya- 
Suddha-buddha-mukta. 
(12-14) Moksa and its means—Mokga is not anything to 
be reached or effected but is the self itself or the svaripa of 
Brahman. The individual , however, thinks that he is not free 
and wants to be free. For him, accordingly, there is the neces- 
sity of a sadhana. This sidhana must be such as will 
lead him to realise that his bondage is an illusion and that he 
is eternally free. To know the truth about himself can, there- 
fore, be the only discipline for him. The sadhana, therefore, 
is primarily that of knowing (] ἢ ἃ ἢ ἃ) and secondarily that of wil- 
ling and feeling (karma and bhakti). The latter makes for 
clarity of spiritual being and is thus implicitly or explicitly the 
clarity of knowledge. Without rejecting any other sadhana, 
the religion of Advaita Vedanta regards knowledge of the 
self as its distinctive sadhana and regards it as self-sufficing 
and requiring no supplementation (samuccaya). 
(15) Universal outlook—Advajitism as religion and philoso-

=== PAGE 135 ===
ANALYSIS 111 
phy in one is at once individualistic and universalistic in its out- 
look. As religion, Advaitism insists on the conservation of 
one’s spiritual individuality (svadharma), while as philoso- 
phy. it recognises the svadharma of everyone else as abso- 
lutely sacred. (16-17) Practical Idealism—Advaitism stands 
for a strong spirituality and for efficient practice of idealism. 
While it prescribes nivrtti or renunciation of the world in 
spirit, it demands that it should be achieved through such dis- 
cipline as is suited to the adhikiara or the spiritual status 
of each individual. The absolute freedom from Jaw which Ad- 
vaitism aims at is to be achieved by the willing of the law, 
by niskama-karma or by merging one’s individuality in 
institutional spiritual life which represents a sacrificial concert of 
gods and men. (18) Toleration—Toleration is to Advaita 
Vedanta a religion in itself. The Advaitin feels that the 
religion of others is not only sacred to them but to himself also. 
There is no prescription, however, of universal brotherhood and 
the duty to relieve distress is to be performed as duty rather 
than as a matter of altruistic enjoyment. The brotherhood that 
is practically recognised is the brotherhood of spirits realising 
their svadharma. (19-21) Respect for individual differences— 
The difference of spiritual status is not necessarily a gradation, 
and in so far as it is. it does not suggest any relation of high- 
er or lower that implies contempt or envy. ‘The notion of 
adhikara means just an acceptance of realism in the spiritual 
sphere and the highest adhikarin should feel it a privilege to 
join in the worship of the humblest. The Advaitic scheme of 
life would view with positive disfavour iconoclasm in any sphere 
or form. There is no room in Advaitic religion for the duty 
of profaning one god for the glorification of another. The idea of 
hustling people out of their reverence in their own spiritual in- 
terest would be scouted in this religion as self-stultifying profanity . 
(22-25) An integral part of Hinduism—Much of what is here 
attributed to Advaitavada is the implied creed, of Hinduism 
and Hindu society. Advaitism is sometimes characterised as 
rationalistic religion. But the abstract cult of self-knowledge derives 
its whole meaning from the concrete religion of ceremonial and 
worship . It represents a protest against concrete religion only in so 
far as the latter resists ‘inwardisation®. Advaitism, far from 
encouraging premature quietism. positively prescribes Karma,

=== PAGE 136 ===
112 THE ADVAITA AND ITS SPIRITUAL SIGNIFICANCE 
though rigorously as a duty and not for gain. The religion of 
jfiiana, however, is in no sense a protest against the religion of 
bhakti. The Advaita knowledge is understood as an intui- 
tion that amounts to ecstasy and does not in any sense mean a 
supersession of bhakti. Although bhakti implies individuality . 
it represents the individual's joy in surrendering his individuality .

=== PAGE 137 ===
THE ADVAITA AND ITS SPIRITUAL SIGNIFICANCE 
1. The illusoriness of the individual self is apparently the 
central notion of Advaita Vedanta. Every vital tenet of 
the philosophy—Brahman as the sole reality, the object as 
false, Maya as neither real nor unreal, IS vara as Brah- 
man in reference to Miyi, moksa (liberation) through know- 
Iedge of Brahman and as identity with Brahman—may be 
regarded as an elaboration of this single notion. 
2. An illusion, unlike a thinking error, excites wonder as it is 
corrected. One’s apprehension of something as illusory involves 
a peculiar feeling of the scales falling fiom the eyes. To be aware 
of our individuality as illusory would be then to wonder how we 
could feel as an individual at all. As we are, it is indeed only in 
faith , if at all, that we accept the illusoriness of our individuality . 
But even to understand the position, we have to refer to some 
spiritual experience in which we feel an abrupt break with our 
past and wonder how we could be what we were. A _ person 
behaves as though he believed he were his body, and although 
he never explicitly says that he is his body, he never also ordi- 
narily feels detached enough from the body to wonder how he 
cannot yet get rid of the belief. The notion of adhyasa or 
the false identification of the self and the body would never occur 
to a person who has no experience of himself as a spirit and 
of the object as distinct from the subject, as another person is 
from oneself. It is only one who felt such a distinction of the 
self and the body that would wonder at his own implicit belief 
in their identity. He can take the identity to be illusory, only 
if he feels it to be impossible and cannot yet deny its appearance. 
Vedanta starts with the notion of adhyasa and presup- 
poses such an experience of spiritual detachment from the body, 
including the empirical mind. 
3. We can conceive this spiritual condition as a deepening of 
the form of moral consciousness in which we not only repent of 
our past actions , but find it hard to imagine how we could perform 
them In this consciousness, our past being is felt not only to be 
strangely alien to us, but as an intellectual absurdity , as apparently 
at once subjective and objective, at once I and me. One at best 
ὃ

=== PAGE 138 ===
114 THE ADVAITA AND iTS SPIRITUAL SIGNIFICANCE 
thinks of one’s body as me and not as I; but in repentance, un- 
less it is a senseless whipping of a dead horse, one is aware of the 
self that is castigated as not merely me but also as 1; not only as 
a thing of the past, alienated or objectified. but as still tingling 
with subjectivity. In the further stage. in which the past appears 
unintelligible , this past I is not only sought to be disowned, but 
is cognitively viewed as a sort of you (yusmad) that is yet 1 
(asmad), a contradiction that yet appears. This alienated I 
which is not mere me is the individual self, and it is on this spiri- 
tual plane. and not lower, that one is cognitively aware of one’s 
individuality. One is aware. however. here of the individual 
self as a contradiction, or as somehow at once true and false . truc 
as the unobjective subject and false in so far as it appears as 
another I (you), as at once me and I. The notions of the indivi- 
dual self. of the individuality or me as false, and of the eternal 
self as the I that is never me, are born in one and the same 
spiritual consciousness . 
4. The individuality is understood as me.i.c.. as the illusory 
objectivity of the subject and not merely illusory identity with the 
object taken as real. The identity of the self and the not-self has 
the form of the self, being in fact the embodied self and not the 
conscious body. The individual self means the self feeling itself 
embodied, the embodiment being only a restrictive adjective of 
the self; and the illusoriness of the embodiment is the illusoriness 
of the body itself and not merely of the self’s identity with it. The 
idea of the object. in fact, as distinct from the subject is derived 
from the idea of the embodiment, which itself is born in the cons- 
ciousness of the individual self as false in respect of its 
individuality . 
5. There is, however. a complexity. The me is taken as 
illusory not primarily because it is objective, but because the in- 
dividual self already appears to itself false in so far as it takes itself 
to be an objective subject, to be a sort, of you which is at once 
me and 1. As the individual self is felt to be false, it is realised 
that the 1 cannot be me; but this does not prevent the me or the 
body from appearing as 1. There are apparently two illusions—of 
the I appearing as you (objective subject) and therefore also as 
me (object) and of the you appearing as I. In the spiritual cons- 
ciousness in which a person wonders how he could be what he 
cannot be, he corrects the former illusion, but not the latter, for

=== PAGE 139 ===
THE ADVAITA AND ITS SPIRITUAL SIGNIFICANCE 115 
unless the past self were still present, therc could be no sense of 
intellectual absurdity. His past self (you) is still somehow he, 
though he sees he cannot be that self. Under the first illusion he 
is aware of the me or the body as only felt, as his embodiment or 
limiting character; and the correction is his realisation that such 
a body was only his individual illusion. In the other illusion that 
continues, the body appears to be a substantive fact, distinct from 
him and yet as somehow he. With the correction of the first illu- 
sion, he sees that this appearance also should be illusory, but he 
still does not actually disbelieve it. Hence it is that he wants this 
illusion to be dissipated and meantime reaJizes that it is not his 
individual illusion, but a cosmic iJlusion , the dissipation of which 
would mean for him realization of the body and the entire world, 
of which it is the point of reference . as illusory . 
6. To be conscious of oneself as individual or me is to be cons- 
cious of the me as illusory and of the subject or I as the truth. 
The me is the prototype of objectivity , and to feel it to be illusory 
is to be aware of the possibility of objectivity itself being illusory . 
We take a particular object to be illusory only as we believe in the 
objective world, but we could never conceive the illusoriness of 
the world itself unless we started with the illusoriness of the me. 
Were it not also for this starting illusion, an illusory object would 
not be conceived , as it is conccived in Advaita philosophy . 
namely , as anirvicya as an unassertable that is yet undeniable. 
The illusion of a snake being corrected rouses wonder. Wonder 
should mean that this (rope) being a snake is a contradiction that 
yet was presented, but there is apparently no actual consciousness 
here of a contradiction presented as such, viz., of this being at 
once snake and rope. The spiritual consciousness of one’s illu- 
sory individuality is. however, explicit consciousness of the con- 
tradiction of the self having been believed as not-self. It is the 
illusion of the individuality therefore that suggests the theory of 
objective illusion called Anirvacya-khyativada. 
7. This brings in the concept of Miya or the principle of 
illusion as what cannot be characterized either as real or as unreal. 
It is primarily the illusion through which the self believes (in 
willing and feeling) that it is an individual. As this belief persists 
even when the individual sees that the self cannot be individual, 
the individuality appears neither as real nor as unreal, for if the 
belief were removed, there would be no individual self to see

=== PAGE 140 ===
116 THE ADVAITA AND ITS SPIRITUAL SIGNIFICANCE 
the unreality of individuality. The principle of individuality, 
then, is prior to the individual’s actual consciousness of himself 
as individual and of this world as his experience (bhoga); and 
as yet this individuality is what cannot be real. it has to be taken 
as the cosmic principle of illusion. Maya is the principle of 
individuality , the beginningless nescience that the individual self 
has to conceive as positively conditioning his individual being as 
also his subjective ignorance. To the individual there are many 
individuals. and so Miya may be taken as the ccrpus of the 
many beginningless individualities. Again, as the world is under- 
stood as the system οἵ experiences of the individual self, which 
apart from the self are but empty distinctions and forms, nam a- 
riipa as they are called. Maya may be characterized as the 
manifold of nadma-ripa—the name and form—which has no 
self-identity and yet is undeniable. 
8. This last conception of Maya, however, is intelligible 
only through the conception of Μᾶν ἃ as the cosmic principle of 
illusory individuality. As cosmic, it has to be understood in re- 
ference to the unindividual self or Brahman, though only as 
what is not Brahman. Brahman has, however, no neces- 
sary reference to Maya: He can be, but need not be, under- 
stood as what is not Maya. Understood as what is not Maya, 
or as it is figuratively put, as shining against May ἃ without being 
identified with it, or as a master using this principle as his servant, 
He is IS vara, the Lord of the individual selves and the Creator 
of the world. The world is understood as the system of the ex- 
periences of the selves, and as they believe themselves to be indi- 
viduals so far as they will, the experiences are to be tuken as their 
bhoga accordant with their karma. ISvara then is con- 
ceived as actualizing their karma into their bhoga or expe- 
rience, and thus manifesting the manifold of n’ima-rupa, 
which as experienced is just this world or jagat. 
9. Ivara has different relations to the individual selves and 
to the world. He is the Creator of the world, but not of the 
selves, the notion of creation of souls being foreign to all Indian 
philosophy and not to Advaitavada only. Creation is under- 
stood as manifestation in the soil of Maya. Brahman in 
a sense becomes the world without losing His transcendence. The 
world is an absolute appearance, at once real and unreal, real 
as Brahman, the cause that continues in the effect, and un-

=== PAGE 141 ===
THE ADVAITA AND ITS SPIRITUAL SIGNIFICANCE 117 
real δὲ alienated from Him. It cannot, howevef, be said simi- 
larly that Brahman becomes the Jiva: the Jiva is Brah- 
man and only views himself as other than Brahman, the 
otherness being no absolute appearance, but only the content of 
his wrong belief. As explained, however, the principle of illu- 
sion itself has to be taken by the Jiva as cosmic, and hence. 
though his individuality is not an absolute appearance, Brah- 
man in relation to him appears absolutely as ISvara. 
10. Igsvara in Advaita Vedanta is conceived as an 
absolute emanation from Brahman, though He has been some- 
times erroneously supposed to be Brahman as merely viewed 
by the Jiva in reference to himself and the world. This re- 
ference to himself and the world is not his thinking only; that 
creative thought (iks3i)}—‘Let me be many’, etc.—belongs to 
Brahman and is not simply referred to Him allegorically by 
the Jiva. At the same time this manifold that is manifested by 
him is manifested as (partially) unreal, as already ‘in the jaws of 
death’, as in fact as much retracted as created. Hence His crea- 
tivity is like that of the magician; as the creativity of absolute 
appearance. His freedom or sakti is neither absolutely real 
nor unreal, and this is just how the cosmic Maya is character- 
ized . 
11. As absolutely free in respect of creation as Brahman 
Himself, with this absolute freedom or M&ya-Sakti—a deter- 
mination that means no restriction of His being—ISvara is not 
only not a false idea of the Jiva. a mere symbol adopted for 
his upasana (worship), He is not also an absolute appearance 
like the world. Ivara is as much unconstituted by Maya 
as Brahman, and both are characterized by the same epithets— 
nitya-buddha-suddha-mukta (eternal , omniscient, pure, 
free). ISvara has a dual form, as wielding Miya-Sakti 
and thus immanent in the world (vikiravartin), and as 
dissociated from it, transcendent (trigunatita) and merging 
back into Brahman. As transcendent, I§vara is conceived 
as what is not Maya, as determined not by Μῆν ἃ but by 
freedom from May, as other than the world that is put forth by 
Him as an appearance, while Brahman is understood with- 
out reference to Maya and the world. ‘The current conception 
of Brahman and Isvara as the higher God and the lower 
God appears to be a fallacious exaggeration of this simple distinction.

=== PAGE 142 ===
118 THE ADVAITA AND ITS SPIRITUAL SIGNIFICANCE 
12. Brahman is the eternal self that has not only no posi- 
tive determination, but has not even the negative determination 
of consciously rejecting positive determination. He is indeed 
characterized as Sat (existence), Cit (knowledge) and Ananda 
(bliss), but these are not determinations , being each of them the 
unspeakable Absolute viewed by us as beyond the determinate ab- 
solutes Sat, Cit, and Ananda formulated by our conscious- 
ness. The individual self has ποῖ only to correct for himself his 
subjective illusion of individuality , not only to wait for the cos- 
mic illusion of individuality to be corrected, but also to contem- 
plate all correction to be itself illusory. He has to contemplate 
moksa not as something to be reached or effected or remani- 
fested , not even as an eternal predicament of the self, but as the 
self itself or the svartipa of Brahman. The 501 or the 
absolute is not a thing having freedom but is freedom itself. 
13. The individual illusorily thinks he is not free and wants 
to be free. To his consciousness , accordingly , there is the neces- 
sity of a sidhana or discipline to attain freedom. This dis- 
cipline to him must be such as will lead him to realize that his 
bondage is an illusion and that he is eternally free. To know 
the truth about himself can be the only way of attaining freedom , 
and the discipline , therefore , is primarily that of knowing (jfidna). 
and secondarily that of willing and feeling (karma and bhakti). 
The latter is in the first instance helpful as a preparation for 
knowledge. as securing the spiritual attitude in which the inquiry 
into spiritual truth can start. In reality it is more than mere pre- 
paration, since with the progressive transparency of the mind 
effected through any discipline , the truth begins to shine in, though 
it may not be in the intellectual way. Knowledge that is de- 
manded for freedom is spiritual being rather than the detached 
consciousness of a spectator. being knowledge of the self not as 
distinct from but as one with the knowledge. The spiritual being 
that is secured by karma and bhakti cannot, therefore, be 
very different from jana. The clarity of spiritual being is im- 
plicitly or explicitly the clarity of knowledge. 
14. Vedanta is primarily a religion, and it is a philosophy 
only as the formulation of this religion. All religion makes for 
the realization of the self as sacred. but the religion of Advaita 
is the specific cult of such realization understood explicitly as 
self-knowledge, as sacred knowledge, and as nothing but know-

=== PAGE 143 ===
THE ADVAITA AND JTS SPIRITUAL SIGNIFICANCE 119 
ledge. Without rejecting any other sadhana, it prescribes 
knowledge as its distinctive sadhana and regards it as self-suffi- 
cing and requiring no supplementation (samuccaya). The self 
is to be known—accepted in the first instance in faith, which, 
as confirmed. clarified. and formulated by reason would be 
‘inwardized’ into a vision. This work of reason is philosophy, 
which is thus not only an auxiliary discipline, but an integral 
part of the religion and its characteristic self-expression . 
15. Advaitism as religion and philosophy in one is at 
once individualistic and universalistic in its spiritual outlook . 
Religion is nothing if not individualistic ; it is an ‘inwardizing’ of 
one’s subjective being, a deepening of one’s spiritual individuality , 
this being the unspoken inner function even of a religion with 
the salvation of all as its professed objective. Philosophy, on the 
other hand. is essentially universalistic in its attitude, presenting 
a truth that is for all, and is not merely a mystic experience of 
the individual philosopher. As an explicit religion, Advai- 
tism insists on the conservation of one’s spiritual individuality 
or svadharma. while implicitly as philosophy, it recognizes 
the svadharma of everyone else as absolutely sacred, being 
in this sense the most catholic and tolerant among religions. 
Again, as an explicit philosophy, it takes every individual self 
as the one self or reality; and at the same time as an implicit 
religion , it denies the world that is common to all and retires into 
the solitude of subjectivity. In either aspect it appears to combine 
the boldest affirmation with the most uncompromising denial. 
16. Advaitism stands for a strong spirituality . for efficient 
practice of idealism, for unworldiness that is neither sentimental 
nor fanatical. It not only asserts the detachment or freedom of 
the self from the world. it boldly denies the world , though it does 
not take even the illusory object to be merely imaginary (tuccha). 
So too, while it prescribes nivrtti or renunciation of the world 
in spirit, it demands that it should be practically and methodi- 
cally achieved through such discipline as is suited to the adhi- 
kara or actual spiritual status of each individual, and may not 
involve even in the case or the highest adhikaiin a literal 
adoption of the hermit’s life. While the spirit is taken as the only 
reality, the object is understood not as absolute naught, but as 
absolute appearance, as a necessary symbolism of the spirit. 
Logic, law, and the revealed word itself are all in this sense.

=== PAGE 144 ===
120 THE ADVAITA AND ITS SPIRITUAL SIGNIFICANCE 
symbolism—unreal in themselves and yet showing the reality 
beyond. The object has thus to be accepted in order to be effec- 
tively denied. One has to be a realist to outgrow realism. It 
is for the strong in spirit to attain the self, and strength consists 
not in ignoring but in accepting facts—accepting the conditions 
of the spiritual game in order to get beyond them. 
17. Advaitism aims at the absolute freedom of the self. 
freedom from all relativity, including the relativity of good and 
evil. Freedom from law is, however. to be achieved by the will- 
ing of the law. by the performance of one’s moral and spiritual 
dutv without desire—desire not only for pleasure but even for 
spiritual merit, and by merging one’s individuality in objective 
or institutional spiritual life which represents a yajiia or the 
sacrificial concert of gods and men. It would imply the strenuous 
cultivation of a dispassionate serenity of soul and the strength that 
it implies to keep out illusions and stand unruffled in one’s sub- 
jective being. 
18. Toleration is to Advaita Vedanta a religion in it- 
self; no one who realizes what any religion is to its votary can 
himself be indifferent to it. The claim of a religion on its votary 
is nothing outside the religion and is itself as sacred to others 
as the religion is sacred to him. While then an individual owes 
special allegiance to his own religion or svadharma, which 
chooses him rather than is chosen by him, he feels that the reli- 
gion of others is not only sacred to them but to himself also. 
This, in fact, is the practical aspect of the Advaitic view of 
all individual selves being the one self. The oneness is not con- 
templated in the empirical region. and there is no prescription of 
universal brotherhood in the sense that the happiness of others is 
to be promoted as though it were one’s own happiness. There is 
indeed the duty to relieve distress, but such work is to be per- 
formed as duty rather than as a matter of altruistic enjoyment, 
the dry detached attitude of duty being consonant with the spirit 
of the religion of jiiaina. The brotherhood that is practically re- 
cognized in this religion is the brotherhood of spirits realizing their 
svadharma, the dharma of each being sacred to all. If 
then, in this view it is irreligious to change one’s faith, it is only 
natural to revere faiths other than one’s own. To tolerate them 
merely in a non-committal or patronizing spirit would be an im- 
piety , and to revile them would be diabolical. The form in which

=== PAGE 145 ===
THE ADVAITA AND ITS SPIRITUAL SIGNIFICANCE 121 
the truth is intuited by an individual is cosmically determined 
and not constructed by him, and the relativity of truth to the 
spiritual status of the knower is itself absolute. Even the illusory 
object in this view is a mystical creation (pratibhuasika- 
srsti), the three grades of reality that are recognized—the illu- 
sory, the relational, and the transcendental —being in fact grades 
of this absolute relativity . 
19. The doctrine of adhikari-bheda is an application of 
this epistemological notion of absolute relativity to the specifically 
religious sphere. The difference of adhikara or spiritual status 
is not necessarily a gradation; and so far as it is a gradation it 
does not suggest any relation of higher and lower that implies 
contempt or envy. The notion of adhikara in fact means in 
the first instance just an acceptance of fact or realism in the spiritual 
sphere. It is a question of duty rather than of rights in this sphere : 
and a person should be anxious to discover his actual status in 
order that he may set before himself just such duties as he can effi- 
ciently perform in spirit. It is a far greater misfortune here to 
over-estimate one’s status than to under-estimate it. A higher 
status does not mean greater opportunity for spiritual work . since 
work here means not outward achievement. but’ an ‘inwardizing’ 
or deepening of the spirit. Again, from the standpoint of tolera- 
tion, one not only respects the inner achievement of a person 
admitting an inferior status, but can whole-heartedly identify one- 
self with it; the highest adhikiarin should feel it a privilege 
to join in the worship of the humblest. There is aristocracy in 
the spiritual polity; spiritual value is achieved by the strong and 
is much too sacred a thing to be pooled. At the same time 
every individual has his sacred svadharma and has equal 
opportunity with everyone else to realize or ‘inwardize’ it. 
20. The merit of Advaitavada lies in having explicitly 
recognized that spiritual work is this ‘inwardizing’, the deepening 
of faith into subjective realization, the striving after self-know- 
ledge. This work can start from any given point, any spiritual 
status or situation that happens to be presented. Men are in- 
trinsically higher and lower only in respect of this inner achieve- 
ment. The problem of altering traditional society, of equalizing 
rights in order to create opportunities for self-realization, has 
accordingly a subordinate place in the Advaitic scheme of life, 
being recognized mainly negatively as the duty of abstaining from

=== PAGE 146 ===
122 THE ADVAITA AND ITS SPIRITUAL SIGNIFICANCE 
acts of conscious injustice. This scheme of life would view with 
positive disfavour iconoclasm in any shape or form, any violent 
tampering with an institution that is traditionally held to be 
sacred; but it would not also apparently require one to vitaljze 
artificially such an institution if one believes—not by hearsay, 
but after loyally trying to work it—that it is moribund or dead. 
Spiritual realism would demand both reverence for and dissocia- 
tion from what was sacred. One sacred custom can only be su- 
perseded by another sacred custom, the former being either re- 
verently allowed to die a natural death or incorporated in an 
ideal or symbolic form in the latter. There is no room in 
Advaita religion for the duty of profaning one god for the 
glorification of another. 
21. The idea of hustling people out of their reverence in their 
own spiritual interest would be scouted in this religion as a self- 
stultifying profanity. Social iife and tradition are viewed as sacred, 
as a yajiia being performed through the ages. the sacredness 
being the shine of the one Self, the shadow of Eternity. It is 
the life of the gods. and we can help it best by merging into it, 
by realizing it as our subjective life. This subjective realization 
may sometimes come spontaneously . but so far as it can be effected 
by sidhana, it can be effected by each individual for himself. 
He can indeed help others in the work by cducation, but he can 
educate only in the measure he has himself realized this life. He 
can wish and pray that other’s self-realization might be expedited ; 
but for an ordinary person to suppose that he can and ought to 
emergize and vitalize other spirits is, to the religion of Advaita, 
a delusion and a curious mixture of arrogance and sentimentality . 
22. Much of what is attributed here to Advaitavada is 
the implied creed of Hinduism and Hindu society. This philo- 
sophy is the most satisfying formulation of the distinctive spirit of 
Hinduism , and in this sense it may claim to be a synthesis of other 
systems of Indian philosophy, which all seek to formulate this 
spirit; and it has also explicitly influenced the historical evolution 
of Hinduism. As it is not only a formulation of the religion , but 
is itself the religion in the simplified and unified form of the reali- 
zation of subjectivity or self-knowledge, it is sometimes charac- 
terized as a rationalistic religion; and there is a tendency to isolate 
it in the abstract and to interpret it as disowning all Vedic and 
post-V edic worship and ceremonial. But the abstract cult of self-

=== PAGE 147 ===
THE ADVAITA AND 17S SPIRITUAL SIGNIFICANCE 123 
knowledge derives its whole meaning from the concrete religion 
of worship and ceremonial , and is recegnizable as a religion only 
as its concentrated essence. It represents a protest against the 
concrete religion only so far as the latter resists ‘inwardization’ ; 
but it implies no rejection but only an interpretation of the con- 
crete religion. The Advaitin would whole-heartedly join in 
the traditional worship and would be false to himself if he pro- 
fessed contempt for it, though he would recognize that the contem- 
plation of the abstract significance is itself a part of the worship 
and at a certain stage may be tne whole spiritual activity. 
23. The contemplation that is demanded is more than mere 
philosophic thought. being a specific enjoyment of the thought 
as sacred and representing a new stage of spiritual consciousness . 
The truth has to be felt as a self-revelation, as a light that shows 
itself. Light 1s a sacred symbol, not a mere metaphor. from the 
contemplation of which the Vedintic conception of the self 
itself may be taken to have emanated . 
24. The Advaita discipline of 1 ἢ ἃ Π ἃ is primarily a protest 
against the discipline of karma. of moral (and ceremonial) acti- 
vity which is apt in all ages to be taken as a self-sufficing religion. 
The discipline of karma is important as a preparatory chasten- 
ing of the soul. but taken as a religion by itself, it is understood to 
work against the attainment of moksa. To will is to energize 
inahankira (egoism). cven though it be willing without desire, 
the specific willing to deny will. to sacrifice one’s mdividuality . 
At the same time, such willing without desire tends unconsciously 
to dissolve the ahan kira. though the tendency requires to be 
confirmed by bhakti, by the dedication of the spiritual merit of 
the willing to the Lord. or by the feeling of merging oneself in the 
cosmic yajiia. the symbol of the life divine. All good will- 
ing means self-purification. and although it requires to be super: 
seded so far as it involves απ ἃ ἡ Κα ἃς, the supersession is itself 
effected through willing in an attitude of detachment, in the im- 
plicit consciousness of the self being beyond ahankara. Hence 
Advuitism., far from encouraging a premature quictism of 
renunciation of karma, positively prescribes karma, though 
rigorously as a duty and not for gain, and conceives it possible 
even for one who has risen above morality to perform karma 
in lokinugraha, for the education of others and for the 
conservation of the social order.

=== PAGE 148 ===
124 THE ADVAITA AND ITS SPIRITUAL SIGNIFICANCE 
25. The religion of jana, however, is in no sense a pro- 
test against the religion of bhakti. To it the higher stages of 
bhakti at any rate not only mean soul-clearing , but also involve 
the enjoyment of the truth in one’s being. [{ is indeed demanded 
that the felt truth may be self-revealed as known truth, but this 
knowledge is itself understood as an intuition which amounts to 
ecstasy and does not in any sense mean a _ supersession of 
bhakti. Although bhakti implies individuality , it represents 
the individual's joy in surrendering his individuality. The 
bhakta may feel his individuality 1estored through the Lord, 
but that is a mystery of divine life with which the Advaitin 
would not dally. The individual’s own achievement terminates 
with the surrender of individuality .

=== PAGE 149 ===
STUDIES IN SAMKHYA PHILOSOPHY

=== PAGE 150 ===

=== PAGE 151 ===
PREFACE 
Much of Siinkhya literature appears to have been lost. and 
there seems to be no continuity of tradition from ancient times 
upto the age of the commentators. In such systematic works as 
we have, one seems to have a hazy view of a grand system of 
speculative metaphysics. There is so much that is clothed in a 
poetic or mystic garb on which commentators do not help us 
much but which are suggestive enough to tempt us to construct the 
system anew. The interpretation of all ancicnt systems requires a 
constructive effort; but while in the case of some systems where 
we have a large volume of literature and a continuity of tradition , 
the construction is mainly of the nature of translation of ideas into 
modern concepts, here in Simkhya the construction at many 
places involves supplying of missing links from one’s imagination. 
It is risky work. but unless one does it one cannot be said to 
understand Simkhya as a philosophy. It is a task that one is 
obliged to undertake. It is a fascinating task because Sammkhya 
is a bold constructive philosophy. Samkhya is not the avowed 
formulation of religious experience which Vedanta is _ pri- 
marily. nor analytical and critical like Nyadya but is based on 
speculative insight and demands imaginative—introspective effort 
at every stage on the part of the interpreter.

=== PAGE 152 ===

=== PAGE 153 ===
ANALYSIS 
CH. 1. PAIN AS EVIL (SEC. 1-15). 
(1-2) Mukti or freedom from pain is believed to be attain- 
able. The wish for freedom from pain is necessary ; for what is 
not wished to be terminated is not felt pain. The wish thus has 
to be regarded as conditioning the facthood of pain and is thus 
itself an evil. Reflection on pain thus develops into reflection 
on itself as evil. freedom from which too is necessarily wished . 
Of the two wishes the one for freedom fiom pain is secular , while 
the wish for freedom even from this secular wish itself is spiritual . 
(3-6) To the spiritual wish the feeling of pain is not a fact in the 
sense in which it is to the secular wish. To the latter. pain is an 
undoubted fact and yet a puzzle because the self as subject appro- 
priates something that is known as an object and is thus opposed 
to itself. To the spiritual wish, however. pain is no absolute 
fact though it is not eliminated from consciousness. The feeling 
of pain is regarded both in Nyaya and Samkhya as real; to 
Vedanta it is only phenomenal fact and not real. (7-8) All 
the views admit that the feeling cf pain involves an illusion. Pain 
appears to develuped reflection as the self opposing itself. The 
self knows itself as object as it opposes itself and it opposes itself 
as it objectifies itself. The objectification is intellectual illusion 
and the self-infliction 1s conative evil, the two as inseparable 
making up spiritual illusion or avidya. (9-10) Error about the 
self and wrong will condition each other in the reflective self, but 
views differ as to which of them is immediately presupposed by 
spiritual freedom. In Vedanta and Sdmkhya the last evil 
that is sought to be got rid of is error, so that freedom is ulti- 
mately through knowledge alone. Pain, in all the views, involves 
spiritual illusion. Pain, felt pain and the feeling of pain are the 
same to the Vedantist and the Buddhist but are taken by 
them to be synthetically or analytically identical with spiritual illu- 
sion. They are distinguishable in Samkhya, felt pain being 
real evil, unfelt pain real but not evil and the consciousness of 
pain being evil but illusory. (11-15) Freedom from actual pain 
is an affective experience of the mind to Samkhya, freedom 
from the mind itself being absolute freedom or apavarga. 
The first freedom for its completion demands the second free- 
dom and is continuous with it. But there is in Samkhya no 
9

=== PAGE 154 ===
130 STUDIES IN SANKHYA PHILOSOPHY 
discipline for freedom over and above reflective detachment which. 
again, is the beginning of freedom. 
CH. II. REFLECTION AS SPIRITUAL FUNCTION (SEC. 16-32) 
(16-17) Reflection is primarily reflection on pain and is at all 
stages a freeing process. It is spiritual in the sense that it is as 
much conative as intellectual. It may indifferently be called the 
will to deny will or the knowing function. In Sis khya. there 
is really no will to deny will as in Yoga. The reversion of the 
will is nothing but the knowing process, and its consummation is 
viveka in which the mind detaches itself from the body and 
gets lost in unmanifest prakrti. (18-19) Two processes of 
mind—the progressive one which is natural life and the regressive 
one which is reflection or the spiritual function of freeing from 
natural life. Sdinkhya admits a continuity between life and 
reflection. while Yoga does not. To the former. life starts re- 
flection and viveka comes as a stage in the process that is 
conditioned by aviveka. But to the latter the upward move- 
ment of the mind is utterly distinct from its downward coursc. 
(20-23) This difference betwcen §i1ikhya and Y oga is connected 
with their difference regarding the relation between viveka or 
self-knowledge and absolute freedom. According to Saumkhya, 
viveka is the residual mind which spontaneously drops off; 
but according to Yoga. a further effort of the mind, namely, 
asamprajfiata is necessary to terminate itself. Samkhya, 
like Vedanta. reccgnises no positive prescription to achieve 
mukti., but it differs from Vedanta which holds that the re- 
flective process towards mukti starts miraculously and is no part 
of natural life. Reflection to Samkhya is no ascetic effort and 
is itself an experience. (24-25) To one who has begun to re- 
flect, the only prescription of Samkhya is not to will at all 
but to let reflection naturaily deepen or fulfil itself. The process 
of yoga is taken as a natural self-deepening of reflection; it is 
a process of active freeing. though it is not any voluntary doing. 
Reflection as a spiritual process is above ahamkira. but the 
voluntary striving for yoga would still imply ahamkdara. (26) 
Samkhya thus presents a ieligion of spiritual naturalness or 
reflective spontaneity. Its metaphysics springs from this religion 
and reflection which is the spiritual freeing process is also the 
organ of metaphysical knowledge of tattvas or noumena of

=== PAGE 155 ===
ANALYSIS 131 
Samkhya philosophy. (27-32). The tattvas are known by in- 
ference, faith and yoga. but these are all understood as implied 
in different ways in the one natural-spiritual process of reflection. 
A metaphysical condition is immediately known in reflection to 
be constitutive of a fact. Such reflection involves inference which 
is reduced to a view of the conditioned getting distinct from itself 
as its condition. of a self-distinguishing process in the content as 
still given. Reflection involving such internal perception is trans- 
cendental reflection. Transcendental reflection in Samkhya in- 
volves inference that implies a faith in its continuous passage into 
intuition. The self-concretion of reflective perception is yoga 
and faith in such yogic intuition ahout metaphysical entities 15 
faith in scriptures. Asscrtorial certitude about metaphysical 
reality cannot in the Sati khya or Vedanta view be yielded 
by inference apart from scriptural testimony . 
CH. 11. THE BODY OF THE SELF (SEC. 33-47) 
(33-37) Siiikhya admits a dualism of subject and object. 
but the object has a necessary reference to the self. This reference 
is characterised as unconscious teleology which is a metaphorical 
description of the objective process being real only as an identify- 
ing of the object with or its distinguishing from the self. (38-41) 
The body is understood as a complex of elements having its unity 
in their non-distinction from the self and the distinction of two 
bodies 1s not understood as existing in the pure object. Object 
not constituting any body would be unmanifest prakrti: 
manifest object must be the body of a self. There are two broad 
grades of the manifest object viz.. mind and matter constituting 
the mental and the material bodies of the self. Each is a body 
in the sense of being a complex of objective tattvas undistin- 
guished from the self. (42-47) The two bodies are known in two 
grades of reflection which are identical with the two kinds of re- 
flection—secular and spiritual—mentioned in Ch.1. To reflection 
on the mind, the mental body and the material body are presented 
as two distinct bodies , the vanishing and the standing. The mate- 
rial body has the mental body immanent in it; but though the 
mental body stands or lapses as a whole, the material body is 
taken as capable of lapsing before the lapse of the mental body.

=== PAGE 156 ===
132 STUDIES IN SANKHYA PHII.OSOPHY 
CH. IV. CAUSAL AND NON-CAUSAL MANIFESTATION (SEC. 48-61) 
(48-49) Concepts of linga and bhava interpreted anew. 
Bhiva as the subjective function of referring to the bhogya. 
Two kinds of manifestation of buddhi: the causal and the 
non-causal. The world as the non-causal manifestation of the 
body . (50-52) The world related to the perceiving body as the con- 
tent of a thought is related to the thought. The world as 
bhogya is the projection or necessary construction of the feeling 
body . (53) The world as construction out of unmanifest gunas. 
(54) The manifestation of prakrti into buddhi as at once a 
causal anda non-causal process, causal in regard to the existence 
of buddhi and non-causai in regard to the content of buddhi. 
(55) The eight bhavas of buddhi and the two grades of 
bhavas. (56) The bodily self as a bhoktr . (57) The caused 
and uncaused manifestations meet in the material body which 18 
constituted by all the manifest tattvas. (58) The analysis of the 
feeling body into linga and bhava gives the clue to the 
Saimkhya theory of Evolution. (59) The views of Nyaya, 
Siimkhya and Yoga on the referential relation of the world 
to the experiencing self elaborated. (60-61) The Samkhya and 
the Yoga views on the constitution of the phenomenal world 
compared . 
CH. V. TIME, SPACE ANID CAUSALITY (SEC. 62-75) 
( 62-64) Causality in the phenomenal world versus causality in 
the world of tattvas. Parinama as self-distinction and its 
two varieties, the unmanifest and the manifest. The causal pro- 
cess as an unfolding or self-distinction and the effect as the cause 
unfolded . (65-66) The implication of causality as unfolding brought 
out. Unfolding as immediately known in reflection on the men- 
tal object which is known as necessarily dual. (67-69) Causa- 
tion as a process of the object towards bhoga conditioned by 
immanent aviveka. The views of Simkhya and Yoga 
on the function of nimitta in causation and on the distinction 
between immanent change and transitive change. (70-71) The con- 
cept of kdrana-&kaS§a or space as a function of prakrti 
distinguished from 4ka$a as bhiita. (72-73) The Sa mukhya 
versus the Yoga theory about the ontical status of time-order 
(krama) . Their difference on this point connected with the 
difference in their views re prakrti-vikrti. (74) The con-

=== PAGE 157 ===
ANALYSIS 133 
cept of qualitative combination or Involution in Saimkhya. 
(75) The concepts of siksma and sthitila in the context of 
causality . 
CH. VI. THE OBJECTIVE TATTVAS (SEC. 76-92) 
(76-77) The significance of the different groupings of the 
objective tattvas. The constituents of the mental body and the 
material body. (78) The mind as functional versus the mind as 
standing. The standing character of the mind explained. (79-88) 
The concepts of tanmatra. bhiita and indriya explained. 
The concepts of aviSesa and visesa analysed. (89-92) Re- 
lation between ahamkara, tanmatras and indriyas ex- 
plained . 
CH. VII. THE OBJECTIVE TATTVAS (CONTD.) (SFC. 93-110) 
(93-96) Ahamkara and buddhi as functional tattvas. 
Buddhi. ahamkara and tanmatta as the counterparts 
of self-knowing . self-willing and self-feeling. Α Ὁ ἢ] πὶ ἃ Π ἃ as the 
function of ahamkara. Ahamkdra as willing towards bho- 
ga analysed. Willing towards freedom—What? (97-98) Bud- 
dhi is mind as knowing and has for its essence certitude (ni§- 
caya). The inward meaning of the evolution of ahamkira 
from buddhj or its dissolution into buddhi brought out. 
(99-101) The concept of buddhi as certitude analysed in detail . 
(102-104) Bhivas interpreted as functions of certitude. (105- 
106) Bhavas and vrtti as mode and function at once. Rela- 
tion between bhava and vrtti. (107-108) The concepts of 
ilocana and satikalpa connected with the indriyas and 
manas explained. (109-110) The anticipatory functions of the 
senses and of the mind. 
CH. VIII. THE SELF OR PURUSA (SEC. 111-126) 
(111) Anticipative response as at once construction and appre- 
hension. The dual function of mind. as bhava projecting the 
object and as vrtti reflecting the object, illusorily referred to the 
self. (112) A new theory of ‘mutual reflection’ put forward as 
against the one advocated by Bhiksu. (113) The self by itself 
not known as object. (114) Two grades of reflection implying 
a distinguishing from the self, the first one yielding the concepts 
of bhiita and tanmatra and indriya, the second yielding 
those of ahamkara and buddhi . (115) Avidya distin- 
guished from asmita. (116) The concept of viveka ana-

=== PAGE 158 ===
134 STUDIES IN SANKHYA PHILOSOPHY 
lysed. The self as mukta conceived as contentless conscious- 
ness. (117-118) The grounds for inferring the existence of 
self as in Sk. explained. The self inferred primarily for the ex- 
planation of the unity of the body. (119) The inferred self as 
knower. ‘The self in its essential nature as knowledge. (120) 
Samkhya pluralism interpreted. (121-125) The self known as 
infinite i.e., as involving all selves. The self known in buddhi 
as having within it a community of selves. (126) Sainkhya 
versus Vedanta on individuality. 
CH. IX. PRAKRTI (SEC. 128-140) 
(128-130) Prakrti as potential being with the actual func- 
tion of appearing. Dualisin inside prakrti of substantial being 
as potential and aviveka as actual but without standing being. 
The difference between Sainkhya and Yoga on this point 
explained and connected with their views of sadrsa-pari- 
nama and simyavastha. (131) The last two concepts fur- 
ther elucidated in relation to Samkhya and Yoga. (132) 
The concepts of sadrSa-parinama and self-causation in its 
two aspects differently interpreted in Samkhya and Yoga. 
(133) The reality of guna as in the two systems. Bhiksu’s 
interpretation questioned. (134) The quantitative inequality of 
the gunas as qualitative distinction between dominant and re- 
cessive. (135) Samkhya and Yoga on immanent change. 
Dharma-laksanavastha-parinima. (136) The con- 
cept of guna analysed. (137-138) Private and ‘public’ affective 
characters of the phenomenal object. (139) The gunas as 
absolutes i.e.. as at once the potentialities of feelings and felt con- 
tents. (140) The gunas as affective absolutes constitute the 
object . 
CH. X. RELATION OF THE GUNAS (SEC. 141-148) 
(141) The three gunas as the ‘absolutes’ of the three modes 
of feeling which are to be understood in terms of freedom. (142) 
In Samkhya. the gunas understood primarily in terms of 
feelings and secondarily as qualities of the object. (143) In 
Yoga. the gunas understood as the triplicity of mental func- 
tions. (144) Existent object as a complex of gunas. (145) The 
three grades of felt-ness in relation to the object. (146-148) The 
co-existence and mutual relation of the gunas. The Saim- 
khya and Yoga views on the point.

=== PAGE 159 ===
CHAPTER I 
PAIN AS EVIL 
1. Indian philosophy starts with the belief in the attainability 
of mukti. Mukti, whatever else it implies, is understood as 
absolute freedom from pain. Is there any ground for the belief 
that such freedom is attainable? 
2. To reflect on the feeling of pain is necessarily to wish to 
be free from it. To wish anything is to think that it may be 
attained. To necessarily wish something is to believe that it not 
only may but can be attained. that it cannot be unattainable. 
The necessary wish for freedom from pain is then the unquestion- 
ed belief that it can be attained. The necessity of the wish fur- 
ther implies that it is constitutive of the feeling of pain which 
yet is distinct from it. The wish presupposes the belief in the 
facthood of pain and yet if the wish were absent . there would 
be no feeling of pain, for what is not wished to be terminated 
is not felt pain. The wish for freedom is the reflective self or 
reason itself which thus has to be regarded.as conditioning the 
facthood of pain and as. therefore, acting suicidally. Reflection on 
pain, though implying the possibility of freedom from it. is in 
this sense an evil. the potentiality of pain. Reflection thus de- 
velops into reflection on itself as evil. freedom from which too 
is necessarily wished. The wish for freedom from the reflective 
wish to be free from pain is spiritual wish, the latter wish being 
secular “~ It is the necessary wish for absolute freedom. freedom 
not only from pain. but from the potentiality of pain, and im- 
plies the belief not only that it can be attained but also that 
it has already begun to be attained. The belief in mukti is 
belief not only in its possibility but also in its actuality and 
in the indefinite realisability of the actuality . 
3. To the wish for freedom from the secular wish to be free 
from pain which is the potentiality of pain, the feeling of pain 
is not a fact in the sense it is fact to the secular wish. To the 
secular wish and the reflection implied by it, pain is an un- 
doubted fact and yet a puzzle. It is known to be given to the 
reflective self but not in the sense an object is given to it in 
sensation. In reflection on the object as perceived, the object

=== PAGE 160 ===
136 STUDIES IN SANKHYA PHILOSOPHY 
is known as only given, the given-ness being the sensation which 
the reflecting self is not aware of as its function. there being 
no introspective consciousness of sensing. The given-ness of pain 
to reflection is the feeling itself in the form ‘I feel’: I am 
directly aware of myself feeling, but not of myself sensing. In 
Introspective consciousness then, pain is known to be as much 
myself as given to or foreign to myself. The facthood of pain 
is not questioned though somehow it appears as both distinct and 
non-distinct from the introspective self. That the reflective self 
itself conditions the pain and thus functions suicidally is not 
known in secular reflection. What appears here is the contradic- 
tion that the sclf appropriates what it knows to be opposed to 
itself . the puzzle that it is not detached from pain as it must or 
should be. Pain is still a fact though its relation to the self is 
unintelligible . 
4. To the spiritual wish for freedom from the secular wish, 
or in other words, to reflection as reflection on itself, pain is no 
absolute fact though it is not eliminated from consciousness. To 
some. as for example. to the Buddhist. its given-ness dis- 
appears. being reduced to the contradiction in the reflective self. 
the suicidal function that reflection is. By others its foreign- 
ness is still admitted but not as absolutely real. It is taken either 
to be real but essentially terminable or to belong to a _ lower 
grade of reality. Nyiaiya, which does not admit grades of rea- 
lity. takes pain to be real even to the final reficction though the 
necessary wish for its absolute cessation implies its necessary 
terminability. To the Vedantist as to the Buddhist, the 
wish for freedom from the reflection which conditions pain is 
wish not only for the non-persistence of pain but also for the 
present pain to be realised as a contradiction. To the Bud- 
dhist, this wish is already such a realisation though it may 
require to be deepened. The Vedantist. however. would take 
the consciousness of the contradiction as faith in its realisability 
rather than its realisation. The faith is still the beginning of 
the absolute detachment from pain, but the demand for its fur- 
ther deepening implies that this initial detachment is not yet a 
realisation of the contradictory nature of pain. Pain, therefore, 
still appears given though as what cannot or ought not to be 
given, appears as impossible and yet as fact. unintelligible yet 
undeniable .

=== PAGE 161 ===
PAIN AS EVIL 137 
5. The Simkhya view on this point is the Vedantic view 
with a difference. There is the faith not only in the terminability 
but in the contradictory character of the feeling of pain. At the 
Same time the contradiction is not regarded as absolute. That 
the self should be one with the feeling that is intrinsically oppos- 
ed to it is no doubt a contradiction, but that the feeling should 
be non-distinct from the self is no coriradiction but a terminable 
fact. Distinction in Saiimkhya is not a given fact: distinction 
is but distinguishing which, however. is 2 function not of the 
subject but of the object. being the real objective process of the 
object defining itself. The object either defines itself from the 
self, thereby itself tending to lose its manifest character or does 
not define itself. in which case it tends indefinitely to put forth 
further manifestation. Both are τοῦ processes in the object. the 
second process being known in the first as what was and has 
been terminated. Thus the non-distinction of the feeling of pain 
from the self is a real fact known in reflection on it which in- 
volves its distinction from the self. In secular reflection, the 
distinction is only possible. but in spiritual reflection, the 
distinction is an actuality that has begun. Pain as actually dis- 
tinct from the self is thus distinct from the feeling of pain, un- 
felt pain being an unmanifest reality which is equated in S4m- 
khya with rajas. one of the three gunas that make up 
prakrti, an unanalysable factor of eternal objective reality. 
6. In other views. pain means the felt pain. unfelt or un- 
manifest pain being a contradiction in terms. To Samkhya, 
unfelt pain as distinct from the felt pain is not only real but 
eternally real. being known as such in spiritual reflection, while 
the feeling of pain is real but essentially terminable. involving 
as it does along with a contradictory notion of the self a real 
non-distinction from the self. the termination of which has al- 
ready begun. To Nyaya also, the feeling of pain is non- 
eternally real as involving an illusion about the self. though it 
involves the illusion only as its cause and does not embody it, 
as it is taken to do in the other views. To spiritual reflection. 
the feeling of pain is regarded both in Samkhya and Nyaya 
as still real: while apparently the Vedantist takes it to be 
only undeniable but not positively possible and therefore not 
assertible. to be only phenomenal fact and not real, and the 
Buddhist denies its reality altogether. understanding it to be

=== PAGE 162 ===
138 STUDIES IN SANKHYA PHII OSOPHY 
no longer ἃ given feeling but an illusion that somehow 
persists . 
7. All the views spring from spiritual reflection and all ad- 
mit that the feeling of pain involves an illusion. The nature of 
the illusion requires elucidation. The feeling appears to ordinary 
reflection to be at once myself and opposed to myself. to be 
appropriated and rejected at the same time. The reflection im- 
plies the belief that I am free and also wonder that I am still 
affected in the way of pain: I do not thus wonder at being affect- 
ed by the object in the way of sensation. The wonder leads to 
the further reflection that I am affected not from without but 
by myself, that I let myself be affected*. that if I would. I could 
refuse to be affected—what I do not think about sensation as an 
affection. Sensation I do not resent but I resent the feeling of 
pain though the sensation is apparently more foreign than the 
feeling. Sensation is in the first instance at least foreign, not 
opposed to the self while pain is opposed precisely because it is 
of the self. Pain thus appears to this new reflection to be the 
self opposing itself . 
8. The illusion that is involved in the feeling of pain is 
thus at once intellectual and conative. The self opposes itself 
and is thus object or not-self to itself. This self-opposing or 
self-objectifying self is the reflective self. It knows itself as object 
as it opposes itself and it opposes itself as it objectifies itself. 
The objectification is intellectual illusion and the self-infliction is 
conative evil, the two as inseparable making up spiritual illusion 
or avidya. They arc inseparable in the sense that each con- 
ditions the other so that avidya has to be conceived as a 
beginningless series of wrong knowledge and wrong will that is 
necessarily terminable, because illusion is known as _ such only 
when correction has begun. The feeling of pain as belonging to the 
reflective self involves this beginningless self-caused avidya 
which is indifferently spiritual illusion or spiritual evil. 
9. Error about the self and wrong will condition or imply 
each other in the reflective self, but views differ as to which of 
them is immediately pre-supposed by spiritual freedom. In 
some views (e.g.. Vedanta and Sainkhya) the last evil that 
“ Cf. Kant—the outer object is given te the inner sense by the self 
itself.’

=== PAGE 163 ===
PAIN AS EVIL 139 
is sought to be got rid of is error, so that freedom is ultimately 
through knowledge alone. In othcrs (e.g., Yoga and Nyaya) 
the self is unfree even in knowledge. has still the conative ten- 
dency to be passive to itself and can be free only through a 
specific freeing activity , unconscious or conscicus. There are again 
views (ς g.. the Buddhist view) to which error and wrong 
will are not synthetically but analytically connected, not causing 
but implying one another. so that neither lapses while the other re- 
mains, freedom being through their simultaneous lapse. To 
Simkhya as to Vedinta, error survives wrong will and free- 
dom is in the last resort through correction of error. 
10. Pain in all these views involves spiritual illusion. To 
the Buddhist, it is but the illusion; the Naiyiyika takes 
it to be only caused by the illusion, while in Vedanta and 
Simkhya, it is at once the effect and the embodiment of the 
illusion. To all but the Buddhist. pain has a natural being. 
Nyiiya regards it as wholly natural though it is conditioned by 
spiritual evil. Vedanta and Samkhya take it to be both 
natural and spiritual. its natural being being constituted by its 
Spiritual being and yet distinct from it. To Vedanta, its 
natural being is accordingly only phenomenal, being nought 
apart from its spirituality. To Simkhya. however, the natu- 
ral being is self-subsistent though undistinguished from the spiri- 
tual evil. pain being on the one hand a mental fact and on the 
other an illusory affection of the self. By pain is meant here 
felt pain; and if unfelt pain be a fact as it is io Samkhya, it 
is not understood to be an evil at all, evil being only to the feel- 
ing consciousness. Felt pain is an evil which, however, is still 
distinct from the feeling consciousness. being a mental fact that 
is the unfelt pain itself with the induced character of feltness or 
manifestness due to its non-distinction from the self. Pain. felt 
pain, and the feeling of pain are the same to the Vedain- 
tist and the Buddhist but are taken by them to be syntheti- 
cally or analytically identical with spiritual illusion. They are 
distinguishable in SAainkhya. felt pain being real evil. unfelt 
pain real but not evil and the subjective consciousness of pain 
being evil but illusory. Felt pain, however. is taken as in 
Vedanta and Nyaya to be synthetically connected with 
spiritual illusion. not merely caused by it as in Nyiya but em- 
bodying it as in Vedanta. though not therefore merely pheno-

=== PAGE 164 ===
140 STUDIES IN SANKHYA PHILOSOPHY 
menal. The illusion is to all an evil in itself, not as transcend- 
ing or superseding the natural evi] of pain but as wholly imma- 
nent in it. 
11. Felt pain is thus to Samkhya a real evil at once 
natural and spiritual and as such both terminable and corrigible 
Hence it is that, as in Nyaya. the striving for secular freedom 
from pain is regarded as continuous with the striving for spiritual 
freedom from the secular strife itself. Mukti is regarded as 
desired , not as it is to the Vedantist as something eternal, the 
achievement of which is itself illusory. The unfree state of the 
self (bandha) is real to Nyi ya. beginninglessly real though 
terminable. To Samkhya. it is unreal as a state of the self. 
the self being essentially incapable of modification, but it is real 
as a state of the mind as object. as the beginningless but termin- 
able non-distinction of the mind from the sclf. The mind is in 
time and its termination (which is its potentialisation into 
prakrti) is as much an event in time as the termination of 
any particular pain. The only difference between secular and 
spiritual desire for freedom is the difference between freedom from 
actual pain and freedom from the mind that is the potentiality of 
all pain. 
12. Freedom from actual pain is still a bhoga or affective 
experience of the mind to Samkhya,. freedom from the mind 
itself being apavarga or absolute freedom. The first free- 
dom for its own completion demands the second freedom. The 
process towards the first is continuous with the process towards 
the second in Samkhya. while in Yoga it is otherwise, the 
mind being likened to a river with two entirely opposite currents 
at once. one towards bho ga and the other towards apavarga. 
So too in Vedanta, there is the irreconcilable dualism of 
§reyah and preyah. of moksa and svarga. of spiritual 
will ($astriya karma) and natural will (svabhavika 
karma), the former in each dualism implying an absolute 
rejection of the latter, although the latter might be phenomenally 
continuous with the former—what would not be admitted by the 
Buddhist. Nyaya like Samkhya admits a continuity of 
secular freedom with spiritual freedom, though it does not ad- 
mit with Samkhya that the latter as a freeing process is not 
egoistic willing but only a distinguishing of the mind from the self. 
13. There is apparently in Simkhya no sadhana or

=== PAGE 165 ===
PAIN AS EVIL 141 
discipline for freedom. Even the secular process of freeing from 
pain is a reflective detachment rather than a willing to achieve 
one’s good or pleasure, though the reflection happens to go with 
such willing. The spiritual process of frecing from the mind or 
the general potentiality of pain is nothing but reflection and is 
already above the egoistic attitude (ahamkara) that condi- 
tions willing. Reflection or knowledge is at no stage to 
Samkhya a sadhana or means to freedom but is the 
beginning of freedom*. Evil is throughout taken as correlative to 
freedom and not to the good, reflection being the freeing process 
started by the feeling of evil itself and not supervening from with- 
out. The current of the mind as non-distinct from the self to- 
wards bhoga turns of itself and continuously backward as re- 
flection: viveka or the self-defining of the object (including 
the mind) from the self emerges in the natural process started by 
aviveka or the beginningless non-distinction from the self. 
14. What is the Samkhya conception of the good? As pain 
is the only evil, pleasure is the only good, both being at once 
natural and spiritual. Pain is not opposed to pleasure, nor is 
it a limitation of pleasure. nor the positive of which pleasure is 
but the cessation, but is only different from pleasure, both being 
positive. As in Nyaya, pleasure is not in itself an evil. being 
evil only as it is mixed with and shot over with pain. Not that 
unmixed pleasure is not attainable. as held by Nyiya,. though 
such pleasure is still of the mind as identified with the self and 
not the self itself as it is to Vedanta. and is not in itself the 
potentiality of pain as it is to Yoga. It is indeed terminable 
but only as it terminates of itself into absolute freedom, being in 
fact the beginning of freedom. Pain leads to reflective detach- 
ment while pleasure as pleasure is the initial stage of such 
detachment . 
15. The good, therefore, in Siinkhya is pleasure which by 
itself does not entail pain and tends of itself to be detached 
“Vide Ma&thara in his gloss on Sk.37—Na hi bhagavatah 
kapilasya mate kimapi kartavyamanustheyataya , 
kintu samkhyanam pancavimSati-tattva-jianameva 
sadharmyena vaidharmena ca nihsreyasahetuh. Uktam 
ca—HaSsa piva lala moda nityam visayanupabhuiija 
kuru ca ma Samkam; yadi viditam te kapila-matam tat 
prapsyase mokga-saukhyam ca,

=== PAGE 166 ===
142 STUDIES IN SANKHYA PHILOSOPHY 
from the self. It is indeed in the first instance a bhoga of 
given experience, but it is already in the proccss of vanishing as 
experience into the free function of knowledge. Hence even if 
the secular freedom from pain be a pleasure or good. it tends to 
abolish itself into freedom that is no given experience at all. Pain 
as evil. therefore , is correlative to absclute freedom which implies 
freedom from pleasure also as good. It is because evil is correlated 
in the last resort with freedom and not with the good that freedom 
from pain is understood as the spiritual goal.

=== PAGE 167 ===
CHAPTER II 
REFLECTION AS SPIRITUAL FUNCTION 
16. Reflection starts as reflection on the feeling of pain. 
To wish to be free from pain is the primary reflection on the 
bodily self. the self that appears to feel in the body. pain unlike 
pleasure being always explicitly felt in the body. Pleasure may 
not be explicitly felt in the body. and even when it is so felt. it 
is felt as being dissociated from the body. The fecling of plea- 
sure is already a feeling of freedom. the initial actuality of the 
reflective consciousness. Pain appears distinct from the reflective 
wish to be free from it, although the wish is consciously consti- 
tutive of the pain. Hence the feeling of pain, unlike that of plea- 
sure, is only implicitly reflective and appears to be followed by 
but not continued in the reflection. No bodily feeling 1s neces- 
sarily followed by reflection: pleasure and pain alike may be 
followed by moha or the feeiing of indolent passivity ..« But 
when they are followed by reflection. pleasure alone and not 
pain appears to be continued in it. ‘To he felt in the body is to 
be felt in moha: pain is felt as struggle with moha and plea- 
sure as conquest over it. which as positive is felt in the mind as 
detached from the body. Were it not. however. for the reflective 
consciousness of struggle in pain, the conquest in pleasure could 
not be reflectively apprehended as such. The body-detached 
character of pleasure or its essentially reflective being is known 
as such in further reflection, only because the body-bound cha- 
racter of pain is first known in the reflective wish to get rid of 
it. Reflection, accordingly. is primarily reflection on pain. 
17. Reflection is at all stages a freeing process. the mind 
freeing itself from the body or from itself as a subtle body of the 
self. The process is spiritual in the sense that it is as much 
conative as intellectual, a detaching activity which may be indif- 
ferently called the will to deny will (will to nivrtti) or the 
knowing function. It is in reflection that the self-assertive will 
(will to pravrtti) is known to have been one with the body 
that is sought to be freed from; and it is in reflection that the 
given object is negatively willed to be detachedly known. In 
Samkhya there is really no will to deny will as in Yoga:

=== PAGE 168 ===
144 STUDIES IN SANKHYA PHILOSOPHY 
it is just the knowing process, knowledge as mental being a 
process. In Saimkhya the consummation of this reversion of 
the will, which is the knowing process, is conceived as viveka 
which is not eternal quiescent knowledge which would be the 
self but the mind distinguishing , defining or detaching itself from 
the self and thereby losing itself in unknown or unmanifest 
Prakrti, the self consequently standing in its eternally mani- 
fest solitariness. 
18. It is in the regressive movement of reflection towards 
mukti that the progressive movement of the self towards 
bhoga is known to have been a fact. The forward process is 
life, reflection as the backward process being the spiritual func- 
tion of freeing from natural life and of knowing it as _ being 
arrested. The further question arises if reflection is continuous 
with natural life, whether the movement towards bhoga arrests 
itself and turns back of itself as the process of freeing from 
bhoga. Does reflection tcll us that it has emerged from life or 
that it has inexplicably supervened on it? That unlike life which 
is perpetually self-caused, reflection absolutely begins is gene- 
rally admitted, but there is difference as to whether it is started 
by life itself. If even pain be admitted to start the reflective 
wish to get rid if it. is the further reflection on this wish, the 
consciousness of the wish being itself foreign to the sclf., also 
started by the wish which is the primary reflection’? This fur- 
ther reflection would be the same as reflection on pleasure. the 
consciousness of pleasure being foreign to the self. but is reflection 
on pleasure started by pleasure itself? Is spiritual reflection 
continuous with the wish to be free from pain which is natural 
reflection ? 
19. The Samkhya view admits this continuity. To Yoga 
as to some other views. there is discontinuity between life and 
reflection and between the so-called natural reflection and spiri- 
tua! reflection. There is no natural retiection to Yoga. the na- 
tural urge towards freedom from pain being to it no conscious 
or reflective wish as it is to Sitnkhya. The conscious wish 
for freedom is not natural but spiritual, and it supervenes on the 
blind movement of life as inexplicably as the further reflection 
supervenes on this reflection. To SAmkhya. the urge towards 
freedom from pain is conscious wish and as such at once natural 
and spiritual; and this wish again is implicitly reflective on itself

=== PAGE 169 ===
REFLECTION AS SPIRITUAL FUNCTION 145 
which of itself becomes explicit. The freeing process of reflec- 
tion is at once a part of life and a detachment from life. Life 
Starts reflection and viveka comes as a stage in the process 
that is conditioned by aviveka. Yoga agrees with Κ ἃ τῇ - 
khya in regarding both aviveka and viveka as _predica- 
ments of the mind and not of the self but does not admit that 
viveka comes in the natural course of the maturation of ἂν ]- 
veka, holding as it does that the upward movement of the mind 
towards freedom is utterly distinct from its downward course 
towards bhoga. 
20. This difference between SAmkhya and Yoga is con- 
nected with their difference on the question of the relation bet- 
ween self-knowledge and absolute freedom. Self-knowledge is to 
both viveka, the spiritual discrimination of the mind from the 
self, which is a mental fact, the terminal stage of the self-atten- 
uating process of the mind called spiritual reflection. Viveka 
to Samkhya is the residual mind which spontaneously drops 
off or distinguishes itself from the self. To Yoga. a further 
effort of the mind—called asamprajiiata— is necessary for 
the mind to terminate itself. The mind has to make an effort 
to lose itself in prakrti, this effort being itself conscious, a 
conscious transition into unconsciousness. The freeing movement 
of reflection. accordingly, is in all stages a strain or effort to 
Yoga, while to Situ khya it is absolute spontaneity continuous 
with the flow of life. ᾿ 
21. Pain, it has been said, 1s in 5 ἃ τὶ ΚΠ Κ ἃ only implicitly 
reflective. appearing as it does distinct from the reflective wish 
to get rid of it, although reflection on the wish tells us that the 
wish is constitutive of the pain. Before this latter reflection emer- 
ges, the reflective freeing from pain appears as an effort from 
without, which however is realised in the latter reflection as due 
to and embodying an illusion, as what was an effort only so far 
as the wish for freedom was blind or natural and was not reflec- 
tion. Even the first reflection was as reflection a spontaneity of 
the mind and was not an effort but only accompanied by it. The 
reflective detachment of the mind from the body or pain involves 
an accidental strain, but the reflection that detaches the mind 
from the self does not involve it, being, as we said, freedom 
or detachment that has already begun to be actual. 
22. Such effortless reflection consciously emerges in the first 
10

=== PAGE 170 ===
146 STUDIES IN SANKHYA PHILOSOPHY 
instance as reflection on pleasure. Pleasure is felt as the already 
started process of the mind freeing from the body, as the imme- 
diate actuality of reflection so that reflection on pleasure is plea- 
sure itself freeing from its apparent given-ness in the body, plea- 
sure spontaneously withdrawing from itself as objective. Sai 
khya Karikas 59 and 60 may be interpreted as asserting this 
spontaneity of the detachment of pleasure as bhoga from the 
feeling self, of pleasure starting reflection on itself. With this 
accords also the passage from Mathara’s gloss on Karika 
37. quoted in section 13. which seems to suggest that the feeling 
self cures itself, spontaneously reficcts on fecling, and frees itself 
in reflection without any effort of the will. 
23. Samkhya like Vedanta recognises no positive pres- 
Cription to achieve mukti. But while Vedanta holds that 
the reflective process towards mukti starts miraculously and is 
no part of natural life, Samkhya takes it to spring from life 
‘and to be continuous with the life-process. Reflection is not only 
no ascetic effort but is nothing foreign to experience, being itself 
an experience (of the vanishing of experience). To reflect is not 
only to abstain conscfously from willing. to feel the lapse of wil- 
ling but to feel the lapse of feeling also. Reflective feeling is not 
a self-abolishing feeling to Vedanta as it is to Samnkhya but 
only a feeling of the blindness or given-ness of feeling (bhoga) 
being abolished through the lapse of willing. Sdmkhya con- 
Ceives it not as standing joy as it is to Vedanta but a joy in 
the process of lapsing , joy that is as much objective experience as 
pain , though not itself a pain as it is to some other views. To 
neither is there such a thing as reflective pain or reflective effort : 
what appears such is blind feeling or willing as going along with 
and inspite of reflection. To both, reflection and the freedom from 
pain that it implies is a positive joy, but while to Vedanta 
the joy is consciousness itself under a limitation. Si mkhya takos 
it to be the manifest character of the mind as passing away. 
24. To one who has begun to reflect and to realise that the 
reflection has come naturally , the only prescription of Samkhya, 
if it is a prescription at all, is not to will, or if willing is al- 
ready there, to make an object of it, to view it as itself a pain 
that should not be. In more explicit spiritual reference , the pres- 
cription is to avoid ascetic effort or antagonism to nature or life. 
It is not to push on reflection nor to wonder at it as miraculously

=== PAGE 171 ===
REFLECTION AS SPIRITUAL FUNCTION 147 
there but to let it, as what has naturally come, naturally fulfil it- 
self. To one to whom reflection has not come, the prescription to 
rouse reflection is meaningless. One to whom it has come but not 
in full measure can do nothing to deepen it but can only let it 
complete itself, avoid misdirecting it or scaring it away by attempt- 
ing to force it. One can indeed will to attend (δ ἢ ἃ νἃ ἢ 8) to 
the content of reflection , but such attention cannot of itself deepen 
the reflection. though reflection by its spontaneous deepening may 
lead to the fixation or unfolding of its content. 
25. Apparently to Sainkhya the process of yoga is a 
natural self-deepening of reflection that has naturally emerged. 
In Yoga philosophy itself, the yoga process is voluntary at- 
tention passing of rmght into concentrated reflection or intuition . 
Not that Simkhya takes yoga to be ἃ passive process. 
for reficction that gets deepened into yoga is a_ process of 
active freeing though it is not a voluntary doing. There is accor- 
dingly no prescription of yoga in Samkhya though it is ad- 
mitted as a stage in the spontaneous consummation of reflection. 
The spiritual process of reflection is from the beginning above 
ahaink4aza or the egoistic will. The voluntary striving for yoga 
would still imply ahamkara. In Yoga philosophy. the will 
to yoga is not egoistic but spiritual. being ultimately the acti- 
vity of asamprajnata. 
26. Samkhya may thus be said to present a religion of 
reflective spontaneity or spiritual naturalness. Its metaphysics 
springs from this religion, reflection which is the spiritual freeing 
process being the organ of metaphysical knowledge. Reflection is 
started by experience or bhoga, unless it is prevented by 
moha; and it is a freeing from bhoga unless the same moha 
misdirects it towards bhoga again. Thinking which is not thus 
misdirected to the service of sense is real only as the spiritual 
process of frecing from sense, and it is this spiritual thinking 
that yields metaphysical knowledge. The freeing from sense is a 
knowing of the self as what the body, with which is bound up 
the experienced or bhogya world, is progressively detached from . 
The mind too is a body of the self in some sense and the detach- 
ment means a gradual distinguishing of the material body and of 
the mental body from the self with which they were identified . 
To distinguish the body from the self, to make the body an object 
of reflection is on the one hand to know the self better and on

=== PAGE 172 ===
148 STUDIES IN SANKHYA PHILOSOPHY 
the other to see the possibility of its dissolution into impersonal 
or objective but unexperienceable realities, experience being pos- 
sible only through the body. The self, which is known only as 
distinguished from, and these objective non-empirical realities are 
the metaphysical] tattvas or noumena of Sainkhya philosophy. 
Reflection is at once a freeing of the self from the body and the 
knowing of these metaphysical entities. The freeing and the know- 
ing, the religion and the philosophy, are not means to one 
another: each of itself passes into the other. There is no freeing 
except in the knowing of the object as metaphysical. as absolutely 
distinct from the self, or—what is the same thing—as what was 
illusorily confused with the self as its body; and there is no know- 
ledge of the metaphysical object except as what was its body and 
now disowned . 
27. The nature of reflection as the organ of metaphysics re- 
quires further elaboration. Are the Samkhya tattvas known 
by inference or accepted in faith or 1eached only through yoga? 
Inference , faith and yoga are none of them denied in 5 ἃ 1 - 
khya as leading to metaphysical knowledge, but they are all 
understood as implied in different ways in the one natural-spiritual 
process of reflection. Inference in metaphysics is necessarily of 
the regressive type from the conditioned to the condition and ult- 
mately to the unconditioned condition. Within phenomenal reality , 
condition and conditioned are in reciprocity, but what is condi- 
tioned by a metaphysical condition never conditions it again. Be- 
sides, metaphysical condition unlike phenomenal condition is al- 
ways constitutive of and embodied in the conditioned which yet 
is distinct from it. Inference of the metaphysical condition 15, 
therefore , always regressive; and the inferred condition is known 
to be embodied in the conditioned in some immediate way and 
not by inference again. The constitutive condition* is knowable 
as such as the immediate self of the conditioned, from which 
the conditioned is still distinguished. Inference may at best in- 
dicate its necessity but cannot yield assertorial certitude about it. 
How then is such certitude attained? 
28. A metaphysical condition is immediately known to be con- 
Stitutive of a metaphysical or phenomenal fact in reflection. Such 
ΔΑ is said to constitute B when B without A is nothing that is known, 
though as embodying A, B is distinct from A.

=== PAGE 173 ===
REFLECTION AS SPIRITUAL FUNCTION 149 
immediate knowledge would be intellectual intuition if it involved 
no inference or superseded inference. But in the first instance, 
at any rate, it involves inference which is not superseded but refiec- 
tively reduced to a view of the conditioned getting distinct from 
itself as its condition, of a  self-distinguishing process in the 
content as still given, the view therefore amounting to an internal 
perception though not yet to intellectual intuition. Yoga or 
samadhi would be this intuition in which the self-distinguishing 
process is conceived to be completed, so that the dualism in 
reflection of internal and external perception lapses, the internal 
perception being but the perception of the lack of completion in 
the process. which is just lack of perception of the given. That 
a content should be but is not perceived in the given object is 
what is known in the internal perception of the content. Reflection 
that involves such internal perception is transcendental reflection . 
Inference of a phenomenal condition is knowing something about 
the conditioned, not knowing it better or knowing its very self. 
But inference of a metaphysical condition is a better knowing of the 
conditioned , a reflectively synthetic cognition of it or an insight 
into it. Kant’s transcendental reflection is the same process : only 
what is founded on it is epistemology , not metaphysics. 
29. Transcendental reflection as in Samkhya_ involves 
inference that implies a faith in its continuous passage into intui- 
tion. The inferred content is meant. in the reflection, to be in- 
tuited in the given content and believed to be intuitable. This 
intuition is not complete perception of the given, for the imma- 
nence of the inferred in the given cannot itself be given; and as 
yet a fulfilment of reflection, it must be more concrete than the 
internal perception that the reflection implies. This self-concretion 
of reflective perception is yoga, and the faith in such yogic 
intuition as involved in reflection which is assertorial certitude 
about the metaphysical entities is what is really meant by faith in 
the scriptures. Thus inference, faith and yoga are all implied 
in the transcendental reflection that is the organ of Samkhya 
metaphysics . 
30. What is reflectively believed and understood as_ unpro- 
‘vable by secular pramadna is not merely thought apriori but 
presented to thought independently of it, vouched for by an 
authority other than the thinking self. To believe in such presenta- 
tion is to believe in a revelation; and to believe in any testimony 
as scriptural or absolutely authoritative is to believe that its con-

=== PAGE 174 ===
150 STUDIES IN SANKHYA PHILOSOPHY 
tent is given to our thought by something other than thought and 
other than sense. What testimony should be taken as revealed is 
a different question , legitimate or illegitimate. The primary point 
is whether we have reflective belief in a content as real and as 
yet unknowable by perception or inference. If we have, we have 
faith in revelation, for no content is believed unless it is present- 
ed. and what is presented but not by sense is ‘revealed’. 
31. Assertorial certitude about metaphysical reality cannot in 
the Samkhya or Vedanta view be yielded by inference or 
necessary thought. To Samkhya as to Kant, the certitude ema- 
nates from outside theoretical thought which. however. yields the 
concept of metaphysical reality. The concept does not depend 
on faith nor does it of itself carry belief. To Vedinta, meta- 
physical thought is itself an emanation of faith. being spiritual 
thought that is utterly distinct from sccular thought which is only 
competent to refute secular doubts about the validity of spiritual 
thought. To Nyaya as to Samkhya. metaphysical thought 
is nothing other than secular thought. Unlike Sa mkhya, how- 
ever. Nyaya holds that metaphvsical thought is validated in 
precisely the same way as secular thought. although certitude 
from outside thought viz.. from revealed scriptures is also ad- 
mitted on the basis of thought as having concurrent jurisdiction 
with secular certitude about the metaphysical . 
32. Vijfiiana-bhiksu discusses the question if the tat- 
tvas are known by inference independently of scriptural testi- 
mony and opines that they are inferred though the inference is in 
interpretation of scriptural testimony’. Vacaspati in his gloss 
on Samkhya-Karika 6 indicates two kinds of contents that 
have to be known through scriptural testimony and not by in- 
ference only, viz., the order of emergence of the tattvas, 
mahat etc., on the one hand and things like heaven, karma 
devata etc., on the other. Of these the former apparently are 
at once inferred and admitted in faith. the kind of content that 
we have taken as necessarily conceivable by thought but deriving 
its assertorial certitude from the scriptures. The latter would 
appear to be further removed from thought, though here too the 
contents cannot be inconceivable. There must be a way of under- 
standing the meaning of devata. for example. in terms of the 
contents of our ordinary consciousness. Faith-content of this type 
is not. like the cosmic evolution of the tattvas, purely intellectual 
and has to be understood apparently as a postulate of some kind 
of non-cognitive consciousness , of feeling or willing on the nonsen- 
suous or spiritual level. 
aSPB.—65.

=== PAGE 175 ===
CHAPTER ΠῚ 
THE BODY OF THE SELF 
33. Samkhya admits a metaphysical dualism of subject and 
object, the existence of each being conceived as independent of 
the existence of the other. At the same time, the nature of the 
object is understood in necessary reference to the self, while the 
self is taken to be intelligible by itself. The nature of the object 
is ultimately its character of manifestness to the self. for, every 
other character of the object involves this character. ‘The charac- 
ter is objective and is not the mere circumstance of the self know- 
ing it or of being aware of knowing it. But it implies a reference 
to the self: the object is known as manifest to the self, though 
what constitutes this character is not the self but distinction from 
the self.. The nature of the object presupposes the distinction in 
point of existence between the object and the subject. The re- 
ference of the object to the self is. in this sense, a necessary syn- 
thetic character and not a defining character of the object. The 
object may be conceived to exist without being the content of cons- 
ciousness. but a character of the object can only be conceived as 
the content of consciousness. which is yet objectively real. 
34. The essential character of the object—viz., its manifestness 
is understood to be at once a being and a process. The object. in 
fact, is known as getting manifested. To get manifested is for 
the object to be defined out of its own unmanifest condition . to be 
in this sense distinct from itself: and to get unmanifested is for this 
outward distinction to lapse or become retracted into itself. Either 
process is explicitly for the self and is intelligible only in reference 
to the self. To reflection on the object as known, the object 
appears as what was being manifested and now arrested in mani- 
festation and as, therefore. beginning to be unmanifested. With 
the arrest of its further manifestation , its present manifestation gets 
an evanescent character, for nothing merely stands as man/fest 
before reflection. The conscious evanescence of the manifestness 
of the object means a perception of its reality being independent of 
or distinct from the self and of the manifestness , therefore , having 
being conditioned by the non-distinction of the object from the 
self. Thus the manifesting process of the object, which is its

=== PAGE 176 ===
152 STUDIES IN SANKHYA PHILOSOPHY 
defining from itself, implies its non-distinction from the self and 
the lapsing of this definition implies a distinguishing of the object 
from the self. The object defines itself when it does not distin- 
guish itself from the self and it gets undefined in character when 
it distinguishes itself as an existent from the self. 
35. The non-distinction of the object from the self is the fact 
corresponding to the illusory identification of the self with the 
object. The self is identified with the object in the consciousness 
of being embodied. The body is itself a real but terminable 
organisation of the object, the unity of which consists entirely in 
its not distinguishing itself from the self. Distinguishing, as has 
been indicated , is a contingent but real function of the object itself , 
implying the termination of the equally real predicament of not 
distinguishing . The body as not-distinct from the self is the cons- 
cious body (and not embodied self), with consciousness not as a 
quality but as an associated thing. The oneness with the self from 
the side of the object means only undistinguishedness. but from 
the side of the self it means the embodiment of the self in the 
object. The body is thus an objective fact known as such when 
it has begun to be distinguished from the self (and thus dissolved ) 
in reflection, or. in other words, when the embodiment of the self 
has begun to be realised as an unreal modification of the self. 
36. The intrinsic process in the object of its manifestation or 
unmanifestation is thus reducible to the process of the object 
forming or unforming the body of the self. By ‘object’ is meant 
here metaphysical object (or objective tattva), not the object 
of sense-experience and feeling (bhoga), the status of which 
will be discussed later. The object in which one is illusorily cons- 
cious of being embodied , the object that can appear one with the 
self is not the spatial object which is experienced as out there and 
never as oneself. The object that is taken to manifest or unmani- 
fest itself is the object appearing as conscious body or ceasing to 
appear such, the object that is as real as the self and can appear 
as the self, or, in other words, the object that is metaphysically 
real. This object is known to have a character that necessarily 
refers to the self. 
37. The necessary reference of the object to the self beyond 
is characterised as unconscious teleology. The object is not cons- 
cious though it may be sometimes undistinguished from cons- 
ciousness ; and if it necessarily manifests or unmanifests itself for

=== PAGE 177 ===
THE BODY OF THE SELF 153 
consciousness or self from which it is distinct, if its entire process 
consists in the formation and the dissolution of the body of the 
self, it may be said to be spontaneously moving towards or un- 
consciously willing the ends of the self. Not that the self has 
really any end or purpose, though it illusorily appears to have it, 
nor also that the purpose is of the unconscious object. Uncons- 
cious teleology is thus apparently a metaphorical description of the 
objective process being real only as an identifying of the object with 
the self, or its distinguishing from the self, or—what is the same 
thing—as the formation or the dissolution of the body of the self, 
formation for the bhoga or experience of the self and dissolution 
for its freedom from bhoga. These are ends of the embodied 
self which. on the correction of the illusion of the embodied self. 
turn out to be no ends at all. The objective process is, however, 
real and has to be understood as having spiritual significance be- 
fore it can end for the self. 
38. The body is understood as a complex of elements having 
its unity in their non-distinction from the sclf. A metaphysical 
complex is intelligible only as for the self, as really undistinguished 
from the self and as having the self illusorily immanent or em- 
bodied in it. The unity of the body is necessarily understood to 
be a spiritual function. To reflection. it appears as what the 
self has become and also as what the self is getting freed from, 
being really a plurality of objects associated with the self forming 
a unity or a unity dissociated from the self dissolving into the plu- 
rality. The unity and the plurality of metaphysical objects are 
thus known alike as processes , processes of synthesis and analysis 
making up the being of the body. The body represents in itself 
the entire process of nature for the self. 
39. The body undistinguished from the self and the imperso- 
nal objects that are its constituents are known together. One 
knows one’s body as a complex of such objects which . again. are 
known only as forming or having formed the body. There is to 
Samkhya no metaphysical object or objective tattva that is 
manifest except in a body that is forming or dissolving. Not that 
in reflection, we know our body as actually forming or dissolving . 
We actually think it only but with the faith that it is actually 
happening. We have faith in mukti and in the body getting 
detached from the self in reflection and thereby becoming resolved 
into impersonal object to the freeing self. The implication is that

=== PAGE 178 ===
154 STUDIES IN SANKHYA PHILOSOPHY 
as the self becomes completely free, the object ceases to be mani- 
fest to it. Must it then continue to be manifest to other embodied 
selves? As a matter of fact, indecd, when one self is reflective, 
other selves blindly press on towards bhoga: the freedom of 
one does not mean freedom of all. But is there any necessity that 
the object should be manifest in some body and that the same 
object that constituted my body should constitute some other 
body ? It depends on whether my body in appearing as object to 
my reflection appears distinct from the object that another body 
appears to be to my reflection. Taking ‘body’ here to mean the 
material body , the matter of it as forming the body is conceived as 
undistinguished from myself , as constituting me or myself as object 
and is, therefore . not taken as a part of the external or experienced 
world—which never appears to reflection as one with me. This 
matter is then noumenal matter and 15 not like the experienced 
object taken to be in space; and as I believe at the same time in 
another’s body, I take the matter of it also as out of space. 
There is thus no intelligible distinction between the two bodies 
other than that they are identified with distinct selves. So. too, my 
mind and another’s mind are understood to be distinct only in 
reference to the distinction between ourselves. 
40. The distinction of two bodies is not understood as exist- 
ing in the object and hence the same object that constitutes my 
body can be said to constitute another’s body. But why must 
the object be conceived to constitute some hody? Noumenal 
object is known only as constituting a body; and although re- 
flection on the body yields the knowledge of the object as a reality 
distinct from the self, it is only as still identified with the self that 
it is manifest as object. Object not constituting any body would 
not be denied but it would be only unmanifest prakrti: mani- 
fest object must be the body of a self. But when this hody dis- 
solves to a mukta self. must the stuff of it constitute at the 
same time the body of an unfree self? The object as manifest 
has a necessary reference not to this self or that self but to self 
in general i1.e., to any self as self, as subject embodied in the 
same object. ‘Self in general’ means self-hood which is constructive- 
ly one as implying identification of each self with the one object* 
“As will be shown later, to be awaie of oneself 1s to be aware of 
other selves, all as embodied in the same object, the object as thus em- 
bodying the self in general being known as devata.

=== PAGE 179 ===
THE BODY OF THE SELF 155 
The object that is manifest to a freeing self as unmanifesting itself 
is manifest to it as manifesting to other selves*. The potentialisa- 
tion of the knownness of an object to one self means to the self 
its actualisation to another. 
41. The metaphysical object is one in the sense of being indi- 
visible , but it admits of many distinct grades, the many objective 
tattvas being such grades. There are two broad grades of the 
manifest object-—viz., mind and matter, known as constituting the 
mental body and the material body—what are called the subtle 
and the gross bodies of the self. These bodies are known in the 
first instance , the grades of object being known as these detached 
from the self in reflection. Each is a body in the sense of being a 
complex of objective tattvas undistinguished from the self. The 
material body is the complex of the five matters (bhiita), and 
the mental body is the complex of the mental karnas or 
organs—including buddhi. ahamkara and the eleven 
indriyas—on the one hand, and of the mental stuff including 
the five tanmatras on the other. These constituents of the 
body are the objective tattvas to be explained later. 
42. The two bodies are known in two grades of reflection, 
one in which the material body is distinguished from the mental 
body which here appears as the self, and the other in which the 
mental body is distinguished from the pure self. The first re- 
flection is identical with the reflection that has been taken to be 
implied in the wish to be tree from pain which is explicitly felt in 
the body. The second reflection is what was called spiritual re- 
flection . reflection on the first reflection. Reficction is the cons- 
ciousness of oneself as objective. of the me as what appeared as 
1. In the first reflection, the me is the material body which no 
longer appears as 7. In the second reflection, it is the mental 
body which still appears as 1. ‘The me as distinct from the 1 is 
the body which is material if it cannot be reflectively called 1 and 
mental if it can be. The mental body as at once me and / 15 
thus explicitly self-distinguishing. More accurately, it is what is 
manifest as the me or the body forming or dissolving, as the 
lapsing of I into me or the turning of me into mere object, object 
that is explicitly not myself. 
®To know an object as ceasing to be manifest is still to know it as 
manutest,

=== PAGE 180 ===
156 STUDIES IN SANKHYA PHILOSOPHY 
43. The material body is also like the mental in the process 
of making or unmaking, but the process is not explicit in the 
first reflection and only comes to be suspected in the second re- 
flection when the mental body is known to involve the process. 
The material body appears to have a finished being like that of the 
experienced object, but unlike it a being that is self-sustained and 
independent of the mind or self. That it only appears to be and 
is not a standing independent being is realised as possible in the 
second reflection. Even then it does not cease to appear as such, 
while the mental body is manifest to reflection as in the process 
of cessation. Hence to reflection on the mind, the mental body 
and the material body are presented as two distinct bodies. the 
vanishing and the standing. The reflection implies the thought 
but not the actual knowledge of the mental body as isolable from 
the material body, though it is actual knowledge of the latter 
body being constituted by and distinct from the former . 
44, The unity of the body is understood to consist in the 
non-distinction of its elements from the self, in its being the me 
as distinct from the 7. The non-distinction is real as objective 
identity with the self. not as the subjective function of identifying 
with the object. The identity of the matters (Ὁ ἢ ἃ 18} with the 
self is. however, mediate, being their identity with the mind as 
immediately one with the self The material body has the mental 
body immanent in it. The mental karanas or functioning 
organs are taken to be the life-functions that hold the material 
body together*, and the mental stuff (tanmatra) is conceived 
to causally become the stuff of the material body. The mental 
elements including the life-functions, however, hold together 
as the mental body through the transcendental function of the mind 
which is the original aviveka manifested as the bhavas of 
buddhi. 
45. There are apparently only these two bodies to Sim- 
khya. Does Samkhya like Vedanta admit a karana- 
$arira over and above the mental body (siksma-Sarira) 
and regard the latter as a complex of bodies (kogsas)? There 
is mention, no doubt, of a body of the unfree self existing even at 
the time of pralaya, but apparently it is conceived at this stage 
either to be no body at all, being aviveka itself or karma by 
itself or to be the mental body of a previous cycle as surviving 
ΔΚ 30, 32

=== PAGE 181 ===
THE BODY OF THE SELF 157 
it*. The mental body, again. is conceived as a complex of 
tattvas but not as a complex of bodies (kosas), there 
being no suggestion of the sense-body lapsing while ahamkiara 
and buddhi stand as body, or of the will-body (ahamkara) 
lapsing with buddhi alone standing as the body. Apparently the 
three karanas—buddhi, ahamkira and manas stand or 
lapse together. In the regressive process of dissolution (prati- 
Saficara) manas indeed lapses into ahamkara and this 
into buddhi. but so long as buddhi does not tend to lapse 
(in its pure bhavas), the mental body stands represented in 
buddhi with its impure bhivas—which may be regarded as 
the ideality or manifest potentiality of the lower tattvas making 
up the body. 
46. But if the mental body stands or lapses as a whole, why 
should the material body be taken as capable of lapsing before the 
lapse of the mental body? As already explained, the material 
body is only mediately identified with the self. The lower factors 
of the mental body , however , cannot be said to be identified with 
the self mediately through the identification of the higher factors 
with the self. To reflection, the material body does not appear 
conscious as the mental body appears, though the consciousness 
is not its attribute but its undistinguished associate. There is thus 
a felt discontinuity of the mental with the material body. There 
is no such discontinuity among the factors of the mental body. 
Fach appears conscious and none appears aS an unconscious object 
to any other in the way the material body appears to the mental 
body. The knowing mind is aware of the willing mind not as an 
object but as subjective or conscious like itself , and 50. too, is the 
willing mind aware of the sentient mind. Mind as a whole is 
object to viveka, but below the stage of viveka, every factor 
of the mind appears endowed with the I-form and never as mere 
object relatively to any other factor. 
47. Viveka itself is a mental function appearing conscious 
and does not imply an immediate lapse in being of the mental 
body into pure objectivity (unmanifest prakrti) though it is 
knowledge of this lapse as already begun. ‘This explains the state 
of jivanmukti which is detachment of the body from the self 
in knowledge but not yet in being. The self that has reached 
viveka no longer subjectively confuses itself with its body 
though the body still inexplicably remains non-distinct from the self. 
*SS. VI. 67-69.

=== PAGE 182 ===
CHAPTER IV 
CAUSAL AND NON-CAUSAL MANIFESTATION 
48. Navina bhavaih lingam 
Na vina lingena bhava-nirvrttih. 
Lingakhyah bhavakhyah tasmat 
Dvividhah pravartate sargah. 
(SK. 52) 
Linga here means the manifest objective tattvas from 
buddhi downwards. Bhava is apparently subjective function 
of the body, mental or material. function implying the J-form. 
function of the object as non-distinct from the subject and as illu- 
sorily taken to be function of the self. We have said that the 
metaphysical object as known is known only as constituting the 
body , the body being taken as one with the self through beginning- 
less aviveka. The bhavas would be the different aspects of 
this oneness as manifest in the manifest metaphysical object—. 
meaning specially the grade of the mind called buddhi. Avi- 
veka runs beyond manifestation, being taken to be the function 
of prakrti even at the time of pralaya. The bhavas. there- 
fore , may be taken as the specifications of this primordial function . 
manifested in the first manifest object—viz.. buddhi and, there- 
fore, also in its evolutes. The above kirika then denies that the 
metaphysical object can be manifest without appearing to func- 
tion as a subject and also that the subject really or apparently 
functions without being identified with a body; and it asserts two 
kinds of manifestation of buddhi viz., into the outward grades 
of objective substance on the one hand and of objective function 
appearing as subjective function on the other. As will appear 
presently, these two kinds of manifestation of buddhi may be 
characterised as causal and non-causal manifestation of the meta- 
physical object . 
49. We may start with the presented dualism of the (mate- 
rial) ‘body and the external world. The external world is external 
to the body which yet appears to be comprised within it. This 
implies a confusion which is cleared up by reflection showing that 
the body to which the world is external is not in space, being felt 
as distinct in itself and known as distinct from I (the mental self)

=== PAGE 183 ===
CAUSAL AND NON-CAUSAL MANIFESTATION 159 
but not from the world i.e.. from space. Felt as undistinguished 
from of one with space, it is not im space: and every external 
object is known as in space which is itself distinguished from or 
external to the body as felt from within. Perceived object neces- 
sarily refers to the body and implies distinction from it but the 
body does not imply distinction from the object but implies only 
distinction from I. In this sense, the external world depends on 
the body but not vice versa. Not that the body causes the world 
in the sense that it becomes the world, nor that it makes anything 
else (e.g. unformed matter) become the world. It is neither the 
immanent cause nor the external cause of the world : not imma- 
nent cause because the effect would then be distinct in it, not from 
it as the world is actually . and not external cause because then its 
material would be other than the material of the world. 
The world, as will appear presently. has for its material 
not indeed the manifest matters (bhiitas) that compose the body 
but their primordial potentialities. the gunas that make up 
prakrti. The world, therefore , is a non-causal manifestation of 
the body. 
50. A non-causal manifestation of a real is just what is called 
its ‘phenomenon’. The real in fact at any stage is understood as 
what phenomenon implies to reflection. The external world to 
reflection immediately implics reference to thc body as real. the 
metaphysical appearing in the first instance as one’s body. The 
world is a manifestation of the body in the sense that, in point of 
existence , it is not other than the body. though in respect of its 
manifest character it is distinct from and dependent on the body. 
A causal manifestation of a real is a distinct real . existing distinctly 
in the cause and not as distinct from it. The perceived world has 
no manifest reality apart from the percipient’s felt body though 
it is manifested as distinct from or external to it, externality of 
the world to it being a function of the body. 
51. The externality of objects in the world to one another is 
implied in the externality of the world to the bodily or percipient 
self. The world is space as cut up into objects and the externality 
of this variegated space to the conscious or perceiving body means 
only that this space is the content of the bodily consciousness , 
distinct from it as any content is distinct from the consciousness 
of it, being at the same time nothing manifest apart from the 
consciousness. By ‘bodily consciousness’ we mean perceptual cons-

=== PAGE 184 ===
160) STUDIES IN SANKHYA PHILOSOPHY 
ciousness, consciousness or self as illusorily identified with the 
material body , the corresponding fact being the conscious or perceiv- 
ing body, the material body as undistinguished from the self as 
an associated thing. The external world is related to the perceiving 
body as the content of a thought is related to the thought—viz., as 
constituted by and distinct from (not distinct in the perceiving body . 
52. The external world is nothing manifest apart from the 
perceiving body or bodily consciousness, being manifest through 
it as distinct from it. The perceiving body is the body as feeling 
the object and the object as presupposing it may be regarded as 
its feeling projection or necessary construction, the necessity being 
the necessity of the manifestation of aviveka as bhoga. This 
projection as bhogya (phenomenon) through the necessity of 
bhoga (experience) of the self as identified with the bhoga- 
yatana (body) is the external world. The entire manifest as- 
pect of this world, spatial and qualitative, 1s an appearance pro- 
jected by the feeling body. It is the appearance of the real matters 
constituting the body, appearance as distinct from the body and, 
therefore, not as their immanent determination. The space 
(-time) of the world is no mode of the metaphysical substance 
akasga, and the qualities of the world—colour etc., which pre- 
suppose this space cannot also be regarded as the other substances 
appearing under a limitation. The world is not a construction by 
the percipient out of the noumenal bhiitas, being a construction 
in respect of its material as well so far as it is manifest. 
53. The world as external to the body is distinct from the 
matters that directly constitute the body and from the other mani- 
fest tattvas that indirectly. condition its manifestation. Yet 
we are aware of it in our experience (bhoga) as given and have 
accordingly to conceive it as a construction (in the interest of 
bhoga) out of unmanifest real matter (which is the three gunas 
of prakrti) out of which the body and its constituents have 
emerged by real causal combination and not by imaginative con- 
struction. Thus prakrti gets manifested in two ways—in the 
causal way as the manifest tattvas that constitute the body 
(including the mental) and in the non-causal way as the external 
world*. As the world is manifest primarily through buddhi (and 
only through it to the jivanmukta), the dual manifestation 
ece, SK. 15 ‘avibhagat vaisvaripasya’

=== PAGE 185 ===
CAUSAL AND NON-CAUSAL MANIFESTATION 16] 
may be said to be the bifurcation of buddhi (dvividha- 
sarga) 
54. Apparently, then, the manifestation of prakrti into 
buddhi has to be understood as at once a causal and a non-causal 
process. Both the existence of buddhi and its content—viz., 
the external world are the manifestation of prakrti. The for- 
mer is what prakrti becomes and the latter what it appears, 
neither being intelligible apart from the other. Manifestation as 
buddhi is thus as much a causal becoming as a non-causal 
appearing. for the distinction between them emerges only through 
buddhi—as distinction within buddhi between its existence 
and content (or function of reference to content). Buddhi begins 
to get un-manifested and its reference to the object begins to be 
withdrawn in one and the samc act—viz., in the reflection that 
distinguishes buddhi from the self. and thus we have to con- 
ceive the manifestation of prakrti into buddhi as the in- 
difference of a dual process. The two manifestations of buddhi 
are also inseparable but distinguishable as the evolution of lower 
objective tattvas on the one hand and as the emergence of its 
bhavas or the subjective functions referring to the bhogya 
or experienceable world on the other. The world is a given ap- 
pearance or phenomenon cf prakrti, being as much given to 
a bhdva as constructed by it, as much a perceived object as 
ἃ percept. 
55. The world as a percept is a construction of the ‘subjective 
function’ that is primarily resident in buddhi and, therefore, 
resident in the lower tattvas (that are distinct in and not 
from buddhi) as well. being in fact the function of the material 
body with the mental body immanent in it. Samkhya-Karika 
speaks of eight bhavas of buddhi and also of two grades of 
bhiva—karandaSrita and karyaSrita, meaning respec- 
tively bhava as resident in the mental body comprising the ka - 
rauas or psychic organs and bhiva as resident in the material 
body. The unity of the body, as has been indicated, consists 
in its non-distinction from the self, in what appears as its self- 
form or subjective function. Thus the unity of the material body 
is karyasrita-bhava presupposing indeed the karanad 
§rita-bhava (comprising the eight bhivas of buddhi) 
but distinct from it as the subjective function of feeling non-distinct 
from the external world, feeling of being an actual experient un- 
11

=== PAGE 186 ===
162 STUDIES IN SANKHYA PHILOSOPHY 
detached from the world or one with space. The psychic bhava 
involves the feeling of being a detached possible experient, of 
being one who might experience or is going to experience or 
experienced in the past. 
56. The conscious material body or the bodily self is the 
actual experient (bhoktr) undistinguished trom the experienced 
(bhogya) world. The experience is primarily a feeling, being 
knowledge of and conation towards a content as felt. The world 
to reflection is the content of bodily feeling or projection of the 
feeling body which is yet felt to be given to the self as distinct 
in existence from it but not from the body while being distinct 
from both in its manifest character. It is never mistaken like the 
body for the self , being thus manifested as distinct from it, though 
it is nothing manifest apart from the bodily self or feeling body. 
It is a phenomenon in the sense that it is manifest only through 
the bodily self but as yet given to it. 
57. The caused and the un-caused manifestations of the un- 
manifest reality are respectively noumenal and phenomenal; and 
they meet in the material body which is constituted and conditioned 
by all the manifest tattvas from the bhiitas up to buddhi 
and is undistinguished from the external world, appearing im- 
mediately as a part of it but to reflection as one with the whole 
of it. Not that this reflective awareness is complete and amounts 
to the positive accomplished knowledge of one-ness with the world , 
there being a persisting feeling of a part of the world as mine 
(abhinivesa). Some other parts of the world (viz., my pro- 
perty etc.) are also felt as mine, but they are known definitely to 
be not me or my felt body, unlike my observed body which is 
not known as not me though not also known as me, being only 
felt as me, felt in fact as at once me and mine. The material 
body, felt as the bodily self feels a part of the world as un- 
distinguished from itself and knows it at the same time as an 
appropriated object. Why this should be so is as much inexpli- 
cable as why there should be an external world, the uncaused 
manifestation of objective reality being just, as a matter of fact, 
given as thus related to the body. The further significance of 
this ultimate fact will appear later in out discussion of solipsism . 
58. The given-ness of the world or the non-causal appearance 
of reality as thus related to the body (felt as the self) is what 
suggests the central Samkhya enquiry into the causal evolu-

=== PAGE 187 ===
CAUSAL AND NON-CAUSAL MANIFESTATION 163 
tion of the manifest objective tattvas. The guiding clue in 
the enquiry is the analvsis of the body into linga and bhava, 
into its constitutive elements and its apparently subjective func- 
tions unifying them. Bhava is a function of the body ap- 
pearing as conscious, the function of referring to the external 
world. The causal and the non-causal processes of manifestation 
are the strands of the single cosmic process of prakrti towards 
the bhoga of purusa. 
59. The external world is generally viewed in Indian philo- 
sophy as having necessary reference to the experiencing self. In 
some systems, it is taken as entirely constituted by the subjec- 
tive demand for bhoga or the necessity of aviveka to lead 
to bhoga; while in others, it is taken to be constructed by it 
out of some given material. In SA4mkhya, no manifest or 
actual material is admitted as given as in Nydya and yet the 
world is taken to be given. the implication being that the given 
is here the unmanifest reality. Yoga philosophy appears to 
present a view intermediate between those of Samkhya and 
Nyaya. With Samkhya, it holds, though not in the same 
sense , that the world is an imaginative or phenomenal construc- 
tion out of given material and not a real combination of it in 
the sense it is conceived to be in Nyaya. But it differs from 
Simkhya and agrees with Ny aya in holding that the material 
is the five actual matters that constitute the body. Samkhya 
has been so far taken to present the view that not only are the 
finite spatio-temporal aspects of the experienced object a construc- 
tion of buddhi in the interest of bhoga but even its qualities 
like colour etc., are projected into this cut-up space by buddhi, 
its given material being thus utterly unqualified or unmanifest. 
Is there any justification for such an interpretation of the 
Samkhya view? 
60. Can Samkhya admit with Yoga any real or causal 
combination of elements in the phenomenal object? The pheno- 
menal object, indeed, appears as having a plurality of qualities , 
but is the mode of their combination more than spatio-temporal 
appearance? The body is conceived as a unity of elements that is 
illusory from the side of the subject but real from the side of the 
object, being the real but terminable non-distinction of the ele- 
ments from the self. It is only as the elements can be really non- 
distinct from or one with the self that their combination into the

=== PAGE 188 ===
164 STUDIES IN SANKHYA PHILOSOPHY 
body can be real and cause a real unity. But the external object 
cannot in any aspect be really or even appear as one with the self and 
cannot therefore present a real or causal combination. Even that 
part of the phenomenal world that is my body as observed appears 
only as mine, not as me, not as undistinguished from the self. 
61. Yoga admits a real combination of the bhiitas within 
the phenomenai object apparently because its view of the unity 
of the body differs. The metaphysical elements that constitute 
the body are taken to be as much appropriated by the self as the 
body as external, and even the extra-organic objects are appro- 
priated. Primordial avid ya, in fact, is conceived in Yoga as 
conative appropriation, identification of the self with the body 
as object in sva-svami-sambandha, while in Samkhya 
the identification with the body is intellectual from the side of the 
subject, a mistaken knowing of the self as the object ( which is real 
non-distinction from the side of the object), consciousness of the 
body not as mine but as me, while the external object is not me 
and can be mine only. There is appropriation of or sva- 
svaimi-sambandha with the external object only and not 
the object constituting the body. In Samkhya, there is real 
combination only of the objects that are not appropriated , enjoyed , 
or experienced , objects that are regarded as wie and not as mine . 
Since then there is no real combination in the phenomenal object . 
the object cannot have real elements too as the manifest substra- 
tum of its phenomenal (spatio-temporal) unity. The pheno- 
menon is a manifestation that is not distinct in the body (like its 
manifest constituents) but distinct from it as its projection or 
transeunt appearance. The external world does not emerge at 
the end of the causal evolution of the tattvas. Samkhya and 
Yoga agree that it is not a new or transeunt tattva caused by 
the bhitas (tattvintara-parinama); but Yoga 
asserts, what SAmkhya would deny, that the material sub- 
stratum of the world is an immanent modification (dharma- 
laksanavastha-parinama) of the bhitas. In fact the 
distinction of phenomenon and noumenon emerges in Saunkhya 
with the emergence of buddhi as a linga with bhava (which 
is reference to or anticipation of phenomenon as its content). The 
course of causal evolution of pra krti is from the beginning 
co-ordinate with and has explicit reference to its non-causal 
manifestation, the bhogya world or phenomenon. Although 
there is bhoga or experience only when the causal evolution is 
completed , there is the necessary anticipation of the bhogya in 
the emergence of the very first stage of the evolution—viz., of 
buddhi.

=== PAGE 189 ===
CHAPTER V 
TIME, SPACE AND CAUSALITY 
62. The external world being an uncaused manifestation or 
phenomenon of prakrti has no place in it for causal change 
through real combination. Causality is understood in Simkhya 
only in connection with the evolution of the tattvas from 
buddhi downwards. There is indeed an appearance of causa- 
tion or change through combination in the external world, which 
implies space and time as mutual determinants. But the causa- 
tion being only an appearance, space as the form of combination 
and time as the form of change in the world are also mere ap- 
pearances. The phenomenal implies the real (though not as 
its manifest substratum ) and we have accordingly to admit causa- 
tion with space and time as iis moments in the real world and 
within unmanifest prakrti itsclf. Prakrti has to be con- 
ceived as the potentiality of change through combination, as 
an unmanifest plurality of elements which is manifest only as it 
becomes a unity by being together. Its reference to the mani-, 
fest unity and to its coming to be through combination is in- 
trinsic, the unmanifest being understood only as the presup- 
position of the manifesting process. The manifest unity is bud- 
dhi, the form of the manifest in general; and its becoming 
through combination is the form of the causal process as the unity 
of time and space, is ik 4 ἃ as causal, as the manifesting process 
of the unmanifest as distinct from akasa as effect or evolute. the 
first bhiita which is space-time as a manifest being. Buddhi 
is in this sense in the makingi.e., as 2ka¢a within prakrti*. 
63. To Samkhya there is real object. distinct from the 
self. which is eternal-in-change (parin4mi-nitya) unlike the 
self which is unchangingly eternal (kitastha- nitya). Pari- 
ndamaas manifest is change but since an unmanifest parinama 
within prakrti is admitted. parinama in general means either 
the process or the product of self-distinction. Distinction, as 
already pointed out. is to Samkhya the distinguishing process 
which is a function of the (real) object referred by a necessary 
illusion to the subject. Self-distinction would be the process of 
aCf, Vijiiina-bhiksu SS.II.12;V.25

=== PAGE 190 ===
166 STUDIES IN SANKHYA PHILOSOPHY 
being distinguished from itself, the emergence from a real of ano- 
ther real which is yet the same. Within prakrti, a guna is 
only as it reproduces itself, becomes merely numerically distinct 
from itself as effect; and within the sphere of manifest reality , the 
real that emerges from a real is, as it emerges, distinct in nature 
also from the cause, though in all cases the effect is distinguished 
in the cause as resident in it, is evident as the cause itself un- 
folding a distinction. The effect as the unfolded cause and the 
unfolding process also are called parinama of the cause. 
64. Self-distinction of the object means its unfolding, the 
causal process being an unfolding. Where the effect is manifest , it 
is manifest as having been unfolded: the product appears imme- 
diately to reflection as the terminus of the unfolding process. The 
effect is not only the cause unfolded but is manifest as such, as 
with the cause within itself unmanifest and manifesting. The cause 
is evident in the effect as its dark ground or implicit being . To para- 
phrase Samkhya-karika 9, the effect is immediately known 
as what was implicit in the cause , as what has now the cause for its 
matter or material, as the only determination of the cause, as 
what the cause alone can become and as partaking of the nature 
of the cause. The cause in fact is manifest in the effect as its 
very self, the effect immediately showing it. The effect reveals 
the cause as having become it, as still becoming it and, so far as 
it is itself manifest, as including the manifest effect within it. 
65. Such are the implications of causality as self-distinction or 
unfolding. Mental being is immediately evident to introspection 
as self-distinct; and apparently the mind or, more specifically , 
buddhi is taken in Samkhya as the pattern of all metaphysi- 
cal or body-forming object. Unfolding in fact is knowable only 
in internal perception about the mental object or in what is on the 
same level, viz., aesthetic perception of the material object. The 
matter constituting the material body does not immediately reveal 
its cause to reflection on the bodily self. But to reflection on the 
mental self. the elements constituting the mental body more or 
less reveal their cause, and hence comes the suggestion of gross 
matter also as having a subtle counterpart, viz., mental stuff 
(tanmatra) as its cause. Elements of the mental body lower 
than buddhi are only imperfectly manifest as self-distinct, but 
buddhi is manifest to reflection as self-distinct only, as the 
process of distinguishing from itselt—distinguishing from itself as

=== PAGE 191 ===
TIME, SPACE AND CAUSALITY 167 
manifest and as ultimately unmanifest—, and as being in the 
making and no standing being at all. 
66. Psychologists speak of the content of introspection being 
modified by the introspection. What is not ordinarily noted is 
that the modification as such is known in the same introspective 
act. The implication of this circumstance is that to be reflectively 
aware of the mental is to be aware of a dual content—viz., of the 
modification and also of that of which it is a modification. The 
latter is again presented to the same reflection as modification of 
a further content and so on, the endless series pointing to the un- 
manifest beyond of which the mental in gencral is a modification. 
Now what is known of the mental is known in introspection. 
Hence the mental as known is neccssarily dual, explicitly distinct 
from or manifestation of itself. The mental may alsc be known 
in introspection as independent of it in being. and so far as it 15 
so known, it is not known as self manifested. Such independence 
is not, however, known as itsclf a content independcnt of the in- 
trospection and hence the lower grades of the mind are and are 
not at once known as self-manifested . or, in other words appear 
partially as being self-manifested and partially also as standing. 
The mental as buddhi. however, is not known as distinct from 
the reflection on it, being, as will appear later, the absolute mind 
which lapses of itself into prakrti and not through any further 
reflection on the reflection. 
67. Such we imagine is the metaphysical basis of the 
Samkhya theory of causality as self-distinction, the further im- 
plications of which have now to be elaborated. Causation is 
understood as a process of the object towards bhoga. the self- 
manifestation of the object conditioned by its beginningless non- 
distinction from the self. The cause is ihe substance of the effect, 
substance that is only as it of itself becomes the effect (or retracts 
its becoming ) and aviveka as the condition of the becoming is 
not a circumstance outside the substance but a beginningless (and 
terminable) predicament of it. The immanent cause (sama- 
vayi) and the external cause (nimitta) of the VaiSsesika 
school are here undistinguished : the cause not only persists in 
the effect but becomes it of its own motion. It can also retract the 
becoming and there is no necessity that the cause should become, 
for there is no necessity of the primitive illusion (or non-distinc- 
tion) continuing. [Illusion is known only as it is corrected, being

=== PAGE 192 ===
168 STUDIES IN SANKHYA PHILOSOPHY 
only undeniable but not assertible as a fact. When the illusion 
comes to be known as such, when in fact reflection sets in is 
utterly indeterminate , though as the corrective or retractive reflec- 
tion comes it is known as continuous with the becoming. So it 
may be said that the cause freely—i.e.. not only spontaneously 
but without necessity—becomes the effect. In Yoga philosophy . 
the cause necessarily becomes, though only when δὴ external 
nimitta—God’s absolutely free will in the last resort—removes 
the starting arrest; and the becoming is arrested and retracted 
through the equally free operation of nimitta. Samkhya and 
Yoga agree in taking the cause as an inherently active substance 
that becomes without being acted on; but Yoga still demands a 
nimitta to remove the circumstance that prevents the becoming 
and thus to let the cause cause. Samkhya does not demand 
such nimitta. 
68. Parinama is self-distinction where the effect, if mani- 
fest (as in all visadrsa-parinama) is distinct in nature 
from the cause. (not merely numerically distinct as in sadrsa- 
parinama). Buddhi, for example. becomes ahamkara 
where a new character emerges. Within buddhi, too, one state 
(vrtti) of it appears to become another: and it may be asked 
if this is also parinama. Yoga philosophy distinguishes it 
as immanent change (dharma-laksana-vastha-pari- 
nama) from transitive change (tattvintara-parinima) 
like that of buddhi into ahamkara. Can Samkhya admit 
real immanent change ? The question is about the relation of the 
modes of a tattva to one another and to the tattva. Sam- 
khya would not apparently admit any unmodalised tattva. 
Buddhi. for example, is never without vrtti: there is nothing in 
this system like the samskara-Sesa-buddhi conceived in 
Yoga to be buddhi that has not yet lapsed into prakrti 
though its vrttis have lapsed. In SA€amkhya apparently, the 
lapse of all vrtti means the lapse of thetattva that has vrtti. 
the substance apart from its modes being nothing but the substance 
that is its cause. An effected substance is manifest only in its 
modes and so the relation of a mode with its naked substance is 
but relation of the effect-substance with the causal substance. As 
to the relation of the modes to one another, one mode is only dis- 
tinct from another and is not what the latter becomes, or, in other 
words , is not distinct in the latter. Each mode is indeed noumenal ,

=== PAGE 193 ===
TIME, SPACE AND CAUSALITY 169 
is the tattva. but it succeeds another mode only phenomenally, 
being noumenally merely distinct from it. Each mode in fact is 
distinct as anticipatively referring through its resident bhava to 
some external bhogya object: vrtti and bhava. as will be 
shown later. are indeed distinct but involve one another .* Now 
the apparent succession of the modes of a tattva is but their 
bhiava-reference to succession within the phenomenal world. The 
real relation of the modes is distinction which is indeed a one- 
directional process like succession. the process of self-distinction , 
but does not amount to change, being like the process of self- 
reproduction (sadréa-parinama) of a guna the  self- 
reproduction of the tattva. The tattva is in fact any mode 
as involving all others so that the distinction of one mode from 
another is the simple self-reproduction or merely numerical self- 
distinction of the tattva. 
69. Simkhya then admits real change only in the sense of 
change of one tattva into another, this alone implying real mani- 
fest time. The so-called immanent change of Yoga is real as 
simple self-distinction and not change . being in time only reflexively 
in reference to the time of the phenomenal world. Samkhya 
may admit it as parinma in the wide sense that includes 
sadrga-parinadma, as immanent parinama that is not 
change, being conceivable as the manifest form of sadréa- 
parinama. This interpretation accords with the Samkhya- 
sfitra II. 12—Dikkalivakasadibhyah. where Vij- 
Panabhiksu explains dik-kala as nitya karana- aki- 
sa. a character or function of prakrti. As already pointed 
out. this Akasa. is the causal prototype of Akasa as bhita, 
both being real 4k 68. as distinct from the constructed space- 
time of the phenomenal world. 
70. This kirana-a&kiasga has already been interpreted as 
the form of changes implied in every metaphysical object and, 
therefore, in prakrti itself. Change is through combination 
and combination is for change. What changes is a complex and 
elements combine for the production of a new unity. Change is 
real time and combination is real space. Each implies the other, 
their unity being called 4k48a, &kasa as the general form of 
change that is inherent in the real object. Such ak ἃ ὁ ἃ is implied 
8In Yoga, there may be bhava without vrtti, as in asam- 
prajfiata.

=== PAGE 194 ===
170 STUDIES IN SANKHYA PHILOSOPHY 
in prakrti as the potentiality of change. The form or function of 
change is not potential, for the distinction of actual and potential 
is intelligible only of what changes and the function does not 
change. Prakrti is conceived as avyakta in being only, 
but the function which is the primal aviveka itself is still taken 
to be vyakta within it. Kadrana-akaS$a is this manifest 
function of unmanifest being . 
71. Time as a moment of this 4k4S$a is understood as real 
becoming (parinama) which is change only when it is becoming 
of a different and not simply of a numerically distinct, or, in other 
words. becoming of a manifest effect. Within prakrti, it is 
becoming as mere self-reproduction of a guna. Nothing is real 
if it is not becoming either in the sense of self-reproducing or in 
the sense of changing and when it is not yet changing , it is still self- 
reproducing which is active persisting. As change is to this active 
persistence , so is combination to bare plurality. So akaSsa as 
the function of prakrti is the active persistence of each of an 
unrelated plurality (triplicity) of gunas, persistence being the 
time-function and unrelated plurality the space-function of 
prakrti. 
72. The procession of the manifest tattvas from prakrti 
is conceived in Siinkhya as in or rather as one manifest real 
time. The evolution of prakrti from buddhi downwards is 
a single process of which each tattva is a nodal point, a real 
continuity of discontinuities. In Yoga philosophy. each change 
(whether of tattva or of phenomenal object) is a real instant 
(ksana) but the succession (krama) of the instants is not real 
as time. The krama of ksanas is still real as eternal law to 
the creative buddhi of I§vara. In other words. though the 
change of A to B and that of B to C are each real time, we cannot 
speak of the series A—B—C as real time, which only appears to 
be a continuity through the constructivity of our intelligence 
(vikalpa or buddhi-nirmana). In Samkhya, change 
of tattva alone (and not of phenomenon) is real time, 
antecedent and consequent being understood as abstractions from 
causal process so that in the causal series A—B—C, A,B, C. are 
three kinds of real object , cause only (A), at once cause and effect 
(B), and effect only (C) respectively. To Yoga apparently, 
prakrti-vikrti does not indicate any new kind or grade of 
reality ; it is not as in SAmk hy a effect with an immediate causal

=== PAGE 195 ===
TIME , SPACE AND CAUSALITY 171 
character, something at once emergent and becoming, a transitive 
being—but is only alternately cause and effect having only the 
speciality of being lin ga or immediate expression of a linga or 
unmanifest prakrti—the vikaras being without this charac- 
ter of manifesting their causal self.* There is nothing special in 
their causal character , the speciality being in their expressive charac- 
ter. Hence ksana-krama is real not as a causal process or 
becoming but as an absolute thought-content (logos). The S4m- 
khya view of A—B—C (which is a scheme of the entire process 
of evolution) as a real temporal continuity is bound up with 
its recognition of prakrti-vikrti as a qualitatively new grade 
of reality and a new category within becoming. 
73. Change of the object in the interest of bhoga is a free 
process in SAmkhya, not a necessary process with God as the 
nimitta letting it start as in Yoga. Change is of a permanent 
that is in three stages—as what can change but has not begun to 
change (prakrti). as what has begun to change and can yet 
change (prakrti-vikrti). and as what it has changed to 
and no longer changes (vik&ra). The causal process is one—the 
potential becoming actual, where the becoming is a distinguishable 
real—distinct from the potential which does not necessarily actualise 
(as in Yoga) and having the finished actual distinct from it, 
there being no necessity for the process to terminate (cp. sleep, 
beginning to wake. persistent wakefulness—freely and not neces- 
sarily continuous at each change). It is accordingly a continuity 
of discontinuities, a line of nodal points (Hegel) . Now each of 
these three is substantial being , whatever is distinguishable as real 
being substantial in SAmkhya. Thus the object is causality 
and causality is a triplicity of substances of which the intermediate 
(prakrti-vikrti) is the concrete continuity of the extremes, 
(manifest) time being this continuity in the abstract. Concrete 
continuity is cause and effect in one and hence implies the notion 
of its reversibility (pratisaficara). For a process to the 
substantial is to have its sense or direction cancelled by admitting 
the backward direction as continuous with the forward direction. 
Thus time is to Sa mkhya a cyclic. 
74. Space is intelligible as the manifest form of noumenal 
combination which is represented in the unmanifest as unrelated 
“Cf. YB.IT.19.

=== PAGE 196 ===
172 STUDIES IN SANKHYA PHILOSOPHY 
plurality. ‘The character of real combination is bound up with the 
character of real change, combination and change being under- 
stood as not in space and time but snace and time theinselves. 
Combination in Samkhya is throughout understood as qualita- 
tive, as having one element explicit—i.e., dominant in mani- 
festation—involving the others as implicit in different senses. The 
elements are together not as phenomenal objects are together, 
each outside the others but as one with the others internal to it, 
i.e., modifying its quality, forming with it a qualitative unity 
and not a quantitative whole ( extensive or intensive). (Cp. com- 
bination of feelings or of musical notes.) Involution and not 
spread (or degree) is the character of qualitative combination 
and the form of involution is intelligible space. All visadrSa- 
parinama implies combination in such space of the unmani- 
fest gunas ultimately; and mediately it may be of the manifest 
reals also. The body, for example. is a combination of manifest 
reals not indeed as making up a cause (for the body does not 
become anything ) but as making up an effect (for the body has 
come to be); the unity of the body thus implies intelligible space . 
75. The causal elements are said to be subtle (siksma) 
relatively to the effect which is said to be gross (sthila) in 
the sense of being both actual and complex as contrasted with 
the cause or causes which are potential and simple. There are 
grades of the real object viz.. the vikaras . which are only 
effects. not causes. These are not only relatively -but absolutely 
sthiila or gross in nature. being wholly actual either as mental 
receptivity (indriya) or as inert matter (bhtita). They do 
not change into any further tattva and the so-called immanent 
change of Yoga, which in the case of the other tattvas implies 
a qualitative interpenetration of vrttis. would here imply a 
mutual outsideness of their vrttis. This outsideness is still 
qualitative, a spatial continuity of distinct determinations which 
yet are not in space, a combination that does not become any 
new qualitative unity but is only non-causally manifested in the 
external world. The space that is implied is not distinct from 
perceivable space which , however, is distinct from it. The vika- 
ras are then sthtla in another sense—viz., they are undistin- 
guished from the perceivable world, appear to be one with the 
perceived .

=== PAGE 197 ===
CHAPTER VI 
THE OBJECTIVE TATIVAS 
(Bhita. Tanmadtra and Indriya) 
76. Saimkhya philosophy is mainly the philosophy of the 
twenty-four cbjective tattvas in reference to the self taken as the 
twenty-fifth tattva. There is considerable difficulty in the inter- 
pretation of the objective tattvas and some light is thrown on it 
by the different modes of grouping of the twenty-three manifest 
tattvas. One grouping is into the seven prakrti-vikrtis 
and the sixteen vikaras. Another is the demarcation of the 
eighteen tattvas that constitute the mental body on one side 
from those five that make up the material body on the other. 
There is again the division into the thirteen karanas or organs 
(internal and external) and the stuff or material of the mind and 
the body—viz., the tanmatras and the bhiitas. A further 
point to be noted is that the senses on the one hand and the tan- 
matras on the other are taken to be co-ordinate (evolutes of 
a#haimkara) while the rest of the evolution is in a single line. 
77. The grouping in reference to the two bodies presents the 
main clue to the interpretation of the tattvas. The constituents 
of the mental-body are taken to he buddhi, ahamkara, and 
the eleven indriyas on the one side as the karanas and the 
five tanmatras on the other. The karanas or organs are the 
mind as through its Bh ava functioning towards the external world 
and the tanmatras appear in contrast to be the mind as stand- 
ing or existent. Both are substances but they embody the self or 
are endowed with the self-form in different senses. Mind as 
Karana appears as subject—i.e., as the self experiencing — 
prehending (A@harana) and revealing (prakasa) the external 
object (and also as holding the material body together), while 
mind as tanmatras (or their original bhatadi) appears as 
the objectively persisting or standing self. The former aspect is 
sattvika and rijasika while the latter is tamasika. 
78. To explain this standing character of the mind. The mind 
consciously stands so far as it feels or enjoys itself. The self or 
consciousness is beyond time, beyond persistence and change. 
The persistence of the self is therefore the persistence of the mental

=== PAGE 198 ===
174 STUDIES IN SANKHYA PHILOSOPHY 
body as non-distinct from the self which is illusorily taken as the 
mental self. Now to be conscious of the persistent self is to be con- 
scious of the persistent me and not I, the consciousness of the mind 
as knowing or willing being that of the objective or embodied /. 
The consciousness of me is feeling, being unreflective when the 
me is the material body and reflective when the me is the mental 
body . The mental body , unlike the other body, is at once me and 
I, is the felt (me) as feeling (I). The persistent self then is the 
mind feeling itself as felt, and the mind as (narcissistically ) felt 
by itself, as manifest objectivity of feeling is the standing stuff of 
the mental body called bhiitadi, the parent of tanmatra. 
The mind functions as the karanas and stands as the tan- 
matras. 
79. The material body as distinct from the mental stands only 
as a complex of matters with no functions of its own other than 
the functions of the mind that animates it. If mental stuff is mind 
as felt by itself, the stuff of the material body is what is sensed by 
the mind. The relation of ἰδ πη {τὰ and bhita thus appears 
to be that between felt and sensed objectivity. If the pure 
sensed content can be shown to be a causal manifestation of 
the pure felt content, tanmatra would be intelligible as the 
subtle or causal form of bhiita. Again if sensing and sensed 
content are knowable only as immediately constituting bhoga 
or perceptual experience with its differentiation into pleasurable , 
painful etc., we can understand why the indriyas and bht- 
tas should be called vigesa-tattvas. | What immediately 
constitutes bhoga appears i.e., is non-causally manifested in 
the bhogya or phenomenon: it does not become or change. 
That would explain why the indriyas and bhitas are called 
mere vik ara or effects that are not causal again. 
80. We may now consider the tanmatras, the indriyas 
and the bhiutas together , the two former being co-ordinate cons- 
tituents of the mental body and the two latter co-ordinate as 
vigesas or vikadras. Tanmatra and indriya_ are 
directly manifest as with the self-form , the former as the ( objec- 
tively ) persisting self and the latter as the functioning self, and 
hence they are taken as belonging to the mind. Bhita is mani- 
fest as with self-form only through them, only as_ they are 
immanent or undistinguished in the material body. Indriya 
and bhiita are alike distinguished as vigesa and vikara

=== PAGE 199 ===
THE OBJECIIVE TATTVAS 175 
from tanmatra; which thus is undifferentiated and causal stuff 
and is just subtle or psychic matter. 
81. To explain the undifferentiated or avigesa character of 
tanmatra. To experience is to subjectively function in the 
material body towards the external world directly. The function- 
ing is apparently of the self but really of the body undistinguished 
from the mind which again is undistinguished from the self. It is 
other than functioning in the mind or mental body which is cons- 
ciously detached functioning towards external world, what may 
be called ‘thinking feeling’ or imaginative feeling. Experiencing is 
feeling the external world in an undetached or sensuous way. 
Experience as specific function of the material body is feeling and 
it is Knowing only as the function of the mental body as immanent 
in the material body. Now the only function of the mind that is 
consciously immanent in the experiencing body is sensing. Bodily 
feeling is at once the standing being of the body and its experienc- 
ing function; and conscious sensing is one with the experiencing 
function which yet may be without it. The content of all sub- 
jective function is the external world which is distinguished from 
the function in all cases except when the function is sensuous ex- 
periencing. Experiencing and empirical world as feeling and the 
felt are indistinguishable and may be both designated  sense- 
experience or bhoga. 
82. Bhoga is, however, distinguished alike from the mere 
feeling and the mere sensing. The mere feeling is the standing 
being of the body and is in fact its constituent matters, the 
bhitas. The mere sensing is the mind functioning in its 
lowest or outermost grade, being the indriyas. Each is one 
with bhoga which however is distinct from each; they neces- 
sarily imply one another in this sense. Each is understood as the 
non-causal presupposition of bhoga and not as causally be- 
coming bhoga. Bhoga or bhogya is hot their effect but 
the phenomenalisation of prakrti as revealed by and reflected 
in them. As undistinguished from the bhogya, they are con- 
ceived as having the originals of its characters. Its characters are 
not only presentative but also affective. The sense-qualities of 
the phenomenal world are represented in the real world by the 
bhitas on the one hand and by the indriyas on the other. 
But each quality has its distinguishable affective aspects—-its 
pleasurable , painful and ‘indolent’ feel, these being the manifest

=== PAGE 200 ===
176 STUDIES IN SANKHYA PHILOSOPHY 
forms of the three gunas of prakrti of which the phenomenal 
is the non-causal expression. These distinguishable aspects are 
then conceived to’ be manifest also in the bhiitas and the 
indriyas which accordingly are called visesas or the 
affectively differentiated tattvas. 
83. The visgesas are alsc the non-causal vikadra- 
tattvas, being visesas through their one-ness with non-causal 
manifestation. Affective differentiation and non-causal character 
are thus connected: what is affectively differentiated does not be- 
come and what becomes is not so differentiated. Becoming in fact 
is for bhoga or phenomenal manifestation and is distinct from 
it while what is undistinguished from bhoga no longer becomes. 
Thus what becomes is avisesa-tattva which would include 
all the othertattvas. The term avisesa, howevcr, is actually 
used in the Karika (38) to mean the tanmatras and in 
Yoga-bhasya (11.19) to include ahamk§ara also. 
84. So tanmatra is a causal tattva that is the content 
of feeling manifest to feeling but not manifested or reflected in the 
external object. It is not experienced in the body but is neces- 
sarily conceived as experienced in the mind, though our actual 
experience is always in our body. It is accordingly conceived as 
experienced by a devatia or a Yogin. As felt-content, it is. 
as already explained , stuff or matter and not function; as causal. 
it is the subtle counterpart of bhiwta which is non-causal; and 
as affectively undifferentiated. it is taken to be pure joy in the 
objective and is accordingly designated devatia along with 
ahamkara and buddhi. These prakrti-vikrtis are 
unlike the vikaras absolute entities in a sense. The derivation 
of tanmatra from ahamkiara will have to be understood in 
connection with their absolute character. 
85. To discuss details about bhiita. indriya and tan- 
mitra. There are the five bhiitas corresponding to the five 
presentalive senses or jfidnendriyas and the five tan- 
matras. There is some sort of development within each pentad 
but the five-fold character is suggested by experience of the ex- 
ternal object and not apriori. The second bhiita—vayu, for 
example , presupposes the first—ak4&a--but is not its evolute in 
the sense in which bhiita is evolute of tanmatra. The 
tattvas within each pentad present progressive concreteness , 
but apparently a pentad as a whole is taken to be evolved from its

=== PAGE 201 ===
THE OBJECTIVE TATIVAS 177 
cause. Now the five experienced or perceived aspects—viz ., sense- 
qualities—of the external object have for their noumenal proto- 
types the five bhiitas which are by a sort of aesthetic abstraction 
or transcendental reflection known to be the reals symbolized by 
the phenomenal aspects. They may in fact be identified with the 
sensa with the metaphysical significance—not ordinarily assigned 
to the sensa—that they are like Platonic Ideas in the sensuous 
sphere of which the phenomenal or perceived qualities are the 
ectypes . 
86. The space-aspect of the phenomenal object is pre-supposed 
by the other aspects which are ordinarily called sense-qualities . 
Admitting what is common to most Indian systems—viz. . that 
space as the so-called bare form of the object is really the space 
of sound, the five sense-qualities appearing in space (of the pheno- 
menal object) answer in the noumenon to five qualitied spaces— 
viz., ik &$a with the sound-quality , vay u which is that Akasa 
as restricted by the emergent touch-quality, tejas which is that 
vayu as restricted by the further quality of colour and so on— 
sound-space and its four emergent but immanent determinations . 
These noumenal qualitied spaces—cach infinite unlike the cut-up 
or finite space of the phenomenon—are the bhiittas. The quali- 
tied spaces may as well be called spatial qualities. qualities by 
themselves real (not qualities of object in space which would be 
phenomenal) . 
87. These noumenal spaces or qualities make up the felt 
material body. Akasa as the eternal form of becoming ts the 
causal space-time already explained. Bhitta as akaSa is 
effect—a k sa that no longer becomes. Indriya also is effect 
that no longer becomes, being, however, effect as function while 
bhita is effect as matter. The non-causal function of sense is 
to reveal the external object while bhiita is matter that appears as 
external object. Sense is said to reveal object by coming in contact 
with it without leaving its place in the body (S. Sitras V. 104-7). 
That appears to imply that the sense-function has to be symbo- 
lised in the phenomenal as a sort of standing motion. The 
vrtti of sense as of the mind in any grade is constituted by its 
bhava or subjective function of referring to the (phenomenal) 
object, vrtti being the standing state or made and bhava the 
function of reaching the object and constituting the vrtti at the 
same time—what is symbolised as standing motion. Thus the 
12

=== PAGE 202 ===
178 STUDIES IN SANKHYA PHILOSOPHY 
sense-function like bhita may be understood as non-causal 
ikaéa with the difference that it is time with space implicit in it, 
while bhiita would be space with time implicit in it. Bhita 
as spatial quality that is referred or projected on to the object, 
while indriya is the time-function of instantaneously reaching 
the object. It is non-causal ἃ Κἃ 684 in both cases with varying 
stresses on the space-aspect and time-aspect. 
88. if bhiita means spatial sense-quality by itself, tan- 
matra would stand for non-spatial sense-quality. Spatiality as 
a character of sense-quality as distinct from a perceived object 
is extensity rather than extension, is spread that is no whole 
but a simple unity of (infinite ) repetitions ( units ) of the same qua- 
lity which yet persist in the unity in their distinctness and is thus 
neither extensive nor intensive quantity. Bhitta is thus con- 
ceived to be qualitatively spatial, with only two qualitative magni- 
tudes—a nu (here, simple unit-character) and mahat (here, 
bigness ), the simple sensible unit being itself a complex of super- 
sensible plurality, which explains also the ‘degrees’ of sensible 
bigness*. The supersensible constituents of the simple sensible unit 
are called tanmatra. Each tanméatra is one. and the five 
tanmatras are only intellectually distinct from one another 
unlike the bhitas which present an intuitable continuous scries 
of qualitative spreads’. 
89. Ahamkara 3s conceived as predominantly rajasika 
or active, being—as will appear presently—the principle of 
egoistic conation. This conation matures into egoistic cognition and 
egoistic feeling which are respectively the sattika and tama- 
sika developments within the conation. As one wills, one ima- 
gines the object willed and feels it in anticipation. To imagine 
is to anticipate sensing and to anticipate a feeling is to begin to be 
immobilised into a standing being. The anticipatory sensing is 
the conation itself maturing as knowing, and the anticipatory 
feeling is the same getting accomplished into a restful or indolent 
being. Conation or ahamka@ra in the former aspect is techni- 
cally called vaikrta, the original of indriya and in the latter 
aspect is bhitadi, the original of the tanmiatras. Neither 
vaikrta nor bhutadi is a tattva other than aham- 
®SS .¥Y .87-88 , 90 
>STK.on SK. 38

=== PAGE 203 ===
THE OBJECTIVE TATTVAS 179 
kara, but these now evolve the new tattvas viz., the 
indriyas and the tanmatras. 
90. Sense or sensing has two aspects—as_ revealing 
(prakasa) and as reaching or pervading (faharana) the 
object—and is accordingly divided into the cognitive (jflainen- 
driya) and the active (karmendriva) senses. Aharana 
apparently would be the mental (Ahamkarika) counter-part 
of the bodily use of the object that is revealed by the cognitive 
senses. Such use is as much a condition of sense-knowledge as it 
is conditioned by it—their correlation being through manas. To 
speak is for the mind (ahamkira) to be the spoken sound, 
to pervade it, to cover it actively. To hear is for the mind to 
reveal (not to receive or be passive to) the sound, to anticipatively 
though undetachedly take its form. So in the case of the other 
senses, though what jfanendriya and karmendriya 
correspond to one another is obscure except in the case of Srotra 
and vik. The mind uses the object in the sense of being or per- 
vading it. Both kinds of indriya function by reaching the 
object (prapti), though it is reaching without leaving its 
position . 
91. As combining the two functions, manas is conceived as 
a further sense—the internal sense as distinct from the others called 
external, which is the lowest of the internal karanas or organs 
of the mind, having as their common function the holding of the 
material body together (dhirana). Manas as internal sense 
not only co-ordinates the vrttis of the external cognitive senses 
but also those of the external active senses, and these two sets of 
vrttis with one another, having for its distinctive vrtti— 
samkalpa (and vikalpa) which would be defining or charac- 
terising the sensed content. 
92. It remains to explain how tanmatra as the felt or 
tamasika transformation of ahamkdra is also the non- 
spatial sense-quality that becomes spatialised as bhiita. As felt, 
it is, as has been explained , the standing being or stuff of the mind. 
But why should pure or simple sense-quality be taken as the same 
as mental stuff? What is felt but not in the (gross) body is the mind 
as felt by itself. The mind here means the individualised mental 
body of the self. as embodied in which the individual self is a 
finitised ego excluding other egos, wills in other words to main- 
tain its finitude. What finitises the individual self which is in-

=== PAGE 204 ===
180 STUDIES IN SANKHYA PHILOSOPHY 
finite is ahamkara as resting in buddhi, the will anticipat- 
ing its fulfilment. The finitising ego-hood is in fact the will in its 
objectivity which as transformed into felt fulfilment or standing 
being is the stuff of the mental body. This standing being is the 
me that was 7 or the ego but is not it any longer , having its place 
still within the mind only through its conscious absence ‘of ego- 
hood.. Bhuta as making up the material body is also me but 
what was never reflectively taken as the 7. The distinction of the 
material me from the mental me is the spatiality of the former. 
Spatial sense-quality as denuded of its spatiality by aesthetic abs- 
traction is manifest as a pure aesthetic content. Aesthetic feeling 
and aesthetic content are one, the former being necessarily ex- 
pressed in the latter which is immediately expressive of the former . 
Aesthetic feeling is self-enjoying and aesthetic content is  self- 
enjoyed. The aesthetic (tanmatra) in fact is an absolute 
mentality like willing (ahamkara) and certitude (buddhi).

=== PAGE 205 ===
CHAPTER VII 
THE OBJECTIVE TATTVAS (Contd.) 
(Ahamkara and Buddhi) 
93. Ahamkaira and buddhi are taken along with 
manas as the three internal organs (karana); and along 
with the tanmatras as prakrti-vikrtis and as other 
than the vigesas. They are functional tattvas that are inter- 
nal (mental) causal and aviSesa. AviSsSesa, as πᾶς been 
shown , is manifest necessarily as mental and causal, and so it will 
suffice to characterise them as manifest functional avisesas. 
The affective differentiations—pleasurable , painful etc.—are mani- 
fest only in the tattvas that do not becorne but are immediately 
reflected in the bhogya world that is distinct from them and not 
distinct in them. The affectively undifferentiated tattvas are 
also manifest as absolute in the sense of being causa sui, cause 
(prakrti) and effect (vikrti) at once and_ not _alter- 
nately, or self-caused. The self-caused is understood in three 
forms—self-known, self-willed or self-felt; knowing, willing and 
feeling amount to self-becoming in the region of the absolute. 
Buddhi, ahamkidra and tanmaitra are the absolute mind 
as corresponding respectively to the illusions of the self objectifying 
itself—knowing itself, willing itself, and feeling itselfi—objectify- 
ing-in each form being really the self-distinguishing causality of the 
mind. These forms of the absolute mind are really three stages: 
buddhi- as self-knowing becomes ahamkira as self-willing 
which in its turn becomes tanmatra as self-feeling . 
94. Buddhi, ahamwnkara and tanmitra may be re- 
garded as self-consciousness in the objective, as the real mental 
counterparts of the illusion of self-objectification. Tanmatra 
as the counterpart of self-feeling has been explained. A ham- 
kara is taken as corresponding to self-willing. Si mkhya-Sitra 
VI-54 says that the agent is ahamkara, not the self, The 
finite ego-hood of the self (which is in essence an infinite indivi- 
dual) is manifested in willing. The knowing self may be finite 
but the finiteness is not manifest in the knowing. The feeling self 
is finite but is manifest as me and not as / or ego ., Ahainkara

=== PAGE 206 ===
182 STUDIES IN SANKHYA PHILOSOPHY 
is the finite ego-hood of the mind as willing. Now willing as in 
the (gross) body and directed towards the external object pre- 
supposes willing in the mind towards itself, the mind as active / 
becoming the standing me. This is the self-willing of the mind 
which answers to ahamkaira. 
95. The specific function of the mind as ahamk4§Ara is said 
to be abhimana—what appears in the gross form as pride or 
vanity or complacency and is in essence the conscious identification 
of the self with a finite being—expressible as ‘I am this being (and 
therefore not other being )’. This finitising function is, as intellec- 
tual, a bhava of buddh1, the ‘subjective’ function of asmita 
which is one of the viparyayas. not a causal manifestation of 
the objective mind. The function, however. is the transcendental 
or anticipatory form of conation as the causal function of becoming 
finite. Transcendental asmtta manifested as causal or conative 
is abhimana: the consciousness (illusory) ‘I am this being’ 
matures into ‘I am going to become this being’. This is the pure 
conative or rijasika manifestation which as partly fulfilled will 
is self-feeling (tamasa) abhimiana, the self-immobilising 
activity of the mind, taking form as pride or complacency. 
Bhitadi is ths tamasa abhimana as self-felt and not 
self-feeling . It still implies conative activity (resting on ἃ 5 π| 118), 
though as a recessive fringe only. With the complete fulfilment 
of this immobilising activity, abhimana as self-felt mind is 
turned into tanmatra. 
96. Ahamkaira is the mind as willing. Willing is under- 
stood as willing towards bhoga. Bhoga is in one’s (material) 
body which is manifestly exclusive of other bodies. Willing to- 
wards bhoga too implies exclusiveness , being in fact the mental 
prototype of the bodily exclusiveness, and it is accordingly the 
nucleus of what has been called the mental or subtle body. Willing 
towards freedom has also been conceived , willing to get rid of the 
finitising body, of the will towards bhoga which though free 
in the sense of self-causing—the sense in which all the prakrti- 
vikrtis are free—is really self-contracting , being the mind acquir- 
ing impotentia (aSakti or anisvaratva). The so-called 
willing towards freedom is properly free activity, activity that 
does not wait for the result, being intrinsically unimpeded , though 
there may be lapses from it. This unimpeded activity of the mind— 
activity and fruition in one or spiritual efficiency—is called

=== PAGE 207 ===
THE OBJECTIVE TATTVAS 183 
aigvarya and is a function of buddhi. It is not willing at 
all because willing must have for its object what was not and is to 
emerge. Activity that is necessarily efficient is not willing because 
it has no object fo be accomplished. The activity towards free- 
dom is but the exercise of freedom. 
97. As ahamkéara is primarily the mind as willing , though 
it may develop knowing and feeling aspects (as vaikrta and 
bhutadi), so buddhi is primarily the mind as knowing 
which may take the appearance of willing and feeling. The 
essence of willing is abhimana while the essence of knowing is 
nigcaya. Nisgcaya means certitude, the formula of which 
in subjective terms is ‘I am I’ as distinct from ‘I am this being’, the 
formula of abhimana. The formulation of abhimiana is 
factitious, for it does not appear as a certitude though it involves 
certitude which, were it to be expressed as a judgment, would be 
expressed as ‘I am this being’. Niscaya or certitude by itself is 
nothing if not explicit as a judgment. Both the formulas there- 
fore express certitude, certitude with or without reference to 
willing . or—what is the same thing—certitude about object and 
certitude about the subject, the expression of which is synthetic 
judgment (identity of diflerents) and analytic judgment (self- 
identity ). Identity , in fact. is the objectivity of what subjectively 
appears as certitude. Buddhi as object distinct from the self 
is mind as undifferenced manifestation’ , undifferenced either in the 
sense of not referring to difference at all or in the sense of supersed- 
ing or anticipating difference. Even in the latter sense, the differ- 
ence is not in buddhi., the anticipatory reference to which is an 
uparaga or reflection of tamas in buddhi”. So even the 
so-called synthetic identity is analytic, the difference of its terms 
being presupposed by but uot constitutive of the identity . 
98. Nisgcaya (certitude) or adhyavasaya (judgment) is 
primarily understood as synthetic in reference to willing. Know- 
ledge may not lead to willing but willing presupposes knowing in 
the form ‘this should be done’ which in the last resort implies ‘I as 
this ideal being have to be actual’, or ‘I am this being in possibility’. 
The asmita (‘I am’) that starts willing is a synthetic identity of 
the differents—myself as possible’ and ‘myself as actual’. ‘This 
alinga-matra or vyaktatéimatra—YB. & YV° II. 19 
PSS .IT.15

=== PAGE 208 ===
184 STUDIES IN SANKHYA PHILOSOPHY 
may be taken to be the original of a synthetic objective judgment 
like ‘A is B’: identity-in-difference is intelligible in reference to 
willing. The reference is anticipative or retrospective. Synthetic 
knowledge is to be or was necessarily embodied in willing (or 
feeling ). This seems to be the inward meaning of the evolution of 
ahamkdra from buddhi or its dissolution into buddhi 
through reflection. 
99. Certitude though primarily isolated in reflection on willing 
as a self-function which is objectively identity-in-difference is not 
what is primary in being. Synthetic identity presupposes (and 
lapses into) analytic identity, the subjective form of which is ‘I 
am I’, the pure sattvika asmita. Analytic identity as objec- 
tive is nothing but the function of manifestation (linga-matra) 
or manifest being in general (vyaktata-matra). ‘I am IP 
really means that the self is not really the content of judgment ; 
the content of judgment is objective, and the analytic identity is 
but the objective representation or symbolism for the self from 
which it is distinct. Mind is essentially buddhi or manifestation 
in general , manifest being and manifesting function. As function, 
it manifests not only all object constructed and caused, but also 
the primordial distinction of object from the self; and as being, 
it is the manifest form of the object as distinct from the self and 
as such unmanifest (prakrti). As being, it is manifested by 
itself as function which as thus prior to manifest being has to be 
understood as actual and not lapsed in prakrti*, actual as 
aviveka, the visanas or memory-traces of a past life. 
100. The primal certitude ‘I am I’ is thus equivalent to ‘mind 
(buddhi) is not I’. The implication is that even analytic identity 
is not subjectively an intuition but thought or distinguishing reflec- 
tion, a negative judgment. To Vedanta, it would be nirvi 
kalpa perception (with the negation cf the apparent relation of 
identity), and to Yoga, it would be asmitanugata 
samadhi, the highest grade of samprajfiata. To 
Samkhya, knowing is distinguishing, even this final knowing 
called viveka. Nisgcaya as analytic identity appears indeed 
relatively to synthetic identity as intuition , but the intuition is only 
a higher grade of distinguishing, distinguishing itself from the 
being of the self on the one hand and from the un-manifest pra - 
9Cf. SPB.1.15;V.25; VI. 12

=== PAGE 209 ===
THE OBJECTIVE TATTVAS 185 
krti on the other. Viveka is buddhi distinguishing itself 
as function (thinking) from purusa and as being (intuition) from 
prakrti. 
101. Certitude, identity or manifestness constitutes the subs- 
tantial reality of the mind. Like ahamkara, it is mind as 
self-objectifying or self-causing: self-knowing is also a becoming or 
causal self-distinguishing of the mind. The difference is that here 
the becoming is not a self-finitising, the mind as effect being as 
infinite as the causal mind. As already explained , even identity- 
in-difference is self-repetition: certitude of the form ‘I am_ this 
being’ confers the infinity of the 7 on ‘this being’ or me. Buddhi 
then may be said to present within itself the manifest form of 
sadrs§a-parinama and hence the vrttis of buddhi may 
be taken to be self-repetitions . 
102. Certitude is explicit as knowing but it may appear also 
implicitly as the proto-type of willing and feeling. Mind as self- 
identity—whether analytic or synthetic—has four bhavas or 
modes of referring to a content. These are jfiana,aisvarya, 
vairagya and dharma belonging to the mind as analytically 
self-identical or pure buddhi, and their opposites ajflana, 
anaisvarya, raga and adharma— belonging to the mind 
as synthetically self-identical or buddhi with the uparaga of 
tamas. Now the first three bh&vas in each set correspond 
respectively to knowing, willing and feeling. The bhivas in 
the second set have negative names though they are also positive 
as subserving bhoga unlike the bhavas in the first set, 
which represent withdrawal from bhoga. 
103. ΑἸ ἤδη would mean such certitude as is implied in the 
knowledge of the object to be enjoyed or experienced , implied in 
what may be called empirical judgment. It is called ajfiana, as 
experience or bhoga implies wrong knowledge, the false identi- 
fication of the self with the not-self. Anaisvarya would mean 
conscious inefficiency . certitude about the will being impeded or 
having restricted efficiency. All ‘willing is impeded willing, un- 
impeded willing or aigvarya, as we have seen, being not 
willing at all. Willing would be ahamkara, but the reflective 
certitude about its limitation is a bhava of buddhi. Raga 
or avairagya (to distinguish it from raga as ἃ stage of 
ajfiidna or viparyaya) is conscious attachment or reflective 
consciousness of being attracted or immobilised by the felt object.

=== PAGE 210 ===
186 STUDIES IN SANKHYA PHILOSOPHY 
Vairagya is feeling of detachment or freedom from the 
bhogya object, disinterested feeling. Like aigvarya, how- 
ever, which is free activity that only appears as willing, vaira- 
gya which is free being has only the appearance of feeling, dis- 
interested feeling being only symbolised as feeling. Jilana, 
however, is mental freedom and is understood literally as the 
mind knowing itself as distinct from the self and as a symbol 
of the self. 
104. The pure bhavas of buddhi are the spiritual 
functions , modes of freedom rcferred to the self but really belong- 
ing to the mind. The impure bhavas are modes of being un- 
free which, however. are realised as such and. therefore. also 
imply spiritual mentality. Both are functions of the mind as 
infinite , as completely self-manifesting or self-identical , as with the 
form not only of the self but of the self as self-conscious . The two 
remaining bhavas however—viz:, dharma and adharma— 
do not have the conscious form of the self. They mean spiritual 
merit and demerit and not conscious spiritual activity. moral and 
ceremonial , as they have been taken to mean by some commenta- 
tors. Merit and demerit are actual (manifest) but unconscious 
tendencies of buddhi, being included arnong bhiavas as due 
to self-conscious activity of the self (mind). 
105. Bhava and vrtti of buddhi (as also of lower 
tattvas) have to be distinguished. Vijfidna-bhiksu inter- 
prets vrtti as dravyartpa or substantial (mode of subs- 
tance) like a flame. though he points out that it sometimes means 
self-maintaining function (sva-sthiti-hetu-vyaipdara‘). 
Even in the latter sense, vrtti is dravya-rtpa in the sense 
that it is the being of a tattva as sclf-maintaining. The former 
meaning is taken to be indicated by sitra V.107 where vrtti 
is said to be other than part (bhaga) and quality (guna), 
being at once in the tattva and outside of it, implying a sort of 
‘standing motion’.” Apparently then vrtti is mode and function 
at once, one or other aspect being stressed in the two meanings 
(as dynamic state or standing motion). Bhava is mere function 
—the function of referring to or appearing conscious of the objects 
®C{.SS.V. 105-8 
bCf.also Aniruddha-Vrtti on the siitra where vrtti is 
characterised as prasarat-ripa,

=== PAGE 211 ===
THE OBJECTIVE TATTVAS 187 
is not dravya-ripa or substantial. Bhava and vrtti 
are indeed dependent on each other: there is no bhava without 
vrtti (such as seems to be implied in the asamprajiiata of 
Yoga philosophy) and no vrtti without bhava (no merely 
mental state without conscious reference to the object). No 
tattva is without either: it has a standing form through its 
teference to the object (buddhi e.g., anticipatively, and 
really , takes the form of the object) and its reference is possible 
through its standing form, the two together making up its real 
pratibimbana or mirroring of the object. 
1N6. With this is connected the S4inkhya theory of know- 
ledge. Knowledge is a bhava or subjective function through 
which a content or object is non-causally manifested. This mani- 
festation is at once knowledge of the content as given and projec- 
tion or construction of the content. The function is primarily of 
buddhi but secondarily of all the karanas. The karanas 
are the four—buddhi. ahamkira, manasg on the one hand 
as internal organs and the external senses on the other. The 
knowing function as through thesc karanas is called adhya- 
vasiya, abhimana, sainkalpa and alocana respec- 
tively . Each of these in reference to the particular object known is 
connected with a particular mode (vrtti) of the karana as 
substance. Jiiana as bhava is a function of a vrtti of a 
karana. Soadhyavasaya etc., are each a knowing func- 
tion in one aspect and an existent mode in another of a substan- 
tial karana-tattva. 
107. The external (cognitive) senses yield knowledge of the 
object as barely given and not yet endowed with a distinguishable 
character, nor related to the willing and feeling ego. nor mani- 
fested as true or self-identical 1.6... as the content of certitude. 
This bare acquaintance with the given is called Alocana. Some 
take it is knowledge of the object as vastu-samanyai.e., as 
without particularity (vigesa) which to them is distinguishing 
and distinguishable character known only in the way of sam- 
kalpa by manas. Others like Vyaisa* and Vijfiana- 
bhiksu° take 4locana as of two grades—acquaintance with 
the vastu-samanya called nirvikalpa, and acquain- 
* YB , III. 47 
> SPB. JI. 32

=== PAGE 212 ===
188 STUDIES IN SANKHYA ΡΗΠΟΘΟΡΗΥ 
tance with it as this and not another, as particularized (visista) 
or savikalpa. Apparently to them this particularity is a dis- 
tinguishing but not distinguishable character (the knowledge of 
which is samkalpa): the sense-datum may be samanya- 
vigesatma, though the vigesa here does not appear as 
visesana distinct from visesya. 
108. Manas is called an indriya though it is also an 
antahkarana. Its specific function samkalpa consists in 
distinguishing the vigesana or determinant in the viSesya 
or determinate object of the external senses. As it only explicates 
what was already known implicitly in the determinate sense- 
cognition, manas is itself a sense, the internal sense ; and in the 
words of Kant. every representation of the external sense is also 
a representation of the internal sense. Samkalpa is not judg- 
ment (adhyavasaya); or if the word ‘judgment’ is used in 
a wide sense, it is only a ‘judgment of perception’ (Kant) or an 
‘analytic judgment of sense’ (Bradley). Manas shares with 
ahamkara and buddhi the character of being concerned with 
all time, unlike the external senses which are concerned with the 
present only." Memory, immediate expectation and immediate 
relating of sense-data would be among its functions. 
109. Ahamkéadra is specifically manifest as willing but it 
is also ‘knowing’ in its vaikrta aspect, knowing of the sensed 
or sensable object as related to willing (—‘feeling) ego. as mine or 
to be mine, as object of my bhoga. It is not knowledge of a 
content as true, as fact independent of zy experience or ‘public’ 
object which would be knowledge proper. adhyavasaya or 
nigcaya. Certitude is explicit at least in the first instance in 
negative reference to one’s private experience: to be aware of 
something as certain is to be aware of it as not merely a fact 
to me. A higher grade of certitude would be the positive know- 
ledge of the pure self as a self-evident or analytic self-identity . 
Certitude as negatively referring to egoistic experience is only 
the implicit form of this certitude. 
110. Now all these karanas are taken to refer to the object 
spontaneously. There is no idea of the external object affecting 
or causing an impression on them nor of any one organ affecting 
any other. The function of each is an anticipatory response: 
«SK . 33, 35

=== PAGE 213 ===
THE OBJECTIVE TATTVAS 189 
each acts freely for the self.* The internal karanas are said to 
have the common character of life, of holding the body toge- 
ther; and their knowing function is apparently an aspect of this 
life-function. Each anticipatively take on a vrtti reflecting the 
form of the object, the vrtti of each higher karana being 
accordingly undistinguished from the corresponding vrtti of a 
lower karana. The karanas thus function in concert, as 
though each knew the mind of the others." They function either 
simultaneously or in succession’ so that although a higher func- 
tion implies a lower, a lower does not imply and may psycholo- 
gically precede a higher. ΑἹΊ the lower karanas yield their 
contents ultimately to buddhi. Object is reflected in a vrtti 
of external sense, that again in a vrtti of manas and so on; 
buddhi-vrtti further is said to be reflected in the self but in 
a new sensc to be discussed in the scquel. 
®SK .31 
Dparasparakita-hetuka-vrtti—SK.3l 
© SK . 30

=== PAGE 214 ===
CHAPTER ΝΙ] 
THE SELF OR PURUSA 
111. In the Sainkhya theory of knowledge. the mind in its 
many grades is understood to anticipatively take the form of the 
external object, to restrict itself to a vrtti reflecting the object. 
This reflecting or mirroring is apparently also the projecting or 
constructing function of the mind. As pointed out, it is the mind 
getting modalised into a substantial vrtti similar to the object 
and also non-causally functioning as bhava apart from which 
the object has no manifest or known aspect. The mind thus as 
much casts its reflection, making a phenomenal object out of the 
given (prakrti) as gets the reflection of the object constructed . 
Reflection means different things in the two cases: the idea is 
constitutive of the object and the idea is like the object. Antici- 
pative response is at once construction and apprehension of the 
bhogya object. The object is ultimately projected by and re- 
flected in buddhi as bhava and vrtti. Now mental func- 
tion, whether substantial or otherwise is non-distinct from the 
self and appears to embody it. Vrtti of buddhi accordingly 
appears as the self reflecting the object and bhava as the self 
projecting the object. The dual function of the mind is illusorily 
referred to the self. The self appears to take the reflection 
(pratibimba) of buddhi-vrtti which reflects the object 
and to be itself reflected in buddhi-bhava which projects 
the object. 
112. This is how the theory of mutual reflection of the self 
and buddhi may be interpreted. Vijfiina-bhiksu who 
presents this double pratibimba theory, however, under- 
stands the reflection of the self in buddhi to mean the vrtti 
for self-knowledge taking the form of the self (like the vrtti for 
object-knowledge taking the form of the object). the presentation 
of the self as me and not as it has been here taken as bhava of 
the form ‘I know’. He assumes this presented me to explain self- 
knowledge: if the self is known, it is known in a vrtti of the 
form of the self, a vrtti reflecting the self. Such vrtti, again, 
is reflected in the self in order that the reflected self may be

=== PAGE 215 ===
THE SELF OR PURUSA 191 
known, just as vrtti reflecting the object is reflected in the self 
in order that the reflected object may be known. The reflection 
of the self in vrtti is then real mode of buddhi, not the illu- 
sory embodiment of the self in bhava as we have taken it to be. 
But the self-form as a real mode of buddhi would be the me 
and not the 7, and the knowledge yielded by the further reflec- 
tion of this mode in the self would be but the knowledge of the 
me. The real Samkhya view, therefore, appears to be that the 
self is known as what buddhi (object) is not, known in 
viveka (the pure bhava, jfiana) which indeed implies a 
vrtti but vrtti of the form Ἵ am I’ or, Jess adequately , ‘I am 
me’ but not of mere me. This vrtti is what has been called 
vyaktati-matra, the native form of buddti, buddhi 
in the bare form of self-identity. The reflection of the self in 
buddhi or more generally in the mind is the embodied 7, (the 
I as constitutive of the body or me), not the presented me or the 
body which is the object with the self-form. 
113. The self then as what the mind is not is objectively 
manifest as constituting the mental body and as the non-causal 
subjective function or bhiva of this body. It is manifest both 
in the pure and the impure bhavas but adequately in the pure 
bhiavas which have for their specific content the distinction of 
the mind from the self. The content of the impure bhavas of 
buddhi is the mind (reflecting the object) as distinct from the 
self, buddhi being self-conscious in both. We know the self 
not as object but in knowing the distinction of the object from it 
or in knowing the object as distinct from it. The self is never 
known by itself: there is properly no intuition of the self. 
114. All knowledge is reflective i.e., implies a distinguish- 
ing from the self. We start by distinguishing the external object 
from the self as embodied in the material body. Then we distin- 
guish the material body from the self as embodied in the 
mental body, thus knowing the former no longer as me but 
as the impersonal cosmic bhiita. Next we progressively dis- 
tinguish the mental body from the self as willing. thus obtain- 
ing the concept of the cosmic tanmatra on the one hand and 
the cosmic indriya on the other; and then from the self as 
knowing (or more generally. as self-certitude) and thereby com- 
ing to conceive the cosmic tattva, ahamkiara; and lastly 
from the pure self with the thinking of buddhi as the cosmic

=== PAGE 216 ===
192 STUDIES IN SANKHYA PHILOSOPHY 
tattva. This second reflection or distinguishing is progressive 
but the mental body holds together till buddhi itself is known 
as object. The knowledge of buddhi in its pure bhavas as 
distinct from the pure self would be viveka, the goal and 
original of all reflection. The reflection that makes an object of 
the mental body is a single process in many stages, for that body 
does not lose its self-form till pure buddhi loses it. 
115. The self is known as actual in all reflection but as 
embodied. The second reflection ir its final stage is indeed a 
distinguishing of buddhi from the pure self, but the pure self is 
here known as what buddhi is distinguished from and yet em- 
bodies. In other words, the identity of the self with viveka as 
bhava is known to persist in the consciousness of viveka as 
vrtti. Viveka is the knowing function conscious of buddhi 
as a knowing state or mode. The identity of the self with the 
function persisting along with the distinction of the state from 
the self is just what is called avidy ἃ" as distinct from asmita. 
116. Viveka asimplying both identity and distinction of bu d- 
d hi with and from the self is necessarily of a vanishing character . 
In fact as one in viveka knows viveka itself to be object. 
its manifest character as substantial buddhi tends to lapse. The 
knowing function also being of the same buddhi and not of 
the pure self tends to cease absolutely, the lapse of substantial 
buddhi being only a potentialisation into prakrti. Hence, 
too, in the evolution of buddhi from prakrti, the object- 
knowing function which conditions the evolution is understood as 
actual within prakrti: buddhi as ajfidna-bhava is 
actual within prakrti. Thus the destiny of the knowing func- 
tion of viveka is to end absolutely as function which means 
the termination of the illusion of embodiment on the one hand 
and of the content of knowledge on the other. The self as 
mukta or in its essential nature is accordingly conceived to be 
contentless consciousness . 
117. The self is pure consciousness, not embodied conscious- 
Mess nor consciousness of a content having the form of the object. 
It is known immediately-in reflection and is not really inferred . 
Inference may indeed help in rising to and clarifying the reflec- 
tion—which has been shown to be transcendental reflection in 
eyVv’ l.6

=== PAGE 217 ===
THE SELF OR PURUSA 193 
Ssamkhya. The self is taken in KGirika 17 to be inferred 
on various grounds of which two—viz., 5 ἃ ἢ β ἢ ἃ [ἃ -pararth- 
atvat and adhigthana@t—appear to be inferential grounds 
proper, the others being only aspects of the self immediately 
revealed by reflection. There is immediate introspective con- 
Sciousness of the object being other than the self (tri gunadi- 
Viparyayat), of the self as feeling or experiencing 
(bhoktr-bhavat) and as striving for freedom (kaival- 
yartha-pravrtteh). ‘Samghadta’ means a combinational 
unity, all combination being understood as qualitative. All 
object, whether noumenal or phenomenal, is a saih ghata of 
the three gunas interpenetrating one another. In this con- 
nection, although this general sense is not excluded, what is 
immediately meant by saihghata appears to be the unity of 
the body. The body is obviously purposive , being for the bho ga 
and apavarga of the self; and hence the clue to the general 
proposition that the emergence of simple functional unity in a 
qualitative (interpenetrating ) combination is necessarily teleologi- 
cal. It would be the Sammkhya version of organic unity. 
With this accords also the explanation of the other ground for 
the inference of the self—viz., adhisthanat. The body has 
the self not only as final cause but also as immanent cause. 
118. So the self is inferred primarily as the explanation of the 
unity of the body. The body and, in fact, any complex that func- 
tions as a simple unity can so function because of a simple unity 
from which it is undistinguished and which appears to function for 
its own good. If a simple real could atc, as it cannot, it would 
achieve only value and be no new existent. If a complex acts 
as a simple, it must appear to achieve the good of an external 
simple unity which is reflected in it. The nature of this simple 
real thus inferred has to be recognised to be the self that im- 
mediately appears to reflection as what all object is distinct from. 
as enjoyer of object or as freeing itself from the object. The 
further understanding of the object being distinct from it brings 
out its character as the subject (saksin)—viz., as an absolute 
distinct (kevala,. alone or unrelated), as affectively detached 
(madhyastha ), as knower (drastr) and as no agent 
(akartr). 
119. The self that is thus inferred and immediately known 
in reflection as subject is called knower (drastr) in reference 
13

=== PAGE 218 ===
194 STUDIES IN SANKHYA PHILOSOPIIY 
obviously to asmita&. But in the last resort, the self is con- 
ceived as knowledge or consciousness , though still, as will appear 
presently, as pure individual. The mukta self is no longer 
siksin, for to it there is no object to be conscious of. 
Viveka leads at once to its lapse into prakrti andto mukti 
of the self, so that the self is essentially contentless jana and 
not δῖ. This essential nature of the self as beyond 
avidya cannot be inferred: it is evident to the terminal reflec- 
tion viveka. 
120. Samkhya admits a plurality of pure selves or puru- 
sas. The plurality is also taken to be inferred from the circums- 
tance of the birth, death, organ, willing and feeling differing in 
different embodied selves’. A prior enquiry, however. is how 
a body other than mine is known to be of another self, for such 
knowledge is obviously assumed in the above inference. The 
karika starts with the common sense belief in other embodied 
selves. but the inference of many pure selves would be inva- 
lid if the datum can be shown to be due to illusion, as it 
is sought to be shown by the Vedantist. The Sam- 
khya view then can be defended if buddhi in its pure 
asmita-function is taken to yield knowledge of J as in a com- 
munity of /’s or in reference to the object, if my certitude about 
an object be taken to involve others’ certitude about it. This 
would be holding that the conimon-sense belief in many selves 
cannot be due to illusion corrigible as in the Vedanta view 
within buddhi- knowledge. 
121. Mere sense-knowledge (Alocana and samkalpa) 
is unreflective, not consciously referred to any self, though to 
reflection it belongs to oneself and not to others. The know- 
ledge of the object as mine—or to be mine, such ἃς willing 
involves (abhimana)}—is consciously referred to oneself to 
the exclusion of other selves. Of the knowledge involving cons- 
cious certitude about the object (adhyavasaya), one is 
aware that it is impersonal and does not belong exclusively to 
oneself or, in other words, that the content known is not affected 
by relativity to the knower. Such awareness is equivalent to— 
though only implicitly—to the awareness of its being knowable 
by all selves. 
ὃ SK .18.

=== PAGE 219 ===
THE SELF OR PURUSA 195 
122. The self is known in buddhi in its pure bhava not 
only as not finite, (i.e., as above ahamkiara) but.as not 
me (i.e., as object to itself). Now the self as infinite 175 
can only mean 7 as involving all 7.5. Infinity in Samkhya 
is infinity as in the finite. It is in reference to the finite 
phenomenal object the universal’ and in reference to ἃ cons- 
tituent of one’s exclusive body the corresponding cosmic subs- 
tance, but what is it in reference to the subject “12 There is the 
concept of purusa-samanya° which does not mean one self 
but the abstraction ‘self-hood’. It cannot be taken as a universal 
in the sense gotva is a universal of individual cows, nor as a 
single substance like an objective tattva with an apparent 
differentiation within it corresponding to different bodies. It is 
an abstraction in the sense that it cannot be represented like a 
universal or a substance as really or apparently comprising indi- 
viduals (or modes) under it, being intelligible only as the sva- 
ΤΡ (or character of being itself) of the individual. It is not 
abstraction in the sense of being a secondary character of a pri- 
mary attribute (like intensity, brightness, universality). The 
subject is manifest as what has no character (nirdharmaka). 
but this characterlessness is itself taken as its character of self- 
manifestness’, Thus the subject is manifest simply as individual 
thing, as being itself. The pure individual is necessarily intelli- 
gible as individual among individuals. The subject that is cons- 
ciously manifest as simply individual is manifest to itself as a 
self among selves. ° 
123. Each self then in the pure buddhi-function of 
asmita involves all selves. The self is essentially individual , 
any individual implying others. The term ‘T’ is to the person who 
uses it singular though he is necessarily aware that others can use 
it of themselves. Purusa-samanya or self-hood 8 this 
necessary universality of a singular, being universal only if uni- 
queness or the unique-in-general is universal. Unique-in-general 
means any unique, not all uniques. ‘All A is B’ indeed means 
‘any A is B’ but ‘any A is B’ necd not mean ‘all A is B’, for 
even the distributive all has an implied collective character. As 
*Cf.sarve eva purusa ifvard iti in SPB. II.15. 
'SS.V.91 .etc. 
¢SPB.1.154;V.116; VI. 66. 
4prakasa—SPB.I1. 145-146.

=== PAGE 220 ===
196 STUDIES IN ΘΑΝΚΗ͂ΥΑ PHILOSOPHY 
applied to the object, any and all may be regarded as equivalents 
but not as applied to the subject. Subjects cannot be understood 
as together in being: they can be together only in function. In 
point of being , each subject is absolute , but they can be conceived 
to function in harmony. In this sense we may say that the self is 
known in buddhi as having with it a community of selves. 
The self is known in the form ‘I am I’ which is an analytic self- 
identity . the enunciation of which is significant only in its being 
the form of many such self-identities. I say ‘I am I’ only as I 
am aware of others saying of themselves ‘I am I’. I am a spirit 
only in the recognition of other spirits and hence, too, my certi- 
tude about an object implies others’ ( possible ) certitude about 11. 
124. So far as I know through buddhi, I know the object as 
not to me alone but to any knowing. ‘This applies both to the 
phenomenal object and to the objective tattva. The bhogya 
is indeed relative to me as exclusive bhoktr but it is none the 
less taken by me as given. as having an existence that is for any 
bhoktr. So when the body, mental and material, is viewed 
through buddhi as object not only to me but to all, the cons- 
tituents of the body become manifest as cosmic tattvas. 
125. The self is thus known in pure asmita as an indivi- 
dual involving a community of individuals. each being an infinite 
or Ig$vara. There is no suggestion in SAamkhya of a self 
really or illusorily differentiated into many selves, nor of a single 
Isvara as in Yoga distinct from the selves and mystically 
working within them. Each self is essentially an ISvara and 
pure buddhi as revealing and embodying the many infinite selves 
is called mahat or the great which gets restricted by rajas and 
tamas conditioning the movements towards bhoga. Of the 
self as mukta which to one’s final reflection is absolute 
(kevala),. we cannot say if it is an individual aware of itself 
involving a community of individuals. There is no reason to 
regard it as not individual in being, but all we can assert of it is 
that it is contentless consciousness, not consciousness of itself or 
of object. | 
126. The distinguishability of purusa-samanya in the 
purusa known in asmita lapses when the asmita lapses. 
and hence the mukta self is at least not consciously individual . 
To Vedanta, unconscious being or individuality of the pure 
self or consciousness is meaningless. To Simkhya the being of

=== PAGE 221 ===
THE SELF OR PURUSA 197 
consciousness can be manifest only to buddhi. When buddhi 
lapses, the self would not be aware of its being. Vedanta 
would take it to be then ecstatically self-conscious. Apparently 
to Samkhya, the being of the mukta self or absolute cons- 
ciousness is then unmanifest or unconscious. Whether it is then 
individual or not can never be asserted. The conflict between 
Vedanta and Samkhya on this point may . therefore, yet dis- 
appear. Only Samkhya would insist that through buddhi, 
you cannot know the individuality of the self as_ illusory. 
Apparently, Vedanta will rely on some spiritual feeling or 
Sastra for its denial of individuality and seek not to disprove 
individuality by reason (buddhi) but only to disprove objec- 
tions to the faith in its illusory character.

=== PAGE 222 ===
CHAPTER [IX 
PRAKRTI 
127. Prakrti, the primal objective tattva, is best con- 
sidered after purusa, for buddhi lapses only by revealing and 
distinguishing itself from puruga. Wiveka is primarily the 
distinguishing of buddhi from purusa, through which the 
conception of prakrti and of its unmanifest distinction from 
purusa emerges. In the order of being. the distinction of 
buddhi from purusa is derived from that of prakrti from 
purusa; but in the order of knowing, the latter is conditioned 
by the former. The order of the tativas may. therefore, be 
thus represented . 
Purusa 
| 
Prakrti—Buddhi—Ahamkaira etc. 
The direct relation of purusa is with buddhi alone among 
the objective tattvas. 
128. The reflection that distinguishes the mind from the self 
is also the consciousness of the mind as having been manifest 
through non-distinction from the self; and as the mind (as 
buddhi) is object with the sole character of manifestness 
(vyaktata). the distinguishing of it from the self means its 
lapsing into the unmanifest (avyakta or prakrti). To be 
aware of manifestness thus lapsing is to be aware of its having 
emerged , of the unmanifest having manifested manifestness , such 
manifesting being as much becoming as appearing. The unmani- 
fest prakrti is thus purely causal or potential being with the 
actual function of appearing which is but the beginningless 
aviveka or non-distinction from the self, the objective aspect 
of what 15 subjectively called the experiencing function 
(bhoga). ‘I enjoy’ is but illusion, the corresponding objective 
fact being that unmanifest reality (thing-in-itself)) appears as the 
external world (phenomenon, bhogya). As it so appears, 
it becomes buddhi and the other tattvas (linga) cons- 
tituting the enjoying or experiencing body (bhogayatana).

=== PAGE 223 ===
PRAKRTI 199 
This appearing function is beginninglessly actual and never poten- 
tial, though it can end absolutely. Hence if the unmanifest be- 
comes manifest, it does not requite any external cause (like 
God’s will in Yoga) to wake it up: it is already awake in its 
appearing function which in good time will actualise its being. 
129. Prakrti then prescnts, both potential being and 
actual function. As in the region of the manifest ( which practi- 
cally means ‘within buddhi’), linga and bhava are dis- 
tinct but interdependent, so within unmanifest prakrti, there 
is the dualism of ‘substantial being’ potential as the gunas and 
of ‘aviveka—comprising the traces (ν ὃ 58ἃ ἢ ἃ 5) of previous 
births—which is actual but without standing being. This aviveka 
is mere function that is somehow at once sat and asat. real and 
unreal, being the identity of subject and object (mind), which 
is real as objective non-distinction and unreal as subjective identi- 
fication." In Yoga, this dualism does not appear to be put 
within pradhana or a-linga: the gunas are conceived to 
be not determinate potential being as in Samnkhya_ but 
as an indetermination of being and non-being (nihsattéi- 
sattvam etc.)°; in other words, the indeterminateness that 
appears in the Saimkhya conception of the function of 
aviveka is transferred to the conception of potential being. 
In Yoga, satta or being means vyaktata or manifestness, 
so that the unmanifest gunas are neither determinate being nor 
determinate non-being.° In Samkhya, potential or unmani- 
fest being as of the gunas is still determinate being which has 
an indeterminate function. 
130. This difference between S&Aamkhya and Yoga 1s 
reflected in their views of sadrSa-parinama and samya- 
vastha. Prakrti is taken as an indefinite plurality of ele- 
ments which are not combined into a unity. The manifest object 
(tattva) is an effect and effect is a unity of elements in qualli- 
tative combination, having a manifest quality of its own. The 
elements by themselves are the causes which by qualitative inter- 
penetration become a unity with a manifest simple quality. This 
becoming is called visadrSa-parinama. Cause then is a 
4SS.V.56. 
PYB.IT.19. 
°YV .11.19.

=== PAGE 224 ===
200 STUDIES IN SANKHYA PHILOSOPHY 
plurality of elements which before the emergence of the effect is 
ununified and has no simple quality. The simple quality of the 
ettect is the quality of one of the elements, the qualities of the 
other elements being either unmanifest or manifest in a way that 
does not affect the simplicity of the effect. The quality of one 
element is in this sense dominant and not in the sense of being 
more intense than the qualities of the other elements. This 
difference between dominant and recessive is not manifest in the 
cause where the elements are accordingly said to be in sAamya- 
vastha, same in the nature of manifestation and not in mani- 
fest degree, the above difference being difference in nature of 
manifestation. The persistent interpretation of samyavasthda 
as equality of degree of the elements appears to make no sense. 
131. Samyavastha of the elements called gunas 
implies their utter unrelatedness and the consequent  non- 
dominance of any one of them. Prakrti is these elements and 
is not their unity or substratum: it is each of them or their alter- 
nation and is not even their togetherness. Is samyavastha 
the defining character of prakrti? Vyasa‘ calls it a-linga- 
parinaima to distinguish it from the other tattvas, though 
he points out that the good of the self (purusartha) which is 
the nimitta of the other parinamas is not the nimitta of 
this parinama which is pralaya nor of its termination in 
srsti, God's absolute will being apparently the sole nimitta 
here. SA€mkhya-sitra” appears to take it as the definition of 
prakrti, though Vijfiana-bhiksu interprets it in the 
manner of Yoga-bhasya as a contingent character (upa- 
laksana). Prakrti is taken as nitya, persisting partially 
even along with the other tattvas; and this does not justify 
one in taking samyavastha as a contingent’ character. 
Samyavastha of prakrti is retained even along with the 
visadrsa-parinamas emerging as distinct in prakrti. 
But as these come to lapse again into prakrti, is not 5 ἃ ΠΥ ἃ - 
vastha4 a contingent character as well ? This lapse or retraction— 
whether for the mukta self or in cosmic pralaya—is properly 
no effect in Samkhya and is even in Yoga an effect outside 
the causal process in the object. Causal process in the object is the 
ΒΎῪΒ 11.119. 
>SS.1. 61.

=== PAGE 225 ===
PRAKRTI 201 
downward process towards bhoga, the opposite process being 
utterly discontinuous with it to Yoga, and no causal process at 
all to Samkhya though continuous with the causal process. 
Purusartha or the good of the self is not the nimitta of 
this reverse process to Yoga and to Simkhya; it is not 
nimitta even of the forward process, there being no nimitta- 
cause outside the immanent cause in this system; and unconscious 
teleology is just the nature or spontaneity of the (noumenal ) object 
and no causal circumstance at all. The reverse process then to 
Samkhya is purely spontaneous, and so toitsamyavastha 
which is its terminus is just the eternal existence of prakrti as 
distinct from its manifestness , existence that is no character , either 
necessary or contingent but the existent itself. 
132. Now samyavastha or prakrti itself, being the 
cause or potentiality of all that is manifest. rust be taken to have 
within it something corresponding to the manifest causal process . 
This appears to be the sadrSa-parinama of each guna as 
unrelated to the other gunas. Sadrsa-parinama means 
mere self-reproduction of a guna. its self-repetition without the 
emergence of qualitative difference. A manifest tattva is un- 
derstood as self-caused or self-causing. and bud dhi the highest 
of the manifest tattvas—is manifest as such. Substance, then, 
even as unmanifest guna must imply self-causation: there is no 
conception of a merely static substance in Simkhya or Y oga. 
The reality of an object consists in its becoming. Manifest reality 
is necessarily what becomes different from itself and manifestness 
as reality is what has become different from itself as the utterly 
unmanifest and is becoming further specificated. As to be mani- 
fest is to be different from itself in nature. the self-caused-ness 
of the unmanifest can only mean bare numerical distinction from 
itself. Now a self-caused tattva may also be taken as self- 
causing but there is difficulty in Simkhya_ about a vikara- 
tattva which to it no longer causes, while‘to Yoga, it still 
causes though only immanent parinimas of itself. There is 
difficulty also about prakrti cr guna in Yoga, for it can 
hardly be called effect of itself, if by effect is meant what has 
determinate being, guna being understood in this system as in- 
determinate. Thus Samkhya _ would generally characterise 
objective reality as self-caused and Yoga as self-causing. 
133. Consequently, in Samkhya, the reality of guna

=== PAGE 226 ===
202 STUDIES IN SANKHYA PHILOSOPHY 
consists in its being self-caused , while in Y og a it consists in self- 
causing. It implies the cessation of self-distinction to Samkhya 
and the emergence of self-distinction to Yoga: it is a being com- 
prising self-distinction to the former and breaking up into self- 
distinction to the latter. To Samkhya a guna is one, the 
material identity of many self-repetitions , presupposing but super- 
seding their difference; while to Yoga it is a nominal universal, 
the many particular gunas being the reality, though even 
here they are not co-existent as conceived by Vijfiina- 
bhiksu. He reads this view of a guna being a mere name for 
many co-existent particular gunas not only in Yoga but also 
in Samkhy a and takes it not only to be implied in certain texts .° 
but as the only explanation of quantitative variation of a guna 
and of immanent parinama within a tattva. Samkhya 
will, however, hardly admit such quantitative variation and im- 
manent parinama within the real, and even if it does. it will 
not necessarily explain them by the conception of particular 
gunas. 
134. There is properly no increase or decrease of the 
tattvasin Samkhya. The so-called quantitative inequality 
of the gunas in a visadrS§a-parinama appears to mean 
only the qualitative distinction between dominant and recessive. 
Two tattvas or modes of a tattva may appear to have more 
of a certain guna, say sattva, in one than in the other; but 
this can be explained by saying that the guna is in one less 
manifest, less obscured by the other guna than in the other. 
the degrees of manifestness of a guna being really its qualitative 
relations to the other gunas—called abhibhava, janana, 
mithuna and asraya to be explained presently (sec. 147). 
135. Immanent parin&ima—what is called in Yoga 
dharma-laksanavastha-parinama as distinct from 
tattvantara-parinama— as already explained is properly 
no change in Simkhya. For one thing, it does not admit 
a tattva without vrtti which changes into vrttis: 
a tattva is always in a vr{ti. Buddhi, for ex- 
ample, as referring in its bhava to a particular object is a 
particular buddhi-vrtti. The vrtti being the tattva itself 
is a causal fact unlike the bhava, and so the pratibimba of 
*SPB.1. 127-28 YV.11 .18.

=== PAGE 227 ===
PRAKRTI 203 
visaya in the tattva is taken as a real pratibimba, though 
there is no such thing as the tattva without any pratibimba. 
The passing of one vrtti into another, however. is not a causal 
process . being apparently only the non-causal passing of one bhi va 
into another. As still each vrtti is the tattva, each in its 
bhava referring to the others, the vrttis only present mutual 
difference and not change and may therefore, relatively to the 
change of the tattva to the next tattva, be said to be in a sort 
of space arrangement. The so-called immancnt change then necd 
not be explained by a quantitative re-arrangement of particular 
gunas. That there are different vrttis does indeed imply that 
the gunas have no static being’, but that need not mean that 
each guna is perpetually changing in respect of attribute . temporal 
quality and state (dharma-laksanavastha). It may mean 
only that each is in sadrS§a-parinama where bare numerical 
distinction and no distinction in nature emerges. So the conception 
of particular gunas (guna-vyakti) seems to have no place 
in Samkhya. 
136. The object, whether phenomenal or noumenal is taken to 
be constituted by the three gun as—sattva,rajas andtamas. 
Guna does not mean attribute; it is substantial reality, called 
guna as being for another (parartha or paropakiaraka” 
for the bhoga of purusa. that being the character of object. 
The gunas are three . corresponding to the three modes of bhoga 
—sukha, duhkha and moha (priti, apriti, visada). 
The object is for the self in these three modes , and the three gunas 
being accordingly defined as having these feeling-modes as their 
atma, svabhava or laksana. An object is pleasurable 
not in the sense of being an external cause of pleasure in one’s 
mind but as being, so far as it is pleasurable, the pleasure itself, 
as being manifested as the pleasure and manifested or shown by 
the pleasure as its implicit being or causal self. No object is 
all pleasurable and hence the pleasurable object is in its other 
affective aspects the other bhogas—duhkha or moha—also. 
What is (dominantly ) pleasurable to one person may indeed be 
painful to another, but this inconstancy in the mutual relation 
of the gunas in the same object appears only in non-causal 
‘calam ca gunavrttam—YB.II.15; "11.13. 
DSTK .12.

=== PAGE 228 ===
204 STUDIES IN SANKHYA PHILOSOPHY 
or phenomenal manifestation. That an external object is the same 
to different persons though it affects them differently does not imply 
that it is really other than its affective character but only that its 
common or public character is also its affective character that is 
distinguished in some way in buddhi from the affective cha- 
racters presented to someone individual only. 
137. All characters of the external objects are affective . being 
non-causal manifestation of the gunas. Even the ‘private’ 
characters are (phenomenally ) real: prakrti is conceivable as 
phenomenalised to each self as the public world with some aspects 
that are for that self only. There may indeed be doubts about 
which aspects are public: what are taken as such may turn out to 
be only private. But that does not invalidate the general distinc- 
tion between public and private. The illusory is only what having 
appeared public now appears private, the previous appearance 
being still believed as having been given or put foith by prakrti 
though as a corrigible manifestation. Thus the conception of 
the illusory as at once real and unreal (sadasat)* applies both 
to transcendental illusion (aviveka) and to objective illusion. 
Non-causal manifestation then may be not only public and private 
but also illusory in this sense. 
138. The inconstancy of the mutual relation of the gunas 
in the external object may thus be explained as constituting no 
bar to the conception of the object being nothing but affective 
experience. There is no dualism of experience (bhoga) and the 
experienced (bhogya). and even experience as knowledge ( οὗ 
the object as public) is affective bhoga. The apparent 
dualism of bhoga and bhogya is really the dualism 
between the body (bhogayatana) and the object (bhoga or 
bhogya) which has emerged out of the same objective reality 
(prakrti). Experience appears to be of the embodied self and 
the body is constituted by the manifest tattvas each of which 
is the causal manifestation of prakrti—i.e., of the gunas, 
the reals that are non-causally manifested as the three modes of ex- 
perience or bhoga. The causal and non-causal manifestations 
bifurcate at buddhi: buddhi is aware of itself as having 
emanated both as being and function, linga and bhava from 
prakrti and as at once becoming the lower tattvas or orga- 
aSS.V. 36.

=== PAGE 229 ===
PRAKRTI 205 
nising the gross experiencing body on the one hand and construct- 
ing or projecting the world on the other. The same tattvas 
that make my body make also other bodies, the difference bet- 
ween the bodies being not in material but in the distinctive modes 
of aviveka with which the many selves are beginninglessly in- 
vested. Thus what appears as ‘private’ characters of the external 
object correspond to the distinctive modes of aviveka consti- 
tuting the bodies. 
139. The manifest object then, whether phenomenal or nou- 
menai, is but the gunas, the reals that are causally and non- 
causally manifested into the experiencing body and experience (or 
the experienced). The gunas become the body and appear as 
experience. It is from the side of experience or the modes of 
bhoga that the gunas are understood in the first instance ; 
and it is as bhoga of itself leads to reflection, that the body. 
with the tattvas as matter and avivcka as form, is gradually 
traced back to the gunas. Hence the gunas are defined as 
what are manifest as the bhogas, as the potentialities of the 
three modes of feeling, as the feelab/les that may not be actually 
felt. As further they are known in reflection to be constituents 
of the tattvas which make up thc body undistinguished from 
the self that appears to feel, they may be regarded as the poten- 
tialities of the three feelings as well. Thus the gunas are at 
once-the potentialities of feelings and felt contents. being absolute 
in this sense. The external world alsc is both experience and the 
experienced , feeling and the felt, but the dualism does not appear 
here at all. The prakrti-vikrtis, where the dualism of the 
feeling and the felt appears in the form of causal self-distinction . 
are absolute in another sense. In prakrti, the dualism is un- 
manifest but has to be still inferred as subsisting between the poten- 
tial being of the gunas and the actual though unconscious 
aviveka which constitutes their function of sadrSsa- 
parindma which may be called their self-feeling, both the 
being and the function being absolute as self-felt and self-feeling 
respectively. The vikaras alone are not absolute in any sense: 
the senses only feel and the bhiitas are only felt. 
140. That guna or the absolute of feeling and felt-content 
is object itself that is utterly distinct from the self requires to be 
explained. Pain, which is bhoga par excellence, appears to be 
the only entity that is immediately intelligible as utterly distinct

=== PAGE 230 ===
206 STUDIES IN SANKHYA PHILOSOPHY 
from the self. The realistic view of the object as what can exist 
unknown or unrelated to the self would be unintelligible unless 
knowledge itself testified to the necessary existence of the object 
as unknown. The idealist’s case is that reflectively the object is 
only known to be now unknown in some particular way (e.g. 
perception ), being still known to be known in some other way: 
the object as utterly unknown is ἃ self-contradictory notion. 
There is no perception and therefore no memory of δὴ object 
existing unknown. We may indeed be aware in knowing an object 
that it was unknown but this is not to remember its past unknown- 
ness and hence we cannot expect cr conceive that il may 
exist unknown, for we expect or conceive on the basis of me- 
mory. We can conceive a content to continue out of conscious- 
ness only if our present consciousness necessarily refers to such 
continuation. This can be said only about the consciousness of 
pain, for to be reflectively aware of pain is to wish to be free 
from it: the necessary wish is the necessary idea of the pain being 
foreign to and therefore ceasing to consciousness. ‘There is the 
consciousness of the pain as given and, therefore, the idea of its 
ceasing to consciousness is not the idea of its ceasing to be real. 
It is then only here that we have the idea of a content of cons- 
ciousness possibly existing out of consciousness. The exemplar 
of objective reality then is pain, and, as will be shown, the other 
bhogas are intelligible only in reference to pain. Hence objec- 
tive reality is essentially feeling or felt content. Object as known 
is but such felt content to detached reflection. The gunas as 
affective absolutes constitute the object.

=== PAGE 231 ===
CHAPTER X 
RELATION OF THE GUNAS 
141. The three gunas are the absclutes of the three modes 
of feeling—sukha, duhkha and moha. Pleasure and pain 
are known as the two primary modes or tones of feeling, but 
what is moha? For one thing, it is a conscious feeling. feel- 
ing of not being able to feel, feeling of affective insensibility and 
not insensibility itself. It is the feeling of absence of affective 
frecdom,, pleasure and pain being feelings of restful freedom and 
restless freeing activity. It is a feeling of indolence, stupidity or 
fascination. Moha is thus intelligible as a primary mode of feel- 
ing co-ordinate with pleasure and pain, the three being understood 
in terms of freedom. The immediate manifestation of the 
gunas in buddhi in its reference to the external object is feel- 
ing or bhoga. Of the modes of dDhoga, pleasure even in the 
grosscst form is as pleasure a conscious detachment or freedom 
from the object. implying a beginning of reflection. Pain implies 
the active wish to be free from pain which is , however, unfulfilled 
so long as it is pain. The feeling of pain is thus a freeing acti- 
vity , ideal or actual willing. Moha is the feeling not only of 
the want of freedom (which pain also is) but also of not actively 
wishing or willing freedom. It is still a positive feeling, feeling 
of indolence in mind and body, feeling of being stupefied before 
the object or being fascinated by the object. The three feelings 
are all positive, different from one another but necessarily op- 
posed, being capable of being combined into a unitary feeling. 
142. The feeling of freedom is described as the feeling of 
lightness in the body or mind, lightness of mind being felt in 
the spiritual qualities of sincerity, mildness, truthfulness , purity, 
kindness, intelligence, forgiveness etc. So the restless and dis- 
tracting activity of the mind in prin is reflected in the qualities of 
antipathy , hatred, anxiety, deceptiveness οἷο... and the feeling of 
moha in the qualities of indolence, ignorance, pride, fear, lack 
of faith etc. Necessarily the feelings are described in objective 
metaphors; and in Samkhya at least the gunas are under- 
stood primarily in terms of the feelings and secondarily as quali- 
ties of the object. Sukha, duhkha and moha are primarily

=== PAGE 232 ===
208 STUDIES IN SANKHYA PHILOSOPHY 
the felt mental qualities of lightness (freedom. laghutva), 
restlessness (calatva) and heaviness (gurutva), and their 
analogues in the object are expression (prakasa), action 
(kriya) and standing being or persistence (sthiti). The 
necessity and sufficiency of the triple characterisation of the object 
are justified by the introspective testimony about the necessity and 
sufficiency of the elementary feelings. 
143. Yoga philosophy starts with the triple characterisation 
of the object ἃ and then apparently, as the mind is also object, 
reads it into the triplicity of feelings or into the triplicity of mental 
functions—knowing , willing and feeling (prakhya-pravrtti- 
Sthiti),.” relying more on imagination than on introspection . 
PrakiSa as a quality of the object is its manifestness , definite- 
ness or expression which is known-ness as an objective character . 
Knowability as a character of the object 15 its aesthetic character 
of expression or expressiveness. Beauty is the perfect form of 
presented intelligibility , the unobscured sclf-revelation of the object 
which may be called its freedom, corresponding to the feeling of 
freedom which is pleasure. Thus is prak$a_ connected with 
knowing (prakhya) and with pleasure: kriya or activity in 
the object may be easily connected with willing (pravrtti or 
self-assertion of buddhi) and with the restless character of the 
feeling of pain; and sthiti or persistence of the object is the 
obvious and aesthetic correlate of the feeling of moha. Whether 
Sthiti as a character of buddhi should be taken as a feeling 
is not so obvious; and some take it to mean unconscious mental 
persistence as sammskara. But as prakhyd and pravrtti 
are understood as conscious mental functions, conscious mental 
persistence appears here to be primarily meant by sthiti: and 
this can be nothing but feeling which in contrast with knowing 
and willing is consciously being unfree or undetached from the 
object . 
144. That the elementary feelings are three will be taken by 
Samkhya as evident to introspection, and the triplicity of the 
conscious buddhi as also of the object that is its content would 
be derived from this introspective testimony. The three feelings 
constitute the immanent nature of the three gunas, which is 
°YB.IT.18. 
DYB.I.2.

=== PAGE 233 ===
RELATION OF THE GUNAS 209 
characterised by the terms laghu (light, free or pliant), cala 
(restless or changing) and guru (heavy or stiff). Their transi- 
tive functional aspects are prakaSsa (manifestation of itself or 
of others), upastambha (acting on or compelling others ) and 
varana (obscuring of prakasa,—more generally, niyama 
or retarding or arresting of both prakaga and kriya). The 
substantial being of the elementary feelings is the gunas. Ex- 
istent object is a complex of the gunas, their unity being con- 
ceived after the manner in which the feelings are introspectively 
found to be combined. 
145. The object is the felt content. What is known or willed 
is still a felt content. The object even to the jivanmukta is 
feelable content which he does not feel and is aware of in a 
disinterested way, such awareness being not bhoga but a seeing 
(saksaitkara) of the felt or the feeling. The known aspect 
of the object is its expression which, to the ordinary knower, is 
the embodiment of aesthetic feeling which in the context of other 
feelings which pervert and obscure the expression; and it is pre- 
sumably to the pure knower (jivanmukta) the perfect em- 
bodiment. The willed aspect of the object is its going to be felt 
or going to be the expression of its felt non-being and its initial 
blind felt-ness or given-ness. The object is felt in three grades— 
detachedly felt as expressing itself, half-detachedly felt as going 
to be, and undetachedly felt as existent or persistent. The second 
grade of felt-ness is the most obvious form of objectivity , in re- 
ference to which the other two grades are appreciated. Without 
reference to it, expression would be regarded as only imagintd 
and persistence would not be manifest to consciousness at all. 
Expression is regarded as known objective fact only so far as it is 
felt to be the continuous fulfilment of going to be; and one is 
conscious of the object as persisting only as it is felt to be pre- 
vented from being another. Pleasure appears objective to the self 
im so far as it is felt as relief from pain or different from pain 
co-existent with it; and moha appears to consciousness when 
one feels unable to wish or will away pain. We are reflectively 
aware of pain along with pleasure and moha and of the object 
in change as having its past integrated in its expression and as 
persisting in and through the change. 
146. Pain, as pointed out, is what is immediately manifest 
as the not-self or object. An object is known as object only as

=== PAGE 234 ===
210 STUDIES IN SANKHYA PHILOSOPHY 
we are conscious of it as what may exist out of consciousness ; 
and such consciousness is primarily of pain. We are aware of an 
object as such so far as it is painful and we know it as fact so far 
as it is at the same time pleasurable or expressive and blindly 
given or helplessly accepted in moha. Thus the experienced 
object is of pleasure, pain and moha, all compact, and it is in 
reference to the experienced object that the tattvas or noume- 
nal objects are known. Object, whether phenomenal or nou- 
menal , is manifest as pain (hostile to the self), and so far as it is 
manifest as pleasure or moha, it is manifest as with the heart of 
pain. The necessity of the co-existence of the three gunas is 
derivable from the very conception of the manifest object. 
147. How are the gunas related to one another in the mani- 
fest object? They are related as the elementary feelings are 
found related in a complex feeling. Four kinds of relation are 
mentioned in 5. Kiarika 12, which are differently interpreted 
by the commentators. Abhibhava means the arresting of mani- 
festation, and janana appears to mean the excitation of mani- 
festation. Each guna may arrest the manifestation of the others 
and each may also excite the manifestation of the others. A §- 
raya probably means being the object of another’s function : 
each guna may function towards the others as object. Mi- 
thuna means being present along with and subordinate to ano- 
ther: each guna may be manifest as subordinate to another . 
Apparently one guna only can be dominant in an object. the 
others—one or the other or both— being recessive, either unmani- 
fest or manifest. In the former case, the dominant may rouse 
an unmanifest guna into manifestation, and in the latter 
case, the dominant may have the others either as the object 
of its function or as adjectival to its substantive being. 
For example, in buddhi, sattva prevents rajas and 
tamas from being manifest (abhibhava); it may reveal 
(prakisga) rajas and tamas as_ object or content 
(agraya); it may lead to willing (ahamkara) and conse- 
quent feeling (tanmatra)—i.e., excite the manifestation of 
rajas and tamas (janana); and it may be adjectival 
(mithuna) to rajas (to indriya as_ proceeding from 
sattvika-ahamkadra) and to tamas (tanmatra as 
pure avisgesa pleasure). There may be consciously unmixed 
joy ; One may aesthetically delight in the contemplation of pain or

=== PAGE 235 ===
RELATION OF THE GUNAS 211 
moha; pleasure may lead to pain or moha; pain may have a 
pleasurable aspect or there may be pleasure in being ‘ fascinated ’. 
148. Yoga-bhasya II, 18 refers to the relation of the 
gunas: ete gun&ah parasparoparakta-pravi- 
bhagah parinaminah samyoga-vibhaga-dhar- 
manah itaretaropasrayena uparjita-mirtayah 
parasparangangitve api asambhinnaSaktipravi- 
bhagah. Each guna as substantive or dominant with the 
others reflected in it tends to change; each may be associated 
with or dissociated from the others and as associated , becomes a 
manifest object; and each, while organically connected with the 
others, retains its distinction. The last part ‘paras- 
parangangitve api’ definitely means something like organic 
unity .

=== PAGE 236 ===

=== PAGE 237 ===
STUDIES IN YOGA PHILOSOPHY

=== PAGE 238 ===

=== PAGE 239 ===
ANALYSIS 
CH. I. SANKHYA AND YOGA. (Sec. 1-15) 
(The place of Buddhi, Ahamwkara and Asamit4) 
(1-5) The nature of will and its place in spiritual life accord- 
ing to Samkhya and to Yoga. The relation of will to aham- 
kara and to buddhi. The concept of asmita analysed. 
The nature of nivrtti and pravrtti to Samkhya and 
to Yoga. The status of viveka and its relation to asam- 
prajfliata. (6-7) The practice of yoga and its relation to 
moksga according to Samkhya and to Yoga. Two kinds of 
yoga, samprajfiata and asamprajfhata, the former 
terminating in pure knowledge and the latter in the super-conscious 
free being of the spirit. Yoga as free willing for free being. 
(8) The nature of nirodha to Samkhya and to Yoga. (9-11) 
The concept of IS vara-pranidhana. The status of IS vara 
as atattva. The concepts of illusion and causality in the two 
systems. (12-15) Two aspects of bhoga: appropriation and 
objectification. Appropriation as a kind of conation to Yoga 
and as a kind of feeling to Samkhya. Appropriation as pri- 
mary and explicit to Yoga. the reverse being the view of Sam- 
khya. Bhoga as a function of buddhi- endowed self is real 
to Yoga and unreal to Samkhya. Illusion as anyatha- 
khyati to Yoga and as sadasatkhyati to Samkhya. 
CH. II. SANKHYA AND YOGA (contd. Sec. 16-31) 
(Causality, Becoming and Timc) 
(16) Bhoga as the final cause of the causal becoming of 
prakrti. To Samkhya the causal process is terminated by 
reflection and to Yoga by free negative willing. 
(17-19) The nature of ‘becoming’ as the unity of succession 
and persistence. The difference between SAmkhya and Yoga 
on the nature of causal becoming. (20-21) The nature and func- 
tion of ‘nimitta’ in Yoga. The concept of prati- 
bandha. (22-24) The concept of ‘time’ in Samkhya and 
Yoga. Time and akasa. Time to Samkhya is prakrti 
in its eternal function of manifestation. Two aspects of time—

=== PAGE 240 ===
216 STUDIES IN YOGA PHILOSOPHY 
ksana and kram a—distinguished by Yoga: their ontical 
status analysed. (25-28) Three modes of real immanent change— 
viz., of dharma, laksana and avastha recognised in the 
Yoga school. These not accepted as real in Samkhya. Im- 
plications of this difference between Satnkhya and Yoga 
brought out. (29-30) The Samkhya theory about the relation 
between one mode of a tattva and another mode conditioned 
by it. (31) The nature of real time to Samkhya and Yoga. 
CH. Il. SANKHYA AND YOGA (contd. Sec. 32-48) 
(The Empirical world : its status and constitution ) 
(32-37) The metaphysical status of the body and the external 
world according to Yoga. Samkhya and Vedanta—fact. 
non-causal appearance and Illusion. ( 38) The tattvas accord- 
ing to SAwhkhya and to Yoga. Different views on aham- 
kira. (39-44) Bhita and its atomic nature according to 
Yoga. The Simkhya view on the point imagined. (45-47) 
Yoga atomism vs. Vaisesika atomism. (48) Bhiksu’s 
ascription of Yoga atomism to Sawhkhya gratuitous. 
CH. IV. BUDDHI-VRTTI (Sec. 49-65) 
(Nidra and Smrti) 
(49) Willing as becoming is to Yoga a prospective func- 
tion, while to Simkhya it is a retrospective one. (50) Two- 
fold parinama—sadrsa and visadrsa—explained. (51) 
Difference between SAmkhya and Yoga on the conception of 
self-identity or vyaktata and sadréa-parinama. (52-53) 
The Samkhya concept of aviveka compared to the Yoga 
concept of avidya. (54) Two kinds of dharma-parinama 
—a-paridrsta and paridrsta—mentioned in Yoga- 
Bhasya. 
(55-56) The Samkhya conception of vrtti versus the 
Yoga conception analysed. (57) The five vrttis in the 
Yoga-sitras as five types of presentation. (58-60) The 
nature of smrti as a vrtti analysed. Two kinds of smrti 
distinguished by Vyasa: Vacaspati and Bhiksu differ 
in their analysis of these two kinds. (61-63) Vrtti analysed in

=== PAGE 241 ===
ANALYSIS 217 
reference to samadhi. (64-65) The nature of nidra as 
vrtti analysed in detail. 
CH. V. BUDDHI-VRTTI (contd. Sec. 66-82) 
(Vikalpa, Viparyaya and Pramdana) 
(66-68) The concept of vikalpa as a vrtti analysed. 
Vikalpa versus viparyaya. (69) The status of vikalpa 
in Vedanta. (70) Vikalpa and savikalpa-samadhi. 
Function of vikalpa in savitarka and savicara- 
samadhi. (71) Vikalpa as aharya cognition in Vai- 
$esika. (72) Thenature oferrorto Yoga andto Vaisesika, 
to Samkhya and to Vedanta. (74) Analysis of empirical error 
according to Yoga and to Vedanta. (75-76) The concept and 
types of kleSa analysed. (77) Analysis of avidya. (78) 
Analysis of asmita. (79) Analysis of riga, dvesa and 
abhinivesa. (80) Avidya and pramana. (81-82) Types 
of pramadna analysed. 
CH, VI. THE FIVE LEVELS OF BUDDHI (Sec. 83-98 ) 
(83) Analysis of certitude as the function of buddhi in 
reference to the self. (84) The five levels of buddhi: ksipta, 
muidha and viksipta characterised by implicit asmita, 
ekagra by explicit asmita and niruddha by lapse of 
asmita. (85) Prakhyia. pravrtti and sthiti variously 
operative in the different levels. (86) Self-identity inferred in 
buddhi, introspected in vrtti and inexplicit in the other 
tattvas. (87-88) The second level, viksipta analysed. (89) 
The first and third levels analysed. (90) Progressive increase of 
freedom of knowing or ‘knowing-duraticn’ in the different levels. 
(91) The mind in the first three levels working within spiritual 
error. (92-95) Analytic elaboration of the first three levels. 
(96-98) The concept of viksepa and its implications. 
CH. ὙΠ. THE NATURE OF YOGA (sec. 99-112) 
(99) The nature of yoga as spiritual activity which is acti- 
vity for achieving absolute freedom. (100-101) Spiritual activity 
is free activity for nivrtti or arrest of the will to bhoga. 
(102) This free realising of freedom conceived as a knowing pro- 
cess in SAm-khya and in Vedanta, as a feeling process in the

=== PAGE 242 ===
218 STUDIES IN YOGA PHILOSOPHY 
Bhakti systems and as a willing process in Yoga and Kant. 
(103) Yoga is not necessarily the type of spiritual activity in 
systems other than the Yoga. (104-106) The apparently mysti- 
cal concept of spiritual activity reduced to an intelligible practical 
psychology in Yoga Philosophy. (107) The religion of yoga 
is not a mere system of psychical gymnastics. Is there any place 
for the consciousness of the sacred in this religion? (108) The 
procedure for attaining super-religious freedom is cither religious 
(i.e.. through grace) or super-religious (1.e.. through one’s 
might). (109) Yoga is willing of miracle or magic. (110-112) 
Skepticism about yoga and bibhtiti considered. 
CH. VIII. THE KINDS OF YOGA (Sec. 113-131 ) 
(113) Two grades of Yoga. samprajfata and asam- 
prajfidta, and the different sub-grades enumerated. (114) The 
concept of 4bhoga in connection with the samprajflita. 
The concept of vitarka. (115) The concept of vicadra. 
(116) Transition from savicira to sinanda-samadhi. 
Vacaspati versus Bhiksu on ‘Ananda’ in this context. 
(117-118) Triple aspect of the content in the four stages of the 
samprajfiata clarified . (119-121) The conceptions of videha. 
prakrti-laya and vivekin clarified. They represent res- 
pectively the affective . conative and cognitive types of spirituality . 
(122) Bhoja on asmita-samadhi. (123-124) The varie- 
ties of vitarka and vicira-samiaidadhi explained. (125- 
126) The object of vicaira-samadhi. (127-128) The con- 
cept of samapatti analysed. (129-130) The nature of the 
prajfd or spiritual wisdom that results from this samadhi. 
(131) Transition to thee asamprajfiiita stage. 
CH. IX. THE PROCEDURE OF YOGA (Sec. 132-146) 
(132) Yoga as absolute will is ‘beyond good and evil’ and 
in that sense is super-religious; yet it is to be distinguished from 
Nietzsche’s concept of absolute will. (133) The steps to sama- 
dhi two-fold—preparatory and constitutive. They are again 
either consecutive or alternative. (134) The concepts of abhyisa 
and vairagya analysed. Different aspects of prayatna 
conditioning yoga. (135) The different stages of discipline for 
the uttamadhikdrin analysed. Auxiliary practices to 
couriteract vikgepa. (136) The discipline for the madhya ma-

=== PAGE 243 ===
ANALYSIS 219 
dhikarin analysed. The eight-fold discipline prescribed for the 
common aspirant. (137-144) The nature of the eight angas of 
yoga analysed. (145-146) The siddhis and the attitude of 
the yogin to them explained. 
CH. X. THE NOTION OF ISVARA (Sec. 147-159) 
(147) The dual meaning of Fsvara-pranidhana in 
Yoga-sttras. (148) Bhiksu’s interpretation of Sam- 
khya atheism. The place of meditation on God in the Yoga 
system. (149-151) The precise nature of the proof of God in 
Vyasa’s commentary brought out. (152-153) The relation 
between faith and God elaborated. (154-155) The eternal free- 
dom of God and his buddhi. (156-158) God. grace and 
bhakti. (159) No reference in the Yoga-suttras to God’s 
creative powers.

=== PAGE 244 ===

=== PAGE 245 ===
CHAPTER I 
SANKHYA AND YOGA 
1. The essential difference between SAmkhya and Yoga 
appears to lie in their conception of the will and of its place in 
spiritual life. To Siamkhya, willing is the function of 
ahamkadra and not of buddhi, being the activity of the 
finite agent to maintain its finiteness. The principle of self- 
maintaining finiteness or exclusiveness (not individuality which be- 
longs to the self) is ahamkaira, while buddhi is infinite 
‘mahat or vibhu) both in its existence and in its content. 
Willing indeed proceeds from self-conscious certitude which is the 
function of buddhi, certitude in the form ‘this is what I am going 
to be’ or as it might be put—‘l (the infinite) am this prospective 
(finite) me’—which is just the certitude of asmita, though 
willing is not asmita. To Yoga, however, willing is as- 
mita: it not only proceeds from self-consciousness, but is self- 
conscious subjectivity, being never the mere object of asmita- 
consciousness. The willing or active me is a _ continuation 
of the 7 that knows it: to be conscious of willing is to be 
conscious , explicitly of 7 willing . conscious not merely of me but 
of I becoming me. Since asmita is not dropped when willing 
emerges as a finite mental object, ahamkara is called in Yoga 
asmita and is as a function taken to belong to buddhi and 
not to a separate tattva, as it is taken in Sitnkhya. 
2. Asmitaé in both Yoga and Samkhya is understood 
as a function of buddhi. Willing is not taken as a function of 
buddhi in Samkhya where, therefore, asmita is a judg- 
ment (adhyavasadya) or certitude (nigScaya) of the form 
‘I am me’ prior to willing, whence willimg is supposed to spring. 
Asmita in this form means indeed the consciousness of I 
willing , but willing is here distinguished as object (me) from the 
consciousness and the I is not so distinguished , so that the I-form 
is taken as only supervening on willing and not as intrinsic to it. 
Asmita again is to both Yoga and Samkhya not only of 
the form ‘I am me’ but also of the form ‘I am I’. This would be 
in Samkhya pure judgment unlike judgment in the other form 
which has reference to or has the shadow of willing. In Yoga,

=== PAGE 246 ===
222 STUDIES IN YOGA PHILOSOPHY 
not only the lower asmita but also the higher is taken as will- 
ing, knowing being never divorced from willing, though willing 
as in asamprajfiata-yoga runs beyond knowing. Wvill- | 
ing to both Yoga and Samkhya is mental activity proceed- 
ing from knowledge. Mental activity has two directions positive 
and negative, called pravrtti and nivrtti. To Yoga both 
these forms are willing, while to Siinkhya the negative one 
is not willing but only reflection, a knowing process implying 
abstention from willing. In Samkhya again, pravrtti, which 
is to it the only willing. is essentially the finitising of the mind : 
it implies the lapse of the infinity or impersonal knowing certi- 
tude of buddhi and is as such the function of a lower tattva 
viz., ahamkira. In Yoga, the finitising pravrtti retains 
the infinity or freedom of buddhi; and there may even be a 
pravrtti that is not finitising such as is said to be exerted by 
the yogin at a certain stage. Nivrtti too is willing. willing 
explicitly to cancel finitising pravrtti. willing in reflective know- 
ledge where the knowledge is an aspect of the willing and is to be 
ultimately superseded by it. Both pravrtti and nivrtti 
emerge in knowledge, but while positive willing never outruns 
knowledge (as it is taken in Samkhya to do necessarily). 
negative willing outruns knowledge in the last resort in 
asamprajnata. 
3. Buddhi to both Samkhya and Yoga is the mind 
with the manifest form of 7 am or asmita. Judgment or 
certitude that is said to be its distinctive function is or involves 
the consciousness of I am. What is called ahamkiara in Sam- 
khya has to it the form of me and not of / and is taken as 
having evolved from asmita in the form ‘I am the prospective 
me’ which is a function of buddhi. In Yoga, ahamkadra 
is the same as this asmita. Willing to SAamkhya is the 
function of ἃ ἢ ἃ τὸ Κατ having simply the form of me and not 
of I, while to Yoga it is a function always involving the I-form, 
even in the stage where it has the me-form and may not have 
the me-form at all. All willing then including what 5 ἃ 1ἢ- 
khya would call willing is to Yoga a function of buddhi, 
the ahamkara of Samkhya being to it the lower asmita. 
Willing in fact is to it the essential function of buddhi which 
is implied in the certitude (with the I-form) that is admitted 
by both as its distinctive function and which may even supersede

=== PAGE 247 ===
SANKHYA AND YOGA 223 
the certitude. The perfect mode of this certitude is taken by 
both to be viveka—the knowledge of buddhi as _ distinct 
from the pure self, of the 7 that is the known content of con- 
sciousness as distinct from the content-less consciousness which 
is the pure self. To Yoga but not to Samkhya even 
viveka involves willing, the knowledge of the distinction of 
buddhi as viveka from the self being an incipient willing 
to detach the self from viveka_ itself—what is actualised in 
asamprajniata where even self-consciousness or the know- 
ledge of 1 as content is said to lapse. Thus willing which al- 
ways starts in certitude and can supeisede it is understood in 
Yoga as a function of buddhi that is even more essential 
than certitude. 
4. The Samkhya term ‘ahamkara’ occurs nowhere in 
the Yoga-siitras. It occurs in Yoga-bhasya 1.45. The 
term ‘asmita’ occurs in many sttras and is apparently 
used in different senses, which are not, however. altogether un- 
connected and means everywhere a function of buddhi. What 
is meant by Δ ἃ ἢ Κατα is referred to in Yoga-bhasya on 
11.19, where asmita-miatra is taken as included in the 
six avViS¢sas which are distinguished from buddhi as linga- 
mitra. Not that it is, therefore. regarded as not belonging to 
buddhi: ‘linga-matra’ in the stitra is the essential 
being of buddhi as distinct from its function as an antah- 
karana, the being of one stage of its function being taken to 
be asmita-matra as an aviSesa. Asmit4d- function 
in this stage is still a buddhi-function, the substantive 
being of which is the sixth avisesa which just corresponds 
to the ahamkiara of Samkhya. In Yoga-bhiasya 
I. 45. where the word “Δ ἢ ἃ πὶ Κατ δ᾽ occurs. it is said—‘asya 
(ahamkadrasya) api linga-miatram siksmovi- 
sayah. It need not mean that ahamkara is separate as a 
tattva from buddhi. Buddhi as linga-mitra is 
subtler than buddhi as antahkarana of which asmita- 
matra or ahamkara is a mode. Every effect is not a new 
tattva. The immanent parinamas of a tattva are 
sthiila relatively to the tattva and may admit of degrees of 
subtleness among themselves. 
5. Thus willing which in Samkhya is the self-manifesta - 
tion of the being of ahamkdara as potential in buddhi is

=== PAGE 248 ===
224 STUDIES IN YOGA PHILOSOPHY 
taken by Yoga to be the function of buddhi that is constitu- 
tive of the being of ahamkadra. Yukti-dipika (p. 32), 
an old commentary on Samkhya-karika, credits one Ρ ἃ ἴδ ἢ - 
jali with the view that ahamkadra is but the asmita- 
function of buddhi. This may be the view of the author 
of Yoga-sitras, the apparent discrepancy as suggested by the 
inclusion of asmita&-matra or ahamkdra within avi- 
§esa being explained if the view is taken to imply that while 
the being of ahamkiara (as avisesa) evolves out of the 
being of buddhi as linga-miatra). the function of aham- 
kara is but the asmita-function of buddhi. To 
Samkhya, ahamkara both as being and function is a 
tattva separate from buddhi. 
6. Willing then to Yoga is a function of buddhi and is 
in fact its essential function. It has the two directions—the posi- 
tive and the negative, the former being towards bhoga and 
the latter towards mukti. Both would be forms of asmita 
of which the former with the downward trend would correspond 
to the ahamkara of Samkhya. The higher asmita with 
its upward trend is spiritual willing which culminates in the mode of 
samadhi called asmitanugata which involves viveka 
and leads to a further form of negative willing called asam- 
prajiiaita where viveka itself is dropped and _ dissolved. 
Spiritual willing or nivrtti is willing to abstain from egoistic 
willing , willing implicitly or explicity to secure the freely quiescent 
being of buddhi called samadhi. This being or standing is 
itself an activity, a grade of spiritual willing consisting in the 
self-reproduction without change of buddhi or a buddhi- 
vrtti in its changeless active flow (praSsanta-vahita). 
Negative willing includes both the activity for samadhi and the 
samadhi itself, the latter being not mercly the result of the 
former but its continuation in a higher potency. To Samkhya. 
nivrtti-activity is reflection, a cognitive and not a conative 
process. The quiescent being of buddhi called samadhi is 
its passive state and not an activity and is only the result or spon- 
taneous (unwilled) concentration of reflection. No specific 
activity of reflection to secure this concentration is prescribed in 
Samkhya. To it there is properly no spiritual willing, all 
willing being the function of ahamkdra or the finitised mind, 
though it need not be explicity to maintain its finitude .

=== PAGE 249 ===
SANKHYA AND YOGA 225 
7. To Yoga, the explicit activity to secure samadhi or 
the practice of yoga is spiritual willing and is an absolutely 
necessary stage in the discipline or sadhana for absolute free 
dom. To it as to other systems , freedom is reached through the cor- 
rection of avidya4 or spiritual illusion. To Samkhya, such 
illusion is finally corrected or eliminated through knowledge while 
to Yoga, the final elimination is possible only through the prac- 
tice of yoga, a form of willing that is conditioned by know- 
ledge. Yoga to actualise knowledge that is already reached is 
the immediate antecedent of the attainment of freedom and is un- 
conditionally prescribed for all, even if yoga be only an alter- 
native way to reach knowledge. Yoga to actualise knowledge 
that is already reached—jfiina-janya-yoga as Vijfiana- 
bhiksgsu calls it—is the specific subject-matter of Yoga _philo- 
sophy. Two broad forms of it are mentioned—samprajflata 
and asamprajfiiata—of which the former terminates in know- 
ledge again, the ultimate form of which is viveka, and the latter 
that is started by viveka is consummated not in any further 
knowledge but in a super-conscious free being of the spirit. 
The latter apparently is the pure or essential form of all yoga, 
yoga being generally spiritual willing for the free being or active 
quiescence of the spirit, of which quiescent knowledge is only a 
contingent aspect. 
8. Yoga as discussed in Yoga philosophy is a form of 
jiana-janya willing which means free willing, willing that not 
only springs from knowledge but continues and actualises it. 
Spiritual willing is free willing in this sense and yoga would 
be this free willing explicitly to secure free being of the spirit. 
Willing in Yoga philosophy is essentially free activity for free 
being , the activity called ‘yoga’ being only the explicit form of 
it which again in its absolute purity is asamprajfiata- 
yoga. As already stated, ‘yoga’ means both the activity to- 
wards samadhi and samadhi itself which is also an acti- 
νιν, the activity of changeless self-reproduction. The activity 
implicitly or explicitly towards samadhi may be called free 
willing and samadhi itself is free being. Yoga being thus 
free willing explicitly for free being is the conscious activity of 
the mind to arrest its helpless change or differentiation into states 
or vrttis. In samprajfidta-yoga the mind stands in a 
vrtti and resists its change into other states, while in asam- 
15

=== PAGE 250 ===
226 STUDIES IN YOGA PHILOSOPHY 
prajfiata it is taken to withdraw itself from all vrttis. The 
will to prevent the emergence of vrtti is called ‘nirodha’ 
which is understood as the heart of yoga. free willing being in 
essence the activity of nirodha. The result of the willing 
which means its continuation as free being is samadhi which 
is conceived to be a return of the mind to its native being. It is 
the character that buddhi has in all the levels of its being in 
some measure or other, its sarvabhauma-dharma as it 
is called in Yoga-bhagya. 
9. Samadhi is the result of nirodha or the vrtti- 
arresting will. The result is a return of the mind to its native 
being and may accordingly be taken to be as much reached of 
right by the will as coming spontaneously to fulfil it. In 
Samkhya, nirodha is no activity at all, being the same as 
samadhi which is only a passive quiescence that comes spon- 
taneously as the concentration of the cognitive activity of reflec- 
tion. In Yoga, nirodha and samadhi are both activities 
and samadhi as a free or active quiescence is not only a new 
grade of freedom but is also continuous with the freedom of the 
nirodha-will. These two aspects of samadhi are distinct 
in samprajfata: as a mode of being, it is reached of right 
by the nirodha-will, but as a mode of self-manifesting know- 
ledge (prajfidloka), it comes spontaneously as the fulfilment 
of the will. In asamprajfata, however, where there is no 
self-manifesting knowledge, the effected aspect and the sponta- 
neous aspect appear as one free being with alternative stresses. 
Hence the nirodha-will that leads to it is taken as _ itself 
coming spontaneously , as the content of a cognitive reflection other 
than, though emerging in, viveka. This cognitive reflection is 
what is meant by ISvara-pranidhana in Yoga-sitra 
1. 23. 
10. Asamprajfiata-samadhi may according to Yoga 
come with absolute spontaneity in the case of certain devatas 
but it has to be reached by us through spiritual activity. The acti- 
vity may be nirodha involving Sraddha (faith), virya 
(strength of will) etc.,* in the super-intense form or it may be a 
unique mode of reflection on God (ISvara-pranidhana). 
The conjunction ‘or’ (va) in Yoga-siitra I.23. has to be 
*'YS .1. 20-21

=== PAGE 251 ===
SANKHYA AND YOGA 227 
interpreted as meaning that the pranidhiaina is a sadhana 
alternative to nirodha-will, and is itself a surrender of willing. 
Nirodha is negative willing, willing to arrest positive willng. 
The pranidhana may be called willing but it is the willing to 
arrest negative willing and therefore all willing , to reverse in fact 
the entire attitude of willing, to secure the attitude of knowing 
though there is no knowledge beyond viveka. This will to be 
in the knowing attitude for freedom from knowledge (asam- 
prajfiata) as the end is the will to contemplate a mystery, the 
mystery of its own spontaneous emergence, of the absolute free- 
dom through which free will itself emerges, the freedom to create 
freedom , which is just the mystery of God as conceived in Yoga. 
The will to secure asamprajfata-samadhi then is at once 
the culminating phase of willing and a contemplative surrender of 
the willing attitude. It is the necessary alternation of willing and 
not-willing where the willing 1s negative, being withdrawal not 
only from vrtti of buddhi but from buddhi itself as mani- 
fest, and the not-willing or surrender of willing is positive contem- 
plation of the mystery of absolute freedom or God. 
11. I§$vara-pranidhina in Yoga-stitra 1.23 is 
surrender of the whole willing-attitude and not simply of 
ahamkara or of the fruits of willing, which pranidhana 
in Yoga-sitra II.1 (also 1.32) is taken to mean in the 
Bhasya. The latter pranidhdna is taken as a kriya- 
yoga, a mode of willing while the former is no kriya or doing 
at all and is understood as contemplation ,* as a bhakti-visgesa 
—a kind of ‘intellectual love of God’ (other than the love that 
consists in the committing of the fruits of action to God),” where 
God appears to be only a postulate of the contemplative attitude 
and not the content of knowledge reached prior to the contem- 
plation. God is regarded as a taitva admitted by Yoga over 
and above the twenty-five tattvas of Samkhya. Apparently, 
however, Yoga would not—any more than S4snkhy a—admit 
knowledge of a tattva that is not implied in viveka, know- 
ledge reached of right by the metaphysical method of distinguishing 
the object from the self. The knowledge of God is not thus 
reached: in fact, God as self-revealing is an object of faith that 
®tajjaph tadartha-bhavanam—YS.1I. 28 
Dparama-gurau arpanam-—YS.II,1

=== PAGE 252 ===
228 STUDIES IN YOGA PHILOSOPHY 
emerges only in the characteristic attitude of contemplation 
(pranidhana) which comes after viveka along with the 
will to drop viveka itself which is, in fact, the will not to know. 
Some proof of God is attempted indeed in the Bhagya, the value 
of which , however, would be shown later to depend on this con- 
templation. God. therefore, does not appear to b& a tattva 
co-ordinate with the Samkhya tattvas that are implied in 
viveka. 
12. Are the other tattvas conceived in the same way in 
Samkhya and Yoga? They are all implied in viveka, being. 
in fact ,reached in the process of reaching viveka, and the ans- 
wer to the question depends on the conception of the nature of the 
process in Samnkhya and in Yoga. The process is conceived 
by both as opposite in direction to the process towards bhoga or 
affective experience. being . in fact. the reflective retracing of the 
causal process by which such experience is rendered possible and 
which is conditioned by an illusory identification of the self and 
the object. Are illusion and causality understood in the same way 
in the two systems ? 
13. Bhoga involves the illusion of identity of the self and 
the not-self in both the systems. this illusion being the parent of 
all illusion. The identification is understood both as regarding 
the not-self—ultimately a buddhi-vrtti-—as the self and as 
viewing the self which is no content of consciousness as though it 
were an objective content, a mode of the not-self or buddhi- 
vrtti. The former is the appropriation of the object implying 
what is called sva-svami-sambandha or relation of the 
possessed and the possessor. The latter may be called objectifica- 
tion of the self in contrast with which appropriation would be the 
subjectification of the object. Appropriation is apparently to 
Yoga a function of willing and to Samkhya a function of 
feeling. Objectification is also understood differently in the two 
systems—as the affective apprehension of the self as with the form 
of the object or of buddhi-vrtti in Samkhya and the 
cognitive apprehension of the form of the self in buddhi-vrtti 
in Yoga. The reflection of the vrtti in the self is indeed 
admitted by Yoga, but it seems to be taken not as constituting 
bhoga—the jivan-mukta who is above bhoga being con- 
ceived also to have it—but as only the cognition of possible 
bhoga.

=== PAGE 253 ===
SANKHYA AND YOGA 229 
14. Of the two aspects of bhoga, appropriation is apparent- 
ly taken by Yoga as the primary and explicit aspect and objecti- 
fication as secondary and implicit, the Samkhya conception of 
bhoga_ being just the reverse. To Yoga, the illusion in 
bhoga is the conative appropriation in which empirical know- 
ledge of the object is taken to be rooted, while Samkhya takes 
the illusion to consist in the affective objectification. a feeling of 
the self as wearing the form of the buddhi-vrtti or object. 
Yoga would admit objectification as implicit in appropriation 
and understand it as the consciousness of the reflection or prati- 
bimba of the self in a vrtti, the reflection being as objective 
as the vrtti. It is from this objectified form of the self that the 
self proper is known* just as the form of the empirical object in 
vrtti is taken as the medium of knowledge of the object. The 
difference is that the object is given to the vrtti wearing its form 
while the self is not given to the corresponding vrtti. The form 
of vrtti is an anticipatory construction of buddhi in cither 
case . but while the form of the experienced object 1s as much given 
as constructed . the form of the self is only constructed and is a 
mere vikalpa, the self being no object of experience. The re- 
flection of the self in vrtti—which is the so-called objectified 
self—is not the self at all. while the reflection of the felt object in 
vrtti is not other than the object. the presentation of the object 
being the object though the object is distinct from the presentation . 
Similarly Sain khya would admit appropriation as implicit in 
objectification and take it as the felt non-distinction of the object 
from the self which, unlike the felt identity of the self with the 
object or the affective objectification , is not illusory but a factual 
predicament of the object or buddh:. 
15. Bhoga is no function of the pure self either to Yoga 
or to Samkhya; but as a function of buddhi- endowed 
self, it is real to Yoga and unreal to SAamkhya. It is 
real conative appropriation to Yoga, real perpetration of an 
illusion or contradiction, real willing of the contradiction of the 
object being the self. This willed contradiction is the real signi- 
ficance of the theory of anyatha-khyati, the theory of illu- 
sion accepted by Yoga and Nyaya. The root of conative 
a'YS . II. 20

=== PAGE 254 ===
230 STUDIES IN YOGA PHILOSOPHY 
appropriation is called in Yoga ‘avidy4’ which is defined * as the 
viewing of the not-self as the self etc., the false viewing being 
explained in the Bhasya as not the mere failure to distinguish 
the not-self from the self but a positive knowing (of their identity- 
in-difference ) other than true knowing .” which must be understood 
as an act, for there can be no differenced presentation of the not- 
self and the self as one. Illusion is a cognitive act, act of identi- 
fying what are indefinitely known as distinct and not a mere con- 
fusing or failing to distinguish ; and a vidya. the primordial illu- 
sion, is just the transcendental act of appropriation, the begin- 
ningless act of relating in sva-svami-sambandha. 
16. To Samkhya, bhoga is the feeling of the self being 
the not-self , wearing the form of the vrtti. getting objectified or 
modified into the form of the affective chject in the last resort. 
It is an affective identification of what are here also indefinitely 
known as distinct . identification of the sclf with the not-self which 
is known at the time as given to the self and as distinct from the 
self only in this sense and otherwise non-distinct in fact. The 
root of the affective illusion—as distinct from the willed contradic: 
tion in Yoga—is aviveka which. too, like avidya, is not 
merely privative. being the positive feeling (not presentation) of 
the self being impossibly affected or modified like the object. The 
object is actually non-distinct i.e., not yet distinct from the self 
while the self is felt as though it were the object (vrtti). The 
non-distinction of the object from the self is an actual objective 
situation , factual or sat though terminable. but the positively felt 
identity of the self from the object is unreal or asat. Hence illu- 
sion is taken in Samkhya as sadasat-khyati. The illu- 
sory identification of the self and the not-self then which is at the 
root of bhoga is understood differently in Yoga and in Sam- 
khya. Hence the theory of the causal process, too. which is the 
movement towards bhoga as distinct from the reffective, spiri- 
tual or free process towards muk ti is different in the two systems . 
“YS .11.5 
°vidya-viparitam jfiadnantaram

=== PAGE 255 ===
CHAPTER Il 
SANKHYA AND YOGA (Contd.) 
(Causality, Becoming and Time) 
17. Bhoga is understood in both the systems as the final 
cause of the evolutionary process of the object. the downward 
process of the causal becoming of prakrti. The process of 
dissolution (pratisaficara) is taken by neither as a causal 
process, being to Samkhya connected with the spontancous 
cognitive act of reflection and to Yoga with free negative willing . 
The causal process is taken by the former to stop of itself with 
emergence of reflection and by the latter to be arrested by free 
negative willing which is to it willing not to exercise causality , 
not willing to exercise an opposite causality. To both, the causal 
process is the function of ahamkara or the will to bhoga, 
the will to be finite and to progress in finitude. Causal becoming 
(parinama) is the process of a tattva becoming finite. 
‘becoming’ being understood as the continuing of the cause into 
the effect in a finitised form. 
18. The concept of becoming requires te be further analysed . 
Becoming is understood as a unitary process presented objectively 
to consciousness. There are systems like Nya&ya which would 
not even admit the presentation of becoming. its so-called unity 
being only the content of a wrong thinking, thinking of distinct 
contents as one. Others like the Vedantist and the Bud- 
dhist would admit it as presented though as appearance only 
and not as fact. To Samkhya and Yoga, becoming is 
presented as fact. Becoming implies both succession and per- 
sistence. both of which are presented. their unity, too. being 
admitted by all except Ny@ya as presented and not merely 
thought. To them the object that conditions experience is nothing 
but becoming. being constituted by the causal process which is 
immediately presented as a becoming. Causality is presented as 
the cause becoming the effect _ the cause as a whole at once altering 
and continuing into the effect. not merely altering in one respect 
and continuing in another. This presentation may be regarded as 
ultimately a false appearance. being false either as succession or 
as persistence. It is regarded as objectively real by Samkhya

=== PAGE 256 ===
232 STUDIES IN YOGA PHILOSOPHY 
and Yoga, but they appear to differ in their conceptions of the 
unity of succession and persistence. 
19. The difference is deducible from their conceptions of the 
will. Causation is to both willing to be finite, willing being a func- 
tion of the object, of buddhi or ahamwkara which is object 
and does not belong to the self. To Yoga, all willing including 
the will to be finite is a function of buddhi, being. in fact, the 
self-actualisation of knowledge. Causality as the will to be finite 
is the self-conscious thought (or thought with the I-form) of the 
finite (me) achieving its being: cause becomes effect as the / 
willing becomes the me. To Samkhya, willing which means 
willing to be finite is the content of knowledge and not the self- 
actualisation of knowledge into being. It is the object as me 
getting further manifest as me. and getting known as having been 
self-manifested. Causation is the self-manifestation of a  pre- 
existent objective being: being is not achieved but is known to 
have been only manifested, to have had only known-ness induced 
in it by itself. The being of the effect with its limitation is already 
in the cause in an unmanifest form i.e.. without its known-ness . 
the cause as distinct from the effect existing only as manifesting . 
expressing or unfolding the effect. The manifest-ness or known- 
ness of the effect and not its existence is constituted by this mani- 
festing function of the cause which exists as the effect itself 
getting self-manifested. Yoga does not appear to take the effect 
with its limitation as pre-existent in the cause. The effect is 
indeed the cause with a limitation but the limitation was not in 
the cause, having been turned up and not merely manifested by 
the cause. The being of the effect implies limitation and is, there- 
fore , taken to be constituted by the causality of the cause, not as 
manifested by it. The causality of the cause again does not, as 
in Samkhya, constitute the being of the cause. The cause, so 
far as it is distinct from the effect and is not itself the effect of 
another cause, is no being at all but a function. In Samkhya 
the cause has the being of the effect and its distinction from the 
effect consists in its manifesting the being. 
20. The cause to both Yoga and Samkhya manifests itself 
as the real limited being of the effect which is recognised either 
as the fulfilment or as the definition of the cause. Fulfilment and 
definition are respectively the conative and cognitive formulations 
of the identity-in-difference of cause and effect. Causation is will-

=== PAGE 257 ===
SANKHYA AND YOGA 233 
ing in both the cases and the result of willing is identical with the 
willing of it. Willing involves knowing. being to Yoga knowing 
itself as achieving its existence and to SAamkhya an existent 
content of its own knowing. The existence of knowing which is 
the result of the willing is identical with the willing in the sense of 
being its fulfilment, while the known or manifest existence of the 
willing which is the result of itself as unknown or unmanifest is 
identical with it as its definition. The identity of cause and effect 
in the case both of fulfilment and definition is not mutual but is 
only in one direction. In Yoga, the cause constitutes the effect 
which , however. as being is distinct from it. In Samkhya, the 
effect is pre-existent in the cause which , however, as being defining 
itself is distinct from the defined being of the effect. To Hegel 
apparently the identity is mutual: fulfilment is definition and 
definition is fulfilment—what would be denied by Yoga and 
Samkhya respectively. Becoming as at once fulfilment and 
definition is affective specification where the cause as the (rela- 
tively ) unspecified content is realised and explicated in the effect 
as the specified content. Cause becomes effect which is recognised 
as cause. In Yoga, cause becomes effect as the 7 becomes me; 
in SAamkhya as the me becomes a more definite me; in Hegel 
as the I becomes me and the me becomes 7. To Yoga, for the 
me to be recognised as the / is retraction of becoming, not 
becoming ; to Samkhya., the 7 as distinct from the me does not 
come in at all—there being retraction of me into me which 1s reflec- 
tion: to Hegel becoming or causation includes retraction. 
21. Becoming to both Yoga and Samkhya is the self- 
determination of the cause. The cause freely determines itself 
either in the way of self-fulfilment or in the way of self-manifes- 
tation: prakrti is svatantra. In Nyaya, the sama- 
vayi or material cause does not determine itself, being deter- 
mined by another cause. an external circumstance called nimi- 
tta, in the production of the effect. To Yoga and Samkhya 
the material cause is the only cause: the samavayi of the effect 
turns up or manifests the difference in itself called the effect. 
Samkhya admits no nimitta at all, the so-called conjunction 
of the object with the self, which is sometimes called the nimi- 
tta of becoming. being nothing other than the object. Yoga 
admits a nimitta which is, however, taken as no cause* and is 
Saprayojaka~—YS.IV.3

=== PAGE 258 ===
234 STUDIES IN YOGA PHILOSOPHY 
conceived to be what simply removes a counter-acting circumstance 
or pratibandha. The latter is not an opposed cause: it may 
be an inoperative circumstance in the presence of which the cause 
does not operate, being as it were hypnotised by the mere 
presence. When the cause becomes the effect, the effect is known 
to be nothing but the cause fulfilled or manifested. But the cause 
is sometimes found not to act and even when it acts, it takes 
time to produce the effect. The implication is that there is some 
inoperative counter-acting circumstance which prevents or delays 
causation. Its absence is a negative condition of causation and 
the positive circumstance that causes the absence is nimitta, 
the ultimate nimitta being the absolutely free will of God. 
22. The question of pratibandha or nimitta arises 
only when the cause is known prior to the effect. If, as Yoga 
takes it. willing is the self-actualisation of knowledge that is 
already there. the cause is known prior to the emergence of the 
effect. If the cause does not operate in any case, a counter-active 
has to be admitted and hence when the cause operates, the ab- 
sence of the counter-active and the nimitta causing the absence 
have to be inferred. Where however, as in Samkhya, the cause 
is known only through the effect as the prior datum, the cause is 
known as having already operated so that the admission of the 
absence of counter-active as a negative condition is superfluous. 
being like the admission of the absence of the absence of A after 
the admission of A. Hence in Samkhya the question of the 
nimitta does not rise at all and it is unnecessary to admit a 
divine will as a co-operant condition of becoming along with the 
self-determining function of prakrti. 
23. The difference between S&Amkhya and Yoga about 
the nature of causality is reflected in their views on the nature of 
time. Neither system admits time as a separate tattva: time 
is to both concrete becoming or parinama which is not con- 
ceived as an event in time. Parinama may be understood as 
the cause turning up its own limitation or as the limited effect 
having got manifested. In the former conception, the real objec- 
tive fact is the act of the cause, its act of turning up or the pro- 
duction, the succession of cause and effect being only a retros- 
pective construction as in the Bergsonian view. In the latter con- 
ception . the real fact is the antecedence of the cause to the effect . 
the prior becoming of the effect, but the causal act as the initial

=== PAGE 259 ===
SANKHYA AND YOGA 235 
moment of this becoming is but an abstraction. Hence to Yoga 
which presents the former conception. time is real as the causal 
act, the initiation or the initial moment of becoming (ksana) 
—what may be called the living present—and the so-called time- 
relation of sequence of cause and effect ts not real, for the past or 
future moment with which the real present appears to be related 
is not real at all. To the latter or SAamkhya conception of 
becoming , the effect being pre-existent in the cause is never turned 
up so that the time-relation of sequence alone—-the prior process 
of manifestation constitutive of the manifestness of the effect—-is 
real time. 
24. The views of time require further elucidation. Time is 
taken by some commentators on Samkhya-karika as 
nothing but 4kasa as bhiita viewed in reference to experienced 
motion—say , of the sun in the sky. This conception, however. 
would hardly apply to the procession of tattvas and would at 
best interpret becoming in the world of experience. Yukti- 
dipika.* the commentary on Karika already referred to, 
suggests that time may be the causal process (karana- 
parispanda) itself, the general process of becoming. This 
accords with Vijfliana-bhik»u’s commentary onSamkhya- 
stitra”’ where the 4kasa of which space and time are taken 
to be differentiations is taken not as a bhuta but as an aspect 
of prakrti itself. Time as an aspect of prakrti is nitya- 
kala or eternal time which appears to be nothing but the eternal 
becoming of prakrti. the eternal procession of the tattvas. 
This &4ka$sa is understood along with buddhi to be manifest 
within prakrti as function though not as being and may well be 
taken as the same as this buddhi. Time then to Sainkhya 
appears to be prakrti itself in its eternal function of manifes- 
tation through which the tattvas from buddhi downwards 
have their manifest character. 
25. The Samkhya view of time has to be mainly guessed 
at but the Yoga view of time is pronounced both in the Yoga- 
stitras and in the Bhasya.° The two aspects of time—ksana 
(instant) and krama (continuous sequence of instants )—are dis- 
2p.89, 11. 8-9 
aT.12.dik-kalavakasadivyah 
CYS. TT. 13-15, 52; TV. 12.32

=== PAGE 260 ===
236 STUDIES IN YOGA PHILOSOPHY 
cussed in YB. II]. 52 and IV. 32. The instant is explained in the 
first instance as infinitesimal duration, the time taken by an atom 
of infinitesimal magnitude to move out of its position or to reach 
the next position. Apparently this applies to an action in the 
empirical world only , but ksana and krama are understood in 
the metaphysical world also* and hence ksana would generally 
mean the time taken by a thing to give up its present mode or to 
take up a new mode. Ultimately it would be the changing act of 
guna which is as much substantial as the guna,” not the time 
taken by the act but the act itself as substantial . 
26. Three modes of immanent change of a tattva (as dis- 
tinct from its change into a new tattva) are mentioned in YS. 
III . 13—viz., change of dharma (character or capacity ), change 
of laksana (stage of actuality) and change of avastha 
(state). each later of which is consequent on the former. The 
laksanas are taken to be three-fold—viz., future, present . and 
past, these being understood not as temporal modes but as stages 
of actuality—what in the process of causation (willing ) respec- 
tively is to be actual, is actual and was actual, the three being 
the eternal stages of the same thing. of which the present is 
vyakta (manifest to all) and the other two siksma (manifest 
to yogin).° The instant is primarily understood in reference 
to laksana-parinama, being the passing from the future 
stage to the present stage or from this to the past stage, 
there being no passing from the past.“ The stages are not tem- 
poral but eternal, but the passing from one stage to another or 
the changing act is time which as necessarily simple or indivisible 
is called ksana or instant. An effected thing has all the three 
stages or laksana-parinamas and time as instant is also 
a parinama, the transition of a thing from one laksana to 
its ‘causal next’ (Samanantara), being parinama in the 
sense of act of change as distinct fom parinama as mode of 
being . 
27. Ksana as the causal act is the living present—emerging 
or evanescing—as distinct from the present as a laksana or 
stage of actuality. We may speak of the present stage of a thing, 
“YB .IV . 32 
PYV .Π|. 52 
°'YS .IV. 12-13 
ΔΎΒ.ΠΙ. 14

=== PAGE 261 ===
SANKHYA AND YOGA 237 
as eternally together with its past and future, but the living pre- 
sent of a thing is unique and cannot be literally spoken of as being 
together with a past or future ksana. The passing of the future 
into the present and the passing of the present into the past are not 
together in the sense the future, present and past are together. 
Yet we speak figuratively of a past or a future instant and hence 
have the apparent concept of krama or sequence of ksanas. 
This sequence is not an objective fact but is only a thinking 
(speaking) construction (vikalpa), a  thought-content cons- 
tructed ‘at the moment of the termination of a change’* i.e., re- 
trospectively . It is, in fact, a figurative representation of the order 
of the laksanas or the stages of actuality, which as an intelli- 
gible or non-temporal order is an objective fact. What then is 
ordinarily called time—viz., a duration differentiated into a succes- 
sion—is to Yoga nothing real. bing but a symbolism for the 
intelligible order within a change which is real time only as the 
durationless transition from one stage of the change to the stage 
that is causally next to it, the transition being the self-changing 
act of the thing. or its immanent causal function, the thing itself 
as ksana. 
28. Apparently time, whether as real instant or the fictitious 
order of instants, is understood by Yoga only in reference to the 
immanent change of a tattva:; the change of a tattva to 
another tattva and hencethe entire procession of the tattvas 
presenting only an intelligible order is not time at all. To Sam- 
khya this intelligible order among the tattvas is the only 
real time, the eternal function of prakrti. There is, as will 
appear presently , no real immanent change in Sainkhya. and 
the entire order alone is time. the passing from one tattva to 
the next being not a real part of it but an abstraction. Time as 
the function of prakrti is one and not many and accordingly 
it is called (ka&rana or functional) aka¢ga. The instant or. 
for the matter of that, any finite determination of time is an un- 
real abstraction. 
29. Samwrkhya would certainly admit many characters 
(dharma), stages of actuality (lak3ana) and states (avas- 
tha) of a tattva and an order among them but cannot take 
this order to be causal. In fact, dharma, laksana and 
* YS .IV. 32

=== PAGE 262 ===
238 STUDIES IN YOGA PHILOSOPHY 
avastha are to it abstractions, not changes of the tattva and 
causality is a relation to change as effect. The emergence of a 
difference in a substance by its own activity or the substance as 
with this difference is called parinama of the substance as 
without this difference emergent in it. In tattvantara- 
parindma, the effect has all the characters of the cause with 
an additional distinctive character of its own. A so-called imma- 
nent change lacks some characters of the previous change and has 
some characters that it lacks. So the latter cannot be said to be 
the effect of the former. Are both to be taken as effects of the | 
one substance? Unless the substance be admitted to exist with- 
out any accidental character, there appears to be no sense in 
speaking of it as the cause of any accidental character emerging in 
it. Immanent (causal) change then can only be admitted if the 
substance can exist without any differentiation in it, without any 
feature other than its defining features. Yoga appears to admit 
such existence of the substance—e.g., buddhi as in the 
asamprajfidta stage is admitted to be without any vrtti or 
actual state (avastha). Samkhya cannot admit an un- 
differentiated substance: a substance exists only in its modes. A 
tattva may be admitted to exist before the emergence of the 
tattva that is its effect. But a tattva cannot by itself exist 
before the emergence of any mode and cannot, therefore, be the 
cause of this mode: there can be no immanent causality te 
Samkhya. 
30. What then, according to Samkhya. is the relation be- 
tween one mode of a tattva and another mode conditioned by 
it, between two buddhi-vrttis, for example? Vijfiana- 
bhiksu’s conception of buddhi-vrttis as like flames of 
the same fire or waves of the same sea does not apparently inter- 
pret Samkhya view. A vrtti to Yoga is what buddhi 
causally contracts itself into.* In Samkhya. vrtti 1s 
buddhi as referring in its bhava-function (not causal func- 
tion) to its content’ as having the form of the content 
not as its real contraction but as an aupadhika or 
reflectional construction. The form of the content as reflected in 
buddhii is real only in the sense the image of a red object in 
®YB.IV.10 
>SS V. 106

=== PAGE 263 ===
SANKHYA AND YOGA 239 
the mirror is really presented as red, not real as a modi- 
fication of b uddhui nor unreal in the sense the reflection 
of a vrtti in the self is unreal, which again is like the image 
in the mirror in so far as it is presented but not as really in 
the mirror. The form of the object is really presented in buddhi 
as the form of the vrtti which, however, is presented as only 
unreally or magically in the self. 
31. Vrtti then to Samkhya is buddhi really in the 
form of object , which form , however , is not its causal modification , 
as it is to Yoga. (though the causality admitted by Yoga is 
that of buddhi itself and not of the object). It is, therefore. a 
non-causal but real manifestation of buddhi, belonging to its 
bhava-sarga as distinct from its linga-sarga.* The rela- 
tion of a vrtti to another conditioned by it is like the relation of 
their contents non-causal. In the sphere of non-causal manifes- 
tation of buddhi, whether in its subjective or objective aspect. 
there can only be an appearance of causation and no real causa- 
tion. The so-called immanent change of a tattva_ then 
(dharma-laksana-avastha-parinama) is to Sim- 
khya an appearance of change or causal manifestation, which is 
neither real change nor, therefore, illusory , being in fact a pheno- 
menally real manifestation of prakrti. 
33. To Saimkhya then real time is the eternal procession 
but not illusory differentiations and their succession would be, like 
the succession of their contents, not time but an appearance of 
time. To Yoga which regards the vrttis as real changes of a 
tattva through its immanent causality. their succession would 
indeed be a non-causal construction or vikalpa, but the emer- 
gence of a vrtti would be a real ksana. 
33. To Samkhya then real time is the eternal procession 
of the objective tattvas. the order of phenomena) objects as 
also of the tattva-vrttis corresponding to them being only 
apparently temporal. though not illusory. [To Yoga real time 
is the act of a tattva of causing an immanent change, the suc- 
cession of such immanent changes is only constructed time. a 
construction or vikalpa of buddhi and the order of the 
tattvas is non-temporal. 
® SK . 52

=== PAGE 264 ===
CHAPTER III 
SANKHYA AND YOGA (contd.) 
(The empirical world: its status & constitution. ) 
34. Samkhya would not apparently admit the Yoga con- 
tention of the immanent causal change of atattva. Such change, 
as for example of buddhi into the vrttis, would be to it only 
an appearance though not illusory, a non-causal or reflectional 
construction which is yet really in the tattva. A vrtti is taken 
both in Yoga and Samkhya as implying a bhava (ripa 
in Yoga) or non-causal reference of buddhi beyond itself to 
the facts of experience, though it 1s itself regarded by Yoga 
against Samkhya as causally manifested. What is the meta- 
physical status of the facts of experience according to these 
systems ? 
35. Both would deny that the empirical world is a tattva 
other than the vikara-tattvas (bhita and indriya) with 
which the evolution of the tattvas is taken to end. Yoga takes 
it, however, to be an immanent parinima of the vikadra- 
tattvas.®* This cannot be the Samkhya view, to which the 
notion of immanent change is, as pointed out. generally inad- 
missible. In the Vedantic view the empirical world is false, 
but then it is of the same status as the objective tattvas so that 
to vyavaharika knowledge it is as real as the body—subtle 
and gross—through which the self experiences the world. The 
bhogya (experienced) and th bhogayatana (experiencing 
body ) would be, as in Yoga, immanent changes of the same 
stuff . 
36. If Samkhya denies immanent change, what would be 
its view of the body and the external world? The body is un- 
doubtedly real, as real as the tattvas constituting it. The uni- 
tary form of the body is the form of the self from which its ele- 
ments are undistinguished , this non-distinction being the principle 
of beginningless aviveka. Aviveka has here, however, a 
manifest form, being manifest in buddhi as its bhava or 
its function of bhoga which is its non-causal reference to the 
ΒΥΒ.11.19.:11Π.13Ν.14. εἰς.

=== PAGE 265 ===
SANKHYA AND YOGA 241 
objects of experience or the external world. The body then is 
one through the buddhi-bhava immanent in it, i.e., through 
its response to the external world, being itself called a karya- 
§rayi-bhava. The body as one is real as bhogayatana 
or the substratum of the bho g a-function. What, however, then is 
the bhogya object which cannot be said to be such substratum ? 
37. The object of experience is not only not an immanent 
parinama of the tattvas that are manifest in the experiencing 
body : it has not even like the body the real unity of a non-causal 
function. As experienced , however, it cannot be unreal unless ex- 
perience as the function of buddhi be taken as in Vedanta 
to be unreal. To Sainkhya, cxperience or bhoga is indeed 
illusory content, but the illusory is to it not utterly unreal but real 
in one aspect while in Vedanta it is what cannot be asserted to 
be real or unreal. If the sense-experience is real, its content or 
the object of experience is real. Experiencing is real not indeed 
as a causal activity (state) of buddhi as in Yoga but as a 
non-causal subjective function of (the) buddhi (-self), of 
buddhi endowed with the form of /. The function is reference 
to the object and cannot be real without its content, the object 
being also real. The object of bhoga is felt to be given and 
this feeling does not cease even when the object is realised as 
nothing apart from the bhoga, as constituted by the illusory 
identity of the self with the not-self. It is thus unlike a manifest 
tattva which is known as other than the self 1.e.. through the 
correction of illusory identity. At the same time if is not an 
illusory appearance , because it is not, like the snake that a rope 
appears to be. known in reflection as what was not given as such 
to bhoga. To know that experience is an illusion is not to 
know that the experienced object is an illusion: even the jivan- 
mukta is supposed to perceive the empirical object as fact though 
he has no experience of it. The empirical object is manifest as 
fact though it is not a manifest tattva: as fact it is the un- 
manifest tattva—prakrti—and as manifest, it is only an 
appearance non-causally manifested—constructed and known—by 
buddhi as the content of its bhiva-sarga. It cannot be 
an immanent change in bhiita as vikdra-tattva, as it is 
taken to be in Yoga because there is no real immanent change 
and because it is not manifest like bhita etc., by the correc- 
tion of the identity of the self and the nof-self. 
16

=== PAGE 266 ===
242 STUDIES IN YOGA PHILOSOPHY 
38. Yoga admits immanent change and specifically takes 
empirical objects as the parinama of atomic bhiita (bhuta- 
siksma) which again is the parinama of the tanmatra.* 
At the same time the spatio-temporal distinctions within the em- 
pirical world are apparently taken by Yoga along with 8 ἃ 1 - 
khya as non-causal constructions of buddhi—i.e., as 
vikalpas. Vikalpa as buddhi-vrtti is as much an 
immanent change of buddh1i as the other vrttis, but the con- 
tent of vikalpa is a neon-causal construct or buddhi- 
niftmana which is no fact (vastu) though not illusory or is, in 
other words , a given appearance such as the entire empirical world is 
taken to be in Samkhya. In Yoga, while the empirical object 
is otherwise a real change of vikira-tattva, its distinguish- 
ing space-time limitations are only given appearances. The 
gunas constituting a tattva are perpetually entering into new 
combinations > and hence the multiplicity of immanent changes. 
Of these parinamas each is in essence every other ° though one 
only gets manifest at a time (emergent, present or udita), the 
others not emerging because of some counteractive circumstance— 
which the particular space-time characters of the emergent change 
are taken to be.* A particular immanent change emerges only 
with its proper time, place, shape and occasional cause. these 
being no changes themselves but only the context for a change. Its 
time Means its position in time-series or krama which is defi- 
nitely taken’ as a construction of buddhi; and presumably 
the same status would be assigned to the other circumstances— 
place, shape etc —constituting the context for a parinadma. 
39. An empirical object is then to Yoga an immanent 
change of bhita in a buddhi-constructed context. To 
Sauwkhya it appears to be wholly a buddhi-construction 
(so far as it is manifest), having place in the bhava-sarga 
as distinct from the linga-sarga of buddhi; or, more ac- 
curately , it is the content of a buddhi-bhaiva as immanent in 
the gross or bhautika body i.e., as karyaSrita-bhava, 
content that is constructed so far as it is manifest but not so far 
®YB.IV.14; TIT. 44 
bcalam ca guna-vrttam—YB. III. 13, etc. 
°sarvam sarvatmakam—YB. III. 14 
4YB.III.14 
°YB. II. 52

=== PAGE 267 ===
SANKHYA AND YOGA 243 
as it is given. It is thus a non-causal manifestation of pra- 
Krti referred to or experienced by the bodily self as constituted 
by the experiencing function but not by the matter of the body. 
The body is itself bhita though not its immanent parinadma, 
bhuita with buddhi-bhava really resident in it though not 
as a modification. Yoga appears to take the empirical object to 
be of the same status as the body experiencing it. 
40. The consideration of Yoga and Sainkhya views on 
the nature of illusion, causality, time and the empirical world 
prepares the way for an answer to the question asked before as 
to whether the objective tattvas are conceived in the same 
way in the two systems. The Saimkhya (objective) tattvas 
are referred to in the Yoga-sitras in the enumeration 
of the four guna-parvas.“ The gunas are taken to exist 
in four stages—viScsa comprising the bhitas and indri- 
yas, avisesa including the five tanmatras and also aham- 
kara called asmita-matra, linga-matra which is 
buddhi, and a-linga which is prakrti or pradha na. 
The difference in respect of ahamkiara in the two systems 
has been already brought out, their conceptions of avige ga 
being otherwise the same. As to the vigesas, the main differ- 
ence is about the atomic nature of the bhiitas which is admitted 
by Yoga and would be apparently denied by Sdrankhya. Im- 
portant differences , however, appear in their conceptions of bud- 
dhi and prakrti. 
41. As already pointed out, Yoga holds that bhita 
emerges out of tanmatra in the form of _perceivable 
sthula atoms in the first instance, out of which again sthila 
complex objects emerge as immancnt parinamas. A bhita 
in its essential form as a new evolute of tanmatra is atomic, 
being called Ὁ ἢ ἢ (ἃ - 5 ἃ Κα ἃ or sthula-stiiksma—having 
much the same status as the trasarenus of VaiSesika phi- 
losophy. The bhiita-siksma is a simple perceivable, though 
it is still a complex of the unperceivable tanthatras which 
are elementary manifest matter." The manifest object is in the 
last resort composed of the gunas which are absolutely simple 
and not only unperceivable but unmanifest (without the objective 
@YS.1T.19 
bYB.IV.14

=== PAGE 268 ===
244 STUDIES IN YOGA PHILOSOPHY 
character of known-ness). Apparently then to Yoga there are 
three grades of stksma matter—the gunas, the tanma- 
tras and the bhita-stiksmas. Of these. bhita-suksma 
is definitely called paramanu* and mahabhita or visva- 
raipa, in the form of composite bhautika objects which are 
taken as its parinama, is presumably composed of or imma- 
nently caused by many such paramanus. Each paramanu 
is composed of tanmatras, an earth-paramanu by all the 
five tanmatras, a water-paramanu by four (excluding 
smell) and so forth. The question is if Yoga admits many 
tanmdatras or many gunas of the same species like many 
paramanus of the same species which are very likely admitted . 
Are there, for example, many individual sound-tanmatras 
or many individual sattva-gunas? 
42. If a mahabhita is taken by Yoga as composed of 
many paramanus (trasas). these are understood not as 
exact similars but as ‘having different qualitative vigesas." 
The mahabhita as avayavin is taken to be an imma- 
nent parinama‘ of each paramanu as avayava. A 
paramanu., again, is avayavi-parinama of many tan- 
matras of the same kind (with tanmatras of other kinds 
combined with them but not making an avayavin with them). 
A tanmatra unlike a bhita does not admit of qualitative 
variations and hence its immanent (avastha-) parinadmas 
can only be quantitatively different as degrees. Tanmatras 
of the same kind as the avayavas of a param4anu are then 
together as the units of an intensive . as distinct from an extensive . 
quantum are together and may be symbolically described as mu- 
tually interpenetrating (cf. the Vaisesika conception of two 
paramanus making up a dvyanuka with the same magni- 
tude as that of a paramanu), their togetherness being here 
felt and not perceived. A unit-tanmatra is further conceived 
like any other tattva as a unity of the three gunas that is pre- 
dominantly tamasika. Does this predominance, which is 
apparently a quantity, imply the co-existence of many individual 
tamogunas? 
ΔΎΒ. ΠῚ. 44: 1Ν. 14 
>YB. III. 44 
°YS.1V.14

=== PAGE 269 ===
SANKHYA AND YOGA 245 
43. The dominant character of a guna in a manifest object 
may not be merely relative to the other gunas constituting it; 
it may be relatively to the same guna in other objects where 
also it is dominant. In the latter aspect, the guna as constitu- 
ting an object may appear to be a quantum requiring to be con- 
ceived as a synthesis of units. Hence on certain other considera- 
tions Vijfiana-bhiksu admits an infinite number of units of 
the same guna. Is the conception tenable? As a guna is con- 
ceived in Yoga and Samkhya, it can hardly be intelligibly 
spoken of as having a given finite quantity. One object may 
indeed appear to have more of a particular guy a than another, 
but the quantity here is understood metaphorically rather than 
literally. It is like taking the knowledge of a greater as itself 
greater than the knowledge of the less. 
44. The gunas are understood in terms of the buddhi- 
function of bhoga in its three forms--sukha, duhkha and 
moha—as their unmanifest potentialities. The three bhogas 
are regarded not only as subjective experiences but as experienced 
characters of the object. Subjectively they stand for three ap- 
parent predicaments of the self, being the feelings of being free, 
being at once free and unfree, and being unfree respectively. 
Objectively they are presented as the three fundamental aesthetic 
characters—prakasa, kriya and sthiti; and these under- 
stood as unmanifest or independent of the subject are the three 
gunas. Apparently even an aesthetic character has a degree 
but the degree here is like the degree of the freedom of the 
self. If subjective freedom be taken as freedom of the will—as it 
would be taken in Yoga, ‘greater freedom’ would be felt in 
making an effort—what is described as willing to reinforce a pre- 
vious willing—which is not really adding to the previous willing but 
is on a higher level of self-consciousness. It is willing the willing 
itself , which is not a greater degree of the first willing but is crea- 
tive of a greater degree. Degree of freedom and. therefore, 
degree of sattva or prak&§sa as an objective character would 
then be understood in Yoga as not an accomplished or existent 
quantum but a quantum in the making. So generally the degree 
of a guna as in a manifest object would have to be regarded 
as a factitious quantity. 
45. Now a quantum in the making cannot be said to be 
composed of co-existent units. More or less of a guna in

=== PAGE 270 ===
246 STUDIES IN YOGA PHILOSOPHY 
an object then is only a coming into being of the object, the 
becoming being thinkable as any number of becomings. The 
object even as tanmatra which admits of no distinguishable 
qualitative variations and only of distinguishable degrees admits 
still of qualitative peculiarities which are un-isolable in thought. 
These are really aesthetic characters and can be present as 
more or less. When an object is said to have more or less of 
any such character, we say loosely that it has more or less of 
aguna. Where the fact is that it has the guna with more or 
less of the aesthetic character as its upadhi, the guna itself 
being a causing function which may be thought as any number 
of functions and is thought as a particular number because of 
the upadhi. 
46. Apparently then Yoga admits many paraminus 
(having nameable qualitatives visesas) of the same bhita 
in the corresponding mahabhtta and many deerees (each 
with an un-nameable qualitative visesa) of the same tan- 
matra in the corresponding paramanus explaining these 
visgesas but not many vyaktis of the same guna as ex- 
plaining such un-nameable vigesas. Not that an un-nameable 
visesa is eternal like a VaisSesika visesa, for the tan- 
matra of which it is vigesa is an effect. As an effected 
visesa,. it too admits of magnitude. But such magnitude can- 
not be a synthesis of units as the vigcsa of a mahabhita 
is a synthesis of those of the paramanus and not even as 
the viSesa of a paramanu is a synthesis of those of the 
tanmatras. The synthesis of paramadnus is extensive and 
that of tanmatras is intensive; and if a tanmatra, again, 
has an effected magnitude, it cannot be the result of an exten- 
sive or intensive synthesis. As a manifest character, this magni- 
tude must be simple, unanalysable into manifest units. But as 
the tanmatra of which it is a character is effected, this mani- 
fest simple must be effected. Its effectuation, however, can be 
only an unmanifest process. Manifest synthesis is of co-existent 
units which retain or lose their manifest distinction as units in 
the compound, though their co-existence is still manifest in the 
latter case, the case of intensive synthesis, where the units are 
felt as flowing into each other. In the un-manifest effectuation of 
the visesa of a tanmatra, if it be called a synthesis at 
all, there is not even this felt flowing existence and, therefore, no

=== PAGE 271 ===
SANKHYA AND YOGA 247 
vyaktis or self-identical units at all. A guna constituting 
the tanmatra is here a pure flow, not the flow of one self- 
identical unit into another, not the emergence of a self-identity 
followed by its cessation but a flow in which self-identity does 
not emerge at all. Yet self-identity as emergent in a manifest 
tattva is an effect, the cause of which, viz., a guna must 
be understood as the causing of self-identity. This causing pro- 
cess in which the g una consists is just what is called its sadrsa- 
parinama. 
47. Yoga thus presents some kind of atomic theory which, 
however, differs from the atomic theory of the VaiSsesika. 
Paramanu, tanmidtra and guna of Yoga correspond 
roughly to trasa, dvyanuka and paramanu of the Vai- 
§esika, these being inferred for the explanation of the magni- 
tude-variations of a sense-perceived bhautika object. The 
cardinal difference between the two atomic theories is in respect 
of the conception of the ultimate simple constituent of objective 
reality—the guna of Yoga or the Vaisesika paramanu. 
Yoga would not admit the Vaisgesika notion of the eternal 
co-existence of many simple constituents of the same kind which 
are absolute repetitions of one another. Objection has been 
taken to this notion by others on the ground that there can be 
no such thing as two exact similars, that what are numerically 
different must be also different in some character. The Vai- 
§esika reply to the objection would be that a given thing with 
a finite magnitude is necessarily inferred to be a synthesis of 
things of smaller magnitude that are exactly similar and that, 
therefore , ultimately exact similars of infinitesimal magnitude must 
exist, each with an eternal un-analysable vigesa. There must 
be co-existent exact similars because there is finite magnitude. 
though how they retain their distinction may not be conceivable. 
Yoga would admit that the notion of finite magnitude implies 
the notion of exact similars but not of their co-existence, that 
their co-existence cannot be inferred from the existence of the 
finite magnitude but is otherwise known where it is a fact, that 
exact similars cause a thing of finite magnitude without necessarily 
being the parts of it. EEven where the parts of a thing with 
finite magnitude have finite magnitudes (e.g., trasas), each 
part causes or causally becomes the whole, the other parts being 
relatively to it only nimitta which to Yoga, as has been

=== PAGE 272 ===
248 STUDIES IN YOGA PHILOSOPHY 
. pointed out, is no cause but only what removes the prati- 
bandha of the effect. The co-existence of the parts, therefore, 
is no causal circumstances in reference to the effect, though it 
is a fact. In what is called samkhya-ja-parimana (mag- 
nitude due to mere number) in VaisSesika where the magni- 
tude of the effect viz., trasa is admitted to be not due to 
the co-existence of the dvyanukas, they are still regarded 
as vyaktis under a jati. This would correspond in Yoga 
to the magnitude of a trasa (called paramanu) as caused by 
the tanmatra-magnitudes which are apparently synthesised 
like the units of a degree. A tanmatra then may be con- 
ceivably regarded as vyaktis under a 1111. Like a Vaise- 
sikadvyantka a tanmatra-unit isaneffect of something 
subtler viz., guna. If a guna appears as more or less in such 
ἃ unit this magnitude cannot be said to be 58 εἶ ΚΠ γᾶ -Ἶ ἃ - 
parimana. In VaiSsesika, a trasa has dvyanitkas in 
it, each of which is composed of paraminus. the magnitude 
of both trasa and dvyanuka being samkhy4d-ja. 
Apparently here, however. we have not two grades of sam- 
khya-ja magnitude. The cause of the trasa-magnitude is as 
much the number of the dvyanukas as the number of the 
paramanus, there being no dvyanuka except as consti- 
tuting a trasa. The magnitude of a dvyanuka does not 
differ from that of a paramanu. both being ‘anu’ and there- 
fore not admitting of more or less. Yoga would take a tan- 
matra-unit as admittedly of more or less of a guna, though it 
cannot understand it as due to the number of guna- units. 
48. The relation of the three grades of siiksma matter in 
Y oga—viz.. guna, tanmatra and paraminu has to be 
more closely compared with the relation of the three Vaisesika 
grades of matter of minimal magnitude—paramanu. dvya- 
nukaandtrasa. A guna (along with other gunas) causes 
atanmatra (and in fact any manifest object ) but is not present 
as many units constituting the parts of the tanmatra. To the 
Vaisgesika, paramainu as causing a dvyanuka is two 
units , though it is doubtful if these units should be called parts of the 
dvyanuka. The param4nus causing a trasa are units 
that are parts of the trasa. The causal constituents of a whole 
that is greater in magnitude than any constituent are called its 
parts. If the paramanus are causal constituents of a

=== PAGE 273 ===
SANKHYA AND YOGA 249 
dvyanuka that has the same magnitude as each para- 
manu, they cannot be called its parts. Even if this objection be 
waived, we have to take the param4nus not as spatially next 
to one another but as only temporal ‘nexts’. Everywhere else 
a temporal next has a space-position other than that of the per- 
sisting antecedent that forms a unity with it, but here a temporal 
next is not a spatial next. Whether we call the paramanus- 
parts of the dvyanuka or not, they are not spatially co-existent 
units as they are even in the trasa. So if they are two units, they 
are together in their product in quite a unique sense. To Yoga, 
a guna constitutive of a tanmatra as its effect is not many 
units at all. Number is a character of what are each already 
self-identical, but a guna is creative of self-identity that appears 
only in the manifest and is manifestness itself. The cause of self- 
identity is not a self-identity but a self-becoming or self-reproduc- 
ing function (sadrsa-parinadma). 
49. Again, to the VaisSesika. the paramanus cause 
the trasa. causing the dvyanuka as implied in the trasa. 
The emergence of the trasa and that of the dvyanuka is 
aparently a single process. the dvyanuka in fact being the 
trasa in one aspect. Although the paramanus are said to 
cause a dvyanuka and the dvyanukas a trasa,. a 
dvyanuka cannot be inferred to exist apart from a trasa nor 
a paramanu apart from a dvyanuka. though their exis- 
tence in trasa is inferred from the change (due to heat) of one 
trasa into another. The emergence that requires to be ex- 
plained may be indifferently expressed as that of trasa as em- 
bodying dvyanuka or of dvyanuka as necessarily embodied 
in trasa. and hence the causation of the dvyanuka and that 
of the trasa are coincident processes. To Yoga a tan- 
matra is not necessarily formative of a paramanu (trasa): 
a higher tattva can exist by itself without causing or being 
embodied in a lower , causing as it does the lower only when there 
is a nimitta to remove pratibandha. If the Vaigée- 
sika admits that a trasa breaks up into free dvyanukas 
and these into fre paramdnus at the time of pralaya 
though not within srsti, admits in other words the possitte 
destruction of samkhy4&-ja-parimana, it can be, accord- 
ing to him, only through the will and in the knowledge of God 
(igsvara-buddhi), through and in which creation also is

=== PAGE 274 ===
250 STUDIES IN YOGA PHI.OSOPHY 
possible. To our buddhi, a trasa breaks up into dvya- 
nuka etc., only in passing into a different trasa: its breaking 
up into free parts would mean its passing out of perceptibility , 
which is never perceived and cannot be inferred. The tattvas 
in Yoga and Samkhya are not properly inferred but are 
known through some kind of ‘transcendental’ reflection through 
which their free being is also known. Tanméatra, for example, 
as the cause of bhiita is not inferred in the sense dvyanuka 
is inferred as the cause of trasa in Vaisesika philosophy. 
While then the causation of the dvyanuka and that of the 
trasa are taken in this philosophy to be temporally distinct only 
to the knowledge of God, Yoga would take the two causations 
—of the tanmdatra and of the bhtita (-param4anu)—as 
distinct to our (transcendental) buddhi also. 
50. Samkhya does not admit the atomic theory either of 
Yogaorof Vaisesika. The atomic conception in fact is alien 
to the spirit of Samkhya, although Vijfiana-bhiksu 
attributes to Siamkhya the atomistic notions of Yoga _ philo- 
sophy. To Yoga, units of the same tanmatra or of the 
same bhiita (as paramanus) would be the immanent 
parinadmas of the tanmiatra or bhita. Samkhya, as 
has been pointed out. cannot admit immanent change at all. The 
so-called immanent change would be to it only aupadhika. 
being not real modifications but real reflections in each tattva 
of the objects of experience. As to Vijfiana-bhiksu’s 
hypothesis of guna-units (attributed by him both to Yoga 
and Samkhya) to explain more or less of a guna, the con- 
ception of sadrsga-parinama has been shown to be suffi- 
cient for the explanation. That conception is entertained both 
by Yoga and Samkhya though with a difference. The 
difference will come out in the discussion of buddhi.

=== PAGE 275 ===
CHAPTER IV 
BUDDHI-VRTTI 
(NIDRA AND SMRTI) 
51. The object is to both Yoga and Simnkhya pari- 
naimi-nitya: its reality unlike that of the self involves be- 
coming or dynamic, as distinct from static, sclf-identity. Be- 
coming is real in the sense willing is real, willing in abstraction 
from consciousness being real becoming. Willing (towards the 
object) is understood in Yoga as consciously becoming finite 
and in Sainkhya as having consciously become finite, as a 
prospective function in the former and ἢ retrospective function in 
the latter. As not yet abstracted from the self, we are aware 
of it as ‘I going to exist as me” or ‘me having come to exist’. 
If ‘me’ be taken as the type of the objective existent, objective 
reality would be to Yoga going to exist and to Simkhya 
coming (or having come ) to exist. It is only in the conative cons- 
ciousness—consciousness of willing or having willed—that going or 
coming to exist is appreciated as real fact. To the mere cognitive 
consciousness , going to exist would be but an imagined content, 
a construction (vikalpa). according to Yoga; and coming to 
exist a mere abstraction from the emergent or manifest existent , 
according to Sith khya. The real object is then to Yoga what 
is going to exist or becoming and to Simkhya what has come 
to exist or has become. 
52. Two kinds of becoming or parinama are admitted 
in Yoga and Siamkhya—sadréSa and visadrSa. Visa- 
drsa-parinama is causal becoming whcre the two terms of 
becoming which are identical in difference are different in charac- 
ter, not mere self-repetitions. Sadrsa-parinadma is becom- 
ing, the terms of which are only numerically different, not 
different in character. Mere numerical difference may be denied 
as a fact, as for example, by Leibnitz; or it may be admitted as an 
eternal or timeless fact, as by the Vaigesika, about para- 
mani or manas, or by Simkhya and Yoga also about 
the self. Objects as merely numerically distinct are admitted in 
Yoga and Simkhya not as timelessly together as in Vaise- 
sika but as terms of becoming. The second term of becoming

=== PAGE 276 ===
252 STUDIES IN YOGA PHILOSOPHY 
is not necessarily an effect distinct in character from the first : 
the ultimate cause, viz., guna, is also real as becoming, as 
what becomes or has become itself over again, there being no 
eternally real (kttastha-nitya) object. Distinction to both 
Yoga and Samkhya as objective is not eternal being but the 
process of becoming distinct. This applics even to merely nu- 
merical distinction which in its manifest form is presented as 
self-identity. A manifest objective tattva is explicitly known 
as known object, unlike the unmanifest guna on the one hand 
which is known as unknown and unlike the experienced object 
on the other which is known but not as known or unknown. 
The self also is known as known but it is not known as object; 
and although it is an explicit self-identity . it cannot be conceived 
as becoming itself. Objective tattva is manifest in the sense 
of being a self-identity involving the process of becoming itself. 
Of the manifest tattvas, buddhi has the sole character of 
manifestness which is just this self-identity, the lower tattvas 
having other characters emergent in them more or less obscuring 
the pure self-identity. The pure self-identity of buddhii is itself 
an effect and its cause, the guna, has to be understood as hav- 
ing the potentiality of self-identity or—what is the same thing— 
as in sadrSa-parinama. 
53. In Yoga the self-identity or manifestness (vyaktata) 
of the object is taken to constitute its existence’ or presence. 
In Samkhya it is a character caused by the already existent 
guna in itself, mamifestness being known-ness rather than exis- 
tence. The cause or potentiality of self-identity is accordingly 
conceived differently in the two systems. In Yoga a guna 
is real but not yet existent, being what is going (or has ceased ) 
to exist, is neither existent nor non-existent and lacks self-iden- 
tity.” In Samkhya., ‘real’ and ‘existent’ would mean the same 
thing: guna is existent without self-identity or mianifestness . 
what is known as not self-identical, not like the object of ex- 
perience that is not known as self-identical. The existence of 
buddhi is self-conserving , as contrasted with which the exis- 
tence of guna is simply emerging, just as ahamk4dra is self- 
conserving finitude and buddhi (as the lower asmiti) is 
only the emerging of finitude. Determinate tattva contains 
*YB.II.19;YV.11.19. 
» Ibid

=== PAGE 277 ===
BUDDHI-VRTTI 253 
the prior process of emergence or becoming determinate ideally 
within it. It is never known without the emergence being 
known : the determinate is never merely given as determinate . 
The emergence, too, which is fact and no mere abstraction is 
known only in the determinate. Yoga would, however, admit 
that becoming may be known prior to the emergence of dcter- 
minate being in the form of going to exist though not in the 
form of coming to exist or emerging. S&mkhya would deny 
it but admit that emerging is known in the knowing of the deter- 
minate—as constitutive of its determination. Whether in the form 
of going to exist or coming to be determined, becoming as prior 
to determinate being i.e., as an indeterminate being has to be 
conceived as the transition between two determinate beings in 
abstraction from them as its terms, the abstraction being possible 
through the conception of the terms being exactly similar. The 
identity of two terms implies one term hecoming the other term 
eas merely numerically distinct from it, the becoming being un- 
derstood either prospectively as in Yoga, or retrospectively as 
in Samkhya. Sadrsga-parinima is this becoming as 
implied in identity, the function of a being going to be itself or 
coming to be itself, its projection of itself in the future or its 
retraction of itself as past. its willed self-propagation or its felt 
self-integration . 
54. This difference between Yoga and Samkhya on 
Sadrsa-parinama indicates their difference on the nature 
of prakrti and buddhi. Existence to Yoga means mani- 
fest existence; buddhi is indifferently satti-miatra or 
linga-matra, prakrti being accordingly nihsatta or 
alinga (avyakta). To sathkhya, manifestness is a con- 
tingent character of the existent , existence being no character and, 
therefore, not contingent: guna is the bare existent and bud- 
dhi is guna with the sole character of manifestness. The 
gunas to both are the three unique modes of freedom, but free- 
dom is understood conatively in Yoga and cognitively in 5 ἃ τῇ - 
khya, so that to the former g una is self-becoming before existence 
and to the latter self-becoming of the existent or the existent 
having become itself, self-becoming being perpetual in either 
way. The difference in the conception of freedom is connected 
with the difference in the conception of ahamkadara in the two 
systems already brought out.

=== PAGE 278 ===
254 STUDIES IN YOGA PHILOSOPHY 
55. Sadrsa-parinama, the function of prakrti. 15 
understood prospectively in Yoga and retrospectively in SAm- 
khya. It may be equated with the function called avidya 
or aviveka understood as the function of anagata or atita- 
buddhi—as distinct from present or manifest buddhi—inci- 
piently operative or unmanifestly persistent within prakrti. As 
in Yoga, guna has no existence yet in prakrti but is only 
the real function of going to exist, it may be conceived to be 
avidya itself as in Vedanta, though it is taken to be objec- 
tively real as the function of sadrga-parinama, not what 
is neither real nor unreal but the real that is neither existent 
nor non-existent. In Sitskhya, aviveka or the function of 
sadrsga-parinadima is real as the retrospective function of 
the existent guna. 
56. In Yoga the first manifest or existent form of prospec- 
tive self-repetition is apparently the immanent change of bud- 
dhi. Buddhi is linga-ma&tra or satta-miatra which 
is the existent freely getting differentiated into many real modes, 
each of which being the undivided buddhi is every other 
(sarvam sarvatmakam ). Immanent parinama is the 
self-repetition of a tattva, where each repetition has a distinct 
identity or existence, is a vyakti, unlike a repetition of a 
guna which has no identity at all. An immanent parinama 
of buddhi may be dharma, laksana or avastha. 
Buddhi has two kinds of dharma-parinama—uncons- 
cious and conscious (a-paridrsta and paridrsta).* 
Yoga-bhasya mentions seven a-paridrsta dharmas— 
of which nirodha, dharma and samskara may be 
specially noted. Nirodha or negative attention, the essential 
function of yoga, is an unconscious willing to arrest the help- 
less change of buddhi, unconscious at all levels of buddh1i 
and is inferred from the samskaras left by such willing which, 
again, are inferred from the facilitation of subsequent nirodha. 
Negative willing , unlike positive willing , is not known by intros- 
pection (though its fulfilment as such may be conscious in 
Samprajfliata-samadhi) but is inferred (even in the case 
of asamprajfidta) from the progressive spontaneity of the 
practice of concentration (as rememberacl in vy utthana). 
4YB 1.15.

=== PAGE 279 ===
BUDDHI-VRTTI 255 
Dharma and adharma (merit and demerit) are the sams- 
karas left by previous willing leading to bhoga or mukti, 
while what is specially called ‘samska4ra’” in the enumeration 
of the seven a-paridrstas is samskara of previous 
bhoga (experience), otherwise designated vasana, which 
leads to memory (smrti). As opposed to the a-pari- 
drstas, there are the conscious parinamas of buddhi in- 
cluding the five vrttis to be mentioned presently and also the 
conscious activities and feelings . 
57. All these are the dharma-parinamas of buddhi 
and the vrttis among them are its specific dharma-pari- 
namas or avasthas. Apparently there may be unconscious 
functions but not unconscious states or vrttis of the mind. 
Vrttis are conscious modes of buddhi which are concrete 
things comparable to the flames shot forth from fire, presenta- 
tions and not mere functions (dharma) or degrees of actuality 
(laksana). Conscious activities and feelings are also sometimes 
called ‘vrtti’ but they appear to be both function and _presen- 
tation, function bound up with vrtti in the narrow sense of 
presentation. The functions—conscious and unconscious—would 
roughly correspond to the bhavas of Saimkhya (which, how- 
ever, has no place for nirodha). Vrtti is understood in 
Saikhya not as presentation, not as a real mode of buddhi 
but as a constructive mode, as the being of buddhi understood 
as characterised by a specific function. 
58, WVrttis are understood in Yoga as cognitive presenta- 
tions which alone are real modes of buddhi. Five classes of 
presentation are mentioned—viz., pramina, viparyaya, 
vikalpa, nidra and smrti—which are respectively prescn- 
tation of object as real, as unreal, as constructive, as absence of 
presentation and as presentation. The classification of vrttis 
is at once psychological and epistemological, psychological so far 
as presentation is itself a differentiated mental object and episte- 
mological so far as presentation is of an experienceable object. 
The function of referring to an object is itself constitutive of 8 
real mode (and not merely of a constructive mode as in Saih- 
khya which is still existent) of buddhi, though it may be 
real without constituting it as in asamprajfiata where 
buddhi is sathhskira-sega_ having a-paridrsta 
dharma only. Presentation is at once mental object (gra hya)

=== PAGE 280 ===
256 STUDIES IN YOGA PHILOSOPHY 
and anticipatory reflection (image) of object (grahana which 
is not subjective function or bhava but objective function or 
rather subjective function in abstraction from the subject or 
grahita), the kind of mental object being determined by the 
kind of anticipation of object or anticipated object. 
59. The epistemological modes of anticipation of object or 
anticipated object are interesting as indicating a unique system of 
objective categories. Real, unreal, constructive, unpresented and 
presented are the ultimate predicates of the object in the sense of 
presented content, content of a self-identical mental state. What 
we assert of a presented content is either about its reality or about 
its presentedness. We assert about its reality in three forms—it 
is real or it is not real or it is as though it were real; and we 
assert about its presentedness in two forms—viz., that presentation 
or its absence is presented. Presentation of a content that is 
known as real is pramana, of a content that is known as un- 
real is viparyaya and of a content that appears real even 
when it is known as unreal is vikalpa:; while presentation of a 
content as presented—-i.e., presentation of presentation is smrti 
and presentation of the absence of presentation is nidra. The 
distinction between reality and presentedness is the epistemological 
distinction between object of presentation and presentation of 
object, both presentation and its object being object in the wider 
sense of drsya or what is distinct from drk or self. 
60. Each vrtti has to be understood in reference to the 
corresponding subjective certitude i.e., to the self as apparently 
functioning through the vrtti. No vrtti is admitted in 
Nyaya, buddhi being but an attribute of the self, not a thing 
seemingly or really distinct from the self, as it is in Vedanta, 
or in Samkhya or Yoga. To Vedanta, buddhi is but a 
manifest mode of ajfidna: ajfiina is intelligible only as a 
positive limitation of [ἢ ἃ η ἃ, self or consciousness and not as a 
thing by itself. Vrtti is accordingly conceived in the system 
from the subjective side only, as tlhe apparent mode of the self 
functioning and not as a real independent thing undistinguished 
from the self. In Samkhya and Yoga. it is an independent 
thing (or state of a thing) which is indeed only as associated with 
the self, being dissolved in dissociation with it; but the association 
is a real character of the thing and an apparent character of the 
self. Vrtti which is thus teally objective also appears subjec-.

=== PAGE 281 ===
NIDRA AND SMRTI 257 
tive and it is in reference to the apparently subjective vrtti that 
the objective vrtti has to be understood. Pramana, for 
example, as an objective mental state has to be understood as 
an implication of the subjective function of true knowing. 
61. To begin with smrti or memory. It is defined as the 
re-presentation of an object as presented. It is not merely a 
second presentation of the object but an implied presentation of 
the first presentation. The first presentation may have been any 
of the five vrttis, not merely pramana or merely percep- 
tion. The first presentation may be of any object, real or un- 
1cal etc.; a presentation js always itself an object to the self 
and can never exist unknown. The object of memory is at once 
the object of the primary presentation and the presentation itself . ° 
The explicit consciousness of the presentation or of the knowing 
(vyavasaya) involving the presentation is called anuvya- 
vasaya. It is a ‘subjective’ function, an apparent function of 
the self ; but if the self knows a content, it knows through a vrtti 
1.€., as identified with a presentation. This is true even when 
the content is itself a presentation and hence a vrtti which 
must be known by a self° is not merely siksi-bhasya but is 
known in a second vrtti with which the self is identified ._ The 
second vrtti in its subjective aspect is anu-vyavasaya and, 
as a mental state, is memory. Memory is in this sense presentation 
of presentation , although it is presentation explicitly of the object 
of the primary presentation and only implicitly of the presentation 
itself, as distinct from anuvyavasaya which is presentation 
explicitly of the presentation and only implicitly of the object of 
presentation. The presentation of the object and the presenta- 
tion of the presentation have both the form of the object, the 
latter having the form of the object with the additional character 
of being distinct from the primary presentation . 
62. Memory (like nidra to be considered presently) is a 
secondary or derivative vrtti. Yoga-bhasya brings in the 
interesting conception of memory being either bhavita- 
Smartavya as in the dream-state or abhavita-smarta- 
vy as in the waking state. Vacaspati interprets the two as 
2YS .IV. 18. 
PYB.I.11. 
cYS .IV.21. 
4 YB.IV.22.

=== PAGE 282 ===
258 STUDIES IN YOGA PHILOSOPHY 
productive and reproductive imagination (‘bhavita’ meaning 
kalpita or constructed), although the former, being admittedly 
what deviates from the primary presentation of the object, does 
not fall under the given definition of smrti and is only loosely 
described as such. Vijfidana-bhiksu understands “bha- 
vita’ in the sense of bhavyartha-siticaka or prognosti- 
cative of the future object (or more accurately of object of future 
knowledge). Memory as revival of past presentation of object 
need not involve the memory-judgment (‘that object which was 
presented ) or a certitude about the past as such: it may be pro- 
egnosticative of the future. Dream involves revival of past pre- 
sentations and also a construction out of them which is no revival 
of the past but a free anticipation of the future. of some object 
to be presented, all dreams being thus apparently taken on the 
authority of $4stra as veridical. 
63. A vrtti has to be understood not only in reference to 
the corresponding subjective certitude (vyavasaya) but also 
in reference to samadhi which may be regarded as the pure 
isolated form of this certitude. Unlike an ordinary vyavasaya 
which is implicitly or explicitly in transition to another vyava- 
saya,samadhi such as is reached through yoga is a cons- 
ciously standing certitude, the standing being pure self-reproduc- 
tion or becoming of itself over again. What aspect of samadhi 
does smrti as a certitude represent? Memory-knowledge is 
knowledge by the self as identified with a vrtti of an object as 
presented to another vrtti. Since a vrtti is as it is presented 
to the self which knows it only as identified with a second vrtti 
with the form of the object of the first vrtti, there is apparently 
an infinite regress of vrttis. But ia vrtti presented to the self 
is not necessarily known explicitly by the self, being known only 
when some doubt arises about the object of the vrtti (of the 
form ‘is the object presented as A or as B?). Memory of a 
perceived object, for example, which need not be explicit know- 
ledge of the perception is such knowledge when the object which 
presents some indeterminateness about its perceived character is 
sought to be known more determinately. So, too. there is no ex- 
plicit knowledge of memory as vrtti unless some indetermi- 
nateness appears about the remembered character of the object. 
A remembered character is indeed a perceived character but it is 
ο΄. 
not simply its repetition but its further unfolding. The changing

=== PAGE 283 ===
NIDRA AND SMRTI 259 
of an object is perceived but when it is remembered, certain 
doubts about the specific character of the changing (e.g., how 
much of it was perceived in one act of perception) emerge which 
would not emerge in the perceptual consciousness. Thus a fresh 
and more fundamental indeterminateness about the object emerges 
at the memory-stage, which leads to the explicit knowledge of 
memory as vrtti, which knowledge again involves a new vrtti. 
—a memory of memory. How far this regress will go will de- 
pend on the number of grades of indeterminateness about the 
object that can be actually conceived. 
64. The presented object is sought to be known better by 
being remembered over and over again. Here, although the 
memories refer to the same presented stratum of the object, each 
Jater memory may refer also to the memory just before it, so 
that the latest memory would present an involution-series of 
memories of the primary presentation. [f a later memory refers 
immediately to the object presented, the series is interminable ; 
but if it refers to it through the previous memory, a qualitative 
difference would emerge between the first. second and_ third 
memories. The second memory would be thinking (cinta) and 
the third would be contemplation (dhyana) in which it is cons- 
cious of itself as a series. A memory later than the third would 
have the same character and thus as a qualitative grade, the third 
memory is the terminus. Samadhi would be the grade be- 
yond it which is no longer memory but intuition of the object 
presented as completely unfolded. Samadhi itself, however, 
would be of different grades which also has a terminus in the sense 
already explained . . 
65. A presented object is known better by having what is 
implicit in the presentation explicated or unfolded through presen- 
tation of the presentation, 1.e., through memory in its three 
grades including thought and contemplation. There is again presen- 
tation not merely of presentation but also of the absence of presen- 
tation. An object that is unpresented in one way may be 
presented in another : an object, for example, that is not perceived 
may be remembered. Memory involves the consciousness of the 
object being presented though not perceptually presented. To be 
thought is also to be presented, the presentation being explicit in 
dhyana or contemplation: that thought and contemplation are 
but grades of memory is known in contemplation. But there may be

=== PAGE 284 ===
260 STUDIES IN YOGA PHILOSOPHY 
a consciousness of presentation being altogether absent, though 
this consciousness is itself bound up with a presentation. This 
presentation of no presentation is nidra or sleep. What was 
implied in a previous presentation and is now explicit in memory 
is remembered as having been only implicit. If the implicitness is 
remembered, it must have been then presented. The presenta- 
tion of implicitness is sleep in general and hence in this case we 
may say, there was sleep along with waking. Generally it may 
be said that all waking short of the highest samprajfata 15 
overlaid with sleep (or pure feeling ? ). 
66. Sleep as a vrtti is taken in Yoga to be directly re- 
membered on waking in the form ‘I know no object > or ‘nothing 
was presented to me’. It is remembered because of the sams- 
kara left by sleep which because it left a samskara must have 
been an actual vrtti presented to the self, because no vf tti 
can exist without being thus presented. Wedanta would not 
admit that sleep is a vrtti of buddhi: the absence of presen- 
tation during sleep is indeed known on waking but it is known 
without the medium of a vrtti (being saksi-bhasya) and 
is not really remembered. Some Vedantists admit nidra- 
vrtti and its samskara, not as belonging to buddhi but as 
belonging to raw ajfiana in which buddhi is taken to be dis- 
solved in sleep. The difficulty however is, as pointed out by 
Vijfiana-bhiksu, that then such ajflana-vrttis might 
be present in dream and waking also, so that there would 
be no necessity to admit a buddhi at all. So if sleep is remem- 
bered it must have been a vrtti known then to the self pre- 
sumably without any further vrtti, there being in any case 
nothing in the nidra-vrtti to raise the question at all. 
67. Sleep as a vrtti may be of many kinds—blissful , rest- 
less or heavy and may include staies like swoon which are not 
remembered but only inferred on waking, inferred as presented 
to the self without being explicitly known by it. Normally sleep 
is remembered as a vrtti known to the self during sleep, the 
self itself being then known in the knowing of the vrtti. 
Vedanta emphasises this self-knowledge during sleep and does 
not admit that it is knowledge of vrtti also, the pure ἃ] ἢ ἃ ἢ ἃ- 
vrtti which is sometimes admitted being not known during 
sleep, and not remembered on waking but only inferred. Su- 
supti according to Vedanta is, so far as it is conscious,

=== PAGE 285 ===
NIDRA AND SMRTI 261 
pure undifferenced self-knowledge and has the same form as 
nirvikalpa-samadhi. The difference between this 
samadhi and susupti would presumably lie in the character 
of the unconscious samskara in the two states. In the for- 
mer, over and above the unsterilised samska&ras of experience 
which make for re-awaking or vyutthana, there is also the 
samskara of the conscious contemplative or abstracting acti- 
vity (dhyana etc.); and besides, unlike the latter, it leaves a 
satnskara of itself facilitating the re-attainment of the ecstatic 
condition. The waking consciousness of the samadhi or 
susupti just ended accordingly differs. The self that was in 
these states is known as having been without ahamkdra in 
samadhi and with ahamkadra in susupti. In the latter 
case, however. ahamkara is known to have been only impli- 
citly present: and implicit presence is apparently to Vedanta 
an ajfiana-vrtti that is not only not explicitly known but is 
not even presented to the self. In Yoga. susupti is remem- 
bered as having been a buddhi-vrtti known to the self. 
Samadhi is not remembered but is known on waking ( as 
susupti too is known according to Vedanta) without a 
vrtti. It is known as having been no vrtti identified with the 
self but as the self identified with a function or a-paridrsta- 
dharma of buddhi., the function of nirodha. In the case 
of samprajfiita-samadhi, a vrtti is indeed remembered 
but not as what the self was identified with. Again. the sams- 
kara left by samadhi is not a νᾶ 58 ἢ ἃ conditioning the 
memory of an experience or empirical vrtti but a karma- 
samskiaira that facilitates later activity and feeling attainment 
in the same direction .

=== PAGE 286 ===
CHAPTER V 
BUDDHI-VRTTI (contd.) 
(Vikalpa., Viparyaya and Pramana) 
68. The vrtti called ‘vikalpa’ is implied in the cons- 
ciousness of a content that is not real and is still verbally meant. 
The verbal expression of the content generates the vrtti but 
even a vrtti referring to an unreal content that is otherwise 
generated but is verbally expressible would appear to come un- 
der vikalpa. The content which is known at once as 
unreal and as verbally expressible is presumably what charac- 
terises the vrtti. Viparyaya or error as a vrtti also re- 
fers to an unreal content and may be generated by a form 
of words but the content is not verbally expressible (except as a 
contradiction ) when it is known to be unreal. The content was 
meant by the generative verbal expression as a real object. and not 
as a possible object plus its reality , so that now that the reality is 
negated , it is not reduced to possible object only. The content 
that vikalpa refers to is a possible object but the content of 
viparyaya is not the unreality of a possible or thinkable ob- 
ject. The possible or the imaginary as such which is the content 
of vikalpa is never reached by the mere correction of error 
Where then a verbal expression generates an error, the content of 
the error is not rendered by the expression after correction; and 
in fact after correction, the content of an error, however gene- 
rated, is not verbally expressible at all except as a contradiction . 
Vikalpa as generated by a verbal expression is , however , signi- 
ficantly expressed by it though known to be unreal. We may be 
imaginatively aware of a content as unreal when there is no ques- 
tion of error at all; and it is not necessary that such content 
should be generated by the understanding of a verbal expression . 
though it always admits of a significant verbal expression. 
69. Patafnali defines vikalpa as —Sabdajifia- 
nanupati vastu-Sunyo vikalpah.* The first adjec- 
tive may mean ‘generated by §abda-jfidna’ or ‘expressible 
as implied in Sabda-jfidna’. The latter is the interpre- 
*YS.1.9

=== PAGE 287 ===
BUDDHI-VRTTI 263 
tation of Vijana-bhikgsu who explains the compound as 
‘what has Sabda-jfiana as its anupati’, not as what others 
explain it viz., ‘anupati1 of sabda-jfiana’. The statement 
in the Bhasya—‘vastu-Sunyatve api Sabda-jflana- 
mahatmya-nibandhano vyavaharo drsyate’ may 
refer to the vyavahdra either before or after the vikalpa. 
The examples given in the Bh4ara are indted all of meanings 
generated by language. but one is not precluded from admitting 
under vikalpa imaginary contents of which one is aware other- 
wise than through the understanding of language. There is no other 
heading of vrtti under which they could come and the text does 
not rule out the extension. Even the perception of the mere 
appearance as such eg., the image in the mirror—may come under 
vikalpa, since it stands. though it is (inferentially ) known to 
be no fact. Whatever being known as unreal is actually present- 
ed is the content of vikalpa. for whatever can be asserted to be 
now presented is verbally expressible. Of the erroneous content 
as such we can say that it appeared to be presented but never that 
it is presented. Error may still be called a presentation because 
we cannot deny that some content was presented though we can- 
not specify what was presented. 
70. The content of vikalpa is presented as an unreal but 
possible object, as the imaginary as such which stands before the 
mind through the meaning function of language. if not through 
anything else. The image in the mirror may also be called an 
imaginary object standing indeed through the perceiving function 
but not as excluding the meaning-function , because to stand be- 
fore the mind is to appear self-identical which is possible only 
through thought or the meaning-function. As distinct from it 
the content of error known as such is the unreal without self- 
identity , of which we can say that it appeared to stand but never 
that it stands-—-what we can say about the imaginary object. The 
self-identity of the unreal is presented not as real nor as unreal 
but as though it were real. Vikalpa is the presentation of an 
unreal not as real (which would be viparyaya) nor as unreal 
(which would be pramadna) but as though it were real i.e., 
as appearing as unreal. The appearance of a content is itself a 
content and the vrtti referring to this secondary content is 
vikalpa. It is not like memory the presentation of a content 
as presentation but is the presentation of a content as apparently

=== PAGE 288 ===
264 STUDIES IN YOGA PHILOSOPHY 
presented or apparently objective. The verbal expression of such 
a content is only figurative and the content as figuratively expressed 
has a presented character due to the expression. Vikalpa is 
the presentation of the factitious character of a content. We 
speak of the head of Rahu (who is all head), of inactivity or 
uncausedness asa character of an object or of appearing as an 
activity of an object. All these are figurative expressions which 
are understood by being actually imagined while being taken as 
unreal. Ordinary language 15 largely figurative though not al- 
ways suspected as such and the understanding of it involves 
vikalpa almost at every turn. 
71. The importance of vikalpa will be realised when it is 
remembered that time itself as krama and. therefore, all space- 
time position of the objects of experience are taken in Yoga 
philosophy to be only presented to vikalpa, not to pramana 
as it is taken by common-sense or to viparyaya as it is taken 
by Vedanta. What is called savikalpa perception, how- 
ever, is not vikalpa (as it is taken by the Buddhist) but 
pramana, its content being not unreal though the space-time 
position of the content is unreal. In Samkhya. too, where not 
only the space-time position but even the presented quality of the 
object of experience is a mere appearance, savikalpa percep- 
tion is not mere vikalpa. since the object is unaccountably 
given and is a non-causal but real manifestation of prakrti. 
In Yoga the object of experience is an immanent causal pari- 
nama of vikara-tattva, though its space-time position 
is constructed. What is given as a manifest or unmanifest 
tattva but with a superinduced vikalpa (though not 
bhrama or error) is not a vikalpa but a pramdna. 
72. In savikalpa (or samprajfata) samadhi, the 
vrtti that is cocentrated on may or may not be a vikalpa in 
the Yoga sense. Its content may be imaginary or a real object 
of experience or a real metaphysica! object; and where it is a real 
object. it may or may not be overlaid with vikalpa (or the 
memory of vikalpa), though even when it is overlaid , it does 
not cease to be the object of pramana. In savitarka and 
Savicara-samadhi, the content, if real is riddled with 
vikalpa.*® is an object of experience (sthila) with a space- 
a'YS.1. 42.

=== PAGE 289 ===
BUDDHI-VRTTI 265 
time limitation, or a tattva (stiksma) as constituting such an 
object. Vikalpa is the appearance of a unity of word, thought 
and thing ($abda. pratyaya, artha) which are really dis- 
tinct. This appearance is the primary object of the contempla- 
tion leading to samadhi that develops through stages in which 
it is gradually dissolved. In passing from savitarka to nir- 
vitarka, vikalpa (or its smrti) in the sthtila object is 
dropped but continues in the siksma object in savicara 
which is dropped in passing to nirvicara. Later stages of 
Samprajflata are free from vikalpa and there is no 
vrtti at all in asamprajfiata. 
73. The difference between vikalpa and viparyaya 
has already been discussed. The Vaisgesika takes vikalpa 
as a form of Hharya or fictitious knowledge. thus including 
it within viparyaya.* Vedanta apparently would bring 
Viparyaya under vikalpa: all error is construction, 
object as distinct from the sclf being false as a construction 
of avidya. Since the object is the self (or reality) it- 
self under the limitation of avidy4, it is mithy4 (though 
till it is actually sublated like the appearance of the rope as 
snake , it is empirically real) and not tuccha but apart from 
the self. it is tuccha, being but a vikalpa. The object is 
to the eye of reason mithya or anirvacya but to the eye 
of faith it is tuccha, or as it may be put. it is tuccha or 
mere vikalpa to the jivan-mukta. Error in the last 
resort would be mere vikalpa: all difference in the object 
is but a verbal construction (viicarambhana). though the 
vak or speech here is cosmic and impersonal. To Yoga, how- 
ever. error and vikalpa are utterly distinct as vrttis. The 
world of experience, so far as it is a construction, is not false 
but phenomenally real. It is not reality with false limitation 
and therefore false in the last resort as it is conceived to be in 
Vedanta but reality with constructed limitation and therefore 
still real. for the construct though unreal does not falsify but 
only limits the manifestation of reality. 
74. Viparyaya or error is to Yoga a vrtti that has 
not the form of the object that it purports to refer to.’ It is 
ΒῪΝ .1.9 
Da-tadripa-pratistham—yYS.I1.8.

=== PAGE 290 ===
266 STUDIES IN YOGA PHILOSOPHY 
then possible to refer to an object without a presentation having 
its form. To Vaisesika, cognition—true or false—trefers to 
its object without presentation and, therefore, there is no 
special difficulty about false cognition. To Yoga cognition is 
through presentation and the difficulty about false cognition is 
how the presentation implied by it refers to the object without 
taking its form. Has the vrtti called viparyaya a form 
at all? The form of object only but not that of vrtti can 
be an apparent form: it cannot be said that the presented form 
of the vrtti is cancelled, by correction or badha. The 
form of the object that is cancelled then never even appeared 
in the vrtti. That is why the content of error known as such 
(through correction) cannot be intelligibly stated: it can be ver- 
bally expressed only as a contradiction (like ‘this rope as snake’ ). 
There is no vrtti for the consciousness of a contradiction. The 
vrtti for a cognition is known in reflection on it. the reflection 
being an anuvyavasaya in other cases and in the case of 
false cognition the correction or badha itself. The vrtti for 
a false cognition as indirectly revealed by the corrective reflection 
is known as not having had the form of the content that is 
now cancelled. It cannot be said—as it would be presumably 
said by the Vedantisi—that the vrtti is known neither as 
having nor as not having the form of the cancelled content, or, 
in other words, that the content was neither presented nor un- 
presented , for some content was certainly presented which is also 
definitely known in the badha as not the content cancelled. 
This definite knowledge of the vrtti as without the form of 
the object that it yet referred to is knowledge of a contradiction 
that implies no vrtti. The knowing or mistaking of the rope 
as snake is a fact but there is no knowledge or consciousness 
reflected in a standing vrtti of the rope being a snake: a 
contradiction is committed but is not known. being a content that 
is unpresentable or unknowable as known. 
75. That a contradiction is committed but not presented 15 
just what is implied by the theory of anyatha-khyati— 
advocated both by Yoga and Vaisesika. The latter does 
not admit vrtti or presentation in any knowing and hence the 
taking of the rope as a snake (previously known in some other 
time-space position }—or the commission of a contradiction—with- 
out its presentation implies no special difficulty, though the

=== PAGE 291 ===
BUDDHI-VRTTI 267 
contradiction is no object at all. Yoga, however, admits pre- 
sentation though in this case it is not presentation of the form 
of snake or of the contradictory ‘rope as snake’ but some inde- 
finite unnameable presentation and understands the committed con- 
tradiction to be the taking as this (rope) not an actual snake 
known elsewhere (as in Vaisesika) but the unreal content 
of the present vrtti or what is presented as unpresented.* In 
Vedanta, the contradiction is itself presented as a content that 
neither is nor is not (pratibhasika-srsti, anirvacya) 
while in Simkhya it is presented as a content that both is 
and is not.’ The presentation here to Vedinta would ap- 
parently be a vrtti not of buddhi but of raw avid y a—such 
as SUsUpti is sometimes taken in this system—while to S4m- 
khya it would be a buddhi-vrtti. In Yoga, there is 
presentation not of the contradiclion but of some content as 
unpresented , the contradiction itself being utterly unpresented and 
only committed. The contradiction 1s the function of avidya, 
while to Vedanta it is a presentation of avidya and to 
Samkhya an indeterminate presentation of buddhi. 
76. To understand empirical error, both Yoga and Ve- 
danta have to refer to raw avidya, to avidya beyond 
asmita (as it would be expressed in Yoga) or the transcenden- 
tal principle of error, which is conceived in Yoga as a func- 
tion and in Vedanta as a presentation conformably to the 
different views on the nature of knowing in the two systems. 
There is no knowing function or activity in Vedanta: what 
appears as such is the quiescent being of knowledge with the 
willing function of buddhi as its upadhi. In Yoga, 
buddhi is as much a knowing function as a willing function. 
the latter being the actualisation of the former (and amounting 
to its supersession in asamprajfiata). The self is indeed 
knowledge (consciousness) itself as in Vedanta and Sam- 
khya but it knows the object only as identified with the know- 
ing buddhi or buddhi-vrtti and not the willing buddhi 
which is no vrtti, that being why it knows no content at all 
in asamprajfata. Error is a knowing function intermediate 
betweeri the bare willing function in asamprajfiata and the 
ayv .1.8. 
bsadasat-khyatir biadhabhavat SS .V.56.

=== PAGE 292 ===
268 STUDIES IN YOGA PHILOSOPHY 
knowing—willing function involving the vrttis other than 
viparyaya which differs from them in being formless. Error 
cannot be merely an exercise of free will, nor is it a mere presen- 
tation with conflicting determinations but an utterly indeterminate 
presentation explicitly embcdying an exercise of free will. This 
free will is just avidya which is constructive of vrtti—the 
viparyaya-vrtti—in the first instance and destructive of 
vrtti—of the viveka-vrtti ultimately—in asamprajiata. 
77. Empirical error unlike other vrttis referring to the object 
explicitly embodies avidya, the transcendental principle of error. 
Yoga mentions five transcendental errors—avidya. asmita, 
raga, dvesa and abhinivesa of which avidya is taken 
as at once starting and pervading the others.* Each 15 the 
nimitta of the next and is loosely regarded as its source. 
Avidya leads to and does not become asmiti, though it con. 
tinues with asmita. Asmita too leads to avidy 4, and may 
co-exist with it though it need not. Asmita and raga, raga 
and dvesa, dvesa and abhinivesa are apparently related 
similarly. Each lower may also cease in the presence of the 
higher, the cessation being gradual. The continuously mani- 
fest stage (udara) as embodied (labdha-vrttika) in a 
presentation may pass to the intermittent (vicchinna) stage. 
that again to the tenuous, half-manifest or sub-conscious (tanu) 
stage and then again to the un-manifest or unconscious (sup- 
ta) stage. From each later stage. a kleS§a may hark back 
to the former stage, but there is a fifth stage, viz., dagdha- 
vija-bhava whence there is no return. When avidya, the 
primordial klesa which may co-exist with the other kleSsas 
and also function in their absence (as in asamprajfnata)., 
reaches dagdha-bijata and ceases altogether, buddhi it- 
self ceases or lapses into prakrti.” 
78. These principles are ‘transcendental’ in the sense of 
being ‘subjective’ functions, functions indeed of the mind but 
necessarily referred to the self, being unconscious as mental and 
conscious only as subjective and empirically conscious as embo- 
died in objective presentations. They may as well be regarded 
as grades of spiritual error or kleSas as they are called, un- 
derstood more as willing function than as knowing function. Yet 
8 YS .11.4. 
>YB.IT.10.

=== PAGE 293 ===
BUDDHI-VRTTI 269 
they are errors and not merely wrong willing—errors , because 
the primordial and pervading kleSa viz., avidy4 is the cona- 
tive actualisation of false knowing Willing is a more essential 
function of buddhi than knowing, but it is necessarily under- 
stood through knowing as its actualisation. 
79. Avidya is explained in YS.I1.5 as the taking of 
the non-eternal as eternal. of the unclean as clean, of the pain- 
ful as pleasurable. of the not-self as the self. Essentially it is 
the wrong viewing of the object as the self and derivatively in 
cognitive. moral and hedonistic reference to the object of ex- 
perience , the viewing of it as though it were as real, as clean 
or sacred, as dear or enjoyable as one’s own sclf. The nature 
of avidya 1s best understood by contrast with empirical :llu- 
sion on the one hand and with asmitaé on the other. The 
content of all error is known in the correction of it as ἃ con- 
tradiction or an unintelligibility, and it is in this sense that it 
has been said to be verbally inexpressible. In the case of an 
empirical illusion, however —e.g., in the taking of a rope 
as ἃ snake, one is aware in the correction that the un- 
intelligible appeared as intelligible, that the contradictory * this 
(rope-) snake’ was explicitly known as ‘this snake’ = In the 
correction of the illusion of taking my bodv as myself—a form 
of avidya, 1 am not similarly aware of my body having been 
explicitly known as myself. i am aware only of having acted 
or felt in a way that has to be interpreted as unplying the cogm- 
tion of my body as my self. The cognition 15 here rmplicit not 
in the sense that its content is undistinguished in an_ explicitly 
known content but in the sense that it is not and does not 
involve explicit cognition at all, that it is only inferred (or 1ma- 
gined } to be a cognition from the manner of willing or feeling 
and not from any explicit cognition as the datum. Such implicit 
cognition of the self is not cognition of a presented content and 
is in this sense a transcendental function. If it is still taken 
as viparyaya-vrtti. it is because the falsc knowing is 
remembered. showing that there must have been some unspeci- 
fiable presentation though it can not be asserted that there was. 
80. Asmita is also a transcendental error and is explained 
in YS.1.6.as the consciousness of the apparent identity of 
the self and buddhi. It is the consciousness of the identity 
either as the self only or as buddhi only. not as their relation .

=== PAGE 294 ===
270 STUDIES IN YOGA PHILOSOPHY 
Avidya would be consciousness of their identity as a relation 
or rather the function of relating them in the way of identity . 
Viveka which is knowledge of their distinction still implies 
the self knowing as identified with buddhi, the identification 
here being the avidy4-function of relating explicit distincts 
as identical. In asmita, there is no consciousness of their 
distinction : it is consciousness of the product of the avidya- 
function, viz., the undifferenced appearance of their unity either 
as the self or as buddhi,®* as for example when one says ‘I 
enjoy” or ‘my enjoyment’ (‘I knowing’ or ‘knowing me’). 
Avidya is the implicit identifying of explicit distincts, while 
asmita is the explicit consciousness of the unity of implicit 
distincts. The explicit unity is the result of the implicit identi- 
fying , the terms of the unity losing their distinction in the result. 
81. Avidya and asmita are conceived as functions of 
false knowing, but the other three klesas or transcendental 
errors are conceived as affective functions only implying or pre- 
supposing false knowing. They, too, are primarily functions and 
become consciousness only when embodied in _ presentation. 
Raga is the craving for pleasure or object of pleasure imply- 
ing memory of pleasure or of the object of pleasure. It is an 
error in the sense that the memory or perception (or the anti- 
cipation that it implies) is not detached knowledge such as the 
jivanmukta may be conceived to have but a craving for 
one’s exclusive self. thus involving asmita: and it is yet 
distinct from asmita& in so far as the consciousness here is 
explicitly of pleasure as object and only implicitly of the en- 
joying self (me). Similar considerations apply to dvesa or 
antipathy for pain and object of pain. As an affective function, 
however . it necessarily presupposes raga and is accordingly less 
self-conscious. implying asmita more remotely than raga. 
Both raga and dvesa admit of different grades and specifi- 
cations in reference to different classes of objects. The last 
Viparyaya, viz., abhinivesa is positively a clinging to 
life and negatively the fear of death. The positive moment is 
less (self-) conscious than the negative moment which thus directly 
involves dvesa. Abhinive§Sa is conscious even in its posi- 
tive aspect and is called 4tmaé¢ih—an instinctive desire about 
syYV.II.6.

=== PAGE 295 ===
BUDDHI-VRTTI 271 
oneself of the form ‘let menot cease to be’ ‘letmebe’ (mana 
bhivam, bhiyasam). It is not due to the samskira 
of any experience in this life but is due to the vasana of the 
experience of death in a previous life and is the most obvious 
datum for the inference of a previous birth.* As a conscious 
desire, it is reckoned as a vriti 
82. Error as avidya which is implied in every other error 
is implied even in pramana or true knowing. Viveka 
which is the highest form of true knowing still involves avidy4 
which demands to be corrected through asamprajfiata or 
the activity of getting rid of all knowledge. Knowledge means 
knowledge of content which is possible only through the erroneous 
identification of the self with buddhi. If the self is taken 
to be jfiana, it is not jfiana of any content, being content- 
less consciousness understood merely as a being and not as a 
knowing function. The erroneous identification or ἂν αν and. 
therefore , also its retraction or purely conative correction which 
is the function of the same avidy 4 thus run out beyond pra- 
mana, viparyaya being in this sense a more fundamental 
vrtti of buddhi than pramana. Within explicit know- 
ledge, error indeed presupposes true knowledge, but knowledge 
itself presupposes conative error which is implicitly cognitive 
also. While pramana may be said to be nearer than error 
to pure consciousness, error as ἃν! αν ἃ is closer to prakrti, 
being as vrtti the immediate evolute of prakrti and as func- 
tion continuous with it. In the retractive movement towards 
moksa, the self regains its character of functionless conscious- 
ness immediately in knowledge (viveka) but through pure willing . 
83. Pramana or true knowledge is of three kinds—pra- 
tyaksa, anumana and 4dgama. Of these, pratyaksa 
is understood to be a vrtti having the form of a real object 
and referring more to its particularity than to its simanya 
or universal, as distinct from anumana which refers more to 
its samanya than to its viSesa, the object being taken in 
both as having both samanya and visesa. Agama in re- 
ferring to an object beyond pratyaksa refers through its sama- 
nya but yields knowledge of its vigesa. An object is known 
as individual i.e., with its visesa either through pratyaksa 
or through 4gama, not through anumana. The visesa 
*YB.11.9;IV.10.

=== PAGE 296 ===
272 STUDIES IN YOGA PHILOSOPHY 
of an object as thus known is, however, known as apparently one 
with or co-implicated (sainkirna) with the remembered mea- 
nings of words that express it—i.e., with verbal universals which 
are, in fact, vikalpas. It is known in its purity in samadhi 
or samapatti of a type to be considered later, which amounts 
to perfect perception (param pratyakgam). Absolutely true 
knowledge through 4gama and anumana can only be reached 
through such pure perception of vigesa. One must have such 
perception for oneself as the basis of the knowledge of the super- 
sensible through anumiana and agama.* 
84. Pramana is a direct or indirect knowing of the real 
individual as having a real or verbal universal, an absence and 
even an unrcality undistinguished in it. The pure individual is 
sought to be intuited, known in the way of para-pratyaksa 
or saksg&tkara by the elimination of the undistinguished 
excrescences through the practice of yoga. Pramana is in 
itself a demand for its purification and actualisation in 5 ἃ [ἢ ἃ - 
dhi. As knowledge of the real individual, it is not direct 
except in perception, and even as perception it is mixed up with 
the other pramanas and, therefore, is indirect knowledge in 
some aspect also. It is further mixed up with vrttis other 
than pramana and thus refers to contents other than the real 
along with the real. Normally then what is taken as_ truly 
known is known neither with absolute directness nor in isolation. 
Not that, therefore, it is not known: it is known but with an 
indefinite background which partly obscures its definiteness and 
threatens its certitude without, however, actually challenging its 
known-ness. Reflection on such knowledge shows its unrealised 
character without negating it as an actual presentation and with- 
out falsifying its content. The unrealisedness is , in fact, a transcen- 
dental or spiritual character but is not, therfore, without any 
bearing on the psychology and logic of the knowledge in question . 
The known content is felt to require further definition. Logi- 
cal definition may be sought to be reached inductively but that 
is only a preparation for a new insight into the nature of the 
content to be defined. To have the insight is to have the pre- 
sentation of the content or the vrtti steadied and clarified. 
The islolating fixation of the knowing vrtti for the definition of 
the known content is just the yoga process of realisation. 
ΔΥΒ.1. 42

=== PAGE 297 ===
CHAPTER VI 
THE FIVE LEVELS OF BUDDHI 
85. The distinctive function of buddhi is niscaya or 
certitude which is (or is implied in) the consciousness of a con- 
tent as to the self, as making a difference to or (illusorily ) 
modifying the self. The nature of certitude cannot be under- 
stood except in such reference to the self. Consciousness or the 
self is indeed associated with the mind not simply as buddhi 
but also in its lower stages, but the mind does not refer to 
the self as content or to a content as to the self except in the 
stage of buddhi. Certitude as such implies asmit4& or the 
consciousness of “1 am’. The consciousness may be implicit 
or explicit but in any case certitude without this consciousness 
is unintelligible. Certitude may be directly about the self or 
about the object, in which latter case it is indirectly about the 
self and may be either implicit or explicit. Direct and explicit 
certainly about the self may again lead to a stage of buddhi 
where the consciousness of ‘I am’ lapses into the mere being 
of 1, where the distinction between 7 as content and the con- 
sciousness of it ceases to be conscious. 
86. Yoga-Bhasya* mentions five citta-bhimis or 
levels of bDuddhi—viz., ksipta, midha, viksipta, 
ekagra and niruddha. Of these the first three levels ap- 
pear to be characterised by indirect and implicit asmita and 
the fourth by explicit asmita which is indirect in its earlier 
Stages and direct in the latest stage. The fifth represents the 
stage where direct and explicit consciousness of 1 lapses into the 
mere being of 7. The sub-stages of the fourth stage together 
with the fifth stage are sometimes specifically called citta- 
bhumis, being the levels of buddhi as concentrated in 
yoga or samadhi. Samadhi is ordinarily understood to 
mean the concentrated state of buddhi but sometimes it 1s 
used in a wider sense to mean its general character of standing, 
of being self-identical or flowing as self-iderftical which is its 
character at all levels (Sirvabhatima-dharma). being just 
a1 .1-2

=== PAGE 298 ===
274 STUDIES IN YOGA PHILOSOPHY 
what is meant by its manifestness. Buddhi is the manifest 
as such , manifesting or reflecting the eternal changcless self directly 
or indirectly , explicitly or implicitly. Buddhi is nothing with- 
out samadhi in the wide sense and the five levels of buddhi 
are distinguished by different measures and qualities of this 
samadhi. 
87. Buddhi like every other objective tattva is a unity 
of the three gunas. The sattva-element is dominant while 
rajas and tamas are more or [655 recessive and may be 
altogether suppressed or reduced to mere samskara; and 
sometimes in the fifth or niruddha level the sattva element 
also may be reduced to samskara and buddhi stands mani- 
fest as bare being with all differences suppressed in it. The 
gunas in reference to conscious buddhi have the characters 
of prakhya, pravrtti and sthiti. Prakhya would be 
the expressive character (prakasa) in reference to the content of 
buddhi which is the self either directly or indirectly, being 
thus the function of revealing the self cr self-conscious knowing . 
Pravrtti would be activity (calatva) in reference to the 
self, the apparent activity of the self to become finite or self- 
conscious willing; and sthiti or persistence in reference to the 
self would be apparently self-conscious feeling . When prav- 
rtti and sthiti of buddhi are actual or emergent func- 
tions, they modify the dominant character prakhya; and 
where they are abhibhiita or reduced to mere sammskara, 
they do not modify. In the ksipta stage, both pravrtti 
and sthiti are actual, the former being more explicit than the 
latter. In the miudha stage, pravrtti is suppressed and 
sthiti is explicit while in the viksipta stage, sthiti is 
suppressed and pravrtti is actual. In the ekagra stage. 
both are suppressed and prakhya alone is actual, and lastly 
in the niruddha stage prakhya also is suppressed or rather 
retracted . ει ΟΠ} 
88. All these stages are stages οὗ buddhi as manifesting 
the self. Buddhi manifests the self not necessarily in the 
sense of conditioning the consciousness of the self—there being 
no consciousness of the self in asamprajfata—but in the 
sense of taking the changeless form of the self, while changing. 
Buddhi is indeed the same even in a flow of vrttis, but the 
Sameness here is inferred and is not evident to introspection.

=== PAGE 299 ===
THE FIVE LEVELS OF BUDDHi 275 
Each vrtti, however. is ἃ flow in which there is a sameness 
that is introspectively evident. Buddhi without vrtti—as in 
asamprajfiata—is also a flow with the form of self-identity, 
as is evident to the memory of it in vyutthana. Flow with 
the explicit form of self-identity is samadhi and is evident to 
introspection or memory about at least some seetion of the flow 
that constitutes the being of buddhi. A tattva lower than 
buddhi is a flow in which the form of self-identity is not ex- 
plicit at all. 
89. The first three levels—k sipta. mitidha and viksipta 
—are, as has been pointed out, characterised by indirect and 
implicit asmita. The mind is here directly occupied with 
objects as to the self. The indirect reference to the self is fur- 
ther implicit in the sense that it here appears as a value of the 
object felt or willed and not as a knowing presentation detached 
from the object presented. as it appears in the ekigra stage. 
We may begin with the viksipta stage and work backwards 
and forwards to the other stages. Here the tamas element 
of buddhi is suppressed or reduced to mere samskara so 
that it does not affect its prakhya or self-consciousness. As 
this self-consciousness is indirect 1.6... is primarily object-con- 
sciousness, its non-limitation by tamas means that buddhi 
here reveals the objective universe. Yet the revelation is of the 
possibility rather than of the actuality of the universe : there is 
consciousness in this stage of an indefinitely extendable series of 
objects beyond the attained definite object. This objective be- 
yond is not actually experienced because it is the content of cogni- 
tion as conatively qualified, prakhya being here still restricted 
by pravrtti or rajas, though not by tamas. The sthiti 
of buddhi or its self-conscious persistence (feeling ) affects its 
prakhya by limiting its field of vision, by making it stick to 
the object actually attained and shutting out the beyond from 
its view. The pravrtti of buddhi or its self-conscious acti- 
vity (willing ) affects its prakhya by making the beyond appear 
indefinitely as what is to be or can be experienced. The objec- 
tive beyond is thus presented to consciousness as a possibility . 
In the ksipta and midha stages this consciousness of possi- 
bility is absent; and in the ekagra stage, there is conscious- 
ness of the beyond as an actuality. 
90. In the viksipta state, the mind is said to reveal all

=== PAGE 300 ===
276 STUDIES IN YOGA PHILOSOPHY 
objects* and in the ekagra state, to reveal the true nature of 
its object or reveal its object as luminous or self-evident.” The 
former refers to the indefinite extent of knowledge and the latter 
to the depth of knowledge or insight into the essence. As 
viksipta precedes yoga, it cannot be said to yield knowledge 
of the actual infinite and hence it can only be understood to 
reveal the possible infinite. The objects that can be known in 
a stage of knowledge are only thought as an ail in that stage and 
can be known as an actual cr accomplished universe in the form 
of a more essential object in a deeper grade of knowledge. 
The possible universe is only thought in connection with actual 
objects that are known and thus knowledge in the viksipta 
state may be said to be of actual objects in a possible universe. 
The thought of the universe is the knowledge of relation within 
the objects of actual knowledge as continued in the thought of 
relation between them and the possible objects beyond them. 
Thus knowledge in the viksipta state may be taken as our 
ordinary thinking or discursive knowledge. 
91. Knowledge in the miidha or ksipta stage is to be 
conceived as lacking this consciousness of the universe. the 
thought of internal and external relation of the known object. 
In the midha stage, the mind is fixed on a particular object 
and is aware that it cannot move on to other objects. In the 
ekagra stage also, the mind is fixed on a particular object 
but is aware that it freely does not move out of it. The miidha 
state presupposes the ksipta state, since to be aware that it 
cannot move, it must have had experience of moving (without 
the consciousness of relating as in the viksipta state). To 
be aware of passing from one object to another without relating 
them is to know on the ksipta level. The mind here is aware 
of moving out from the object on which it was fixed, and get- 
ting fixed on another, moving out of it again and so on. There 
is an alternation of moving and standing, pravrtti and 
sthiti within knowing while in the midha state, there is 
no pravrtti, but only sthiti, there being only a helplessly 
®sarvatah pradyotamanam. 
bsad-bhitamarthampradyotayati—where ‘sad.~bhitam’ 
is explained as paramartha-bhitam or as §obhanam nitanta- 
Virbhitam sattvam.

=== PAGE 301 ===
THE FIVE LEVELS OF BUDDHI 277 
fixed or standing cognition. In the viksipta state the mind 
moves only and does not stand though in moving it relates, rela- 
ting being a free standing or consciously keeping self-identical 
inspite of movement. In the ekagra stage, the mind does 
not move from object to object but freely stands or fixes 
itself on an object and enjoys its sclf-identity in the activity of 
standing . 
92. What is this freedom of knowing? The mind as pra- 
khya or self-conscious knowing is free, is aware of keeping 
self-identical , of actively maintaining itself in samadhi. It is 
aware of itself not as the persisting object that it is but as the 
persisting subject , as the self willing to stand (not eternally stand- 
ing), or, in other words, as consciously achieving its duration. 
The sthiti of the mind that is due to tamas is an objective 
or helplessly given duration. which is not consciously realised as 
its self-identity. Knowing in the different levels of buddhi differs 
not in respect of this sthiti but in respect of sthiti as samai- 
dhi or prasganta-vahita’ or self-achieved subjective dura- 
tion. There is progressive increase of such knowing duration as 
one passes from ksipta to ekagra, not of the duration of 
the vrtti involved in knowing. The subjective duration, how- 
ever. is undistinguished from the objective duration in the stages 
before ekagra and hence the duration of a cognitive vrtti 
appears to increase gradually in passing from ksipta to vik- 
sipta. It is greatest in viksipta not in respect of the know- 
ledge of the substantive object but in respect of the knowledge 
of the relations within the object, while in ekagra, duration is 
felt mystically to lapse into eternity. 
93. The difference among the first four levels of buddhi 
has been considered so far in reference to knowing. But it is 
really a spiritual difference of which the cognitive aspect is only 
one aspect which is specially stressed because it is through it 
that the other aspects can be precisely characterised. In con- 
trast with viksipta, ekagra is said not only to be a new 
quality of knowing which reveals its object as luminous or self- 
evident but also to attenuate the klesas or spiritual errors, to 
loosen the bonds of karma and to make for freedom from 
the knowing or objective attitude altogether. Viksipta does 
®YB.I.13

=== PAGE 302 ===
278 STUDIES IN YOGA PHILOSOPHY 
not thus work—at least directly—against spiritual error, does 
not seek to reverse the downward current of karma and posi- 
tively maintains the objective attitude. The viksipta mind 
is said to work for dharma, jfiiana, vairagya and aiS- 
varya, and the miidha mind to work for their opposites— 
adharma, ajfiana etc.—both attaining ‘subjective’ good or 
evil—while the ksipta mind directly wills and enjoys visaya 
or object. These spiritual characters of the mind—good and evil 
—are rooted in the klesas or spiritual errors. The mind in 
the first three levels works within spiritual error in which sam - 
sira or natural life is rooted. The spiritual problem of cutt- 
ing the root of natural life and of turning the will backwards 
towards the attainment of mukti as strong un-ruffled self-posse- 
ssion does not arise in these mental levels. The mind here 
has only natural characters which receive their spiritual complex- 
ion from the memory of its spirituality in the higher levels— 
ekagra and niruddha,. memory of samadhi in the res- 
tricted sense of the term. 
94. As immediately antecedent to explicit spritual mentality . 
viksipta mentality is implicitly spiritual, seeking to attain but 
not consciously enjoying the attainment of dharma, jfiana, 
vairagya and aigvarya as the forms of ‘subjective’ good. 
Explicit spirituality is more than the enjoying attainment of 
‘subjective’ good which as such is good for the striving self, self 
that is identified with buddhi as with the moral pravrtti for 
the good. But it is only as this moral pravrtti is satisfied 
that the good is enjoyed as good in itself or spiritually good : 
striving for the subjectively good is consummated in the enjoyment 
of the spiritually good. Spirituality is more than even this spiri- 
tual enjoyment : it is implicitly a detachment or withdrawal from 
the enjoyment which is actualised in a transcendental or super- 
conscious state of buddhi called asamprajfiata. This de- 
tachment from spiritual enjoyment in the enjoyment itself comes 
spontaneously according to other systems, but in Yoga philoso- 
phy it is taken to be effected through a specific withdrawing 
activity of the mind—viz., the practice of yoga. Viksipta 
is thus the pre-spiritual mentality, conscious as pre-spiritual. as 
a striving mentality that makes for but is not the enjoying attain- 
ment of spirituality and much less the detachment from the en- 
joyment .

=== PAGE 303 ===
THE FIVE LEVELS OF BUDDHI 279 
95. The midha mentality as just preceding the viksi- 
pta, the opposite of the moral striving towards the subjective 
good in which viksipta consists, being thus what makes for 
the subjective evil in the form of adharma, ajfiina etc. As 
there is no pravrtti in the midha state, the making for 
evil is not a striving but is still self-conscious. In mitidha 
and viksipta, the evil or the good is felt as of the 
finite self, as subjective, but in ksipta, it is not so felt. 
There is no consciousness of evil in ksipta where the attitude 
is non-moral striving towards and enjoyment of the object or 
visaya felt as good but not known as such, as good for the 
self. That, however, the object is still felt as good shows that 
the mentality is implicitly self-conscious and belongs to buddhi. 
The consciousness of evil comes first in the mitidha state as 
the result of the baffied striving for natural good in the ksipta 
state. It is indeed the consciousness of natural evil but as baffled 
striving rouses the consciousness of the self also, the natural 
evil is felt as an evil for the self. Such subjective evil is im- 
plicitly a moral evil which is recognised as such in the viksipta 
state. What is felt as a natural good is implicitly a subjective evil: 
and what is felt explicitly as a subjective evil is implicitly a 
moral evil. What is explicitly felt as morally good is an im- 
plicit spiritual evil recognised as such in the explicit spiritual 
consciousness ; explicit spirituality recognises itself as an absolute 
evil to be superseded . 
96. The midha state represents the tendency towards 
subjective evil and it comes midway between the ksipta and 
the viksipta representing the tendencies towards natural good 
and moral good respectively. There is no helpless movement of 
the mind or distraction in the miidha stage. Its immobility is 
felt in the state as a subjective disability but not as a moral evil: 
it is, in fact, implicitly enjoyed , being suicidally sought to be con- 
tinued by blind resistance to distraction (implicit pravrtti). Itis 
moral indolence which is recognised in viksipta as the funda- 
mental moral evil, as the parent of adharma, ajfidna etc. 
The viksepas are the causes that keep the mind in the 
viksipta or morally striving state and prevent it from passing 
into the spiritual activity of yoga. Nine such viksepas are 
mentioned and five derivatives from them (viksepa-saha- 
bhuvah), the former being apparently what directly prevent

=== PAGE 304 ===
280 STUDIES IN YOGA PHILOSOPHY 
yoga and the latter what are only incompatible with’ yoga.® 
The nine viksepas are disease, mental dullness, doubt, un- 
conscious omission or lapse of will, bodily dullness, greed, error, 
hesitancy in rising to a higher spiritual level and unsteadiness on 
the present level. Of these, mental dullness and greed appear 
to be the persistence of the midha state itself within the 
viksipta and are opposed not to yoga-practice (spiritua- 
lity ) only , but to moral striving also, being thus specifically moral 
evils. Disease, unconscious lapse and bodily dullness are felt as 
evil even in the pre-moral or miidha stage. Doubt, error and 
the last two viksepas are specifically spiritual evils. 
97. The mind passes from object to object in the ksipta 
state not freely but because it is at the mercy of the objects which 
attract it successively. The operation of tamas is here impli- 
cit and the operation of rajas as expressed in the passing or 
transition is explicit, though the former really determines the latter . 
The former becomes explicit in the mudha state where rajas 
ceases to operate though, as sattva or prakhy ἃ is the ground 
of all this variation. there is a consciousness of the absence of 
movement or transition. In the viksipta state tamas lapses 
and the movement from object to object is free in a sense and not 
conditioned by the attraction of the object as in the ksipta state. 
The movement , however, is judged from the standpoint of yoga 
or the spiritual consciousness as an inability to stand, as unfree. 
as due to an internal necessity—the intrinsic instability of a 
vrtti—though not to an external necessity, viz., the attraction 
of the object. The ksipta mind is at best aware of moving to- 
wards an object but not of moving out of an object. The 
vikgipta mind is aware of moving out of an object freely and 
does not realise that this freedom is only apparent and that it 
really cannot stand due to its inherent instability. It is only in 
spiritual consciousness, the yoga- level of mentality that the 
inherent cause of its movement is understood as a viksepa 
opposed to freedom. Freedom is conceived as the conscious 
power οὗ the mind not to move from vrtti to vrtti, such 
power being lacking in the τῷ ἢ 4 ἢ ἃ state where the mind only 
helplessly stands and is unable to move. ‘The yoga-level of 
the mind implies the conscious ability to move and the actual 
*YS.1I 30-31.

=== PAGE 305 ===
THE FIVE LEVELS OF BUDDHI 281 
exercise of this ability not in moving from object to object 
(vrtti to vrtti) but in the mind or a mental vrtti flowing as 
self-identical—which is in fact the conscious arrest of mental 
change or ruling out of viksepa. 
98. Viksepa is thus distraction not merely of attention but 
of the free flowing being of buddhi. Buddhi as prakhyad 
is not merely knowing but the will to realise knowing, which is 
more than the will to attend. The will to attend may be variously 
motived and when the motive is explicitly to secure the free being 
of the mind, freedom from the inner tendency to change, from 
its own instability or unfreedom, the will tc attend is the will to 
realise the mind. It is in the first instance a realising of freedom 
in a vrtti that has itself come through change but ultimately it 
means a realising of freedom from vrtti altogether. Viksepa 
is understood in this will to realise freedom as a mode of unfree- 
dom of the self-conscious mind, as a tendency of the spirit to 
be in ἃ vrtti and as a necessary consequence to pass on to a 
new vrtti. There is no vrtti with viksepa®* actual or 
potential. In the viksipta state, the viksepa is actual. 
while in the yoga state (short of the finndl asamprajfita) 
it is potential, waiting to be actual as vyutthana. Vik- 
sepa is not itself a vrtti but the conscious passing to a vrtti 
or the mental cause of the passing, which may be conscious or 
unconscious . 
99. The fact that vrtti necessarily implies vik sepa is taken 
in Yoga-Bhiasyal.33.to disprove the Buddhist view 
of the mind being but a series of momentary cognitions 
(pratyaya). If each pratyaya or vrtti stood by itself 
in the series that mind is taken to be, each would be an ekagra 
mentality and there would be no viksipta mentality at all— 
which is not the fact. Since then the difference between 
viksipta and ekagra is an undeniable fact, the mind must 
be one with many vrttis, either similar or dissimilar. 
100. The continuity of one vrtti with the next is conscious 
in both the levels: to be aware of a vrtti is to be aware of pass- 
ing beyond it. In the viksipta mind, the conscious passing 
to a dissimilar vrtti is specifically called viksepa-. In the 
ekagra mind, the passing is conscious self-reproduction of a 
2 YB.I. 30

=== PAGE 306 ===
282 STUDIES IN YOGA PHILOSOPHY 
vrtti, its conscious achievement of duration and is itself vrtti 
though not another vrtti, while in viksipta the passing is 
conscious function of the starting vrtti and not itself vrtti. 
As the self-reproduction of an ekigra-vrtti is itself the 
vrtti, viksepa is here not all potential as in asam- 
prajiata but both potential and actual, potential in respect 
of the subsequent vyutthana-vrtti and actual in respect of 
the insight into the essence of the object of the starting vrtti. 
The insight here implies not a subsequent (anagata) vrtti 
but a present vrtti involved in the starting vrtti. The 
relation of the ekagra-vrtti to the involved vrtti of insight 
is not a passing or viksepa in the sense of a conscious self- 
losing of the initial vrtti but in the sense of its conscious self- 
realising. It is still the conscious passing of a vrtti and is as 
such a subtle viksepa which is, however, absent in the fifth or 
niruddha level. Vrtti as necessarily implying viksepa is 
an evil and the consciousness of this evil is what impels the mind 
to pass from viksipta to ekagra and from ekagra to 
niruddha.

=== PAGE 307 ===
CHAPTER VII 
THE NATURE OF YOGA 
101. In Yoga philosophy, ‘yoga’ is understood as spiri- 
tual activity or the result achieved by spiritual activity. Activity 
is conceived in this system as willing, knowing and even feeling 
as a process being taken as implicit willing. The process or acti- 
vity of knowing or feeling is not necessarily understood in other 
systems as willing; and willing itself may be regarded as a mode 
of knowing or feeling . «Spiritual activity, however , if adinitted at 
all. is taken in all systems as a specific conscious function, the 
function of achieving freedom from evil as such. Non-spiritual 
activity may be a freeing from evil but it need not be freeing from 
evil explicitly understood as evil. Again, spiritual activity is 
activity explicitly for achieving freedom. Activity in the merely 
moral stage is a freeing from evil as such but is not explicitly for 
freedom being cither for some gocdsform of being (objective or 
subjective) or in pure obedience to the law, while spiritual 
activity is for freedom as the good but not as a good form of 
being. By ‘good form of being’ is meant here what is desired : 
and in desire the agent necessarily conceives his desiring being to 
continue unaltered at the time of fulfilment. Freedom which is 
the end of spiritual activity is not desired in this sense, being 
conceived in the, activity not as what will satisfy the self retaining 
its present mentality at the time of satisfaction but as freedom 
from this mentality itself .4 Spiritual activity, in other words, is 
for the good in itself conceived indeed by the agent but not as 
good for the agent with his present mentality , conceived by him 
as an impersonal satisfaction, whether or not he remains ἃ per- 
son at the time of satisfaction. Lastly, unlike other conscious 
activities, spiritual activity not only makes for the end and is 
anticipatively conscious of it but is explicitly aware of being the 
activity of the end. It is not only avowedly for freedom but is 
itself self-consciously free from evil, being in this sense the self- 
deepening of a satisfaction already attained. The activity of the 
impersonal end is more readily intelligible—though only figura- 
tively—in spiritual knowing and fecling than in willing. Yoga 
philosophy may claim the merit of making it literally intelligible

=== PAGE 308 ===
284 STUDIES IN YOGA PHILOSOPHY 
in the conception of yoga as the essential or spiritual form of 
willing . 
102. Freedom and evil are connected notions: evil is intelli- 
gible only as implying a limitation or privation of freedom while 
freedom is known in the first instance as freedom from evil though 
it may not mean it. One is conscious of being unfree in the 
consciousness of freedom: un-freedom is realised as such in cons- 
ciously not knowing , feeling or willing what ought to be known, 
felt or willed. The concept of ‘ought’ is understood literally in 
reference to willing and has only a figurative meaning in reference 
to knowing and feeling. What ought to be known or felt is what 
is good to know or feel, something that is already known or felt 
but necessarily wished to be realised, known better by introspec- 
tive clarification of the presentation of it and felt more intimately 
by imaginative inwardisation of its significance for the self 
Realisation here is no willing except to Yoga and although it is 
a process or activity terminating in a result. the result is felt to 
come of itself and not to be achievedaby right . There may be a pre- 
paratory willing to remove the obstacle to its spontaneous emer: 
gence but the emerging process itself and not merely its result is 
felt to be a miraculous fulfilment of a wish involving the conscious 
dropping of the willing attitude. Yet it appears as though the 
fulfilment was achieved by willing; and there are figurative im- 
peratives like ‘ know the self’ or ‘love your neighbour’ (represent- 
ing as it were, the will of an Oversoul). To systems other than 
Yoga, not willing but the symbolism of willing is necessary to 
the spiritual realisation of knowing and feeling; and even the 
realisation of willing may not be literal willing but only a symbo- 
lic willing , a wishing that the realised will may come. To Yoga 
all realisation is willing though it is not willing outward but in- 
ward and is will to nivrtti and not to pravrtti. The will 
to nivrtti, will not to will, will to retract willing is the one 
spiritual activity. The self-retracting will may rest in the first 
instance in realised knowledge or feeling but ultimately it shoots 
beyond them. Spirituality 1s essentially the will to retract the 
forward will, and though it may yield the capacity of energising 
the forward will also, the exercise of this capacity except in the 
retractive interest would mean a fall from spirituality. 
103. Spiritual activity is essentially for nivrtti or arrest of 
the will towards bhoga. It may be an overt striving towards

=== PAGE 309 ===
THE NATURE OF YOGA 285 
an object but the motive of the striving is a good other than 
bhoga. Starting from the conative tendency towards bhoga 
as natural, spirituality may be taken to consist in viewing it, so 
far as it is self-conscious as evil, as the un-freedom of the self. 
The natural tendency may not in itself be an evil, but to be ex- 
plicitly aware of it as an activity of the self is to be aware of it 
as evil. One is thus aware of it when pleasure is viewed as to be 
appropriated or enjoyed as a possession and not as an expansion 
of the self, as the self being better. Pleasure may not be viewed 
as for the self, and even when so viewed may be taken—as on 
the merely moral level—as a presented mental fact that does not 
affect the being of the self. It is viewed on the spiritual level as 
affecting the being of the self, as either expanding it—yielding the 
sense of freedom, or contracting it—yielding the sense of posses- 
sion and as evil in the latter case. It is only when the self seeks 
pleasure to appropriate it that the will to bhoga is taken as evil 
willing. Spiritual activity is the activity to arrest evil willing, 
to be freed from willing viewed explicitly as evil. activity 
for the avowed end of freedom from unfree willing. Such free- 
dom may or may noi be a desirable form of the being of the self, 
but in any case it is not sought to be realised as such. The acti- 
vity is spiritual as a realising of freedom only from unfree willing ; 
and it is spiritual in the further sense that it is itself free which it 
would not be if freedom were sought to be realised as a good 
being of the self. 
104. The free realising of freedom is regarded in Samkhya 
and Vedanta as a knowing process and in bhakti- systems 
as a feeling process. In Yoga it is taken as literal willing, 
willing not necessarily to the exclusion of knowing or feeling, 
nor merely along with them but willing as their essential implica- 
tion and as capable of outgrowing them. In Kant also it is 
taken as willing. willing to be freed however not from the evil 
will to bhoga as in Yoga, but from natural inclination (and 
also it may be from the evil being or the intelligible character of 
the self); and it is willing to realise freedom not as the good nor 
as potentially outgrowing knowing and feeling as in Yoga but 
as the practically known and respected law of holiness. Spiri- 
tual activity is in Yoga willing to free oneself from the will to 
bhoga regarded as evil. All willing is in this system self- 
conscious, the function of buddhi called asmita. Spiritual

=== PAGE 310 ===
286 STUDIES IN YOGA PHILOSOPHY 
willing is willing behind willing, willing in reference to objective 
willing, higher asmita controlling lower asmita essentially in 
the negative or inhibitive way but capable of positively starting 
or energising it also either in the interest of freedom or as an 
expression of an unconscious evil in one’s being deeper than the 
will to bhoga. Willing to control willing in the negative or 
the positive way is just what is meant by yoga in the system. 
All spiritual activity is yoga. 
105. In other systems spiritual activity is ποῖ necessarily 
yoga in the sense of spiritual willing and yoga may be a 
spiritual condition other than activity. Although yoga either 
as an activity or as a passive condition is admitted as a fact in 
most Indian systems, it is.only in Yoga philosophy that yoga 
is identified with spiritual willing and understood to be the essen- 
tial form of spirituality . Spiritual willing is complete at every stage . 
neither complacent nor impatient but strong in its detachment 
and masterful in its activity. At every stage it is dual, willing not 
to be finite as against willing to be finite, ever succeeding beyond 
success , ever retaining and achieving its free infinitude. As free 
willing not to will. it is at the same time a possible willing to 
will, the possibility being here unlike the possibility on the moral 
level which is real to willing but not to knowing, an actuality that 
is known to be really annulled within the annulling willing. It 
is not preventing a desire from passing into willing but making it 
pass into willing to be killed by or subordinated to the spiritual 
willing. A jivanmukta is said to create a body (nirmana- 
kaya) to work off his karma, this being the terminal factual 
form of a willing annulling other actual willing within itself. 
106. Willing as explicitly free both in the act and in the end, 
these being identical, is yoga. It is the merit of Yoga phi- 
losophy to have reduced the apparently mystical consciousness 
of spiritual activity to an intelligible practical psychology of 
willing. Psychology is ordinarily conceived to be a science based 
on reflection of the grade to which the mental states are only 
presented facts without any bearing on the consciousness of free- 
dom and evil. Even the psychology that is based on moral 
reflection, if it refers to freedom at all, refers to it as extra- 
psychological or transcendental which mental states presuppose 
but do not determine or specificate. Hence it is that in the 
spiritual consciousness one feels an instinctive antagonism to the

=== PAGE 311 ===
THE NATURE OF YOGA 287 
reduction of it to psychology. Such reduction , in fact, is generally 
a denial of the unique value, obligatoriness or sacredness of 
distinctively spiritual activity; and where it is nct a denial, it 
stands confessed as inadequate psychology presenting the husk 
and not the kernel of spirituality; for the value here constitutes 
the fact. Spiritual value or freedom, however, is not other than 
mental fact though the latter is distinguishable from the former. 
Freedom is mental fact as constituting, not as constituted by, 
mental state while mental state is fact as constituted by freedom. 
Freedom or value is not the pure self, for it has a necessary 
reference to mental being, nor is it the mental being which 
presupposes it. Freedom is a mental fact constituting mental 
state or being which is distinct from it. There may thus be a 
psychology dealing with freedom as the mental function of mak- 
ing and unmaking mental being; and the reduction of spirituality 
to this mental function neither denies its value nor presents an 
inadequate analysis. 
107. Freedom as constituting mental state is psychologically 
intelligible only as freedom of the will. The purely logical or 
formal relation of “constitutiveness’ has indeed no necessary re- 
ference to willing : A is said to constitute B when B is distinct 
from A, but apart from A is nothing knowable. If B stands for 
knowable being im general, either there is no A to constitute it 
or A stands for a knowable real non-being which is just what 
is meant by freedom. Now mental state may be taken as re- 
presenting knowable being in general, for if there be knowable 
non-mental being, freedom cannot be said to constitute it with- 
out constituting a mental state---viz.. knowledge of the being. 
If freedom, as shown, is still a mental fact, it can be said to 
constitute mental state or knowable being in general if it can 
be real as non-being even without constituting being. This 
can only be understood about freedom of the will. Free know- 
ing or feeling, unless taken as an aspect of free willing, is fact 
only to the mystical consciousness. Free willing as a psycholo- 
gically intelligible spiritual fact is yoga. 
108. Spirituality is reduced to a procedure of practical psy- 
chology in Yoga philosophy, to a methodical willing to un- 
make or withdraw from mental state or knowable being in the 
first instance and then to make or freely put forth mental state, 
if and when necessary. The religion of yoga has accordingly

=== PAGE 312 ===
288 STUDIES IN YOGA PHILOSOPHY 
been called a psychological religion. In one sense any religion 
that emphasises the inner or subjective spiritual attitude in con- 
trast with objective spiritual life, social and ceremonial, is a 
psychological religion. The religion of Yoga is called psycho- 
logical in a specially disparaging sense on the assumption that 
it is merely a system of psychic gymnastics and does not imply 
like the subjectivistic religions of jfiina and bhakti the rea- 
lisation of sacred truths and values. The assumption is wrong. 
yoga being—as has been shown—exercise of explicitly spiritual 
and not of merely psychic willing. Such willing is also 
realisation of truths and values though it seeks to go beyond them. 
But it may be contended that as seeking to achieve freedom by 
right or might, yoga leaves no room for the consciousness of 
the sacred which is essential to religion. The charge requires 
to be examined. 
109. Knowledge or feeling of the sacred content as such is 
as realisation of it itself sacred. The realisation is not a produc- 
tion or causation of the sacred and may accordingly be under- 
stood as the activity of the content itself. It is difficult to un- 
derstand the conative realisation or my willing as the activity 
of the content or end willed without dropping the conative atti- 
tude altogether. The primary willing of freedom as end may 
be knowingly or feelingly realised as the activity of the end: 
but is it realised in the conative way ? if the realising will were 
a surrender to a categorical imperative, to freedom as the sacred 
law (as in Kant) and not as an end, its sacredness might be 
intelligible as the activity or motivation of the law. But in the 
Yoga system, yoga as the realising will has freedom as the 
end or good though it does not exclude a surrender to freedom 
as the law. to If vara as holy will. As the end or good is 
supposed to be achieved by right and not to come to the agent 
through its free grace, how can the achieving be sacred? It 
has to be admitted then that so far as yoga is the will to 
realise freedom of the will as an end and not as an imperative, 
it 15 the will to transcend the sacred and to supersede religion. 
At the same time the activity of realising it is at the start a sacred 
or religious willing that is known or felt to come. Even the 
will to overcome this religious willing (in asamprajfidta) 
may come (though it need not) through the religious will 
to surrender to God as the eternally realised law, the will to

=== PAGE 313 ===
THE NATURE OF YOGA 289 
Isvara-pranidhadna (as understood in YS.1.23 and not 
in YS.11.1,32). The freedom that comes through such reli- 
gious willing, however, is conceived as super-religious., as 
the freedom of asamprajfiata. The striving after it and 
the praying for it (as I¢vara-pranidhadna may be called) 
are alternative activities which both bring in  super-religious 
freedom. The discipline of Yoga may then be taken as alter- 
natively religious and super-religious activity for super-religious 
freedoni as the end. 
110. The procedure for attaining super-religious freedom 
(as in asamprajiiata) is either religious or super-religious. 
The religious procedure in the last resort would be Igvara- 
pranidhana in response to which Tévara in his grace 
is said to help the passage into asamprajfidta. The 
Super-religious procedure would be the spiritual effort of yoga, 
the intensification of sraddha, viryya etc.* This effort is 
not religious willing : there is no religious willing, for to reach 
an end through one’s might and not through grace is not an 
activity that is felt as sacred. Nor is it the ordinary egoistic 
will, for it is the effort to get rid of the ego or the finitising 
ahamkara. It is a willing negatively to avoid willing on any 
interest including the religious interest and positively to will itself 
or the freedom of self-possession or active self-identity. As willing , 
it is activity for an end or good, but the good here is conceived 
as itself and nothing else. If to act for a good is to act in an 
interest, the interest here is in the freedom from all interest . 
Yoga is an absolutely dis-interested willing (not the surrender 
of willing like certain forms of religion including I§vara- 
pranidhana), being even in the asamprajfiita 
Stage a super-religious spiritual activity. In other systems also 
there is the conception of super-religious spiritual activity , though 
the activity may not be conceived as willing. All activity for 
moksa (as distinct from svarga)—activity as opposed to 
self-surrender—where the good is conceived as absolute and not as 
co-ordinate with evil, not, in other words, as satisfying an interest 
is super-religious. Self-knowledge, for example, is a super-reli- 
gious good in Vedanta: so is bhakti in Vaisnava 
systems. 
* YS .1. 20-21 
19

=== PAGE 314 ===
290 STUDIES IN YOGA PHILOSOPHY 
111. Yoga as spiritual willing is not for jfiana but is 
started by jfidna. In the case of samprajifiata it leads to 
jfiana also, though not as an intended result. Again yoga, 
unlike jfiina, is said to make for the cessation of prarabdha 
bhoga or experiences in this life due to the karma of a pre- 
vious life.* Jfiana leads to vairagya and this to the atte- 
nuation of karma, but such attenuation does not at least nor- 
mally work against prarabdha and tends only to destroy or 
“burn the seed’ of saficita-karma. The jivanmukta 
waits for the prairabdha to work itself out and is not supposed 
to be competent to arrest its operation. In Yoga philosophy. 
jfiana is supposed (through vairagya) to start the specific 
kind of willing called yoga which works against all karma 
and tends to arrest the operation of even prarabdha. Yoga 
is not only like the other spiritual functions generally reversive of 
the current of life. the downward course of causality towards 
bhoga, but is specifically directed against the causal course 
within the present life, being thus the will not to will, the self- 
conscious will to nirodha. Nirodha is not merely the 
anticipative prevention of a possible causality but the present con- 
quest of a causality that has actually beeun to function. Yoga 
in this sense is interference with natural causality, nature being 
understood as a system of experiences (bhoga) that has al- 
ready started into being and includes a determinate future. It is 
thus tantamount to the willing of miracle or magic. 
112. There is general scepticism at the present day not only 
about any mental activity actually yielding the capacity of pro- 
ducing magical effects in nature but even about the possibility 
of willing in the mistaken faith in such magic, scepticism not 
only about the yoga-vibhitis but about the psychological 
possibility of yoga itself. Even if such scepticism be waived 
there is the dispute already noticed as to whether yoga is a neces- 
sary stage of spiritual discipline; and there is besides the doubt 
whether magic has any place in spiritual life at all. Whoever ad- 
mits free willing, however, in any sense admits magic in some 
form or other. Even if free willing is admitted in the sense simply 
of willing as determined by the knowledge of the cnd to be 
achieved, the causality of the knowledge, though not implying 
ΔῪΝ .11.1

=== PAGE 315 ===
THE NATURE OF YOGA 291 
that 1 could have caused a natural effect other than what I actually 
cause, implies that nature could be and not merely might be 
otherwise , could suspend its causal operation or, in other words, 
that nature is free. If freedom of willing is admitted in the 
further sense of the real possibility of willing what I do not will, 
it would mean an indetermination not only in external nature 
but even in mental nature, the external indetermination being 
conditioned by the internal. If further there is freedom of will- 
ing not to will, the willing that is said to be abstained from, 
has to be understood not merely as a real possibility but as 
an actuality that is annulled or ‘reduced to ideality’ in the 
abstaining will. There is not only indetermination in the mind, 
but the indetermination is a determinate moment in the spiritual 
willing , or, in other words, magic not only can be willed but 15 
willed—at once put forth and retracted-—in the freedom of yoga. 
If freedom is admitted at all. it is admitted as the causality or 
self-energising of knowledge (of the end willed). Freedom is 
not a hypothesis unless willing as causality is a hypothesis. The 
only causality that we are directly aware of is willing whence 
we derive the conception of causality in nature on the one hand 
and of spiritual causality on the other as the starting and re- 
traction of willing itself as the effect. If knowledge has causa- 
lity, the knowledge of knowledge also has its causality which 
would be just the magic efficiency of yoga. Free will in the 
different senses is, in fact, the same activity in different stages 
of realisation and implies the possibility of magic at every 
stage. To doubt yoga-vibhiti is to doubt yoga _ itself 
and to doubt yoga is to doubt the freedom of the will. 
113. The fundamental doubt is about willing as the causality 
of knowing. Knowledge that starts willing is knowledge of a con- 
tent to be brought into experienceable existence or to be prevented 
from emerging in it. Is the experience of attaining or avoiding 
literally caused by such knowledge ? Is such known-ness of the 
content the cause of its emergence or non-emergence into exis- 
tence? Is it of itself materialised into positively or negatively 
experienceable actuality? To deny the causality of knowledge 
in respect of the actuality of its content is to hold that knowledge 
is but a by-product of nature, that object that exists of itself 
causes its own known-ness. This would be materialism in which 
one inexplicability is only substituted for another. If the causa-

=== PAGE 316 ===
92 STUDIES IN YOGA PHILOSOPHY 
lity of knowledge be magic, the emergence of knowledge or 
known-ness as effect is also magic. Knowledge whether as cause 
or as effect of the experienceable actuality of its content implies an 
inexplicability. We start with the belief in our willing as a real 
causation . The belief may be held to and inwardised into the theory 
of yoga as a system of magic willing. Or it may be sought 
to be rejected, but the rejection also requires a specific discipline 
to realise it—realise the emergence of known-ness as a continuous 
change of the object—which would be yoga again though of 
another type. Materialism to be asserted as a theory demands 
to be realised. Realisation is yoga and one can only choose 
between different types of yoga. There is no escape from 
magic . 
114. So much as to the general possibility of yoga and 
yoga-vibhiti. The possibility of specific vibhitis will 
be discussed later.

=== PAGE 317 ===
CHAPTER VIII 
THE KINDS OF YOGA 
115. Two grades of yoga are mentioned by Patafijali 
—viz., Samprajflata and asamprajfiliita. Sampra- 
jiiata is said to present four sub-grades as having for its object 
the content of vitarka, vicara, ananda and asmita. 
The first two are each sub-divided into two stages. the first into 
savitarka and nirvitarka and the second into savicara 
and nirvicadra. Again. three kinds of yoga are distinguished 
according as its object—the content concentrated on—is grahya. 
grahana or grahitr. These stages and kinds of yoga 
require to be explained. 
116. Samprajfiaita implies concentration on a vrtti cor- 
responding to an object. The object is in the first instance 
sthiila or perceptual which has siiksma aspects apprehensible 
by the mind without the mediation of the senses. Concentration 
on the presented sthiila aspect leads to its clarification. to the 
explication of all its implicit sth ἢ 1 ἃ particularity , to the mind being 
“completely filled’ by it (4bhoga) or intuiting it in its fulness. 
The presentation of an object prior to the concentration implies the 
consciousness of a gap between the mind and the object : the mind 
does not completely reflect the object and the object is not com- 
pletely unfolded. these being different sides of the same fact. 
The given-ness of the object in ordinary perception is not an ulti- 
mate inexplicability as it is to Kant but implies the conscious- 
ness that I have to know it better and the object has to reveal 
itself more frankly. It is an implicitly conscious gap—an abso- 
lute entity at once subjective and objective—-between the mind and 
the object, the explicit fulfilment of which is yoga as concen- 
tration , this too being an absolute entity. Abhoga or the mind 
being ‘filled’ by the object or intuition is the general character 
of the samadhi reached through concentration. When the intui- 
tion is of the sthiila object as sthtila, it 1s called vitarka.* 
117.. The concentrative intuition called vitarka explicates only 
the sthiila particularity of the sthiila object, The comple- 
PYB.T.47

=== PAGE 318 ===
294 STUDIES IN YOGA PHILOSOPHY 
tion of the process furnishes the occasicn for the next stage of 
concentration called vicara which yields intuition of the sik- 
sma aspect of the sthiila object. ‘Stiksma’ means both 
what is imperceptible to sense and what is the constitutive cause 
of the sthula object and is understood here as the metaphysi- 
cal reality immanent in the sensible object that is concentrated 
on. Vitarka leads to the intuition of the implied sensible 
aspects of the sensible object of concentration. The supersen- 
sible essence of the sensible object is not implied in it in the 
sense its sensible particularity is implied: the implicitness or 
immanence of the constitutive essence in the sensible object is 
of another grade. To intuit the object in its full sensible parti- 
cularity is to be aware of the problem of intuiting its metaphysi- 
cal essence. The sensible object is a construct of the vikara- 
tattvas or viSesas—bhita and indriya, these being 
accordingly themselves taken as sthula, although neither is 
by itself perceptible to sense.“ The siiksma essence of the 
sensible object is a gradation of objective essences from tan- 
matra upwards to prakrti. Vic&ra is concentration on 
these essences, on the eight prakrtis mentioned in simkhya. 
118. The completion of vicara in respect of any of these 
essences raises the problem of inandanugata yoga. The 
meaning of ‘ananda’ here is disputed. Vacaspati takes 
it to mean the pleasure that consists in the mind being ‘ filled’ 
by indriya, sense-pleasure self-consciously understood as the 
intuition of the senses themselves as object, as the mind freely 
one with indriya. Vijfidna-bhiksu holds that ‘Aanan- 
da’ has here no reference to sense, sense-pleasure as _ self-con- 
scious being to him only a form of vitarka: Ananda is the 
pure joy that emerges after the realisation of the essence or heart of 
the object. To Vacaspati as to some others, while vitarka 
and vicadra are concentrated on the grahya or apprehended 
object, &4nanda is concentration on grahana or the act of 
apprehension—which would be denied by Bhiksu. The point 
will be discussed presently but Bhiksu appears to be right 
at least so far as he implies that inandanugata represents 
a higher grade of yoga than vicéranugata. Asmi- 
*Bhiita is sthiila-siiksma and indriya is also such, the 
former representing the substantive bemg and the latter the  sense- 
perceptibility or manifestness of the bhautika object.

=== PAGE 319 ===
THE KINDS OF YOGA 295 
tanugata is a still higher grade: 4Gnanda, whatever else it 
implies, is not presentation of an object like vitarka and 
vicara but is a mental state that is itself presented as an im- 
plicitly ‘subjective’ content while asmita is presented as the 
subject itself, explicit either as the mind with the form of the 
self or as the self with the form of the mind. Concentration on 
implicit subjectivity (8 π ἃ ἢ 4 4) prepares the way for concentra- 
tion on the explicit subject (asmita). 
119. In YS.1.41 which will come up for later discussion , 
there is reference to the content of samprajfidta-samidhi 
or samapatti as either grahya (apprehended object), 
grahana (apprehending act) or grahitr (apprehending sub- 
ject). There is dispute as to whether the content of each of the four 
stages of yoga has these aspects or whether yoga as vitarka 
and vicara has grahya only as content, while AGnanda 
and asmita have grahana and grahitr respectively. The 
first view is apparently held by Vijfiana-bhiksu and the 
second by Vacaspati and cthers. It may be suggested. how- 
ever, that although the content of vitarka and vicara has the 
triple aspect, the grahya aspect is alone explicit, the grahana 
and the grahitr aspect being explicit in ananda and 
asmita respectively. In each of the four stages, the content 
has a triple aspect. for yoga is concentration not of cognitive 
attention only but of the whole being of the mind. In the first 
two stages the attitude is mainly cognitive or cognitively object- 
tive , while in the last two it is mainly subjective, being the feeling 
attitude in the third stage which is subjective but not opposed to 
the objective attitude and in the fourth stage either the pure cona- 
tive attitude which is subjective and opposed to the objective or 
the attitude of knowing the self and not the object as in vitarka 
and vicara. 
120. The important point appears to be that the subjective 
attitude of mind presupposes the objective attitude and that it is 
only when the object of experience is known as constituted by 
objective metaphysical essences that the feeling and willing aspects 
of the object are explicitly detached from the object as free subjec- 
tive function and subject. The correction of the objective attitude 
of the mind is effected through the pure or metaphysical knowledge 
of the object. With all this accords the interpretation of the diffe- 
rent stages of samprajfhata given in Bhoja-vrtti [, 17.

=== PAGE 320 ===
296 STUDIES IN YOGA PHILOSOPHY 
The content of samadhi is the grahya in vitarka and 
vicadra. The content οὗ dnanda-samadhi is buddhi 
itself with the self implicit in it, buddhi as subjective function , 
not pure buddhi but with a touch of rajas and tamas in it 
and hence not freed altogether from the objective attitude, such 
content being ananda or joy, the self-conscious ‘absolute’ 
being of subjective function or grahana. ‘The objective atti- 
tude of the first two samadhis implies the conceit of a body— 
gross and subtle—in which the mind is finitised. In ananda- 
samadhi, this conceit of a body drops, such samadhi being 
said to be enjoyed without self-knowledge by the videha- 
devatais. Next comes asmita-samadhi of which the con- 
tent is pure buddhi freed from the objective attitude altogether 
and itself object in the sense of the bare existent or manifest self- 
identity . identified with the pure self and reflecting no visaya at 
all. This samadhi has two forms according as the identity of 
the self and buddhi is taken as buddhi only or as the self 
only. The former would be the samadhi said to be enjoyed 
by the devatias called ‘prakrti-layas and the latter would 
be viveka-khy4ti as the consummation of samprajfiadta. 
121. The conception of videha and prakrti-laya re- 
quires to be interpreted. Both are understood to be free from 
ahamkara or the conceit of the body. Freedom from 
ahamkara does not by itself mean knowledge or realisation of 
the self (or I$ vara). It is in the first instance a merging or 
forgetting of the self in a tattva higher than ahamhkara, a 
free identification of the self with infinite b ud dh i—either in the 
form of feeling or in the form of willing. Free identification means 
identification in the explicit subjective attitude as distinct from 
unconscious or erroneous identification which implies the objective 
attitude and the conceit of the body. It means consciousness of 
infinite bud dhi as one self, such consciousness being feeling the 
-self as content, or willing as the self. The self is not the content 
of consciousness nor does the self will and hence the self as 
apparently content or apparently active is really buddhi un- 
distinguished from the self or the self undistinguished from 
buddhi. The identity of buddhi with the self—as the con- 
tent of-consciousness—is the subjective object, feeling itself being 
the object felt; and the identity of the self with buddhi—the 
activity of consciousness—is the subject as willing towards

=== PAGE 321 ===
THE KINDS OF YOGA 297 
buddhi. Videha apparently represents the former and 
prakrti-laya the latter. The videha may be taken as 
actively feeling out towards feeling as absolute object or tan- 
matra and as in this activity feeling infinite buddhi as the 
self. The prakrti-laya in willing towards infinite buddhi 
feels infinite prakrti as the self. Both are devatias, for to 
feel an infinite tattva as the self without being unrestricted to a 
body is to be a devata or an absolute feeling. One feels an in- 
finite object as the self, in being active towards something lower 
which is the finite absolute or tanmatra (lower than buddhi) 
in the case of videha and the infinite absolute or buddhi 
(lower than prakrti) in the case of prakrti-laya, ‘abso- 
lute’ meaning here manifest identity of subject and object. The for- 
‘mer is in sinanda-samadhi and the latter is sismita - 
samadhi, neither knowing the self (or God) as a tattva 
beyond the object. neither achieving freedom from the object. 
As unfree, though without the conceit of body, they are re- 
born but reborn as in samadhi which has not got to be 
achieved . the former apparently in the highest samprajfata, 
or viveka-khyiti and the latter in samprajfata; 
each being re-born in a samadhi higher than its present 
samadhi. 
122. The videha, the prakrti-laya and the vive- 
kin appear to represent the affective, conative and cognitive types 
of spirituality or realised consciousness of the self. In terms of 
samadhi, the first stands for sananda and the last two for 
two stages of sismita, sainanda and sasmita having 
grahana and grahitr or subjective function and subject as 
their respective contents. Realised feeling as of the videha is 
the objective absolute, the identity of subject and object appear- 
ing as impersonal. Realised willing as of the prakrti-laya 
is the subjective absolute or the identity appearing as personal. 
Realised knowing or viveka would be detached from these two 
absolutes and as such would be the over-personal self as correct- 
ing or dissolving the. self-conscious or free identity of subject and 
object. This correcting is stil a buddhi- function with which 
the self is identified and is not accordingly explicitly aware of 
being over-nersonal. The subjective absolute or absolute will like 
the objective absolute or absolute feeling is identified with the 
substantive buddhi and not merely buddhi- function, but

=== PAGE 322 ===
298 STUDIES. IN YOGA PHILOSOPHY 
unlike it is identified with the implicit or unmanifest form of 
buddhi which is just prakrti. 
123. The videha and the prakrti-laya are conceived 
to be freely merged into or identified with the object and not 
knowing the self (or God) as beyond the object. The freely 
feeling self is aware of the self but not as distinct from buddhi 
and the freely willing self 15 aware of the self as distinct but not as 
known. The prakrti-laya as absolute will may be further 
taken in Yoga as implicitly aware of God working in him (or 
in prakrti with which he is identified }—that is why he is sup- 
posed to be reborn as janyes$vara—but not therefore as 
known. The vivekin is conceived in Yoga as knowing not 
only the self but also, it may be, God. 
124. Is asmita-samadhi necessarily dual as absolute 
knowing and absolute willing, viveka and prakrti-lina- 
tva as apparently conceived in Bhoja-vrtti? It does not 
appear that one in the sinanda stage has to pass through the 
prakrti-lina form of asmita in order to attain the 
viveka stage. It was pointed out before that intensive effort 
and the contemplation of Ig vara are only alternative ways 
of reaching asamprajfiata. May not the two forms of 
asmita be similarly alternative processes? Viveka or abso- 
lute self-knowledge need not be reached through the realisation of 
absolute will: sananda or absolute feeling seems to pass 
directly either into absolute willing or into absolute knowing. 
Two courses appear to be open at every stage of the free willing 
of freedom. F1eedom is understood both in the act and in the 
end of willing: the end remaining the same, a higher freedom 
or grade of efficiency in the act may be developed or the form of 
the act may be the same while a higher quality of freedom as the 
end may be achieved. Apparently the end of the videha and 
of the prakrti-laya is the same—viz., to freely merge into the 
object; but the act of the latter is freer as willing towards 
buddhi itself than the act of the former which would be actively 
feeling out towards tanmatra. Again, the act or subjec- 
tive function of the vivekin and the videha is the knowing 
of the mind, not willing towards it which is the act of the pra- 
krti-laya; but while the latter seeks to merge in it, the former 
secks to be detached from it. Similarly the passage beyond 
vicdra also is in two directions—towards the knowledge of

=== PAGE 323 ===
THE KINDS OF YOGA 299 
Ananda and towards Ananda itself. But ananda as free 
samadhi is at once both, unlike asmita which is alter- 
natively knowing and willing. The knowing of Gnanda as sub- 
jective function and the feeling of it are indistinguishable . 
125. So far as to the samadhis in the subjective attitude 
(i.e., with grahana and grahitr as_ content )—-viz., 
ananda and asmita. As to the objective samadhis— 
Vicadra and vitarka (with grihya as content). each pre- 
sents two forms which are distinct and co-ordinate (not alter- 
native). The two forms of vitarka are savitarka and 
nirvitarka. ‘vitarka’* in these terms meaning wrong 
vitarka.* Similarly about the two forms of vicara—savi- 
cara and nirvicara. In both savitarka and savi- 
cara. the content is presented with an adventitious distinction 
which drops out in nirvitarka and nirvicara. In savi- 
tarka this distinction is a vikalpa generated by verbal 
knowledge,” while in savicara, it is the specific spatio- 
temporal or causal position® of the content concentrated on, this 
being also avikalpa in the wider sense. This adventitious dis- 
tinction in the content is a buddhi-construct which is sought 
to be eliminated in the next higher samadhis—nirvitarka 
and nirvicara. 
126. In vitarka the object concentrated on is a perceptible 
whole of perceptible parts. In savitarka, it appears with the 
fictitious unity of the name, meaning and thought’ called 
vikalpa. Not that the object as thus known is false. for the 
adventitious character is a mental construct and not the content 
of error. But it is known inadequately, known as indefinitely 
confused with presentation owing to the mind-created limitation . 
To be known adequately within perceptual limits—in para- 
pratyakga‘° is to be known in nirvitarka. Here the fac- 
titious character of the vrtti drops off, the elimination being 
called smrti-pariguddhi‘ or the removal of the memory 
or thought of the verbal meaning. The object in savitarka 
ΔῪΝ 1.17. 
bYS.1.42. 
‘YB.1. 44, 
4¥S.1.42;TH.17. 
°YB.1.42. 
YS .1.43,

=== PAGE 324 ===
300 STUDIES IN YOGA PHILOSOPHY 
appears within the vrtti and yet as distinct from it because of the 
verbal reference. In nirvitarka, as the verbal reference 
lapses, this distinction of vrtti and its object also lapses so that 
the vrtti appears to lose itself (svartipa-siinyeva) and 
shines as the object only (arthamatra-nirbhasa). This 
object is still a whole of parts, an avayavin the unity of 
which is real and not a vikalpa. 
127. Theobjectof vicara is siksma inthe sense of being 
the imperceptible cause or cause of cause etc. of the sthiila 
or perceptible object. Savicara is the intuition of the siksma 
object as present with the limitations of desa. kala and 
nimitta.* The intuition is of the siksma as manifest in the 
sthula and having the objective time-position of the sthila, 
which is position in the causal series of spatio-temporal pheno- 
mena. (Such stiksma corresponds to what Kant calls subs- 
tance or cause in phenomenon). This objective time-position is 
presumably a vikalpa, as implying krama which is taken in 
Yoga-bhasya® to be a vikalpa,° though apparently not 
in the sense of a verbally generated construct. As this time- 
position neeessarily involves dega and nimitta, they too are 
vikalpas; and the incidental implication is that there is no 
real causality in the succession of phenomena. In nirvicdra 
this time-position of the stiksma object is eliminated, the 
noumenon being known as integral and unrestricted to any specific 
immanent parinama.’? As in nirvitarka, the vrtti 
appears to lose itself and shines as the artha only. 
128. Nirvicdra yields intuition of the supersensible causes 
of the sensible world, beginning with the tanmatras and end- 
ing with prakrti, a gradation of objective essences as standing 
by themselves without being manifest in this world. An object of 
normal perception under savitarka-concentration is isolated 
from all its external relations but is still known as an avayavin®. 
unfolding its internal perceptible characters such as were implicit 
in the presentation of it. Under vicara - concentration, this 
isolated object reveals a gradation of imperceptible constitutive 
®YB.1.44. 
DTI. 52. 
SCVastu-stinyo buddhi-nirmanah Sabdajflananupiti 
ΔῪΒ 1.44. 
°YB.1.43.,

=== PAGE 325 ===
THE KINDS OF YOGA 301 
causés terminating in the a-linga, object that is unmanifest and 
manifests nothing, object as unrelated to the self in this sense. 
The viewing of the sensible object as thus resolved into prakrti, 
as unrelated to the self, as unknowable leads to the lapse of the 
objective attitude altogether and to the emergence of the 
subjective attitude. The objective attitude implies attention 
to the grahya (apprehended or known object) which ultimately 
reduces it to a known unknowable (a-linga ), grahya- 
a-grahya as it may be called. The subjective attitude emerges 
when the object thus turns out to be a puzzle, if not a contradic- 
tion. The consciousness of the subjective not only presupposes 
the consciousness of the objective but the reduction of objectivity 
itself to an apparent or real contradiction. Attention is thus 
turned from the grahya or apprehended object to grahana 
or apprehending act or subjectivity whence again, as has been 
explained , it is turned to the grahitr or apprehending agent or 
the subject. 
129. All these are stages of asamprajfata-yoga. The 
general character of samprajfata is best understood in re- 
ference to its result which is technically called samapatti. 
Samapatti is the fixation of the mind on a content (the mind 
being tatastha, ‘in it’) and its assuinption of the form of the 
content (it being tadafijana—‘taking its smear or com- 
plexion’). In all knowledge. the mind may be said to be fixed 
on the content and to take its form, but this has to be understood 
in a special sense about the super-normal intuition that sam4- 
patti is taken to be. The mind here self-consciously fixes itself 
on the content and self-consciously identifies itself with it. Self- 
conscious fixation is not only the awareness of the mind as fixed 
on the content but also the awareness of willing to withdraw the 
mind from other contents , not provisionally—as in ordinary reflective 
knowing—in order to know more about the object fixed on but to 
know it better. willing to conquer viksepa as a spiritual evil, 
evil conceived to be a limitation of freedom (of self-possessed 
contemplation). As the result of such disinterested fixation, the 
mind overcomes the gap between knowing and its object or their 
dualism , gets ‘filled’ by the object and thus rises above the sub- 
jectivism that ordinary reflection involves. The mind takes the 
form of the object, is tadafijana in the sense that the dualism 
of knowing and known lapses. The lapse may take two forms:

=== PAGE 326 ===
202 STUDIES IN YOGA PHILOSOPHY 
either the mind or the mental vrtti that is fixated finds the object 
within itself , the object being still distinct within, though not from, 
the mind as mirror, or the mind may freely merge itself into the 
contemplated object, give up its self as it were, (Svariupa- 
S$iinyeva) so that the object alone shines out (artha- 
matra-nirbhasa). Even in the latter case, the object that 
shines is the mind or vrtti appearing as the object by freely re- 
tracting its subjectivity. These two forms are distinguishably con- 
tinuous in vitarka and vicara where there is samadpatti 
in respect of the grahya object. In Ananda and asmita-— 
where the samapatti is in respect of grahana and grahitr 
as content, the two forms either coincide or are exclusive 
alternatives . 
130. Samapatti is attained by the mind that is ksina- 
vrtti, abstracted from all vrttis other than that concentrated 
on and with the functions of rajas and tamas that make for 
viksepa attenuated by abhy&asa and vairiagya or dis- 
interested spiritual practice. The abstraction or the arrest of 
viksepa—the retractive spiritual will—is the essential activity of 
yoga which in samprajfiata terminates or rests in a parti- 
cular vrtti. In attention in the viksipta stage, concentra- 
tion appears to be the activity, abstraction being only its passive 
concomitant and result. In yoga, abstraction is the explicit 
activity of which concentration is the result which, too, is not 
passive but a restful activity, the activity of keeping self-identical 
in avrtti. Abstraction is negative or retractive willing which is 
real only through the spiritual interest, interest in the freedom 
from interest. The willing, however, rests in the vrtti from 
which as Alambana it starts. There is no vrtti, however, that 
does not imply an actual or potential vikgepa.* and even in 
ekagra, there is potential viksepa in the form of a persist- 
ing reference to the objects of bhoga or experience, reference 
that is, however, only a sainskadra. Hence samadhi in 
Samprajihata is said to be savija—with the seed or poten- 
tiality of suffering in it. At the same time this seed or 58 1 5 - 
kara is gradually devitalised by the samsk4ara left by the 
Samadhi itselfi—prajha-krta-samsk4dra as it is called— 
which as the sainskara or as conditioned by the samhskara 
®*YB.1.30.

=== PAGE 327 ===
THE KINDS OF YOGA 303 
of the retracting activity tends to arrest the tendency to relapse 
into the vikgipta level. 
131. Prajfia that shines out in samadhi is spiritual wis- 
dom implying not only intuition of the visgesa or particularity of 
metaphysical objects, which gama and anumana only postu- 
late and do not establish, but also a purity or transparency 
(vaiSaradya) of the buddhi-self in which one views suffer- 
ing souls as from a height.* It need not mean the wisdom that 
is reached in nirvicadra-samadhi alone (in which pra- 
ja is first mentioned in YB.): it includes viveka (param 
prasamkhyanam—-YB.1.2.) which also is called pra- 
j#a in YS.11.27. Prajfia in this wide sense leaves its sains- 
kara which militates against the samiskara of viksipta 
mind that persists in ekagra. The samskara of viksipta 
does not persist in asamprajfiita which is accordingly 
called nirvija-samadhi. This samadhi arrests vrtti 
altogether , arrests even the terminal vrtti, the prajiiad called 
viveka and militates against the samskara left by the 
prajiia. Nirvija-samadhi or niruddha also leaves its 
salhskara, as may be inferred from the facilitation and in- 
creased duration of later niruddha. This samskara works 
against the sashskara of savija-samadhi. 
132. The prajfia that emerges in the final samprajnata 
—viveka as it is called—is the perception of itself as buddhi- 
vrtti distinct from the self and as accordingly savija, tending 
through its implied ἀνιᾶν ἃ towards bhoga or potentially evil. 
The perception is spiritual as implying para-vairagya or 
final detachment of the self from the object, detachment not only 
from the object of the mind but also from the mind itself as object, 
from the mind even in its final actual state viz., viveka. 
Vairagya is not mere desirelessness but a free conquest (ν ἃ ὅ1 - 
kara) of desire—whether for natural (drsta) or for spiritual 
(anusravika) good through the perception of the evil im- 
plied in desire. Vairagya is the condition of all yoga, the 
one motive of the will to nivrtti. The perception of the evil 
even in viveka-samadhi in so far as it is a vrtti leads 
to para-vairagya which is no longer the conquest of desire 
—for viveka already means a cessation of desire—but the free 
*Bhiimisthaniva sailasthah—YB.1.47.

=== PAGE 328 ===
304 STUDIES IN YOGA PHILOSOPHY 
annulment of unfreedom that viveka itself as vrtti is per- 
ceived in viveka to imply. Freedom is the positive end—the 
freedom of the mind to stand like the self. Negatively it is 
freedom from desire—and therefore is not said to be desired— 
and even from knowledge which as viveka knows itself to be 
but vrtti, as dependent on the object and as, therefore , the ini- 
tial form of unfreedom. There is no knowledge except through 
vrtti and freedom though achieved through knowledge is free- 
dom from knowledge itself , freedom as the super-conscious activity 
of the mind to stand like the self, to be and not to know. 
133. This super-conscious activity or freedom beyond know- 
ledge is asamprajfladta-samadhi. It is still the activity 
of buddhi, not of the self which is pure consciousness and no 
activity. In all lower stages the activity of buddhi is bound up 
with a vrtti though even there as the will to nivrtti, it also 
transcends the vrtti. Here it is the will to withdraw from 
all vrtti and is, therefore, no function of vrtti. being the func- 
tion of buddhi without vrtti, i.e., with vrtti reduced to 
samskara within it. It does not mean a lapse of buddhi 
into prakrti, as the retraction of all vrtti would imply in 
Sauwhkhya. This samskara-Sesa-buddhi lapses into 
prakrti only in the final asampraifiata which of itself 
passes into mukti or kaivalya. Otherwise there is relapse 
from asamprajflata to samprajfiadta—waking or vyut- 
thina means this relapse here—-to viveka-prajiia whence 
through the samskara left by asamprajfiita there is 
easier elevation to the super-conscious stage. The alternation goes 
on till viveka reaches its full maturation in the four-fold know- 
ledge of evil (heya), cause of evil (heya-hetu), freedom 
from evil (hana) and means to freedom (hanopaya; and then 
comes the final asamprajfidta with its three stages—p ara- 
Vairagya, citta-laya (in prakrti) and kaivalya (ces- 
sation of the possibility of re-emergence of citta) spontaneously 
succeeding one another without the necessity of fresh sidhana. 
The four stages prior to final asamprajiiata make up 
what is called karya-vimukti (interpreted by Bhiksu as 
kartavya-samapatti or cessation of duty ) and the last 
three citta-vimukti which is freedom from the mind δ 
* YB .IT.27.

=== PAGE 329 ===
CHAPTER ΙΧ 
THE PROCEDURE OF YOGA 
134. Yoga or the free willing of freedom is a super-religious 
spiritual activity. It may presuppose a moral and religious dis- 
cipline, and religious activity in the form of I§vara-pra- 
nidhana may be an alternative procedure co-ordinate with the 
yoga procedure for the attainment of yoga or the freedom 
of samadhi as the end, but freedom whether in the yoga 
act or as its end is conceived to be super-religious. The absolute 
will that yoga implies is as much ‘ beyond good and evil’ as the 
absolute knowledge of the Vedantist or the absolute bhakt1 
of the Vaisnava. These Jatter may still be described as reli- 
gious so far as they imply a surrender to the sacred but yoga 
as absolute will is explicitly a transcendence of the sacred. At 
the same time it is spiritual , unlike the absolute will in Nietzsche’s 
cult of the superman, being essentially the will to nivrtti and 
not to pravrtti, the will to mukti, to freedom as the power 
to stand as distinct from the power to create objective values inde- 
finitely. Not that the mukti of Yoga is incompatible with 
a patricipation in the life of God for all time in His work of libe- 
ration of souls, but anyway such participation would not be to 
Yoga the self’s own life as individual , the self being as in Si m- 
khya eternally individual and without any activity. The frec- 
dom of negative willing indeed implies the freedom of forward 
willing but as has been pointed out, such forward willing con- 
ceived in Yoga to be actualised and annulled at the same time. 
135. The practical procedure for the attainment of sama- 
dhi includes many steps, some of which are only preparatory 
to absolute willing (bahiranga or external means) and others 
that are constitutive of it (antaranga or internal parts); and 
the lower forms of samadhi are themselves preparatory in re- 
reference to the highest. Some of these are consecutive steps of 
which each higher is to be attempted only after the lower step 
has been efficiently practised ; and some are only alternative steps . 
As to the consecutive steps, it is not necessary that one should 
20

=== PAGE 330 ===
306 STUDIES IN YOGA PHILOSOPHY 
begin with the lowest; one may be competent to function on a 
higher level.* In fact, one should begin on the highest level and 
then gradually discover by trial the level that suits him i.e., on 
which he can function efficiently .° 
136. The spiritual procedure of yoga consists in the last 
resort in abhyasa or vairagya, positive exercise of free- 
dom and negative annulment of unfreedom. Two grades of 
vairagya—para and apara—have been mentioned, of 
which the latter is desirelessness understood as the active con- 
quest of desire and the former is the free withdrawal of the self 
from the mind itself. Both are forms of negative or retractive 
mental activity conditioned by the knowledge of the evil (dosa- 
darsgana) in the objective attitude of the mind and both may 
be regarded as the prasada or realisation of the knowledge. 
The knowledge itself implies a residual objective attitude , the evil of 
which is manifest only in para-vairagya which is accord- 
ingly a withdrawal from knowledge itself and may be described 
as such realisation (prasada) of knowledge as amounts to 
the transcendence of it. Abhyasa or practice is the free will- 
ing to stand.,° the self-conscious effort of the mind to persist un- 
changingly as an isolated buddhi-vrtti or as vrtti-less 
buddhi, such willing being confirmed by constant repetition in 
the right spirit.‘ The right spirit is but vairigya, the motive 
to the positive effort and not merely to its repetition, so that 
abhyasa and vairagya appear to be different aspects of 
the same activity, the difference lapsing altogether in the passage 
to asamprajnata, where the positive activity is negative 
and the negative activity positive, freedom in the act and free- 
dom in the end being coincident. The positive activity in all 
yoga is a prayatna or willing of which Sraddha, virya, 
smrti, samadhi and prajiia are specific aspects. ‘Srad- 
dha’ means here the active wish or aspiration for yoga, 
virya’ the will to dharana, ‘smrti the effort of dhya- 
na, ‘samadhi’ the effortless activity to be and ‘prajfia’ the 
knowledge that shines out in samadhi: knowledge which 
ΒῪΒ.ΠΙ.6. 
ὈΥΝν .ΠΙ.6. 
eysS.1.13. 
dys .1.14. 
°YS.1.20.

=== PAGE 331 ===
THE PROCEDURE OF YOGA SUI 
being practised in vairagya for its object leads to the freedom 
of asamprajnata. 
137. All these are stages of abhyasa which is here direct 
willing and not willing through means, prescribed in the first 
pada of Yoga-sutra for the uttama-adhikarin, the 
fittest aspirant who starts with Sraddha in the above sense and 
is already in a sense on the ekagra level. This direct willing 
leads him on even to asamprajfiata, though here an alter- 
native to willing—viz., If vara-pranidhana which implies 
surrender of the willing attitude—is prescribed which also is 
attained directly without means. The aspirant who can directly 
attain yoga and is on the way to it may, however, experience 
viksepa and certain auxiliary practices are prescribed for its 
avoidance which are not really means but serve only to strengthen 
and chasten the aspiration (and are accordingly called ‘parikar- 
ma’). These include cultivation of a serene moral attitude to- 
wards other persons, breath-control, experimental production of 
certain magical experiences (“pravrtti’ as they are called) 
through the control of attention and so forth. The moral atti- 
tude mentioned is interesting. The aspirant is enjoined to culti- 
vate maitri, karuna, mudita and upeksai for the happy. 
unhappy, the virtuous and the vicious person respectively .* He 
should avoid envy for the happy man, have good wishes for 
him, feel his happiness as though it were his own, these being 
implied in maitri or friendliness through which he gets freed 
from riga or the lure of pleasure. Karuna or compassion 
implies avoidance of indifference (tatasthyam) towards others’ 
suffering , of the conceit of being superior to them (darpa) 
and of the wish to inflict suffering on the enemy (dvesa): the 
feeling of others’ suffering as one’s own frees one from dvesa 
or fear of pain. Mudita or joy (of approval) at others’ 
punya (merit or virtue achieved) excludes asiiya or the car- 
ping tendency and leads one towards punya and the avoidance 
of the pain of a bad conscience (pascat-tipa). For the sinner 
one should have upeksa or forgiveness (indifference or auda- 
sinya in the sense of seeking to forget his sin) and not 
amarsa—anger or hatred. Unlike the first three. upekgi 
is only negative and has no positive counterpart unless it be 
YS 1,33,

=== PAGE 332 ===
308 STUDIES IN YOGA PHILOSOPHY 
karuna, which, however, is for the relief of the suffering due 
to sin rather than for the conversion of the sinner (though it 
may not exclude what is called inGita ‘loka-samgraha’ 
or the compassionate teaching of others). That upeksa is only 
negative comes out in Yoga-bhasya.* where it is pointed 
out that while the other three can be intensified by thought (bha- 
vana) leading to realisation (samadhi) and _ spiritual 
strength (bala), upeksa does not admit of realising thought 
and hence does not lead to positive strength. 
138. No means to the attainment of yoga are apparently 
prescribed in the first section of the Yoga-sttras which des- 
cribes only the actual procedure of the uttamadhikiarin, the 
aspirant who is already posted in the ekagra level. The dis- 
cipline for the madhyamadhikarin, the next best aspirant 
who has already the spiritual impulse and cannot yet spiritually 
will , is stated’ as comprising tapas (asceticism), svaidhyiaya 
(study of sacred ὁ ἃ 518 or meditation—j ap a— of sacred man- 
tras) and Igvara-pranidhana (contemplation of God), 
these making up what is called kriya-yoga (inner religious 
activity which is external relatively to super-religious spiritual 
activity viz., the free willing of freedom). These attenuate the 
spiritual evil (kiesa) in our nature that prevents rise to sama - 
dhi.° They are prescribed for one already in the rcligious stage 
with aspiration for freedom or moksa. There are, again, others 
who have not yet risen to this stage, for whom a discipline of our 
relatively outward nature—moral and even physical—is neces- 
sary. The discipline for all who are on the viksipta level— 
for the vyutthita-citta (with a waking or discursive con- 
sciousness as distinct from the ecstatic sleep of samadhi)—is 
summed up in the eight stages—y ama, niyama, asana, pra- 
nayama, pratyahara, dharana, dhyina and sama- 
dhi, samadhi being the end to which the others are consecu- 
tive means (and which is itself means to higher samadhi to 
one already on the ekagra level). 
139. Are these eight members of the yoga-procedure (yo- 
δα ὐ 58) consecutive stages, each leading on to the next? In 
connection with Yoga-sitra JII.6, Vyasa states in re- 
811,23. 
bYS .1L.1. 
CYS 11.2.

=== PAGE 333 ===
THE PROCEDURE OF YOGA 309 
ference to sathyama comprising dharana, dhyana and 
samadhi that one has to mse here consecutively from the 
lowest grade upwards unless one is already competent to function 
in a higher grade. Vijiiina-bhiksu extends this rule to these 
eight stages in interpretation of the word ‘yathakramam’ in 
the Bhasya.* The rule, however, is taken by others to hold 
good about the last six stages, the first two—yama and niya- 
ma—being understood as only removing the obstacles to the 
attainment of samadhi.” Of the six stages the first three are 
taken to be preparatory steps (bahiranga) and the Jast three 
constitutive steps (antaranhga), samprajfidta-samadhi 
itself being antaranga to asamprainata. 
140. Yama and niyama constitute the ethical and reli- 
gious setting of the specific yoga-activity. Five yamas are 
prescribed—ahimsa, satya, asteya, brahmacarya and 
aparigraha—all ethical in the sense of being negative or 
prohibitive in form and in reference to outward action. The 
niyamas are also five-Sauca, santosa.tapas, svidh- 
yaya and ISsvara-pranidhana, these being religious as im- 
plying the cultivation of certain positive inner virtues. The 
yamas as negative (or forms of nivrtti), are prescribed for 
all irrespective of caste (jati), place (4644), time (kala) and 
convention (sama y a—restrictive condition , reservation in respect 
of purpose etc.), or in other words, they are universal and cate- 
gorical rules of action. The niyamas as positive (or forms 
of pravrtti) have reference to activity at a particular time 
and are not, therefore, universal (sirvabhauma) rules of 
action. Nor are they categorically prescribed 1.e., for their 
own sake, for virtue is positive willing though in the inner spirit 
and as such demands to be retracted (nivrtti). Not that it js 
implied that yama is more obligatory than niyama. Morality 
as abstinence, though from outward action, is continuous with 
vairagya (or upeksa for evil) and is directly willed for its 
own sake: while religious practice, though more inward than 
morality , is willed only as a means (kriya-yoga) to the free 
activity of yoga (to abhy4sa, morality as an embodiment of 
vairagya being co-ordinate with abhyasa). Hence appa- 
ΒῪΝ .11.23. 
ΒΝ 11.29.

=== PAGE 334 ===
310 STUDIES IN YOGA PHILOSOPHY 
rently there is one morality but many religions. Morality is uni- 
versal as the negative externality of spirituality , religious practice 
is its positive particularity and internality. while super-religious 
yoga is its transcendent individual reality . 
141. The five yamas are forms of the will to nivrtti 
or abstinence from violence, lying , stealing , sexual indulgence and 
acquisition of property—these forms of evil willing being under- 
stood not merely literally but as both generalised and inwardised. 
Hiwnsa or violence is taken to be the basal form of evil willing . 
the other four involving it or leading to it in spirit, if not in 
actual fact; and even the niyamas are taken to be intimately 
related to ahiinsa which is thus taken to be central to all 
morality and religion.* Ahimsa and in fact, all the yamas 
are primarily the avoidance or arrest of hithsa etc. in thought 
i.e., aS vitarka through the contemplation of their prati- 
pakasa, of their evil consequences. Hiinsa etc. may be com- 
mitted . abetted or approved; they may proceed from lobha 
(greed). krodha (anger) or moha (illusion that they are right 
or good, perverted conscience—dharmo me bhavisyati 
iti)’ and may be directed towards an infinite variety of objects. 
142. Of the five niyamas, the last three—tapas, sva- 
dhyaya and [S$vara-pranidhana—are specific religious 
practices (what are called kriya-yoga in YS. II.1); and 
the first two—Sauca and santosa—are religious attitudes in 
the sense of being not merely negative like the yamas and of for- 
ming the spiritual setting for the last three. Sauca is cleanliness , 
not natural but spiritual, cleanliness of the body as well as of 
the mind. The spiritual side of bodily cleanliness implies feel- 
ing of the association with the body itself (of oneself or of others ) 
as unclean (anga-jugupsa)° which explains the inwardness 
of ceremonial or symbolic purification of the body (saims- 
kara) by holy water etc. Mental cleanliness would imply free- 
ing oneself from moral dirt (citta-mala) through the atti- 
tudes of maitri, karunda etc. Santosa 15 contentment with 
what one has‘ or—as sometimes explained— with what is barely 
necessary for life.. Tapas is asceticism (without prejudice to 
“YB.IT.30. 
YB .11.34. 
cys .11.40. 
ἀ ΝῊ 12.

=== PAGE 335 ===
THE PROCEDURE OF YOGA 311 
mental] serenity for the attenuation of the specific spiritual evils 
(karma-klesa-vasan4), consisting in deliberately bearing 
—accustoming oneself to—a pair of contrary experiences 
(dvandva) like heat and cold. It includes all self-chastening 
and expiatory religious practices and, according to Bhiksu, even 
joyous religious practices like worship etc. Svadhyadya in- 
cludes sacred meditation and study. ISvara-pranidhana or 
meditation on God—understood here as an emotional activity rather 
than an impersonal or pure cognitive activity (as in YS. 1.23) 
is the crown and consummation of niyama or religious disci- 
pline. Perfection in this meditative practice is said to lead direct- 
ly to samadhi?” which, as Yoga-vartika exlpains, does 
not imply that the other items of the yoga-procedure are use- 
less. It implies that it is only in the attitude of surrender to 
God that the later steps of yoga have to be performed for the 
sure attainment of samidhi. 
143. The next three steps of yoga—vi7., Asana. pra- 
nayama and pratyihara—constitute the process of direct 
energising of the body as an organ of the spirit in anticipation of 
the purely spiritual or bodiless willing that consists in dharana. 
dhyana and samadhi. The moral and religious disciplines 
represented by yama and niyama are subjectivistic in attitude 
implying a flight from the merely natural bodily and mental life. 
The passage of subjectivism to concrete spirituality is effected 
by the conquest of the conscious body and not by flight from it, 
by spiritualising the body or attuning it with the infinite. The 
association with the body is due not to subjective error which 
implies ahathkara but to transcendental error which originates 
ahainkara itself, and which though attenuated by the sub- 
jective discipline of yama and niyama can only be conquered 
by the direct idealisation of the body. The willing implied in 
morality and religion is still bodily willing: normally there is no 
willing except in the body, the so-called religious willing being but 
a wishing or aspiration that tips bodily willing. Freedom from the 
body may come through grace in response to religious aspiration , 
but in the yoga-form of spirituality, this freedom has to be 
achieved by the will. Hence the necessity cf reversing the direc- 
7YB.I.1. 
bYS.11.45,

=== PAGE 336 ===
312 STUDIES IN YOGA PHILOSOPHY 
tion of bodily willing: the natural movement of bodily willing 
which is pravrtti towards finitising bhoga has to be turned 
into nivyrtti-movement in the body towards the infinitude of 
the spirit (buddhi). Outgoing or assertive bodily willing has 
to be replaced by ingoing or retractive bodily willing in the form 
of the achievement of a tranquil posture, equable vital flow and 
the reversal of sense-activity . 
144. The attitude of surrender to God makes directly for an 
effortless serene or sacred poise of the body called 4sana. The 
poise is the consciously achieved expression of effortless strength, 
involving free relaxation of the will (prayatna-Saithilya) 
on the one hand and free identification on the other with the poise 
of our planet* or with the infinity of ἃ Κἃ 8." The merely bodily 
posture may be induced by positive natural willing, the uncons- 
cious willing that holds the body together (vidharaka- 
prayatna), but the spiritual poise of the body that asana 
means is induced by the will not to exercise this prayatna 
which is in fact antagonistic to 115 implying such strength as con- 
sists in the non-exertion of strength and in spiritual rapport with 
the infinite (devata). Asana spontaneously leads to pra- 
nayama_ which may be taken as control (negative—gati- 
viccheda, gatyabhava etc.) of the life-function. Like 
vidharaka-prayatna, prana or vital activity is also an 
unconscious natural willing, and pranayama is the will not to 
exert i.e., to hold or arrest this willing. This vital willing is 
called vayu and is taken in Samkhya-karika as the func- 
tion common to the karanas—-buddhi, ahamkdra and 
indriya. Its manifest form is breathing—life felt or sensed as 
though it moved outwards and inwards and stood within the 
body ; and pranayama means free breath-control. Here also, 
as in the case of Asana, the control though exercised in the 
body is spiritual willing , willing in tune with the universe, willing 
in the realisation of bodily life as the cosmic rhythm. This con- 
®fananta-samapatti or realised thought of being one with 
Ananta, the god holding the earth steady. 
>D*inantya-samapatti’—an alternative reading, meaning 4ka4- 
Sadigatanantye cetasah..... avyavadhanena tadat- 
mvam— Bhoja-vrtti I1.48. 
Sep. TV.IT. 47. 
dys 11:48.

=== PAGE 337 ===
THE PROCEDURE OF YOGA 313 
trol of life spontaneously makes for control over the mind 
(dharana-yogyata),* which in the first instance is- manifest 
as pratyahara which means the retraction of thesenses into 
the mind. The retraction is explained as the free act, objects being 
unpresented to the senses, absorbing the senses into the mental 
vrtti that is concentrated on so that they appear to take the 
same form as the mind.” It is the mind that takes the form of 
the sensible, but in pratyahara the senses appear to take the 
form of the vrtti: the free image of the object contemplated be- 
comes sense-percept. Pratyahara is not mere indriya- 
jaya understood as the withdrawal of the senses from the objects 
presented to them, from evil objects or from all objects. The with- 
drawal, according to some, implics non-apprehension of the pre- 
sented object and, according to others, the free apprehension of 
them.° Such withdrawal would tn fact come under yama but 
pratyahara is a specific spiritual activity in the body like 
asana and prinayama, not merely negative control of the 
senses but positive conquest and absorption of them by buddhi 
which supersedes the necessity of moral control. 
145. Pratyahara is the consummation of spiritual willing 
in the body. The next three stages—the antarangas or cons- 
titutive members of yoga—viz., dharana, dhyana and 
samadhi imply bodi-less willing or willing in the pure spirit. 
These three apparently correspond to @sana, pranayama 
and pratyahara, the forms of spiritual willing in the body: 
willing is willing of a static attitude, of an outgoing action or of 
a retractive action, whether of the body or of the mind. 
Dharana is the fixation of the mind onareal space-position .4 
As a merely psychic process, it is interesting as a form of actual 
doing and not an imagined doing, the actual placing of an 
imagined object or image in the space-position attended to. The 
imagined object is the proposed content of dhyana which in 
dharana4 is voluntarily visualised as there, referred to an actual 
position in the real world (including one’s body). Ordinarily in 
imagining an object, if we visualise it at all with a background, 
the background or the spatial context is taken to be as unreal as 
a'YS. II. 43 
bYS ἢ]. 54 
°YB.IE.55 
4yS 10.1.

=== PAGE 338 ===
314 STUDIES IN YOGA PHILOSOPHY 
the object itself. Here in dharana, however, the spatial con- 
text is real and the willing to visualise the imagined object in a 
position in it is just as real as the willing to see or looking for an 
actual object there. A presentation actually emerges in both cases 
as the result of and in response to the willing, the production of 
a desired effect being willing , whether the effect be a physical fact 
or a ‘mere’ appearance. Dharana is not mere imagining nor 
willing (attending) to know but willing to imagine in a known 
context, to visualise it there—it is added—for a certain desired 
duration. It is actually placing the imagined object there, the 
mind being fixed on it by its vrtti.* The mind or the senses 
are taken in Simkhya’° to be or to have their vrtti where they 
function i.e., in the place where their object is referred to, not 
within the brain, their kriy ἃ being not motion in space but the 
apprehending act which has space within it as its content. 
Dharan4 is, however, not a mere psychic process: like isana. 
it is a spiritual process in tune with the infinite, implying 
a slackening of the natural effort of attention and δὴ identifi- 
cation with the sacred—devata or sclf or I§vara,. the 
visualising attitude here being a mode of negative willine, for 
otherwise real de§a or space-position would not be presented . 
Again, the de§a is not any arbitrary position but a position in the 
body or relatively to it that is prescribed as significant of the 
sacred content (devata etc.) to be realised in samadhi. the 
significance being accepted in faith. Dharana4 is only a help 
to samadhi. to be practised in the earlier stages of yoga and 
may be dispensed with later. 
146. Dhyana is the continuous contemplation of the object 
on which the mind is thus fixed. The contemplation consists in 
the thinking or imagining of the object over and over again till the 
operation loses its intermittent character and is felt as a single 
process of willing and imagining, of the effort of the mind and 
the self-revelation of the object. Still there is a consciousness of 
subjective effort in fulfilment and supersession of which comes 
effortless samadhi where the conscious subjectivity lapses and 
the object alone shines out, the mind being expressed as 
the standing shine of the object. This samadhi is like 
‘YB .III.1 
SS. V. 106

=== PAGE 339 ===
THE PROCEDURE OF YOGA 315 
dhairanaé and dhyana only a member of the yoga - proce- 
dure and is distinguished from samprajfiata-samadhi or 
aikdgrya in which as the result of the continued practice of the 
three antaranga-yogas in successive levels of the mind, 
there emerges prajfidloka or the light of intuition in which 
all the implicit vigesa or particularity of the object con- 
centrated on becomes self-evident. The antaranga tnad— 
called sashyama—is again preparatory or bahiranga to 
nirvija or asamprajflita-samadhi. 
147. The eight-fold procedure of yoga is the spiritual disci 
pline of willing in three stages—-the subjectivistic-spiritual (or 
ethico-religious ) stage comprising yama and niyama. the 
bodily-spiritual stage including 4sana, pranayama and 
pratyahara, and the concrete pure spiritual stage divisible 
into dharana&. dhyana and samadhi. Each stage is 
bahiranga to the next stage as antaranga, this holding 
good also of the sub-stages within each stage. The whole proce- 
dure is bahiranga to asamprajfiata-yoga which thus 
is implicitly operative as the form of negative willing in all the 
stages and is more and more explicit and inwardised as one pro- 
ceeds in the series. 
148. Yoga is concentration on a variety of objects and in 
many grades. Each form of yoga is believed to yield a special 
siddhi or vibhtiti—super-normal knowledge or magical con- 
trol over objects. The general possibility of magical efficiency 
through spiritual willing has already been discussed. That a 
particular form of efficiency 1s acquired through a form of yoga 
is necessarily , to one who has not experienced it, a matter of faith. 
Yet as in the case of specific bhoga of a karma in a later 
birth , in some cases at least one can detect an imaginative affinity 
between the inward form of a particular spiritual willing and the 
specific vibhiiti said to be acquired by it. Since yoga is ἃ 
spiritual activity and not mere psychic gymnastics, the efficacy of 
it cannot be entirely unanticipable in imagination: the spiritual is 
the self-revealing. Incidentally it is pointed out that some preli- 
minary experience of this magical efficiency of yoga is necessary 
for an aspirant in order to have a motive for the practice of yoga 
proper. In connexion with YS.I.35, Vyasa says that faith 
alone in the super-natural helped by inference etc., is not suffi- 
cient to induce spiritual willing : there must be personal ex-

=== PAGE 340 ===
316 STUDIES IN YOGA PHILOSOPHY 
perience of at least some element of the super-natural content 
(including mukti) the realisation of which is prescribed. With- 
out some experience of yoga-magic, spiritual activity is apt 
to be a matter of idealistic sentiment only. 
149. The attitude prescribed for the yogin towards the 
magic siddhis or vibhitis of yoga is of spiritual interest . 
Yoga-sitralll.51 states about the yogin at a certain stage 
that the de vata of the level of buddhi conquered by him invites 
him to enjoy the paradise earned by him when he is expected to 
pass on unconcerned without desire and without conceit (sanga- 
smaya). The magical powers come to be acquired but are not 
meant to be used for the gratification of desire. Nor should the 
sense of power induce the self-complacent feeling of being superior 
to the gods or an arrogant ascetic disdain for the paradise offered 
by them, which in fact is the name for a quality of spiritual satis- 
faction. If the yogin passes on, it is because he is genuinely 
afraid of slipping down and feels the urge to use the freedom 
already acquired to win final freedom.

=== PAGE 341 ===
CHAPTER Χ 
THE NOTION OF ISVARA 
150. There*is reference to ISvara-pranidhana or the 
contemplation of God both in the first pada and the second 
pada of the Yoga-sitras. YS. 1.23 takes this prani- 
dhana as an alternative procedure for the attainment of 
asamprajflata. Siitras JI.1. 32,45 understand it as 
coming under kriya-yoga or,niyama and leading to the 
attainment of samadhi (11.45) which apparently is sam- 
prajmata and only through it to the attainment of asam- 
prajfiata. Pranidhadna in II.1 is explained by Vyasa 
as the dedication of one’s willing and of the merit thereof to God , 
this being an emotional meditation enjoined as a karma-ésesa, 
aS an accessory to specific religious practice; while in I.23 it 
appears to mean pure intellectual meditation—though it is still 
called bhakti-vigesa, a special quality of bhakti. 
It is so called because it is still a surrender to God, surren- 
der not merely of particular acts of willing but of the entire 
attitude of willing, of the willing behind knowledge itself for the 
sake of asamprajfidta. In other forms of bhakti there is 
surrender only of ahathkara, not of buddhi as here. God 
is understood everywhere as the implicate or postulate of 
bhakti; but while bhakti as a kriya-yoga implies medi- 
tation on an accepted God, God taken to be caught in buddhi, 
bhakti for asamprajfiita—as the surrender of buddhi 
itself—is meditation on a God that is manifest only through the 
meditative surrender or, to put it paradoxically. that is known 
not by knowing, by the renunciation of the conceit of knowledge . 
All the Sashkhya tattvas are known in buddhi, Iévara 
as a new tattva being not included in them, because God as 
the object of religious bhakti would be either a feeling- 
construct and no tattva at all or only a self among selves with 
no qualitatively new character. Yoga admits God as a tattva, 
as a self qualitatively and not merely numerically distinct from 
the other tattvas. God only appears to be such in religious 
bhakti, and to super-religious bhakti, God is a tattva un- 
knowable in buddhi.

=== PAGE 342 ===
318 STUDIES IN YOGA PHILOSOPHY 
151. Vijfiana-bhikgu in his Samkhya-bhiasya 
makes the ingenious suggestion that the Samkhya denial of 
Is§vara is only vyavahadrika intended in the interest of 
viveka to induce vairagya for god-like power (aiSvarya); 
and as a matter of fact, I$ vara understood as the eternal God 
—not as janyesvara, the existence of which is admitted—is 
taken to be only unproved* and not as non-existent. Any way the 
contemplation of God is not necessary to the distinctive spiritual 
discipline of Samkhya and is even repugnant to it. To 
Yoga, the contemplation is necessary as a niyama in the lower 
stages of spirituality and has at least the status of an alternative 
sidhana for the highest stage—viz., asamprajfiata. To 
it but not to Samkhya, God is a postulate of the activity of 
spiritual realisation. The exact meaning of ‘ postulate’ here has 
to be determined in reference to the Kantian view of God as a 
moral postulate . 
152. What is called the moral argument for the existence of 
God resolves into the position that since there is a higher and 
higher , there must be the highest. The question is whether it re- 
presents only an emotional or moral certitude or a logical in- 
ference. To Kant it is but a moral certitude about a content that 
is necessarily thought but not known. The content is not indced 
an imaginative ideal like beauty or teleology , not a mere heuristic 
concept of rational imagination but is logically connected with the 
moral ought which, however, is only practically and not thco- 
retically known. Not that it is therefore practically known; nor 
is there any moral obligation to entertain belief in it, the belief 
being there but apparently without any practical bearing on spiri- 
tual activity. To others, like the Mimamsaka, there is an 
obligation to entertain the belief: the contemplation of ISvara 
or of Brahman is prescribed as auxiliary to the performance 
of religious duty like worship or sacrifice , although the content is 
not regarded as a knowable truth or an absolute reality. To the 
Vedantist, Brahman—not ISvara—is the absolute 
truth and the knowledge of it is eternal. being contingent only in 
its manifestation to the individual mind and is no end the attain- 
ment of which is practically prescribed; nor is Brahman a 
mere symbol for a contemplation that is prescribed for its own 
* SS ..1. 92-5

=== PAGE 343 ===
THE NOTION OF ISVARA 319 
sake. Between the Mimainsa and the Vedanta positions, 
an intermediate position is conceivable viz.. that 1$vara is an 
absolute reality, the certitude about which and the contemplation 
of which emerge as one integral spiritual fact: ISvara is not 
known first and then contemplated, nor does contemplation come 
first and then generate belief in IS vara. Yoga apparently re- 
presents this position; and the Vedantic position on Ig§vara 
as distinct from Brahman is conceivably similar with the 
difference that ISvara is here the eternal truth or Brahman 
itself with the sole vikalpa of being contemplatcd , or—what 15 
the same thing—of revealing itsclf as absolute contemplation. To 
Vedanta there is knowledge of the eternal truth without the 
mediation of buddhi-vrtti but not to Yoga to which the 
certitude about God that involves no buddhi-vrtti is no 
knowledge of truth but a conviction about reality as in Kant. 
153. Some proof of God is indeed attempted in Yoga 
bhagya on the lines of the moral argument. God is_ mainly 
conceived as omniscient, as the infinite of knowledge, knowledge 
being the basis of spirituality , of power and goodness. Now this 
infinite of knowledge is inferrible on the ground that knowledge 
necessarily admits of increase i.e., knowledge of a content ncces- 
sarily implies knowledge of a greater content that includes it, just 
as a magnitude is perceived necessarily as part of a greater magni- 
tude. Whatever necessarily implies a greater implies a greatest cr 
an infinite. This infinite of knowledge is the omniscient or sar- 
vajfia. The inference is, however, that there must be a sar- 
vajiia: that this sarvajfia is God has to be accepted in faith. 
The infinite is an individual and assertorial certitude about the 
inferred (or necessary ) existence of an individual that is un- 
perceivable can only be yielded by the testimony of §astra—or 
what is its nearest equivalent—by the testimony of our spiritual 
consciousness . 
154. What is important in the present connection is that asser- 
torial certitude about the infinite spirit is not yielded by inference 
or by any logical pramana; and the implication is that the 
infinite spirit is not known in a buddhi-vrtti. Faith is be- 
fore and beyond knowledge though it may be quickened by it: 
it is through faith that spiritual knowledge (ρ τα ἢ 8} reaches 
assertorial certitude. Where the knowledge is of a metaphysical 
content that is intuitable, the intuition is reached through yoga

=== PAGE 344 ===
320 STUDIES IN YOGA PHIJ.OSOPHY 
started in faith. Apparently ISvara in Yoga is unintuitable 
and there is no mention of the intuition of IS vara in any form 
of samadhi. If He could be known at all, He would be 
known in some samadhi higher than samprajfiadta but in 
asamprajiliata there is no knowledge at all. So about 
Igvara, even if we know that He must exist, we can never 
know that he does exist. Like para-vairagya, the 
Sraddha leading to the IS$vara-pranidhana _ that 
inducs asamprajfladata is the samprasida of 
viveka reached in samprajfidata. knowledge being 
realised negatively by the will to be free from it (para- 
vairagya) and positively by the wish for such freedom 
(sraddhai). The motive to the will to yoga is vairagya 
and the aspiration for yoga is §raddha or faith. The 
asmvega or inner intensity of the will to yoga is or is deter- 
mined by the depth of vairagya. Asamprajfiata is said 
to be attained either directly by tivra-sathvega willing or 
indirectly by ISvara-pranidhiana, the former being 
determined by vairaigya and the latter by Sraddha. 
Viveka may be taken as realised by negative vairagya into 
the positive will to yoga and by positive ὅτ ἃ ἃ 4 ἢ ἃ into nega- 
tive surrender of willing which is IS§vara-pranidhdana, 
where I$ vara (who is nowhere mentioned as known in viveka) 
can only be the mystery of asbolute freedom bound up with the 
will-surrendering faith . 
155. Faith or Sraddha has apparently two aspects— 
Astikya-buddhi or belief that there is a higher being than 
one-self and samprasada or aspiration for a higher state of 
oneself. The concrete conception of the higher in either sense 
may be presented by S4stra but $A4stra is recognised as 
§astra because it is felt to interpret the faith in a higher that 
is already there. The concept of the higher is intrinsically bound 
up with the attitude of faith. The faith that emerges after 
viveka or self-knowledge reached in samprajfiita is faith 
in the existence of a higher self than the self-knowing self and in 
the attainability of a higher state of the self than self-knowledge , 
faith in ISvara and aspiration for asamprajfata. The 
aspiration is not merely subjective, for there is no place for sub- 
jectivism after samprajfiadita but a self-fulfilling activity. 
Nor is Ifvara merely objective in the sense of being other than

=== PAGE 345 ===
THE NOTION OF iSVARA 321 
the self but is higher in the sense of being capable of working in 
and annulling the self-consciousness (a buddhi-vrtti) of the 
self and inducing in it the state of samprajflata. The aspi- 
ration for asamprajfiata then fulfils itself through the in- 
ward working (antaryamitva) of I$vara, which in this 
connection is his grace. The aspiration thus matures into 
pranidhadna or bhakti in I§ vara, which is at once a self- 
surrendering activity and the feeling of its fulfilment in His grace. 
Through this feeling of grace, self-knowledge as in viveka be- 
comes the realisation of the self as like God. Thus God is pri- 
marily conceived through self-knowledge as higher than the self 
and absorbing its self-knowledge and then the realised feeling of 
God’s grace transfigures the self with the reflection of divinity. 
156. The conception of I§vara that emerges in the faith 
after viveka which leads to pranidhiana or bhakti re- 
quires to be elaborated. God is taken as a purusa-visesa 
or a self qualitatively different from other selves. Other selves— 
as isolated from buddhi—are absolute self-repetitions: they 
differ only in the mode of buddhi that is their upadhi. The 
divine self may also be said to have a perfect buddhi 
(prakrsta-sattva) as its upaidhi, but the difference is 
not only that the upadhi is perfect buddhi but also that God 
freely assumes the upadhi. Other selves are associated through 
beginningless avidya with buddhi that is shot with this 
avidya and although they can free themselves from it, they 
start as unfree while God is eternally free, free both to asso- 
ciate with and to dissociate from buddhi. Freedom means 
both mukti and free activity—positive and negative. God 
is free both in being and in activity and His free activity whether 
in the assumption or renunciation of buddh i—waking or 
sleep—does not prejudice His eternal freedom of being. In 
one sense, indeed, a jivatman is eternally free, for he 
is only illusorily identified with buddhi as he finds out in 
viveka. But the illusion itself is a fact to him accord- 
ing to yoga and not illusory as to Vedanta, for even 
the jivanmukta who recognises the illusion as such is con- 
ceived in Yoga not as passively watching the illusion that 
still binds him to his buddhi disappear of itself, i.e., turning 
out to be itself illusory but as actively seeking to free himself 
from it, from at least the potentiality of a body (saficita-kar-

=== PAGE 346 ===
322 STUDIES IN YOGA ΡΒΠΠΟΘΟΡΗΥ 
ma) by the creation of nirmana-kayas, such activity im- 
plying awareness of the illusion as a fact. There is apparently 
to Yoga no conscious realisation in life of freedom from 
buddhi. Yoga-bhasya I1.27 points out that there is 
conscious realisation at best of freedom from the urge of the will, 
from the felt demand of something to be effected by buddhi 
but not from buddhi itself, freedom from buddhi—citta- 
vimukti as it is called—being an unconscious, unwilled pro- 
cess. The consciousness of the self in fact as eternally free 
is but a faith that is said to be realised through Igvara- 
pranidhana.® 
157. God is eternally free both in His being and in his will. 
The jiva’s freedom of will does not belong to him as the self. 
being an intrinsic function of buddhi with which his self is illu- 
sorily and helplessly identified. But God’s freedom in his will to 
assume or renounce buddhi as his upadhi belongs to him as 
a self: his identification with buddhi is free and does not in- 
volve an illusion. That is why his excellence (utkarsa) and 
absolute reason ($astra or logos) are said to justify each 
other, being in eternal mutual implication in his nature (prak- 
rsta-Sattva): his knowledge (revelation, $astra) and his will 
(freedom, utkarsa) are the same. But then it implies that his 
freedom to assume buddhi, to know or to reveal $4stra is 
his intrinsic attribute as a self. This involves a conception of the 
self as inactive (niskriya). Fsévara’s freedom to assume 
a buddhi-body is an actual willing and hence the self gene- 
rally may have to be conceived as having the capacity (yog- 
yataé) for action which is actualised in the Divine self and is 
never actualised, except illusorily, in the other selves. In the 
case of God, there is real willing though as being absolutely free 
it is as much actual as unactual, his freedom of action being 
indistinguishable from his freedom of being or mukti. The 
freedom of being of other selves, even when actualised in 
their ‘ abiding in their essential nature’ (svartipavasthana), 
is not a willing to abide but only the capacity for such willing, so 
that there is no incompatibility with the Vaisnava conception 
of their participation in the Divine work of the liberation of souls, 
though such participation would be to Yoga a mystery which is 
®*YB.1.29.

=== PAGE 347 ===
THE NOTION OF ISVARA | 323 
beyond philosophy. Hence, too, there is no knowledge of IS vara 
in buddhi and if all knowledge of content is taken to be 
mediated by buddhi, there is no knowledge of ISvara but 
only a faith in his reality conditioning pranidhaina or upa- 
sana or bhakti. There is even no knowledge of the self as 
eternal and absolute (nitya-pwtirna) but only a contemplative 
certitude bound up with the contemplation of God,* for such 
self-knowledge as we have is a buddhi-pratyaya. 
158. The buddhi with which God is said to freely identify 
himself is perfect or pure buddhi (prakrsia or guddha 
sattva), buddhi that is free from klesga (transcendental 
error), karma (merit and demerit), vipaka (its maturation 
into bhoga) and asaya (dispositions generated by bhoga). 
His mind represents the eternal limit (kastha) of aigvarya 
-——the infinite of knowledge and will. knowledge of all that is real 
and resistless power having neither an equal nor a greater 
(samyatigaya-vinirmuktam). Will (and wish) is but 
efficient or self-realising knowledge and what proves the existence 
of infinite knowledge proves the existence of the infinite mind. 
The existence of infinite knowledge is proved by the necessarily 
felt finitude of our actual knowledge though as what is inferred is 
only the necessity of existence, assertorial certitude about the 
existence of infinite knowledge can only be yielded by S$astra. 
The mutual dependence of the truth of $astra and the reality 
of the infinite mind has already been referred to. the implication 
of which apparently is that the faith in the infinite mind or in the 
validity of §astra is immediate. The fact of §raddha (after 
Viveka) is justification at once of the reality of perfect 
buddhi and of the truth of 4 ἃ 518. 
159. This justification—called ‘nimitta’ in Yoga-bha- 
sya 1.24 (interpreted as ‘pramaina)—is cause rather than 
the logical ground of our belief in truth and reality , or more accu- 
rately is neither cause nor ground but something prior to both. 
Subjective reason or pramana itself derives its pramanya 
or validity from §raddha or faith and that is why the inferred 
infinite requires to derive assertorial certitude from Sastra, re- 
quires to be given by objective reason, demands to be presented 
* YB .1. 29. 
YS .1F.20.

=== PAGE 348 ===
224 STUDIES IN YOGA PHILOSOPHY 
to subjective reason independently of it. The faith in objective 
reason justifies subjective reason or logic in the sense of giving it 
assertorial certitude; and the faith in objective reason is itself 
justified by the infinite mind that is the content of objective 
reason , justified in the sense that truth is truth as emanating from 
or breathed forth by absolute reality. Reality emanates truth 
which reveals reality. That truth or objective reason or §astra 
reveals reality or the infinite free self or 1§ vara is because other- 
wise it would not be truth. Reality, too, would not be reality were 
it to emanate untruth, though it need not emanate either truth or 
untruth. The last clause implies that reality is the mystery of 
absolute freedom: there cannot be an unveracious God, but God 
may be silent as he is said to be in pralaya when he freely 
abstains from revealing himself. His self-revelation or assump- 
tion of buddhi- body or breathing out of Sastra as well as 
his self-concealment is absolutely free. 
160. The infinite mind with which God is said to freely iden- 
tify himself is conceived to be essentially the knowing mind. 
Knowledge is, however, regarded not only as receptive but as 
actively communicative or revelatory. God as with this mind is 
both sarvajiia or omniscient and the eternal teacher, timeless 
teacher of all past teachers.* He is said to tcach not for his own 
good but to save others. compassion or grace being the motive 
of his absolute free activity of revelation.” The work of this 
grace is conceived in different stages: he breathes forth Sastra. 
he quickens the reason of others from within (as antaryamin) 
and he helps in their attainment of asamprajfiata. God’s 
relation to other selves is that of the saviour to the saved, the 
saving work consisting in enabling others to work out their free- 
dom, either by communicating to them knowledge in the shape 
of §astra or by inducing in them inner intuitions or by directly 
devitalising the evil tendencies in their minds—the antarayas 
or obstacles to yoga—that stand in the way of their realisation 
of freedom. The last is the specific work of grace responsive 
to Ig§vara-pranidhadna that facilitates the passage to 
asamprajfiata. The viveka in either presses towards 
absolute freedom in vairagya from viveka itself or 
®YS.1.26. 
>YB.1.25.

=== PAGE 349 ===
THE NOTION OF ISVARA 325 
finds absolute freedom coming to him as the correlate of his 
bhakti. 
161. For this bhakti or pranidhina, [vara is 
already revealed in sound as the mystic syllable ‘Om’ which may 
be regarded as at once his eternal expression and his perennial 
grace. The significance of language is eternal (sthita) and 
the restriction of particular words to particular meanings is begin- 
ningless convention which may be taken as God’s will to parti- 
cluarise the significance ,* the will being free but not arbitrary. 
freely revealing or bodying forth the truth. The eternal significance 
of ‘Om’ which may be taken to symbolise language in general or 
the concept in general or truth is the absolute reality or ISvara 
and the expression of reality in “Om’ would then symbolise 
I§vara’s permanent will to reveal or grace. Isvara is eter- 
nally revealed in a symbol for contemplation and the contem- 
plation is consummated not in knowledge or intuition but in a 
spontaneous liberation from the conceit of knowledge which is 
just the freedom of asamprajfidta. It is God who makes 
worship (pranidhina) possible and it is God who frees the 
worshipper from his own thinking mind—-which is freeing him 
from worship itself and enabling him to work out his liberation . 
While then in lower stages God speaks to and vitalises man’s 
reason, in the highest stage He frees him from his reason 
and from his feeling of dependence on Him which is _ con- 
ditioned by reason. There is no suggestion in Yoga of God 
raising man either into identity or into perpetual communion with 
Himself , though apparently Yoga would not oppose either sug- 
gestion. The precondition of such identity or communion is 
freedom—achieved or vouchsafed— from religious dependence and 
philosophy to Yoga apparently goes no further than this 
freedom . 
162. There is no direct reference in Yoga to God’s power 
to create or retract the universe. Ay in Samkhya, so in 
Yoga, srsti and pralaya are the functions of prakrti or 
the object which is regarded as svatantra or free, uninfluenced 
by anything foreign to it whether in its downward path of causal 
parindma or in its upward or anti-causal retraction of causa- 
®YB.1.27.

=== PAGE 350 ===
326 STUDIES IN YOGA PHILOSOPHY 
lity. Yet the movement of prakrti is for the bhoga or mukti 
of embodied souls and may be regarded as in its essence the func- 
tion of avidya or aviveka that is illusorily referred to the 
self. Avidya, however, is really the function of the object 
and its causal and anti-causal movement is nothing but this 
avidya- function. Now if I$ vara operates in reference to the 
object, he operates primarily in the buddhi of other selves, 
buddhi with which they are unfreely and he is freely identified . 
He, in fact, operates as a nimitta primary for the actualisation 
or retraction of their buddhi and through it for the creation 
or dissolution of the world of experience, nimitta being under- 
stood as a negative condition, the removal of pratibandha 
to the causal and anti-causal operation of nature. To operate as 
a nimitta is still his free willing: even in mahapralaya 
or His sleep. He is said to freely will not to will .* 
*Yv.1.24.

=== PAGE 351 ===
THE JAINA THEORY OF ANEKANTA

=== PAGE 352 ===

=== PAGE 353 ===
ANALYSIS 
(1) Jaina Realism not only asserts a plurality of determi- 
nate truths but takes each truth to be an indetermination of alter- 
native truths. (2) Sometimes an ultimate plurality of truths has 
been taken as one truth in the sense that there is one cognition of 
the plurality. The objectivistic equivalent of this unity of cogni- 
tion is the bare togetherness of the facts known. (3) This category 
of ‘togetherness’ is the fundamental category of realism but it 
is only a name for quite different aspects of truth which do not 
make a unity in any sense. (4-5) Taking the distinction bet- 
ween ‘subjective’ knowing and ‘ objective’ knowing what precisely 
is the counterpart of the knowledge of this distinction? Now, 
since togetherness or bare distinction is the form of objectivity , 
the counterpart in question must be ‘distinction from distinction’. 
(6) This distinction from distinction has been taken as a kind 
of identity and the problem arises as to the relation between this 
identity and distinction in the objective. The Hegelian subordi- 
nates distinction to identity; Nyaya assigns priority to distinc- 
tion. But the Jaina theory admits identity as indeterminate 
non-distinction and takes the two relations to be co-ordinate. 
(7-8) The Hegelian subordinates distinction to identity in the 
sense that the dialectical movement ends in an absolute identity 
and not in an absolute distinction. But then this identity com- 
prises all differences and is thus,in the relation of identity with 
the differences. Identity would thus be at once a relation and a 
term. (9-10) To the Hegelian, identity as relation is nothing 
but mutual implication. But then the Identity of the Absolute 
synthesis with the retained being of the distinction within it is not 
identity as mutual implication. Apparently then the Hegelian has 
to admit two utterly different kinds of identity which cannot be 
reduced to further identity. This, however, is a contradiction. 
(11-14) There is a similar contradiction in the Ny aya view. We 
have synthetic identity of positives in this system in the form of 
samavaya. But this relation is a distinct existent only by 
self-identity. As a fact, it is only unrelated and cannot be even 
said to be definitely different from its terms. Relation, then, as an 
unrelated term is not even determinate and it is a contradiction to

=== PAGE 354 ===
330 THE JAINA THEORY OF ANEKANTA 
speak of it as self-related or unrelated and yet as determinate. 
(15-17) In the case of identity-in-difference then, the subordina- 
tion of either relation to the other seems to lead to a contradic- 
tion. The relations of identity and difference may, however, 
be taken to be co-ordinate. But this would be no solution, for, 
on analysis it would be found that on this view, the identity of 
a determinate thing disappears and gives place to a dualism of 
the abstraction—thinghood and particularity . 
(18) The only way of escape lies in taking the determinate 
thing to be ‘simply given’ i.e.. to be existing as a distinct 
apart from distinguishing. This may be justified by the cir- 
cumstance that the distinction between the subjective and the 
objective is itself a known object. But then distinction from the 
objective , taken as itself objective, implies that knowing is known 
as distinct from the known i.e.. as unknown. ‘This brings 
up the conception of the objective indefinite or the ‘definite in- 
definite’. (19-22) What now is the relation indicated by the 
phrase ‘definite indefinite’? According to the realistic postulate . 
the ‘definite indefinite’ is a fact with two elements incompatible 
in thought. The factual equivalent of this incompatibility would 
be no-relation. Here then we have togetherness of unrelated or 
undifferenced elements. In the case of the given definite, like- 
wise, we have the definite definite or differenced togetherness . 
We have thus two modes of togetherness—differenced and un- 
differenced—which the Jaina calls kramarpana and sahiar- 
pana respectively. 
(23-24) The different basal categorics of objectivity corres- 
ponding to different forms of realism answer to the different as- 
pects of the act of knowing. These categories are three in num- 
ber, viz., distinction, distinction from distinction as other than 
distinction and the indetermination of the two: Ordinary realism 
is based on the first category. There are forms of realism that 
admit some kind of identity as distinct from distinction: and 
finally Jaina realism admits both in the form of indetermina- 
tion. (25-30) The development of the Jaina conception of 
indetermination into seven alternative modes of truth analysed and 
assessed ,

=== PAGE 355 ===
THE JAINA THEORY OF ANEKANTA 
1. The Jaina theory of anekanta or the manifoldness 
of truth is a form of realism which not only asserts a plurality of 
determinate truths but also takes each truth to be an indeter- 
mination of alternative truths. It is interesting as suggesting a 
criticism of present-day realism and indicating a direction in which 
its logic might be developed. It is proposed in the present paper 
to discuss the conception of a plurality of determinate truths to 
which ordinary realism appears to be commiited,and to show the 
necessity of an indeterministic extension such as is presented by 
the Jaina theory. 
2. The truth that we actually know is a plurality of truths 
and philosophy, rightly or wrongly , sets itself the problem of find- 
ing the one truth which either denies or in some sense comprises 
the plurality. Whatever differences there have been as to the actual 
conception of the truth, the rejection of the faith that there is one 
truth has generally been taken to argue a scepticism about the 
many truths that we claim to know. Sometimes, however. an ulti- 
mate plurality of truths has itself been taken as the one truth and 
the apparent contradiction has been sought to be avoided by taking 
it to mean only that there is one cognition of the plurality. Else- 
where the cognition of a fact is a further fact but here the addition 
of cognition as a fact to plurality as a fact yields us nothing but 
the plurality. The realistic or objectivistic equivalent of the unity 
of a cognitive act is the bare togetherness of the facts known ; and 
the togetherness of cognition as a fact with the fact cognised is 
the exemplar of this relation. 
3. The difficulty is about the objectivity of this bare together- 
ness. When two objects other than knowing are known 
together, they are ordinarily taken to be in some kind of whole, 
specific relation or unity. This cannot be said of object and its 
cognition as together. Objects also may, however, be barely 
together: the relation of a whole to its elements, of a relation to 
its terms or of a unity to its factors is nothing more specific than 
togetherness. This then is the fundamental category of realism; 
and whole, relation or unity would be understood as particular 
cases of it. We propose to show on the lines of the Jaina 
theory that this category is itself manifold , being only a name for

=== PAGE 356 ===
332 THE JAINA THEORY OF ANEKANTA 
fundamentally different aspects of truth which cannot be subsumed 
under a universal and do not make a unity in any sense. To- 
getherness, as ordinarily understood by the realist, means dis- 
tinction of determinate positive truths. The Jaina category 
might be formulated as distinction from distinction which, as will 
be shown. has a definite range of alternative values, only one of 
which answers to the distinction or togetherness of the modern 
realist . 
4. Prima facie there is a difference between the relation of a 
composite fact with its components and the relation of the com- 
ponents themselves. We may overlook for the present the 
different forms of the composite—whole, relation or unity—which 
imply varying relations to the components and provisionally admit 
composite truth as a single entity Now there is no difference 
between the togetherness of any one component with the rest and 
that of any other with the rest: the components in their various 
combinations are together in exactly the same sense. Taking , 
however, the composite on the one hand with the components on 
the other, we find that the two sides can be only thought alter- 
nately: while one side is thought by itself, the other can be 
thought only in reference to it; if the components are taken to 
be given, the composite can be understood as only their plurality ; 
and if the composite is given as one, the components are known 
as only its analysis. Each side can be given by itself as objective 
and so it is not a cause of mere correlative thoughts. Neither side 
need be thought in reference to the other; but while one is thought 
as distinct by itself, the other has to be thought as only together 
with or distinct from it. We have in fact a correlation here bet- 
ween ‘distinct in itself’? and ‘distinct from the other’, between 
given position and what is sometimes called the negation of 
negation . 
5, Is the necessity of thinking something as other than its 
other merely subjective? It would appear to be objective in the 
same sense and on the same grounds as the togetherness or bare 
distinction of positives admitted by the realist. Realism objecti- 
fies the subjective because it is known and is not simply transcen- 
dental. The question may be asked, is the distinction of subject 
and object, of knowing and the known, both taken to be facts— 
‘enjoyed’ and ‘contemplated’ respectively, to use Professor Alex- 
ander’s phrase—a fact of the former or of the latter category

=== PAGE 357 ===
THE JAINA THEORY OF ANEKANTA 333 
subjective or objective? Now just as knowing is known, the abso- 
lute difference of the two forms of knowing—enjoying and con- 
templating is also known; and if the unity of the knowing act 
be taken to correspond to objective togetherness, this absolute 
difference must also be taken to have its objective counterpart . 
Togetherness or bare distinction is the form of objectivity in 
general. The counterpart then of the difference of ‘ subjective’ 
knowing or ‘enjoying’ from objective knowing or ‘ contemplating ’ 
would be distinction from objectivity i.e., from distinction. Thus 
both distinction and distinction from distinction should be taken 
by the realist as objective. These two, however, are not ordinarily 
distinguished : both are called by the same name—togetherness . 
6. If however, as shown, these two forms of togetherness are 
fundamentally different, what is their further relation? Now dis- 
tinction from distinction has sometimes been taken as a determi- 
nate relation, as identity or some unique relation, like ‘ charac- 
terising’ or adjectivity, which also for our present purpose we 
may call a peculiar form of identity. The problem is accordingly 
about the relation of identity and distinction in the objective. We 
may consider two forms of identity as presented by the Hegelian 
and the Ny aya systems respectively. The Nyaya is avowedly 
a realistic system and the Hegelian theory may also in some sense 
be taken to be realistic. Realism proper, as we conceive it, has 
no place for the relation of identity in the objective except in a 
factitious sense, although it should—what it ordinarily does not 
—admit distinction from distinction as a specific category. The 
above two theories, however, admit both identity and distinction 
though they do not stress them in the same way. The Hegelian 
subordinates distinction to identity while the Ny aya assigns prio- 
rity to distinction. The Jaina theory admits identity only in the 
sense of indeterminate non-distinction ; and it takes the two rela- 
tions to be co-ordinate without subordinating any one to the 
other . 
7. In what sense does the Hegelian subordinate distinction 
to identity ? No doubt he emphasises distinction to distinguish his 
concrete identity from abstract or formal identity but he does not 
admit—what a realist would admit—that an object can be distinct 
in itself and need not be in a comprising identity. The dialectic 
movement ends in an absolute identity , not in an absolute distinc- 
tion. The thesis and antithesis at any stage are said to be re

=== PAGE 358 ===
324 THE JAINA THEORY OF ΑΝΈΚΑΝΤΑ 
duced to ‘ideality’ in the synthesis, to be not only contained but 
also transformed by it, The identity progresses in concreteness in 
the sense that ‘it dissolves in itself a deeper and deeper difference ; 
but the absolute in the last resort is taken as the identity of the 
deepest differences, not as incommensurable bifurcations of an 
identity . 
8. What, however, is this relation of subordination of distinc- 
tion to identity? Distinction is in some sense negated by the 
identity ; it is said to be dissolved or reduced to ‘ideality’ in the 
identity. Not that it is negated in the sense an illusory percept is 
said to be negated by a true percept: difference or the rich variety 
of the universe is not an illusion. If then difference still retains 
some kind of being , what is the name of the relation between this 
being and the being of the identity? Should it be called identity 
again, as apparently the Hegelian would call it? Identity then 
would occupy two positions: the synthesis or the composite, as 
we may call it, is the identity of the different factors and is also 
identical with them, being thus at once a relation and a term. 
9. The Hegelian ordinarily understands identity as mutual im- 
plication or correlation. If A and B imply one another, each 
being wholly intelligible by the other, they are said to be identi- 
cal. In this sense a synthesis would be taken as the identity of 
its factors. Is the identity of the synthesis with the retained being 
of the distinction within it also to be understood in the sense of 
mutual implication? The two implications that make up mutual 
implication must be envisaged as substantially different truths and 
must not be a purposeless repetition of each other in different ver- 
bal order only. If a synthesis and its factors be mutually impli- 
catory, the synthesis implying the factors must mean some thing 
concretely different from the factors implying the synthesis. It 
cannot mean simply that the factors are presupposed by the unity ; 
for that means substantially the same thing as that the factors 
presuppose the unity. The two sides are but the verbal explica- 
tions of the same fact viz., the thought of identity-in-difference or 
synthesis. Synthesis implying the factors should mean then that 
the unity must break out actually into difference. In the last 
resort it will amount to saying that the Absolute should be 
experienced , not merely thought, as necessarily reproducing itself 
in actuality. But is the actual universe experienced as necessary? 
It is only thought to be necessary ; and accordingly the implication

=== PAGE 359 ===
THE JAINA THEORY OF ANEKANTA 335 
by the Absolute of actual differences—-the necessity of its self- 
reproduction—is not distinct as a substantial truth from the 
mere presupposition of the Absolute by the universe. 
10. The identity then of a synthesis with the retained being 
of the distinction within it is not an identity in the sense of mutual 
implication. If the relation be still called identity, it must be 
taken as simply intuited, as all identity is taken to be in 
the Nyaya. Apparently then the Hegelian, while subordinating 
distinction to identity, has to admit two utterly different kinds of 
identity . corresponding to the difference of thought and intuition, 
which cannot be reduced to further identity. This, however. is a 
contradiction . 
11. Α similar contradiction may be brought out in the 
Nyaya view. Here, however, we start with the priority of dis- 
tinction to identity and we have to end, as will appear presently . 
by admitting an identity that is not distinct from anything at all. 
Confining ourselves to positives, we have synthetic identity of 
positives in this system in the form of Samavaya or the rela- 
tion of inherence . Without going into the subtle technicalities of the 
Nyaya in this connection, we may indicate that Samavaya 
is understood by it as the relation of attribute to its substratum and 
of a whole to its part. It is a relation of distinct objects and is 
regarded as what is presupposed by every other relation of exis- 
tents. It is not a mere formal relation of identity: the distinction 
of the terms of this relation is taken to be real and to be in no 
sense superseded ty it. Hence it is rot called identity in this 
theory but it is pointed out that one term of the relation (attribute 
or whole) exists inseparably from the other (substratum or part), 
the inseparability being eternal although no term may be infinite 
or permanent. This eternal inseparability may accordingly be 
regarded as a form of concrete identity . 
12. Now this identity is taken as knowable by perception, un- 
Jike the implicational identity of Hegel which is supposed to be 
known only by necessary thought. As a percept it is a distinct 
among distincts, not as in the Hegelian theory comprehensive of 
the distincts. Ultimately there are objects like the simple atoms 
distinct in themselves and not inhering in anything beyond them. 
Other objects like attributes and wholes exist as distinct but 
inseparable from their substrata. Finally, the relation sama- 
vaya or this concrete identity is also a distinct object. Thus

=== PAGE 360 ===
336 THE JAINA THEORY OF ANEKANTA 
priority is assigned, as has been pointed out, in this system to 
distinction . 
13. The relation of Samavaya implies three grades of dis- 
tincts—objects that must be in some substratum, the substrata. 
and the relation itself. The question may be asked if relation is 
a distinct being in the sense in which the objects of the other two 
grades are distinct. These objects are distinct as the terms of 
the relation : objects which do not inhere in anything are still 
determinate as having attributes and wholes inhering in them. 
Not that the knowledge of a substance presupposes the knowledge 
of what inheres in it: it is known as distinct prior to the analy- 
sis. But in point of being , every object except relation must either 
have something inhering in it or itself inhere in something else 
or be in both these situations. Relation is not itself related to 
anything beyond, for then there would be a regressus add infini- 
tum. It is a distinct existent only by self-identity or sva- 
samavaya. 
14. Self-identity , however, is not a relation of distincts at all. 
Granting—what is not admitted by all—that Samavaya is 
known by perception, this self-identity or Sva-samaviaya is 
not a perceptible fact but is only an artificial thought-content . 
‘Self-related ’ means unrelated in the objective. Samavaya is 
certainly known along with its terms but as a fact it is only 
unrelated and cannot be even said to be definitely different from 
its terms. Can it then be determinate in itself? It may indeed 
be conceded that the determinateness of a related term does not 
in point of being depend on its relations: the relation of a 
term presupposes an intrinsic determination in the term. But 
that need not mean that the term is itself unrelated and has re- 
lation only added to it. In point of being the relation of 
Samavdaya is eternal and so the related term is never unrelated , 
though as a term it is distinguishable from the relation. Rela- 
tion then as an unrelated term is not even determinate and it is 
a contradiction to speak of it as self-related or unrelated and 
yet as determinate. 
15. In the two conceptions of identity-in-difference above con- 
sidered , the subordination of either relation to the other appears 
to lead to a contradiction. Shall we then take the relations to 
be merely co-ordinate? We may take one type of such a view 
as presented by W. E. Johnson (Logic, Vol. I. Chapter vii).

=== PAGE 361 ===
THE JAINA THEORY OF ANEKANTA 337 
In the last two views, a term A can be both identical with and 
other than B. The present view denies it and keeps to the 
common-sense principle that distincts cannot be also non-distinct. 
Yet identity as a relation is admitted: a term Χ, viewed in 
connexion with the distincts A and B, would be said to be iden- 
tical as against the distinction of A and B. Identity of X here 
practically means its self-identity: it is not merely the thing Χ 
but a relation in reference to the distinction. Identity of X thus 
implies a distinction outside X, viz.. between A and B, not 
any distinction or plurality within itself . 
16. The so-called mutual implication of the identity and 
distinction of two terms M and N means, according to this view. 
their identity in one respect a and their distinction in another b ; 
the two relations are presented together, each being known in- 
dependently. It amounts to saying that M and N are in the 
two relations the same two terms only in a factitious sense. They 
are two pairs of terms—Ma,Na and Mb,Nb—presented toge- 
ther; and the identity of Ma, Na, means that they are only 
different symbols of P. 
17. But what does ‘symbol of P’ mean, it may be asked. 
Can we simply say that Ma, Na, are P as in connexion with 
i.e., aS distinct from and together with Mb, ND, respectively? 
Apparently P has to be thought in two positions. The difference 
of symbols is not accidentally together with the identity P: it 
cannot be got rid of and cannot in the last resort be taken to 
be merely outside the identity, like the difference of Mb, Nb. 
In other words , a new relation—other than the mere co-ordinate- 
ness of distincts has to be admitted between P and its ultimate 
symbols or thought-positions. So far as the identity of P can 
be distinguished from this relation, it is only P-ness and not P; 
and the relation itself is but the particularity of P. The identity 
of a determinate thing then disappears and gives place to a dua- 
lism of the abstractions—thinghood and the particularity . 
18. Ordinary realism starts with the determinate thing and 
would resist this analysis as artificial. But the alternative would 
appear to be to take the determinate thing as simply given, as 
implying no identity and to reject self-identity as only a mean- 
ingless phrase. What precisely is meant by ‘simply given’? It 
can only mean ‘independent of all particularising or symbolising 
thought’. It is to assume that the distinct exists apart from 
22

=== PAGE 362 ===
338 THE JAINA THEORY OF ANEKANTA 
distinguishing. If this is justified simply by the circumstance that 
the distinction between the subjective and the objective is itself 
a known object, we come back to the old difticulty about dis- 
tinction within the objective and distinction from the objective. 
Distinction from the objective, taken as itself objective, implies 
that knowing is known as distinct from the known i.e., as 
unknown. If this is not a contradiction, Knowing can only be 
understood as the indefinite that is known (i.e., is definite or 
objective ) as the indefinite. The realistic equivalent of the re- 
lation of object and subject then is the relation of the definite 
and indefinite . 
19. The objective indefinite has been admitted by some logi- 
cians with a realistic tendency, e.g.. by Hobhouse in his Theory 
of Knowledge. The content of simple apprehension which to him 
is the standard fact is at once definite and indefinite. What is 
apprehended is a definite with an indefinite background. The 
indefinite as apprehended is so far definite but it is definite as 
indefinite, not as superseding the indefinite. Yet to Hobhouse 
there is knowledge only so far as the content is defined by abstrac- 
tion. The knowledge of the indefinite as such is not regarded 
as necessitating any modification of the forms of definite know- 
ledge. The difference of the definite and the indefinite is not 
understood as other than the difference between two definites . 
There is the other obscure relation approximating tc adjectivity 
or identity indicated by the phrase ‘definite indefinite’. But 
this relation, if not denied. is not considered by him at all. 
The Jaina recognises both these relations explicitly and obtains 
from their contrast certain other forms of truth, simpler and 
more complex. 
20. The obscure relation in the content ‘definite indefinite ’ 
requires elucidation. If the indefinite is definite as such, is this 
definiteness an objective character? To the realist, thought only 
discovers but does not constitute the object. Bare position cor- 
responding to the simple positing act of thinking must then be 
objective. The indefinite is thought as indefinite and by the 
same logic the indefiniteness is also objective. The ‘definite in- 
definite’ is thus a fact but the two elements of it are incompatible 
in thought. The factual equivalent of this incompatibilty would 
be disconnexion or no-relation. The two elements cannot be said 
to be related objectively even in the way of distinction. Yet

=== PAGE 363 ===
THE JAINA THEORY OF ANEKANTA 339 
as the elements have to be thought together, their togetherness 
is to be admitted as objective in the same abstract sense. Here 
then we have togetherness of unrelated or undifferenced elements . 
We cannot deny a plurality nor can we affirm a definite dis- 
tinction : the relation is a magical alternation. This would be 
the Jaina equivalent of the relation of identity. We may call 
it non-difference, distinction from distinction or indeterminate 
distinction . 
21. If the given indefinite is definite as indefinite, the given 
definite is definite as definite. The given definite thus turns 
out to be a manifold. in contrast with the given indefinite. If the 
adjective ‘definite’ in ‘definite indefinite’ be objective. it is also 
objective in ‘definite definite’ and distinguishable from the sub- 
stantive ‘definite’. We use the terms adjective and substantive 
only in a provisional way. The adjectival definite is objective 
thought-position and the substantive definite as contrasted with 
it is objective given-ness or existence in general. As they are 
both distinct. their relation is definite distinction or differenced 
togetherness. Thus we have two modes of togetherness—differ- 
enced and undifferenced. The Jaina calls them kramarpana 
and saharpana respectively—consecutive presentation and co- 
presentation, as they might be translated. To him the indeter- 
minism or manifoldness of truth (anckanta) presents itself 
primarily in these two forms of difference and non-difference . 
22. The two definites in the phrase ‘definite definite’ mean 
thought-position and given-ness. They answer precisely to the 
elements of the determinate existent—viz.. particularity and 
thinghood—which we obtained from the co-ordinateness of identity 
and distinction. In order to avoid the apparently artificial analy- 
sis, the realist takes the determinate existent as merely given. 
It is indeed given but so is the indefinite also given and the 
contrast of the two brings out the circumstance that the deter- 
minate existent is manifold—the very analysis that was sought 
to be avoided. The determinate existent then implies the distinct 
elements and is at the same time distinct from them. 
23. Such is the logical predicament that is presented every- 
where in the Jaina theory. It may be generalised as a princi- 
ple : the distinction from distinction is other than mere distinc- 
tion and yet asserts the distinction. It is just the realistic equi- 
valent of the simple statement that the subject is distinct from

=== PAGE 364 ===
340 THE JAINA THEORY OF ANEKANTA 
the object and knows this distinction, or as it may be put more 
explicitly , that the knowing of knowing is the knowing of know- 
ing as referring to the object. As we have already suggested, 
the different basal categories of objectivity with which the different 
forms of realism are bound up answer to the different aspects 
of the act of knowing. If knowing is a unity, the known 15 a 
plurality , the objective category being distinction or togetherness , 
If knowing is itself a duality of ‘contemplating’ and ‘enjoying’, 
the known or the contemplated is a duality of distinction and 
distinction from distinction. If finally knowledge is of the object. 
refers to the known, the known must present an equivalent of 
this of-relation or reference . 
24. What is this of-relation? It is the relation of knowing 
and its content, the knowing or assertive function which is some- 
times identified with the function of meaning. It is a relation, 
not of two contents, but of content and no-content; of being 
and no-being — something that is neither the one nor the other 
and is intelligible only by the concept of freedom that can neither 
be said to be nor not to be. This freedom. stripped of its 
subjective associations, is but the category of indetermination . 
Distinction and identity in fact—or as we call them. differenced 
togetherness and undifferenced togetherness (of particularity and 
thinghood }—are themselves related in the way of indetermina- 
tion or alternation : particularity and thinghood are ‘in each το- 
lation without being in the other relation at the same time. Iden- 
tity is distinct from distinction and yet implies it, i.e., is in al- 
ternation with it. There are thus three basal categories—viz.. 
distinction , distinction from distinction as other than distinction, 
and the indetermination of the two. Ordinary realism is based 
on the first category; there are forms of realism that admit some 
kind of definite identity as distinct from distinction; and finally, 
Jaina realism admits both in the form of indetermination, the 
identity being interpreted as indefinite. 
25. The Jaina develops this category of indetermination into 
seven alternative modes of truth. The indetermination is ulti- 
mately of the definite and indefinite. Now this yields two 
relations—definite distinction between them and indefinite distinc- 
tion. But indefinite distinction between them is to our know- 
ledge nothing other than the indefinite as a term of it: we do 
not know more of the indefinite than that it is indefinite. The

=== PAGE 365 ===
THE JAINA THEORY OF 4NEKANTA 341 
most complex mode of truth then that we know is the definite 
distinction between the definite and the indefinite, or as we put 
it more explicitly, between the definite-definite and the definite- 
indefinite. Every other aspect of truth, as we shall see presently , 
is implied by it as distinct from and alternative with it. 
26. Now the definiteness of the given indefinite, as has been 
shown already, though objective, sits lightly on the indefinite 
and is a detachable adjective. The conception of detachable de- 
finiteness being thus obtained, the given definite turns out to be 
a manifold , to be a togetherness or distinction of two definites—the 
detachable definite , on the one hand, or particular position which 
has no reference to existence or non-existence, and given-ness or 
existence in general, on the other, which as contrasted with the 
particular i.e., as characterless may be called its negation. No 
other negation is admitted by the Jaina to be objective: what 
is called absolute negation—one form of which is the contradic- 
tory—the negation of what it is not possible to affirm at all 1s 
to be rejected as not objective, as no truth at all. The definite- 
definite or the determinate existent may then be said both to be 
and not to be: particularity or pure position is its being and 
existence in general is its negation. There is no contradiction 
if we bear in mind that the being of pure position is not given 
existence but only what must be thought. what is objective in 
this sense. The same logic is sometimes expressed by saying 
that a determinate existent A is in one respect and is not in 
another respect. This does not simply mean that A is A and is 
not B: it means that existent A, as existence universal, is dis- 
tinct from its particularity . 
27. The determinate existent is, in the sense explained . being 
and negation as distinguishably together, together by what the 
Jaina calls kramarpana. ‘The given indefinite—the ‘un- 
speakable’ or avaktavya as it has been called—as distinct 
from the definite existent, presents something other than this 
‘consecutive togetherness’: it implies saharpana or co- 
presentation which amounts to non-distinction or indeterminate 
distinction of being and negation in the above sense. It 15 objec- 
tive as given: it cannot be said to be not a particular position 
nor to be non-existent. At the same time it is not the definite 
distinction of position and existence; it represents a category by 
itself. The common-sense principle implied in its recognition is

=== PAGE 366 ===
342 THE JAINA THEORY OF ANEKANTA 
that what is given cannot be rejected simply because it is not 
expressible by a single positive concept. A truth has to be ad- 
mitted if it cannot be got rid of even if it is not understood. 
28. So far then we have obtained four modes of truth—being , 
negation. their distinction and their non-distinction—all implied 
by the distinction between the definite given and the indefinite 
given. Now this distinction is itself a mode of truth: and as 
the definite given is taken to be being and negation or particularity 
and existence together. the indefinite may be considered as to- 
gether with or distinct from each of these elements taken singly. 
It may be taken fo be a particular i.e.. to be together with 
position. and it may be taken to be many undistinguishable nego- 
tions. to be the wuniversal—existence—as itself a confusion of 
the negations of many particulars. as not-A. not-B, not-C.... 
indefinitely together. Thus we have altogether seven modes of 
truth—b hangas as they have been called—viz.. particular posi- 
tion or being . its negation or the universal—existence . position and 
negation as distinguishably together or the determinate existent, 
these as indistinguishably together or the indefinite. this inde- 
finite as itself a being or particular position, as many negations 
together, and finally as distinct from the determinate existent. 
If there be an eighth mode. it would be non-distinction of the 
definite and indefinite, which however is but the indefinite, 
nothing more specific than the fourth mode. 
29. The value of these modes of truth for logic cannot be 
fully discussed within the limits of this paper. We may conclude 
by pointing out that these modes of truth are not merely many 
truths but alternative truths. The last mode may be regarded 
as implying the other modes but is not therefore in any sense 
a comprising unity. What is implied by a mode is a different 
mode. The implying relation in objective terms is but indeter- 
mination. The implying mode and the implied mode are at 
once distinct and indefinitely non-distinct. Truth as an indeter- 
mination or alternation of truths is but manifold possibility. Each 
mode of truth as alternative with the others is a possible though 
it has to be taken as objective. 
30. There is the conception of indeterministic will to which 
there are many possibles, any of which can be really chosen by 
it. Here we have already the notion of manifold possibility as 
objective to the will. But the logic of this notion has not been

=== PAGE 367 ===
“Ὁ. 
THE JAINA THEORY CF ANFKANTA . 343 
sufficiently investigated, though the relations of objective possi- 
bles cannot be adequately expressed by the categories of ordinary 
logic. The Jaina theory elaborates a logic of indetermination 
not in reference to the will—but in reference to the knowing, 
though it is a pragmatist theory in some sense. As a realist, 
the Jaina holds that truth is not constituted by willing, though 
he admits that the knowledge of truth has a necessary reference 
to willing. His theory of indeterministic truth is not a form 
of scepticism. It represents, not doubt, but toleration of many 
modes of truth. The faith in one truth or even in a plurality 
of truths, each simply given as determinate, would be rejected 
by it as a species of intolerance. What is presented and cannot 
be got rid of has to be accepted as truth even though it is not 
definitely thinkable or is thinkable in alternative definite modes .

=== PAGE 368 ===

=== PAGE 369 ===

=== PAGE 370 ===

=== PAGE 371 ===

=== PAGE 372 ===

=== PAGE 373 ===

=== PAGE 374 ===
