EDMUND HUSSERL 

COLLECTED WORKS 
VOLUME III 


Volume I 


Volume II 


Ideas Pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and 
to a Phenomenological Philosophy 
Third Book : Phenomenology and the 
Foundations of the Sciences 
Ideas Pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and 
to a Phenomenological Philosophy 
First Book: General Introduction to a Pure 
Phenomenology 
Volume III Ideas Pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and 
to a Phenomenological Philosophy 
Second Book: Studies in the Phenomenology of 
Constitution 


translations 

PREPARED UNDER THE AUSPICES OF 
THE HUSSERL-ARCHIVES (LEUVEN) 


EDMUND HUSSERL 

IDEAS PERTAINING TO A PURE 

PHENOMENOLOGY AND TO A 

PHENOMENOLOGICAL PHILOSOPHY 

Second Book 

STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY 

OF CONSTITUTION 

TRANSLATED BY 

RICHARD ROJCEWICZ and ANDRE SCHUWER 


KLUWER ACADEMIC PUBLISHERS 
DORDRECHT / BOSTON / LONDON 


ISBN 0-7923-0713-5 (paperback) 


Published by Kluwer Academic Publishers, 

P.O. Box 17, 3300 AA Dordrecht, The Netherlands. 

Kluwer Academic Publishers incorporates 

the publishing programmes of 

D. Reidel, Martinus Nijhoff, Dr W. Junk and MTP Press. 

Sold and distributed in the U.S.A. and Canada 

by Kluwer Academic Publishers, 

101 Philip Drive, Norwell, MA 02061, U.S.A. 

In all other countries, sold and distributed 

by Kluwer Academic Publishers Group, 

P.O. Box 322, 3300 AH Dordrecht, The Netherlands. 

05-0200-250 ts 

Second printing 1993, Third printing 1996, Fourth printing 1998, Fifth printing 2000 

All Rights Reserved 

© 1989 by Kluwer Academic Publishers 

No part of the material protected by this copyright notice may be reproduced or 

utilized in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including 

photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, 

without written permission from the copyright owner. 

Printed in the Netherlands 


CONTENTS 


TRANSLATORS' INTRODUCTION 

Foreword 


XI 
XVII 


SECOND BOOK 

STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY 

OF CONSTITUTION 


Section One 
The Constitution of Material Nature 

Chapter One: The Idea of Nature in General 

§ 1. Preliminary deUneation of the concepts of nature and experience. ^ 

(Exclusion of meaning predicates) • 

§ 2 The natural-scientific attitude as a theoretical attitude 4 

§ 3. Analysis of the theoretical attitude, of the theoretical interest . . 5 

§4 Theoretical acts and "pre-giving^' intentional lived expenences . 6 

§5. Spontaneity and passivity; actuality and inactuality of conscious- ^^ 

ness 1 • ^4 

§ 6. The distinction between the transition into the theoretical attitude 

and the transition into reflection 

§ 7. Objectivating and non-Objectivating acts and their correlates . . 7 

§8. The sense-objects as primal constitutive objects 

§9. Categorial and aesthetic C sensuous") synthesis ]^ 

§ 10. Things, spatial phantoms, and the data of sensation 23 

§11. Nature as sphere of mere things 


VI 


CONTENTS 


Chapter Two; The Ontic Sense-Strata of the Thing 
OF Intuition as Such 

§ 12. Material and animal nature 30 

§13. The significance of extension for the structure of "things" in 

general and of material things in particular 32 

§ 14. The significance of extension for the structure of animaha ... 35 
§15. The essence of materiality (substance) 36 

a) Phenomenological analysis of the givenness of the thing as a 

way toward determining the essence, "material thing." ... 37 

b) Mobility and alterability as constituents of the material thing; 

the thing-schema 39 

c) Exhibition of the materiahty of the thing by way of its depen- 
dence on circumstances 44 

d) The schema as real determinateness of the material thing . . 46 

e) More precise determination, redetermination, and cancellation 

of the thing-experience 4g 

§ 16. The constitution of the properties of the thing in mulfiple relafions 

of dependency 49 

§17. Materiahty and substantiality 58 

Chapter Three: The Aestheta in Their Relation 

TO the Aesthetic Body 
§ 18. The subjectively conditioned factors of the constitution of the 

thing; the constitution of the Objective material thing 60 

a) The intuitive qualities of the material thing in their dependencies 

on the experiencing subject-Body 60 

b) The significance of normal perceptual conditions for the consti- 
tution of the intuited thing and the significance of abnormah- 

ties 63 

c) The significance of psychophysical conditionality for the various 
levels of constitution 70 

d) The physicahstic thing 80 

e) Possibility of the constitution of an "Objective nature" on the 
solipsistic level 82 

Transition from solipsistic to intersubjective experience ... 83 

g) More precise characterization of the physicahstic thing ... 89 
h) The possibiHty of the constitution of an "Objective nature" at 

the level of intersubjective experience 94 


Section Two 
The Constitution of Animal Nature 

Introduction 

§ 19. Transition to the consideration of the soul as a natural Object 
§ 20. The sense of the ordinary talk about the " psychic " .... 
§21. The concept of "I as man" 


96 
97 
99 


CONTENTS 


VII 


Chapter One: The Pure Ego 

§ 22. The pure Ego as Ego-pole ^^^ 

§23. The possibility of grasping the pure Ego (the Ego-pole) .... 107 

§24. " Mutability " of the pure Ego ^^^ 

§ 25, Polarity of acts : Ego and Object ^11 

§26. Alert and dull consciousness ^^^ 

8 27 "I as man" as part of the content of the environment of the pure 

^ ■ „^ 115 

Ego 

8 28 The real Ego constituted as transcendent Object; the pure Ego as 

. - • 117 

given m immanence • 

§ 29. Constitution of unities within the sphere of immanence. Persistent 

opinions as sedimentations in the pure Ego 118 

Chapter Two: Psychic Reality 

§30. The real psychic subject l^^ 

§31. The formal-universal concept of reahty 133 

§ 32. Fundamental differences between material and psychic reality • 134 

§ 33. More precise determination of the concept of reality 144 

8 34 Necessity of the distinction between the naturalistic and the person- 

. . 1 47 

ahstic attitudes 


Chapter Three: The Constitution of Psychic Reality 

Through the Body 
§ 35. Transition to the study of the constitution of "man as nature" 151 

8 36 Constitution of the Body as bearer of localized sensations (sens- 

■ ings) •;; 

§ 37. Differences between the visual and tactual realms ^^^ 

§ 38. The Body as organ of the will and as seat of free movement . . 159 
8 39 Significance of the Body for the constitution of higher Objectivi- 

\ . . 160 

ties 

§40. More precision concerning the localization of the sensings and 

concerning the non-thingly properties of the Body 161 

§41. Constitution of the Body as material thing in contrast to other 
material things 

a) The Body as center of orientation 1^5 

b) Peculiarity of the manifolds of appearance of the Body ... 167 

c) The Body as integral part of the causal nexus 167 

§ 42. Character of the Body as constituted solipsistically 168 

Chapter Four: The Constitution of Psychic Reality in Empathy 

§43. Givenness of other animalia ^'^ 

§44. Primal presence and appresence 1^^ 

§45. Animalia as primally present Corporeal bodies with appresented 

interiority ' L 

§ 46. Significance of empathy for the constitution of the reality " I as 

man." 

§ 47. Empathy and the constitution of nature 1'^ 


VIII 


CONTENTS 


Section Three 
The Constitution of the Spiritual World 

§48. Introduction 181 

Chapter One: Opposition Between the Naturalistic and 

Personalistic Worlds 
§ 49. The personalistic attitude versus the naturalistic . 183 

a) Introjection of the soul as presupposition even for the natural- 
istic attitude 184 

b) Localization of the psychic 187 

c) Temporalization of the psychic. (Immanent time and space- 
time) 188 

d) Reflection on method 189 

e) The naturalistic attitude and the natural attitude 190 

§ 50. The person as center of a surrounding world 1 94 

§51. The person in personal associations 200 

§ 52. Subjective manifolds of appearance and Objective things .... 211 
§53. The relationship between the consideration of nature and the 

consideration of the spirit 219 

Chapter Two: Motivation as the Fundamental Law 
OF THE Spiritual World 

§ 54. The Ego in the inspectio sui 223 

§55. The spiritual Ego in its comportment toward the surrounding 

world 226 

§56. Motivation as the fundamental lawfulness of spiritual life ... 231 

a) Motivation of reason 231 

b) Association as motivation 233 

c) Association and experiential motivation 235 

d) Motivation in its noetic and noematic aspects 238 

e) Empathy toward other persons as an understanding of their 
motivations 239 

Natural causality and motivation 241 

g) Relations between subjects and things from the viewpoint of 

causahty and of motivation 243 

h) Body and spirit as comprehensive unity: "spiritualized" 

Objects 248 

§ 57. Pure Ego and personal Ego as Object of reflexive self-appercep- 
tion 259 

§ 58. The constitution of the personal Ego prior to reflection .... 263 

§ 59. The Ego as subject of faculties 266 

§ 60. The person as subject of acts of reason, as " free Ego " .... 269 
a) The *' I can " as practical possibility, as neutrality modification 

of practical acts, and as original consciousness of abilities 270 


CONTENTS 


IX 


b) The "I can" motivated in the person's knowledge of himself. 
Self-apperception and self-understanding 277 

c) The influence of others and the freedom of the person . • • 281 

d) General type and individual type in understanding persons 282 
§61, The spiritual Ego and its underlying basis 288 

Chapter Three: The Ontological Priority 

OF the Spiritual World over the Naturalistic 

8 62 The interlocking of the personalistic attitude and the naturalistic 

A 294 

attitude 

§ 63. Psychophysical paralleUsm and mteraction ^^^ 

§ 64. Relativity of nature, absoluteness of spirit 311 


Supplements 

Supplement I: Attempt at a step-wise description of constitution 319 

Supplement II: The Ego as pole and the Ego of habituaUties . . 324 

Supplement III: The localization of the ear noises in the ear . . . 324 
Supplement IV: Sketch of an introduction to "The constitution of 

the spiritual worid. " ^25 

Supplement V : The pregivennesses of the spirit in spiritual life . 328 

Supplement VI: /n^pecn'o 5mi (" I do " and *' I have ") 329 

Supplement VII: The Ego and its " over-and-against. " 330 

Supplement VIII: On the unity of " Body " and " spirit " 333 

Supplement IX: Spiritual products 

Supplement X: Personal Ego and surrounding world (333)~The 
levels of the constitution of Objective reahty (336)— 

Pure Ego and personal Ego (337) 333 

Supplement XI: The human being apprehended in an inductive- 
natural way and the free person 340 

Supplement XII: Supplements to Section Three 344 

I. The Person— The Spirit and Its Psychic Basis 

8 1 The distinction between primal sensibility and intellectus 

... 344 

aS^^s .*.•■■ ^.. 

§ 2. Sensibihty as the psychic basis of the spint ^^^ 

Excursus : impression and reproduction 348 

§ 3. Development of the Ego— Ego-action and Ego-affection 349 

IL Subjectivity as Soul and as Spirit in the Attitude of the 
Natural Sciences and in the Attitude of the Human 
Sciences 

§ 1. The reahty of the soul and of the human being .... 351 


CONTENTS 


§2. Psychophysical causahty and the causal nexus of things 354 

§ 3. Possibility of the insertion of the soul into nature ... 355 

§4. The human being as spiritual subject 357 

§5. Empathy as spiritual (not naturalistic) relation between 

subjects 35g 

§ 6. Spiritual Ego and psychological Ego. — Constitution of the 

Ego as self-apperception 358 

§ 7. Subjects considered as nature and as spirit 362 

§8. Distinction between a psychological and a psychophysical 

analysis 366 

§ 9. Stream of consciousness, lived experience, and intentional 

correlates as nexuses of psychic life 369 

§ 10. The spiritual considered psychologically and the question 

of its *' explanation. ''—Two concepts of nature .... 369 
§11. The human sciences posit subjectivity as absolute. — 

*' Inner" and "outer" experience 374 

§ 12. Nature in the human-scientific attitude.— The human- 
scientific and the phenomenological attitude 377 

Supplement XIII: "Personal subjectivity" as theoretical theme . . 382 
Supplement XIV: Human-scientific attitude— Natural science incor- 
porated into the human-scientific attitude. — Mere 
nature as surrounding world (389)— The various 
types of intuitive causality (390)— Abstract-scientific 
investigations (391)— Natural science within human 
science (392)— The concept of Objectivity (398) . 386 

Epilogue 4Q5 

I^DEX 433 


TRANSLATORS' INTRODUCTION 

As is made plain in the critical apparatus and editorial matter 
appended to the original German publication of Husserl's Ideas 
II ^ this is a text with a history. It underwent revision after 
revision, spanning almost 20 years in one of the most fertile 
periods of the philosopher's hfe. The book owes its form to the 
work of many hands, and its unity is one that has been imposed 
on it. Yet there is nothing here that cannot be traced back to 
Husserl himself. Indeed, the final "clean copy" for pubhcation, 
prepared by an assistant, was completely reviewed by the master 
three times and emended by him in detail on each occasion. 
Nevertheless, in the end the work was in fact not submitted for 
publication, and after Husserl's pen last touched the manuscript 
in 1928 it was set aside until posthumously edited and pubUshed 
by the Husserl- Archives in 1952. 

The story of the composition of Ideas II begins with the 
''pencil manuscript" of 1912. This is the ultimate textual 
source for both Ideas II and Ideas III. 2 It has been preserved as 
a folio of 84 sheets in very dense shorthand of the Gabelsberger 
system, written mostly with a pencil. It was composed by 
Husserl "in one stroke" immediately after the completion of 


» Edmund Husserl: Ideen zu einer reinen Phdnomenologie und phanomenologischen 
Philosophie. Zweites Buck: Phdnomenologische Untersuchungen zur Konstitution. 
Edited by Marly Biemeh The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1952 {Husserliana IV). 

2 Edmund Husserl : Ideen zu einer reinen Phdnomenologie und phanomenologischen 
Philosophie. Drittes Buch: Die Phdnomenologie und die Fundamente der Wissen- 
schaften. Edited by Marly Biemel The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1952 {Husserliana 
V). English translation by Ted E. Klein and William E. Pohl: Ideas pertaining to a 
pure phenomenology and to a phenomenological philosophy. Third Book: Phenomeno- 
logy and the foundations of the sciences. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1980 (Edmund 
' Husserl: Collected Works, Vol. I). 


XII 


TRANSLATORS' INTRODUCTION 


the first Book of the Ideas. ^ The manuscript is divided into two 
parts, corresponding perfectly to the plan for the second Book 
as announced in the first. Eventually, hov^ever, the first part 
(the constitutive analyses) was greatly expanded and became a 
volume on its own. Ideas II, while the second part (studies in 
scientific theory), became, without further revision, the text of 
Ideas III, also published posthumously. 

In 1915, Husserl elaborated and re-wrote, again in shorthand, 
the first half of the pencil manuscript, approximately doubling it 
in size. This folio bears a title page with the inscription " Ideas 
II " and includes the remark, " My revision and basis for Miss 
Stein." The first page mentions that the writings stem from 
lecture courses of 1913 and 1915 (deaUng with the problem of 
constitution). In fact, the editor of the published version 
indicates that already a conglomeration of diverse writings can 
be seen in this folio, as it contains studies from various contexts, 
some dating back as early as 1908. 

In 1916, Edith Stein, as Husserl's assistant, completed her 
first redaction of the manuscript. For the most part this 
consisted merely of transcribing into longhand the folio of 1915 
and parts of the pencil manuscript. She transcribed the entire 
second half of the latter, and this became the text of Ideas III. 

The first redaction by Stein and the texts on which it was 
based relate only to the first and second sections of Ideas IL 
Section three, on the constitution of the world of spirit, has its 
source in the so-called ''H-foho." This is a manuscript in 
Husserl's longhand, dating from 1913. In addifion, the textual 
sources of other parts of Ideas II, especially the second half of 
the middle section, go back to numerous manuscripts written by 
Husserl during the war years, up to the beginning of 1917. 

In 1918, Stein completed her second redaction. This time her 


' Edmund Husserl : Ideen zu einer reinen Phdnomenologie und phdnomenologischen 
Philosophic. Erstes Buch: Allgemeine Einfiihrung in die reine Phdnomenologie. Edited 
by Walter Biemel. The Hague; Martinus Nijhoff, 1950 {Husserliana III). English 
translation by F. Kersten: Ideas pertaining to a pure phenomenology and to a 
phenomenological philosophy. First Book : General introduction to a pure phenomeno- 
logy. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1982 {Edmund Husserl: Collected Works. 
Vol. II). 


TRANSLATORS' INTRODUCTION 


XIII 


work involved much more than merely transcribing. By incor- 
porating into the text writings from the H-folio and others from 
the war years, the main text of Ideas II began to take its present 
form. 

In 1923, Ludwig Landgrebe became the assistant of Husserl 
and worked for more than a year on preparing the text of Ideas 
II for publication. Landgrebe's main source was to be the 
second redaction by Stein, but in the meantime Husserl had 
revised the third section and had inserted numerous annotations 
and other writings. These had to be incorporated into the text, 
and, in addition, Husserl desired that many manuscripts from 
the H-folio be included, ones that Stein had not used. In order 
to preserve as much as possible a unity of exposition. Land- 
grebe appended many of these writings as supplements to the 
main text. In 1925 Landgrebe completed a "clean copy," 
typewritten and ready for publication. 

Husserl, however, continued to revise the manuscript. Three 
series of annotations in shorthand can be distinguished, the last 
dating from 1928. These annotations were transcribed after 
Husserl's death by Stephan Strasser, working at the newly- 
established Husserl-Archives in Leuven. They were incorporated 
by the editor of the present volume. Marly Biemel, into the 
published version. Where possible the annotations were interpo- 
lated directly into the text. Critical remarks and allusions to new 
circles of problems were assigned to footnotes. The remaining 
annotations were presented in the supplements. 

The division of the text into three sections and into 64 
paragraphs derives from the " clean copy, " only shghtly altering 
the organization found already in the second elaboration by 
Stein. The division of the sections into chapters and the chapter 
l^eadings themselves were based on the Landgrebe draft: for the 
first section, the chapter divisions and headings were indicated 
by Husserl explicitly. As regards the second section, Husserl 
marked the divisions but only hsted the key words for the 
headings. For the last section, Husserl was more vague as to the 
chapters, and their titles were supplied by the editor. Likewise, 
the title of the book as a whole is attributable to her. 


XIV 


TRANSLATORS' INTRODUCTION 


The volume now in the reader's hands is for all intents and 
purposes a complete Husserliana edition in English. It contains 
everything available to the German scholar except for the 
text-critical apparatus which provides variant readings. In addi- 
tion, the present volume includes the Epilogue to the Ideas. This 
text was composed to serve as a preface to the English 
translation of the first Book and was published as such in 1931. 
A slightly altered German version actually made it to print the 
year before, in Volume 1 1 of HusserFs Jahrbuch. It was later 
appended as an actual Epilogue to the Ideas, that is, the last text 
of the third Book. The translation included here is of this 
published German version. It was considered too important to 
be omitted from the " Collected Works. " 

The Epilogue differs considerably in style from the other 
writings presented herein. It is written in very polished German, 
employs a broad vocabulary in highly idiomatic language, and 
represents Husserl at his most literary. Standing in sharpest 
contrast are the manuscripts included in the supplements, which 
are sometimes rather inchoate and often quite cryptic. The main 
text occupies something of a mean between these extremes, in 
terms of style. It uses a restricted vocabulary, and this not only 
as regards technical terms; it repeats many stereotypical 
phrases; and the text is not without its grammatical pecuUarities 
and ambiguities. Our translation could not help but reflect these 
three different styles of the respective parts of the book, and we 
ask the reader's indulgence for this unevenness. 

We have observed, for the most part, what can now be 
considered as established conventions in rendering Husserl into 
Enghsh. We are proposing, however, one innovation. German 
has two terms for what in English is designated by the single 
word, " body. " The distinction made in German is that between 
Korper, inanimate physical matter, and Leib, the animated flesh 
of an animal or human being. Both these terms would ordi- 
narily be best rendered simply as "body" in English, the 
context determining the proper sense. But Husserl often plays 
on the distinction between the two, and so some sort of device 
was called for to make these passages intelligible. We are 
proposing, then, to translate Leib as "Body" (with a capital) 
and Korper as "body," and the same applies to the derivative 


TRANSLATORS' INTRODUCTION 


XV 


words, "bodily," "corporeal," etc. Leibkorper thus becomes 
"Corporeal body." This stratagem was chosen as the most 
simple and as having a precedent in the analogous (a hmited 
analogy, of course) distinction between Objekt ("Object") and 
Gegenstand (" object "). Just as, for Husserl, Gegenstand is the 
more general term, encompassing anything at all that can be 
intended in any way, a sensation, for example, and Objekte are 
only certain kinds of Gegenstdnde , intersubjective ones, so 
Korper is more general: i.e., every Object is an object, but not 
vice versa, and in the same manner every Body is a body. 

The reader should also be advised that Geisteswissenschaft is 
being rendered here as "human science," '' geistesmssenschaft- 
lich'' as "human-scientific," etc. Thereby, unfortunately, the 
connection with the word Geist ("spirit") is lost. Where we 
have thought it necessary to make the connection explicit we 
have resorted to a parenthetical phrase or hendiadys. 

Our translation was carried out under the direction of the 
Husserl-Archives at Leuven, and we wish to acknowledge 
especially the invaluable assistance provided by Ullrich Melle of 
the Archives staff. We consulted him on various passages that 
had become for us lites inter doctores, and we always found his 
resolutions to stem from a profound grasp of Husserl and of the 
German and English languages. There is no doubt that our 
translation could have benefitted from his critique of it in its 
entirety. Needless to say, we are alone responsible for defects. 
We were also assisted by having available published transla- 
tions of Ideas II in French ^ and Itahan,^ and they more than 
once provided suggestions concerning the sense of a passage. 
Naturally, it was our hnguistic intuition of the original German 
that was always our final recourse. 

We beheve there can be no question that Ideas II is an 
important work and will repay a close reading. It is a book that 
exercised an influence, even before it was published, on two of 


5 Edmund Husserl: Idees directrices pour une phenomenologie et me philosophie 
phenomenologique pures. Livre second: Recherches phenomenologiques pour la consti- 
tution. Trans. Eliane Escoubas. Paris: PUP, 1982. 

2 Edmund Husserl : Idee per una fenomenologia pura e per una filosofia fenomeno- 
logica. Libro secondo: Ricerche fenomenologiche sopra la costituzione. Trans. Enrico 
Filippini. Torino: Giulio Einaudi, 1965. 


XVI 


TRANSLATORS' INTRODUCTION 


the greatest phenomenologists of all, Heidegger and Merleau- 
Ponty. Husserl sent Heidegger a copy of the manuscript early in 
1925 (doubtlessly the draft prepared by Landgrebe) when Hei- 
degger was lecturing at Marburg and was occupied precisely 
with the distinction between the naturahstic and personalistic 
attitude. As for Merleau-Ponty, he studied the manuscript after 
Husserl's death at the Archives in Leuven, and many precursors 
of themes in Merleau-Ponty's own work are visible in this text. 
Merleau-Ponty was a very reserved man, but one of us can 
remember clearly a conversation with him in which he, with 
sudden animation, spoke so rapturously of the second Ideas and 
described his study of it as ''une experience presque volup- 
tueuse. " Our hope is that this translation may contribute to a 
rekindling somewhere of the same enthusiasm for the book. 

R.R. 
A.S. 

Simon Silverman Phenomenology Center 
Duquesne University 


FOREWORD 


Ideas II presents some concrete examples of constitutive 
analysis. In doing so, it executes at least one phase of the sort of 
phenomenological philosophy introduced, methodologically and 
systematically, in Book I. At the same time, it supplements the 
overall picture of phenomenology portrayed, somewhat lop- 
sidedly, in Book I. 

Ideas I emphasized (perhaps even exaggerated) the absolute 
character of pure consciousness to such an extent that phenom- 
enology might readily be misinterpreted as an abstract idealism 
that eschewed all concern with the real world of human life. The 
method of attempting to doubt the existence of the world in 
order to arrive at pure consciousness as a "residue," and the 
fantasy of a possible "destruction of the world" which would 
leave the essence of pure consciousness untouched, had their 
legitimate rhetorical purpose. But they set a one-sided tone 
needing a supplementation and a balance that Book II begins to 
provide. 

Further, the selected examples of introductory analyses of 
constitution of Book I focussed upon the most elementary 
instances of the constitution of perceptual objects. In the 
process, the character of the experienceable world might seem to 
have shrunk to features identifiable as visual spatial configura- 
tions alone. The world of the natural attitude, preserved as 
modified referent of a complex of noematic sense within the 
reduction, might seem to have been attenuated to mere, theore- 
tically conceived, nature ; and mere nature, to spatial phantoms 
alone. 

Book II sets the record straight in some important respects. 
The world of the natural attitude (" the real world ") is seen to 
be more comprehensive than what is accessible to any purely 


XVIII 


FOREWORD 


theoretical attitude. The legitimate theoretical version of the 
natural attitude is seen to be more comprehensive than its 
naturaHstic limitations. Nature as object of the theoretical 
version of the natural attitude is seen to be much more intricate 
than the sample analyses of Book I could indicate. And the 
correlation of transcendental consciousness with the transcen- 
dent world is displayed more concretely than was possible in the 
introductory context of Book I. 

The specific context within which Husserl presents these 
analyses of constitution is that of the philosophy of science. 
Husserl refers to this context of problems also as "metaphysi- 
cal. " The full sense of the juxtaposition of those two terms here 
needs to be worked out by carefully thinking through the 
problems addressed by means of constitutive analyses. But from 
the start, it is clear that the phenomenological approach to the 
philosophy of science requires a replacement of the inherited 
metaphysics of naturalism, to supplement the epistemological 
refutation of naturahsm introduced in Book I. A newly 
fashioned approach to the manifest being of " the real world" is 
required also in order to provide a basis of clarification for the 
domain of the human sciences [Geisteswissenschaften] as well as 
the grounds for an intuitively adequate understanding of nature 
as the domain of the natural sciences. 

In the course of the analyses, by attempting a step by step 
approach to the constitution of the world as nature (even in a 
generously broadened sense), Husserl shows concretely that the 
observer of nature can not encompass his or her own psychic 
and spiritual life (nor those of necessarily participating others) 
within the categories that do very well to portray intuited nature 
apprehended as merely material (substantial-causal) in charac- 
ter. The argument is intricate. And it proceeds by devoting 
careful attention to the subtle interplay among observation, 
categorization, and general theoretical attitudes of apprehen- 
sion. 

Husserl presents the results as having been made possible by 
the pedagogical and Hberating functions of the phenomenologi- 
cal reduction. Once we have emancipated ourselves from the 
previously unnoticed theoretical Winders of the naturalistic 
version of the natural theoretical attitude, we learn of the power 


FOREWORD 


XIX 


of attitudes to disclose what they can and to cover over all else. 
But we learn also of our own power, not only to shift back and 
forth between the personalistic and the naturalistic theoretical 
attitudes (and between practice-oriented, value-oriented, and 
theory-oriented attitudes) but to do so in full consciousness of 
our own involvement in such shifts and in their consequences. 
Husserl the rigorous theorist sticks close to the themes at 
hand. But Husserl the person has a keen sense of the fuller 
human, cultural, significance of the issues with which he is 
grappUng. He writes, in a letter to Albrecht dated August 2, 
1917, "Duty demands that I bring to completion and to 
publication my labors of many years, especially since they 
provide the scientific foundations for a reconciliation between 
the naturalistic world-view that dominated the epoch just 
expired and the teleological world-view. But the teleological 
world-view is the definitively true one. " ^ 

John Scanlon 

Philosophy Department 

Duquesne University 


' ^^r^^chuhmann, Husserl-Chronik: Denk- md Lebensweg Edmund Husserls The 
Hague: Nijhoff, 1977, pp. 212-213. 


SECOND BOOK 

STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY 

OF CONSTITUTION 


Section One: The Constitution of Material Nature 

Chapter One 
THE IDEA OF NATURE IN GENERAL 


§ 1 . Preliminary delineation of the concepts of nature 
5 and experience 

(Exclusion of meaning-predicates) 

We begin our new discussions with nature — specifically, with [1] 
nature as the object of natural science. Nature, one would say 
first of all, is the total spatio-temporal "universe," the total 

1 domain of possible experience : thus we are accustomed to take 
the expressions ''natural science" and "experiential science" as 
synonyms. 

The universe, the world-totahty, includes, of course, every- 
thing "worldly" but not everything in the full sense, not every 

1 5 individual object whatever. Hence the question arises : precisely 
how are nature and the perception of nature, the experience of 
nature, to be determined? We said at the outset that nature is 
the field of transcendent — specifically, spatio-temporal — reali- 
ties. But the concept of real spatio-temporal objectivity, as will 

20 soon appear, is insufficient. It will immediately be evident that 
not all predicates which are, in truth, to be ascribed to 
spatio-temporal realities, and are actually so ascribed by us, do 
for all that belong to the essence of the nature-Object which is [2] 
the correlate of the idea of natural science. Our consideration, 

25 Jiowever, is supposed to aim at nature in the sense of that 
correlation. Now, it is in no way the character of this science to 
restrict itself arbitrarily in the choice of its Objects or in the 
choice of the predicates referring to its Objects. Rather, what 
underlies natural science is always an idea of the essence of 

30 nature, if only an implicit one. Correlatively, the consciousness 
which functions as natural-scientific experience, and thus also as 


4 STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 

the thinking pertaining to natural-scientific experience, has its 
essential phenomenological unity, and this consciousness has its 
essential correlate in nature. A ruling "apperception" deter- 
mines in advance what is or is not a natural-scientific Object, 
5 hence what is or is not nature in the natural-scientific sense. The 
task is to bring that to clarity. In which respect it is evident 
from the outset that all the predicates we ascribe to things under 
the headings of pleasantness, beauty, utility, practical suitabil- 
ity, or perfection remain completely out of consideration (val- 
10 ues, goods, ends, instruments, means, etc.). These do not at all 
concern the natural scientist; they do not belong to nature in his 
sense. 


' 2, The natural-scientific attitude as a theoretical attitude 


That will be understood if we examine more closely the 

15 character of the attitude of the subject who intuits and thinks in 
the natural-scientific way. Through the phenomenological 
description of that attitude, we will learn that what is termed 
" nature " is precisely the intenfional correlate of experience as 
carried out in this attitude. Our approach at first will be as 

20 follows: the thematic attitude of the natural scientist's experience 
of nature and experiential research is the doxic-theoretic. Over 
against it are other attitudes: namely, the valuing (in the 
broadest sense, valuing the beautiful and the good) and the 
practical attitude. This talk about attitudes obviously refers 

25 back to the respective subject, and accordingly we speak of the 
theoretical or the cognitive subject, of the valuing and the 
practical subject. 

Nature is there for the theoretical subject; it belongs to his [3] 
correlative sphere. Of course, that does not mean simply that 

30 nature is already completely determined considered as the corre- 
late of a possible theoretical, cognitive, subject. Nature is an 
object of possible knowledge, but it does not exhaust the total 
realm of such objects. Nature, as mere nature, contains no values, 
no works of art, etc., though these are indeed objects of possible 

35 knowledge and science. But at first our consideration will be 
general. 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MATERIAL NATURE J 

§ 3. Analysis of the theoretical attitude, 
of the theoretical interest 

The theoretical attitude: what does that mean? It is not 
determined merely through the conscious lived experiences we 
5 designate as doxic (Objectifying), as representing, judging, 
thinking acts (whereby we now always want to have in view 
non-neutrahzed ^ acts), for doxic lived experiences also occur in 
the valuing and practical attitude. On the contrary, what is 
characteristic of it lies in the manner in which such lived 

10 experiences are performed or carried out in the function of 
knowledge. In general it happens not only that the focus of the 
subject passes through the lived experiences to that which is 
represented, perceived, remembered, thought about; rather, the 
subject Hves in these acts and does so in a phenomenologically 

15 eminent way. It is one thing to see, i.e., to live through at all, to 
experience, to have something in the perceptual field, and it is 
another thing altogether to perform attentively an act of seeing 
in the specific sense, to "hve" in the seeing in a pre-eminent 
way, to take an active part oneself in a "believing" and a 

20 judging, as an Ego in the specific sence, to perform an act of 
judging as a cogito, to be directed with an active focus to what 
is objective, to be directed in a specifically intentional way. 
Again, it is one thing to be conscious at all that the sky is blue, 
and it is another thing to live in the performance of the 

25 judgment (that the sky is now blue) in an attentive, explicitly 
grasping, specifically intentional way. Doxic lived experiences in 
this attitude, in this manner of explicit performance (I think, I 
perform an act in the specific sense, I posit the subject and [4] 
thereupon posit the predicate, etc.) we term theoretical acts. In 


' On the concept of neutralization, cf. Ideen /, pp. 264 ff. [Trans: I.e., Edmund 
Husserl : Ideen zu einer reinen Phdnomenologie und phdnomenologischen Philosophie. 
Erstes Buck: Allgemeine Einfuhrung in die reine Phdnomenologie. Edited by Karl 
Schuhmann. The Hague: Martinus NijhofT, 1976 {Husserliana III/l). English transla- 
tion by F. Kersten : Ideas pertaining to a pure phenomenology and to a phenomenolog- 
ical philosophy. First book: General introduction to a pure phenomenology. The Hague: 
Martinus NijhofT, 1982 {Edmund Husserl: Collected Works, Vol. II). References to 
this work will cite the Husserliana pagination, indicated in the margins of the 
Collected Works edition.] 


6 STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 

them, not only is an object simply there for the Ego, but rather 
the Ego is, as Ego, thereupon directed attentively (and then 
comes thinking, active positing), and thus it is at once directed 
to the object in a grasping way: as "theoretical," it is, in an 
5 actual sense, Objectifying.^ 


§ 4. Theoretical acts and " pre-giving ' 
lived experiences 


intentional 


Let us suppose that the subject (always understood here as 
the ego belonging inseparably to every cogito, as pure subject) is 

10 the theoretical subject in the aforementioned sense, something it 
is only intermittently. It v^ould thus be "Objectifying" in the 
specific sense of the term, grasping and positing as a being (in 
the validity-mode of the doxic intention of Being) an objectivity 
of the respective sense and furthermore determining it in 

15 explicative syntheses, perhaps in predicative-judgmental ones. 
But then the objectivity in question is already consciously 
constituted prior to these theoretical acts, through certain 
intentional lived experiences, but yet by no means through all of 
those which can be distinguished in the pure subject as related 

20 to this objectivity. In other words, to say that they are related to 
it does not mean that the focus of the specific intention, ruling 
in all theoretical acts, goes right through them, as it were; 
rather, it goes through only those lived experiences which are 
sense-giving or determining for the theoretically grasped object 

25 as such. The remaining lived experiences, e.g. feeling-experi- 
ences, lived experiences of this or that special kind, are indeed 
lived ; as intentional lived experiences they also are constituting ; 
they constitute new objective strata for the object in question, 
but ones in relation to which the subject is not in the theoretical 

30 attitude, and thus they do not constitute the respective theore- 
tically meant and judgmentally determined object as such (or 
help determine this object in a theoretical function). It is only by 
means of a shift of the theoretical regard, a change of theoreti- 


C/ p. 10. 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MATERIAL NATURE 


cal interest, that they emerge out of the phase of /?re- theoretical [5] 
constitution into the theoretical; the new strata of sense enter 
into the framework of theoretical sense, and a new object, i.e., 
one intended in a new and more proper sense, is the Object of 
5 the grasping and theoretical determination in new theoretical 
acts. The total intention of consciousness is therewith an 
essentially changed one, and the acts responsible for the giving 
of other meanings have also experienced a phenomenological 
modification. To what extent this is a necessary state of affairs 

10 is evident from the fact that even the theoretical acts, by means 
of which the pure subject relates to a given Object delimited by 
a constitutive sense (e.g., an Object of nature), no matter how 
they occur as subjectivating, attributing, collecting, relativizing, 
and other acts, at once also exercise a constituting function, 

15 "Categorial" objectivities thus are constituted (in a quite 
definite sense : objectivities of thought), which, however, for their 
part, first become theoretical Objects precisely when the theore- 
tical subject intentionally focuses on these new objectivities (i.e., 
above all, on states of affairs, collections, etc.) and so performs 

20 new acts which grasp them in their being and determine them 
theoretically; thus these acts are subject-acts, predicate-acts, 
etc., of a higher level. 

With reference to these acts of a higher level — always 
initiated by shifts of focus of the specific intending and which 

25 could be called a special kind of "reflection"^ — the categorial 
objectivities constituted in the precedent theoretical acts are 
pre-givennesses. (A state of affairs which holds analogously in 
other cases, ones in which feehng-acts function as pre-constitu- 
tion.) If a shift of focus takes place, then the pre-giving 

30 acts — in our case, the categorial — have already run their 
course in the modality of their original performance. They are 
now no longer active steps of the spontaneous intending and [6] 


' " Reflection " is taken here in an enlarged sense and includes not only the 
grasping of acts but also every ** turning back," i.e., every turning away from the 
natural attitude's directedness toward the Object. Included would also be, for 
example, the turning to the noemata, the manifold of which brings into appearance 
the one identical thing. 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


theoretical determining, of subject-positing and predicate-posit- 
ing, of step-wise collecting, etc. They are alive only in an other, 
essentially modified, form as the '' still " having in consciousness 
of what has been constituted and the retaining of it (this also 
5 takes place already in the progressive development of the 
categorial acts with regard to those that occur earlier in the 
chain) and, furthermore, precisely as the reflecting of an inten- 
tional ray upon its synthetic " results. " 
These complex relationships really need to be heeded and 

10 understood. At the same time, one must make clear to oneself 
that it belongs to the peculiar character of the theoretical 
attitude and its theoretical acts (the performance of which 
makes the subject the theoretical subject) that, in them, objects 
which for the first time will become theoretical are already, in a 

15 certain manner, laid out there in advance. Thus objects are 
already constituted pre-theoretically ; it is only that they are not 
appropriated theoretically and are not Objects intended in the 
pre-eminent sense, and much less are they Objects of theoreti- 
cally determining acts. 

20 As can be seen from what has been said, '*pre-given " Objects 
can themselves "spring " originally out of theoretical acts, and so 
in this regard they can already be theoretical Objects. This can 
happen in various ways : first of all in the manner in which such 
theoretical Objects have been consfituted just now originally in 

25 "properly" (i.e., spontaneously) performed theoretical acts and, 
subsequently, in the manner in which the theoretical subject 
directs its grasping intentional regard toward what has been 
constituted. That becomes possible in this way: the different 
spontaneous stages of the act are retained in consciousness after 

30 their execution and specifically in the modified form of passive 
states, and finally, at the end of the whole process of thought, 
consciousness stands as a unified state, which, in analogy with 
simple representation, can funcfion as a pre-giving conscious- 
ness and can take up a new theoretical direction of focus on the 

35 Object it is conscious of as a unity. 

But obviously there are also other cases possible. Thus, for 
example, a state of affairs constituted earher in spontaneous [7] 
and articulated thinking can " emerge again " in the form of a 
memory that suddenly occurs. It does so through the medium of 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MATERIAL NATURE 


a reproductive modification of the ensuing final result of the 
earlier thinking, and this modification functions now as pre- 
giving consciousness for the acts of the new theoretical attitude. 
Again, this holds also for theoretical "sudden ideas" in which 
5 new — i.e., not merely presentified once more as memories — 
states of affairs surge up as certainties, possibilities, or proba- 
bilities and function as the "stimulus" for the thinking related 
to them. Obviously the pre-givennesses of no matter which acts 
of a theoretical attitude (in other words, the categorial acts 

10 performed in the original spontaneity of thinking) cannot 
always refer back to theoretical acts whence they spring. Thus 
we arrive in each case at pre-given objectivities which do not 
spring from theoretical acts but are constituted in intentional 
lived experiences imparting to them nothing of logico-categorial 

15 formations. 

We have invariably been speaking here about pre-givennesses 
of theoretical acts. But the same holds with respect to other 
spontaneous acts and their pre-givennesses; thus here the dis- 
cussion requires supplementafion. As possibilities running 

20 parallel to the theoretical attitude, there are the axiological and 
practical attitudes. In this respect, analogous results are to be 
estabhshed. Valuing acts (taken in the widest possible sense as 
any kind of act of pleasing or displeasing, as acts performed by 
every kind of posifion-taking in the affective sphere and every 

25 act performed in the unity of one affective consciousness in 
syntheses essentially proper to it) can relate to pre-given objec- 
tivities, and their intentionality proves itself immediately 
thereby as constitutive for objectivities of a higher level, analo- 
gues of the categorial objectivities of the logical sphere. We have 

30 thus to do with a class of objectivities constituted as sponta- 
neous products, as polythetic formations of the polythetically 
unified acts (joined in the unity of one constitutive act) which 
produce them. These are not simply objectivities founded in 
general and in this sense objectivities of a higher level, but they [8] 

35 are precisely objectivities originally constituted as spontaneous 
products and which only as such come to possible originary 
givenness. 

Let us clarify this with an example. We had earher drawn a 
contrast between just being conscious, by way of seeing, of the 


10 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


blue sky and the theoretical performance of this act. ^ But we 
are no longer performing the seeing in this eminent sense when 
we, seeing the radiant blue sky, live in the rapture of it. If we do 
that, then we are not in the theoretical or cognitive attitude but 
5 in the affective. On the other hand, though we have adopted the 
theoretical attitude, the pleasure may very well be present still, 
as, for example, in the observing physicist who is directing 
himself to the radiant blue sky, but then we are not living in the 
pleasure. There is an essential phenomenological modification 

10 of the pleasure, and of the seeing and judging, according as we 
pass over from the one attitude to the other. This characteristic 
change of attitude belongs, as an ideal possibility, to all acts, and 
accompanying it is always the corresponding phenomenological 
modification. That is, all acts which are not already theoretical 

15 from the outset allow of being converted into such acts by 
means of a change in attitude. We can look at a picture "with 
delight. " Then we are living in the performance of aesthetic 
pleasure, in the pleasure attitude, which is precisely one of 
"delight. " Then again, we can judge the picture, with the eyes 

20 of the art critic or art historian, as "beautiful." Now we are 
Hving in the performance of the theoretical or judgmental 
attitude and no longer in the appreciating or pleasure-taking. If 
by "valuing" or "appreciating" we understand an act of 
feeling and precisely one in which we live, then it is not a 

25 theoretical act. But if we understand these terms, as so often 
happens by equivocation, as an evaluation in the form of a 
judgment, possibly even predicating about value, then we would 
be expressing a theoretical act and not an act of feeling. In that 
case, in the judging in terms of value, such as it emerges out of 

30 the attitude of a purely dehghting abandon or surrender, the 
work of art is objective in quite a different manner. It is 
intuited, however not only with sense intuition (we are not [9] 
living in the performance of perception) but with axiological 
intuition. In the active abandon of the " being-occupied-with- 

35 it-in-aesthetic-pleasure," in the aesthetic enjoyment, understood 
as act, the Object is, as we said, the Object of the delight. On 


C/ p. 6. 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MATERIAL NATURE 


11 


the other hand, in aesthetic judging and appraising, it is no 
longer an Object in mere delighting abandon but is an object in 
the special doxothetic sense: the intuited is given with the 
character of aesthetic enjoyableness, which is its proper attri- 
5 bute (which constitutes its " what "). This is a new " theoretical " 
Objectivity and, specifically, a characteristic Objectivity of a 
higher level. Living in simple sense intuition, the one on the 
lowest level, and performing it theoretically, we have theoreti- 
cally grasped a mere thing in the most straightforward manner. 

10 When we pass over to the aesthetic grasping and judging of 
value, we then have more than a mere thing, we have the thing 
with the "what" character (with the expressed predicate) of the 
value; we have a value-thing. This value-Object, which, in its 
objective sense, likewise includes the "what" character of the 

15 value, is the correlate of the theoretical grasping of value. Thus 
it is an Object of a higher level. We observe that the universal- 
original judgment of value or, generally speaking, each con- 
sciousness which originally constitutes a value-Object as such, 
necessarily has in itself a component belonging to the sphere of 

20 feelings. The most original constitution of value is performed in 
feelings as that pre-theoretical (in a broad sense) dehghting 
abandon on the part of the feeling Ego-subject for which I used 
the term "value-reception" already several decades ago in my 
lectures. The term is meant to indicate, in the sphere of feehngs, 

25 an analogon of per-ception, one which, in the doxic sphere,' 
signifies the Ego's original (self-grasping) being in the presence 
of the object itself Thus in the sphere of feelings what is meant 
by this talk of delighting is precisely that feeling in which the 
Ego lives with the consciousness of being in the presence of the 

30 Object "itself" in the manner of feehngs. Just as there is, 
however, a sort of representing from afar, an empty representa- 
tional intending which is not a being in the presence of the 
object, so there is a feeling which relates to the object emptily; 
and as the former is fulfilled in intuitive representing, so is the 

35 empty feeling fulfilled by way of the delighting. On each side [10] 
there are intentions which strive in parallel: a representing 
(cognitive, tending toward knowledge) striving versus an eva- 
luating one which tends toward expectations, toward the 
dehghting enjoyment. The similarity here is what is supposed to 


12 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


be expressed in the parallel terms ''per-ception/value-recep- 
tion. "* "Value-feeling" remains the more general term for 
value-consciousness, and, as feeling, it hes in every mode of 
such consciousness, the non-originary included. 
5 It is also to be noticed here that even in a consciousness 
which is receptive of values (converted doxically, is intuitive of 
values), there can be "inadequate" intuition: that is, an antici- 
patory one, endowed, accordingly, with emptily anticipating 
horizons of feehng, just as is the case with outer perception. In a 

10 glance, I take in the beauty of an old Gothic building, some- 
thing I only grasp fully in sustained value-reception, and that 
provides, with the corresponding doxic conversion, a fuller 
value-intuition. The fleeting glance can finally be anticipating 
quite emptily, pre-grasping the beauty, as it were, following 

15 certain indications, but without actually grasping anything at 
all. Furthermore, this feehng-anticipation already suffices for a 
doxic turn and predication. Everywhere this is the same, even in 
the sphere of willing. Actively willing, living in the attitude of 
wilHng, can be distinguished from positing and judging, in the 

20 theoretical attitude, that which is willed as practically 
demanded, required, etc. We can live in willful self-resolve or 
else in the activity of actually carrying out that resolve. Then, 
what is presupposed are certain representing acts, perhaps 
thinking acts of various levels, and valuing acts. But these acts, 

25 all of them, are not ones performed in the eminent sense of the 
word. The true and proper performance Hes in the wiUing and 
the doing. The attitude changes and becomes theoretical if we 
look at the resolution and the action, etc., in a way that grasps 
them theoretically and, possibly, if we form a judgment on the 

30 basis of this theoretically intuiting or representing behavior. 

What is in question here, in fact, are the universal essential 

properties which belong to all acts built up on a foundation. The 

subject that lives through can first live altogether in the 

performance of an act; then, in an equivalent expression, the 

35 Ego is, in an eminent sense, directed toward the objectively [11] 
given, is abandoned to what is objective. Thereby what is 


1 [WahrnehmenlWertnehmen: lit., "truth-taking/value-taking;" the former is the 
ordinary German word for "perception," the latter is a coinage. — Trans.] 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MATERIAL NATURE 


13 


objective is always characterized in consciousness in various 
ways depending on the basic character of the act: object of 
judgment, object of valuing, object of will To this state of affairs, 
however, there belongs apriori the ''possibihty" of an alteration 
5 in the subject's attitude, by virtue of which it can always pass 
into the theoretical attitude — unless it was already theoretical 
from the start — in which, therefore, what is objective becomes a 
theoretical object, an object, that is, of an actively performed 
positing of being in which the Ego lives and grasps what is 
10 objective, seizes and posits it as a being. 


§5. Spontaneity and passivity; actuahty and inactuahty 
of consciousness 


This faculty, this I-can of the subject, can always be made 
thematic and, in its own appropriate way, envisaged. Thus what 

15 was " pre-theoretically " conscious and objective comes "prop- 
erly" to consciousness in its own objectivity in the subsequent 
"unveihng" reflective theoretical grasp. It is also to be noted 
here that, by the manifold interweaving of theoretical and other 
acts, essential phenomenological distinctions arise which can be 

20 seen more easily than they can be clearly marked off. Above all, 
it is with regard to them that we speak of the theoretical, 
axiological, and practical attitudes, thereby indicadng also that 
"to have intentional lived experiences in the nexus of conscious- 
ness" and "to perform by oneself acts as spontaneities" do not 

25 yet mean taking up an attitude directed to their objects and do 
not mean, more specifically, being in the theoretical attitude or 
being focused on values or on acts in general, on the practical 
in no matter how broad a sense. We are in such an attitude only 
when we live in the acts in question in a privileged sense: that is, 

30 are directed to their objects in a privileged way. Distinctions of 
two kinds intersect here. 1) First, the distinction between the act 
performed quite spontaneously (with many-leveled acts, there 
would be articulated steps) over against the consciousness in 
which the objecfivity that must be constituted through this act [12] 

35 is '* passively *' there in consciousness in a confused state. Every 
spontaneous act, after being performed, necessarily passes over 


14 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


into a confused state; the spontaneity, or if you will, the 
activity, to speak of it more properly, passes into a passivity, 
although of such a kind that — as has already been said — it 
refers back to the originally spontaneous and articulated perfor- 
5 mance. This reference back is characterized as such by the I-can 
or the faculty, which evidently belongs to it, to ''reactivate" 
this state, i.e., to convert it into the production, which comes to 
consciousness as a " repetition, " of that producing out of which 
it previously came forth and in which it "again'' finally, as the 

10 same state, comes forth, and it lets come forth, in itself, the 
same result as the same final sense with the same vahdity. As we 
saw, however, such a state can in a similar manner become 
present to consciousness without having arisen in this way, as a 
secondary passivity, out of a spontaneity which hdisjust now run 

15 its course. 2) If we remain now in the sphere of spontaneous 
performances of acts, then, according to the previous clarifica- 
tion, different spontaneities, which overlap each other, can arise 
with different phenomenological dignity: on the one hand, as 
the so-to-say dominating spontaneity, the one in which we prefer 

20 to hve, and on the other hand, as the supporting or collateral 
spontaneity, the one which remains in the background, the one, 
therefore, in which we do not prefer to hve (acts characterized 
as acts of ''interest, " regardless of their further specific inten- 
tional properties). For instance, we receive some joyful tiding 

25 and hve in the joy. It is a theoretical act when we perform the 
acts of thought in which the tiding itself is constituted for us; 
but this act serves only as a foundation for the act of feehng in 
which, by preference, we are living. Within the joy, we are 
"intentionally" (with feehng intentions) turned toward the 

30 joy-Object as such in the mode of affective " interest. " Here the 
act of turning to the joy has the higher dignity ; it is the principal 
act. But the reverse is also possible: that is, there can take place 
a change of attitude, from the one of joy to the theoretical. 
Then we are living in theoretical consciousness (we are " theo- 

35 retically interested"), and the theoretical act gives the "main [13] 
thing. " We can sfill take joy in it, but the joy remains in the 
background, and that is how it is in all theoretical research. 
There we embrace the theoretical attitude, even if at the same 
time there may also be performed spontaneous and hvely 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MATERIAL NATURE 


15 


turnings that yield joy, as e.g., a lively feeling for the beauty of 
the appearances which occur in physical-optical research. In the 
back of one's mind a decision might thereby be made to show 
the beautiful phenomena to a friend, though we are still not in 
5 the practical attitude but instead stay continuously with the 
"theme" of the theoretical atfitude (in brief, the theoretical 
theme). Again, it can be reversed, and then the practical attitude 
is what we are in, and we remain in it, staying continuously with 
the "practical theme " while some appearance which is close to 

10 our former theoretical concerns incidentally raises our interest. 
But it does not, for all that, become a theoretical theme for us; 
it remains in a supporting role within the context of the 
praxis — unless we do in fact exchange the practical attitude for 
the theoretical, let the practical theme go in order to assume the 

15 theoretical. Perhaps this incomplete descripfion will suffice to 
give the reader a clear enough nofion of the phenomenological 
distinctions that I here have in mind. 

Now, in such thematic interweavings, new objectivities are 
thus always being constituted, possibly with constitutive strata 

20 which are ever higher according to whether they arise out of 
theoretical, evaluating, or practical acts and which have a 
thematic significance whose sense is different, depending on the 
attitude. Specifically, through a transition to the theoretical 
attitude, they can again and again become theoretical themes. 

25 They then become objective in a special sense: they are grasped 
and become subjects of predicates which determine them theo- 
retically, etc. 

Naturally, in a corresponding way, we encounter in the 
extra-thematic sphere, in the sphere of passivity, various objectiv- 

30 ities which consciously (hence by means of the intenfionaUty, be 
it ever so "confused," in which they are conscious) refer back 
to such connections. 


§ 6. The disfincfion between the transition into the 
theoretical atfitude and the transifion into reflecfion 


[14] 


35 We need to pay close attenfion to the distinction between the 
transition into the theoretical attitude, which is what we have 


16 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


been focusing on, and the transition, which any act, in prin- 
ciple, admits of— namely, the transition to an immanent per- 
ception directed at the act or to an immanent retention once 
that act has fleetingly passed by. This, too, is a theoretical 
5 attitude; perception, like retention, is a general Objectivation, 
and in the so-called immanent reflection on the act we live 
in that Objectivation, performing it. Hence we are dwelling 
in the theoretical attitude. But this theoretical attitude is 
a different one; it is much more remarkable and belongs, in 

10 principle, to all acts. In aesthetic pleasure we are conscious 
of something as aestheticallly pleasing, as beautiful. Let our 
point of departure be the fact that we live in the aesthetic 
pleasure, thus that we are pleasurably surrendered to the 
appearing Object. We can then reflect on the pleasure which 

15 occurs, as when we declare, ''I take pleasure in it." The 
judgment in this case is indeed a judgment about my act of 
pleasure. But it is something quite different to direct one's 
regard to the object and its beauty. 

I intuit the beauty in the object, though, to be sure, not 

20 by way of the straightforward sensory perception which 
gives color or shape. Yet it is in the object itself that I find 
the beauty. Here "the beautiful" means anything but a 
predicate of reflection, as, e.g., if I say, "It is pleasing 
to me." The "pleasant," the "enjoyable," the "sad," 

25 and all similar predicates of objects are, as to their Objec- 
tive sense, not relation-predicates referring to the acts. They 
arise through the change in attitude we have described; 
the acts in question are thereby presupposed with it. I 
continue to be pleased, I still feel joy or sadness, etc., but 

30 instead of simply being joyful or sad -^ i.e., carrying out 
these acts of feeling — I bring them into another mode 
by means of the change in attitude. They are still lived 
experiences, but I do not live in them in the eminent sense. 
I look to the Object and find in it, in my changed, at 

35 present theoretical, attitude, the correlates of these acts of [15] 
feeling, namely: an Objective stratum superposed on the 
stratum of the sensuous predicates, the stratum, that is, 
of the "enjoyable," of an Object that is objectively "sad," 
of the "beautiful," the "ugly," etc. In the theoretical atti- 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MATERIAL NATURE 


17 


tude of reflection, however, I cannot find Objective predicates 
but only ones relative to consciousness. ' 

It is clear now that all talk about objects, their predicates, 
properties, relations, or the states of affairs pertaining to them, 
5 such as their laws, refers back to theoretical acts in which objects 
are (or can be) given, perceived or in some other way envisaged, 
theoretically explained, thought, etc. If we attribute objectivities 
to all intentional lived experiences, including affective lived 
experiences, objectivities toward which these lived experiences 

10 take a position in the mode of feelings, i.e., objects under the 
headings of value-objects, practical objects, etc., then we do so 
obviously with reference to the fact that in principle belonging to 
the essence of each act are possibilities of various theoretical 
directions of focus, in which such objects are graspable as 

15 so-to-say implicitly contained already in the feeling-attitude, and 
among these objects are the ones belonging properly to every 
basic kind of act, e.g., the values belonging to the valuing, 
etc.^ 


20 


§ 7. Objectivating and non-Objectivating acts 
and their correlates 


To this we immediately join a further distinction. Every basic 
kind of act is characterized by its own basic kind of ''act- [16] 
quality, " Thus the objectivating acts are characterized by the 
quality of the doxa, of " believing " in its various modifications; 


' Yet it would still be necessary to articulate the fact and the reason why such 
predicates of feeling are indeed, in a special sense, merely subjective and refer to 
valuing subjects and consequently to these subjects' acts in which they are constituted 
for them but not for everyone. 

\ -^ It must be added here immediately, however, that the term "predicates of 
feeling'' has been referring to determining predicates of objects but precisely only 
such as are constituted in feelings in the way indicated. To that extent they are called 
objective predicates and even, in a general sense. Objective ones. On the other hand, 
they are also called, quite legitimately and in a proper sense, " subjective, " as being 
predicates which in their very sense refer back to valuing subjects and their evaluating 
acts. This is in opposition to the merely natural, purely objective predicates, which in 
their own proper sense do not intimate anything of the subject and the subject's 
acts. 


18 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


the basic kind of act that in a broad sense we designate as 
valuing, precisely by the quality of the act of valuing, etc. 
Theoretical acts are the ones that are properly or explicitly 
Objectivating; to have Objects in the proper sense, or to have 
5 objects, the characteristic grasping and positing attitude of the 
theoretical subject is required. Every non-Objectivating act 
allows objectivities to be drawn /rom itself by means of a shift, a 
change in attitude. Essentially, therefore, every act is implicitly 
Objectivating at the same time. By essence, it is not only built, as 

10 a higher level, upon Objectivating acts but is also Objectivating 
itself according to what it adds as something new. Thus it 
becomes possible to immerse oneself in this Objectivation, and 
in that way not only the object of the underlying Objectivation 
but also the newly Objectivated in the new stratum of feelings 

15 comes to theoretical givenness. ' If the pleasure is founded on a 
simple Objectivating perception, then I am able to grasp 
theoretically not only the perceived but also what has been 
newly Objectivated by means of the pleasure. For instance, I 
can grasp beauty as a theoretical predicate of the perceived, as 

20 has been worked out above. Now there are obviously two 
possibilities here: 1) Either an act is from the outset only 
Objectivating (if that is at all possible), or if it does indeed have 
a stratum of a different quality, even though essentially inter- 
woven with a new Objectivation, we are leaving it out of play 

25 and are not living in it, and so we are then grasping mere things 
and merely logical characters of things. The characters of the 
object corresponding to the new acts or to the new qualities are 
either, from the outset, not there whatsoever (again, if that is at 
all possible), or they remain out of action, out of consideration. 

30 In either case, there would then be no beautiful or ugly, no 
enjoyable or disagreeable, no useful or good, no things to use, 
no cups, spoons, forks, etc. All such terms already include, in [17] 
conformity with their sense, predicates derived from non- 
Objectivating acts. 2) Or, we move about in the domain of the 

35 new, founded, qualities. We draw into the sphere of theoretical 
interest, into the compass of the theoretical attitude, the predi- 


on this point, cf. the treatment in Book I, pp. 81 ff., 237 ff., 283 ff. 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MATERIAL NATURE 


19 


cates correlative to these acts, too. And then we have not just 
mere things but precisely values, goods, etc. 


§8. The sense-objects as primal constitutive objects 

Obviously, in all these forms of the constitution of objects we 
5 are led back to objects which no longer refer to pre-given 
objects of the kind that originally arose from whatever sort of 
theoretical, valuing, or practical spontaneities. In other words, if 
we pursue the intentional structure of no matter which given 
objects and also the retrospective indications of which we are 

10 conscious in the form of secondary receptivities, and if we 
produce spontaneities which bring the objectivities at stake here 
into a fully authentic originary givenness, then we come back, 
perhaps by means of a series of steps, to founding objectivities, 
noemata, which no longer contain anything of such retrospec- 

15 tive indications and which are originally grasped or graspable in 
the most direct theses and refer back to no antecedent theses 
contributing to the constitutive content of the object, theses 
which only have to be reactivated. The objects phenomenologi- 
cally characterized by this property — the primal objects, as it 

20 were, ones to which all possible objects, in conformity with their 
phenomenological constitution, refer back — are the sense- 
objects. 

The characterization we have presented so far, however, is by 
no means full and perfect. Matters are, in fact, more difficult 

25 than at first appears. Connected with this is the fact that the 
concept of a "" sense-thing " is not univocal, just as, correlatively, 
the concept of representation in the pregnant sense is not — I [18] 
mean sensuous representation {sensuous perception, sensuous 
remembering, etc.). 


30 


§9. Categorial and aesthetic ("sensuous") synthesis 


Let our point of departure be the distinction between catego- 
rial (formal and, in a certain sense, analytic) synthesis and 
aesthetic (sensuous) synthesis. We know that objects, no matter 


20 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


how constituted (objects of any region whatever, objects of any 
species and genus) can be substrates for certain categorial 
syntheses and can, as constitutive elements, enter into the 
'' categorial" formations of objects of a higher level To the latter 
5 belong collectives, disjunctives, and states of affairs of every 
kind, such as the relations between any A and any B or 
relations of attribution, that A is a, and the like. We find such 
formations in the doxic sphere where doxic theses are built one 
upon the other, subject-positings functioning as foundations for 

10 predicate-positings, etc., and also in the sphere of feeling and 
will where positings by the will are performed on the basis of 
other positings of the will (end and means), etc. ^ Thereby we 
touch upon unities of conduct of feeling and will, as well as 
upon formations which are essentially part of them, in which 

15 states of affairs come to explicit, although not to intuitive, 
givenness, and so do, in general, logical formations which are 
all, in accordance with their essence, states of affairs or possible 
parts or moments of states of affairs. 

Now it is possible that objects are not only constituted 

20 categorially^ by means of a plurality of theses, thus that these 
theses are in their constitutive operation categorially united^ it is 
also possible that a plurality of theses may contribute to the 
constitution of objects in another way as well. The originary 
constitution of one object is obviously always carried out by 

25 means of one thetic consciousness, and ^^h^X functions as ''mat- 
ter ''for the unitary thesis and furnishes the objective ''content, " [19] 
the objective sense, can, for its part, refer back to a plurality of 
theses. But the unity of the object need not in every case 
presuppose a categorial synthesis and in that way include it in 

30 its sense. Thus every straightforward thing-perception (that is, a 
consciousness giving the present existence of a thing in an 
originary manner) leads us intentionally back; it demands of us 
separate considerations, special traversings, and transitions to 
series of perceptions which are indeed encompassed by the unity 


1 Cf. Ideen /, p. 293. 

^ By "categorial" we understand here not merely the formal-logical but also the 
formal of all regions of objects in the sense of the theory of categories drafted in the 
first chapter of Ideen I. 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MATERIAL NATURE 


21 


of a continuous thesis but obviously in such a way that the 
many single theses are not at all united in the form of a 
categorial synthesis. What confers unity on these single theses is 
a synthesis of a totally different kind ; we suggest calling it the 
5 aesthetic synthesis. If we seek to dehmit both of these in their 
peculiarity, one against the other, then we find, as a first 
distinguishing feature, that the categorial synthesis is, as a 
synthesis, a spontaneous act, whereas the sensuous synthesis, on 
the contrary, is not. The synthetic connection is itself, in the first 

10 case, a spontaneous doing and performing, a veritable activity; 
in the second case it is not. The objective sense of a pure 
sense-object (a pure something) is a synthesis of elements, ones 
which are not for their part products of an aesthetic synthesis. 
They are the ultimate sensuous features. ^ 

15 To characterize the aesthetic synthesis it can be mentioned 
besides t^at the single apprehension of a thing — or of its 
properly essential parts and sides — contains in itself partial 
meanings in the form of ''secondary passivities"- which as such 
are determinative of sense and motivate the further course of 

20 perception. It is thus that in the apprehension of the form of a 
thing from one side confinuous courses of apprehendings of the 
other sides of the same form are intentionally included. 

These indications, of course, are not sufficient for an exhaus- 
tive description of the aesthetic synthesis; for that, a special [20] 

25 invesdgation on a large scale would be required. Here it need 
only be emphasized that the function of the aesthetic synthesis 
should be pursued in several different strata. When we consider 
a thing we necessarily consider it in some respect or other; that 
is, we are thereby focused on a "feature" which comes espe- 

30 cially into our grasp as a distinct moment of the pure aesthetic 
sense. In the example cited, that was the form. Furthermore, we 
can limit ourselves to purely visual grasping and then within 


' Regarding the aesthetic synthesis: must one not introduce a fundamental 
distinction between 1) synthesis as connection or binding in the proper sense, terms 
that imply a synthesis of what is separated, and 2) continuous synthesis as continuous 
fusion? Every aesthetic synthesis of the first kind leads to ultimate elements. The 
thing as a product of an aesthetic connection is constructed out of sensuous features 
which for their part stem from a continuous synthesis. 

^ On the concept of "secondary passivity," cf. p. 14. 


22 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


that region find synthetically unified partial meanings. But it is 
not thereby necessary that these partial meanings always have 
the form of " secondary passivity, " thus that they refer back in 
themselves to acts which bring into prominence something that 
5 had already been apprehended /c?r itself. So, in the apprehension 
of a unitary surface are potentially included acts which would 
bring to experience the individual partial surfaces, although 
these were not previously given there as separate. Something 
analogous can be shown for every ''sphere of sense. " 

10 Another function of the aesthetic synthesis is to unify with 
one another the objectivities that are constituted in the various 
single spheres of sense: e.g., the visual stratum of a thing with 
the tacdle. 

Finally, we have to indicate the syntheses which produce the 

15 relation between the moments of the "thing-appearance," 
through which the apprehending ray passes, and the correlative 
" perceptual circumstances " (for instance, the positioning of the 
eyes in seeing, of arms, hands, and fingers in touching, etc.) 
which, in the natural attitude, occupied as it is with the Object 

20 of the perception, are not grasped or properly co-intended. ^ 

Thereby the thing presents itself persistently as something 

which is such-and-such, even if no concepts, no judgments in 

the predicafive sense, are mediating. We always pay attention to 

" features, " no matter which, and while we are considering the 

25 thing from the viewpoint of one " feature, " at the same time it 
stands intentionally there as endowed with others. In part, they 
are determined features already present in the perceptual field, [21] 
though un-grasped; we need only bring to bear on them our 
grasping regard in order to fulfill the intentions or else to 

30 transform them into intentions which, in a determinate or 
indeterminate manner, do indeed grasp, although they do not 
present intuitively. This is something that is obviously vaUd 
concerning what remains unseen in the thing. In part, these are 
indeterminate features. In that case, horizons and possibly rays 


' That the aesthetic synthesis — as aesthetic-causal — is operative as well in the 
higher strata of the constitution of a thing (the only ones Kant has in mind when he 
speaks of synthesis) will be shown as soon as we have progressed that far in our study 
of thing-constitution {cf. pp. 44 ff.). 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MATERIAL NATURE 


23 


of intention which have a determined direction are reactivated ; 
in the form of non-activated "confusions" they contributed to 
the sense of the apprehension. But, as has already been men- 
tioned, the analysis does not need to be a reactivation. To be 
5 sure, one can always say that no analysis could bring out 
anything that was not latently already implicated in a certain 
way in an impHcit synthesis and that we can only bring parts out 
where we have, with a change of apprehension, intended them 
in, even if only in the form of confused co-intentionaHties. Thus 

10 our apprehension of a thing is constantly shifting; it appro- 
priates moments of the apprehension into the framework of the 
unitary style prescribed by thing-consciousness. Hence succes- 
sive explication transforms the confused co-apprehendings, per- 
haps into a thematic thesis, a theoretical grasp, with which are 

15 generally coupled more precise determinations and, in unity 
with the kinesthetic processes, more precise intuitive presenta- 
tions. Yet in so far as such changes of apprehension are possible 
in advance in accord with the essence of thing-apprehension 
(and such possibilities are not empty ones but are, instead, 

20 motivated), we have at hand "implicit" partial apprehendings 
which, however, were not really [reell] portrayed in the original 
apprehension. 


§ 10. Things, spatial phantoms, and the data of sensation 


The objects which served us up to now as representatives of 

25 sense objects were real things, such as they are given in 

"sensory perception" prior to all thinking (all operation of 

synthetic-categorial acts). They are not spontaneous products 

(not products in the proper sense, something which presupposes 

genuine activity, an operation), but still they are "synthetic" 

30 unities of components (ones like these do not necessarily have to 

be synthetically connected). The unity of the visual sense-thing 

does not necessarily require connection with the unity of the 

tactual sense-thing. And that is not all. Already in the constitu- [22] 

tion of a sensed spatial something as such, even if it be only a 

35 pure visual spatial phantom (a form fulfilled purely by color, 

not only without relation to the tactual and the other data of 


24 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


the other senses, but also without any relation to the moments 
of "materiality" and thereby to any real-causal determina- 
tions), we have a formation of a hidden, analytically exhibita- 
ble, constitutive synthesis; it is indeed an "appearance" which 
5 refers back to the kinesthetic "circumstances" to which it 
appertains. We are always led back further analytically and 
arrive finally at sense-objects in a different sense, ones which lie 
at the ground (constitutively understood) of all spatial objects ^ 
and, consequently, of all thing-objects of material reahty, too, 

10 and which lead us back again to certain ultimate syntheses, but 
to syntheses which precede every thesis. Let us consider, as the 
most convenient example, a tone played on a violin. It can be 
apprehended as a real violin-tone and hence as a real occurrence 
in space. It then remains the same no matter whether I move 

15 away from it or approach it, or whether the door of the 
adjacent room, in which it is being played, is open or closed. By 
abstracting from material reality, I can still be left with a tonal 
spatial phantom, appearing with a determinate orientation, 
proceeding from a certain position in space, resounding through 

20 the space, etc. Finally, the spatial apprehension can also be 
suspended, and then it becomes a mere "sense datum" instead 
of a spatially sounding tone. In place of that consciousness of 
the tone which, out there in space, remains unchanged regard- 
less of whether it moves closer or further away, the tone now 

25 appears, in the shifting of the focus onto the sense datum, as 
something which is changing continuously. 

It is to be understood that such a tonal datum could be 
constituted without there being carried out any spatial appre- 
hension at all, an apprehension which, in our example, was only 

30 abstractly put aside or, to correct this misleading expression, 
was suspended but is still, in the changed mode, a lived 
experience, the hved experience, to be precise, which pre-gives 
the spatial tone. We should mention, however, that this is not a 
necessary pre-givenness. A tone would be thinkable which 

35 dispensed with every spatial apprehension. Here, with the pure 


' An example of a spatial object that is not a 
"phantom." 


'thing" is the just-mentioned 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MATERIAL NATURE 


25 


datum of sensation, we encounter a pregivenness which yet [23] 
precedes the constitution of the object as object. 

We can describe this by juxtaposing two possible cases : the 
first possibihty consists in this, that in the background of 
5 consciousness a tone may sound which is indeed apprehended as 
an object but is not grasped; the Ego is turned toward 
something else. In the case of the second possibility, talk about 
a sounding tone denotes a state of sensation which in relation to 
the Ego does indeed function as a stimulus but which does not 

10 possess the property of an object-consciousness, in which a 
sounding tone comes to consciousness as an object. A genetic 
example might serve here to make this clear. A conscious 
subject that had never yet "perceived" a tone, thus had never 
yet grasped a tone as an object for itself — to such a subject no 

15 object-toxiQ could impose itself as object. Once this grasp is 
accompUshed (the original object-consciousness), it can lead to 
object-apprehendings without an intentional advertence, 
whether in the form of a remembrance of similar tones or in the 
form of a background consciousness of a newly sounding tone 

20 (it is this latter case that we have been using). Obviously not 
every advertence to a tone can refer back genetically to an 
advertence toward a constituted object-tone; there must be a 
tonal sensation which is neither an apprehension of objects nor 
a grasping of objects. There must be an original constitution of 

25 the object-tone which, as a pre-giving consciousness, is prior; in 
the most proper sense it is not actually pre-giving but is a 
consciousness which apprehends precisely already in terms of 
objects. If we leave aside the genetic considerations (which for 
all that do not have to be empirical-psychological), then two 

30 phenomenologically possible cases distinguish themselves: first, 
precisely the one of a merely objective apprehension which is an 
Objectifying consciousness but is a modified one in relation to 
the consciousness which gains distinction as advertence and 
grasp, and, secondly, the case of a state of sensation which is 

35 still not an apprehension in terms of objects. Mere apprehension 
[A UF-fassung] shows itself here, consequently, to be an inten- 
tional derivation from grasping [ER-fassung] somewhat analo- 
gous to the way reproductive remembering is a derivation from 
perception. 


26 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


An object is constituted originally through spontaneity. The [24] 
spontaneity of the lowest level is the one of grasping. Grasping, 
however, can be a kind of reactivating; to wit, a reactivating of 
a modified grasping which brings to the regard of the grasping 
5 Ego something that is already present to consciousness as an 
object. 

Or, it can be a more original act, constituting the object in a 
most original way. 
Thus we see that all Objectivation of spatial things ultimately 

10 leads back to sensation. With all objectivities, we are led back 
from the categorial objectivities to the sensuous. As such are to 
be considered, on the one hand, sensuous objectivities which in 
a certain sense are aiaGTixd i6ia, i.e., ones containing only 
representatives of a single sense sphere and doing so specifically 

15 in such a way that they contain no implicit distinct apprehen- 
sions and so do not refer back intentionally to hidden theses 
which could be made explicitly distinct by reactivation. 

An example is the tone already apprehended as spatial, insofar 
as it is correct, as we in fact believe, that there is to be ascribed 

20 to such objectivities no intentional references back to perceptual 
circumstances, ones which would be brought to fulfillment 
through proper intentions. 

But from such objects we are led, ultimately, to sense data 
constituted in the most primitive way, constituted as unifies in 

25 original time-consciousness. 

All primitive objects, be they objects of sensation or unities 
already constituted as things in a sphere of sense (even if they 
are not real objects in the full sense) are originally given as 
objects through mere single-rayed ''reception." In a broader 

30 sense, those thing-objects constituted through the participation 
of several sense spheres are also received, but they still need, in 
order to be property given, as results from what we have already 
worked out, articulated processes, chains of receptions. We can 
also say that the former objects were merely accepted; the latter, 

35 at once received and accepted — received, insofar as they con- 
tain intentional components that refer to non-active acceptings 
as implicit constituents. 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MATERIAL NATURE 


27 


§11. Nature as sphere of mere things 


Let us now go back again to the idea of nature as the 
correlate of modern natural science, the radical phenomenolog- [25] 
ical deUneation of which has been the aim of our investigation 
5 hitherto. It is clear that, in this sense, "nature" is a sphere of 
''mere things," a sphere of objectivities which distinguishes 
itself, by means of a demarcation traced out apriori in the 
essence of constituting consciousness, from all other spheres of 
objects that may be treated theoretically. We can and we could 

1 already easily say that natural science knows no value- 
predicates and no practical predicates. Concepts such as the 
valuable, the beautiful, the amiable, the attractive, the perfect, 
the good, the useful, act, work, etc., as well as, similarly, 
concepts like state, church, right, rehgion, and other concepts, 

15 that is, objectivities to whose constitution valuing or practical 
acts have essentially contributed — all these have no place in 
natural science, they are not concepts pertaining to nature. But 
it must be understood from within, from phenomenological 
sources, that this abstraction from predicates belonging to the 

20 spheres of value and practice is not a matter of an arbitrary 
abstraction, left to one's own discretion, for, as such, it would in 
fact produce no radically self-enclosed idea of a scientific 
domain and thus also no idea of a science self-contained apriori. 
Yet we do gain such an apriori closed idea of nature — as the 

25 idea of a world of mere things — provided we become purely 
theoretical subjects, subjects of a purely theoretical interest, and 
then proceed purely to satisfy that interest. This is to be 
understood, however, in the sense previously described. Thereby 
we are performing a sort of "reduction." We are putting in 

30 brackets, as it were, all our feeling-intentions and all the 
apperceptions deriving from the intentionality of the feelings by 
virtue of which there constantly appear to us, prior to all 
thinking, spatio-temporal objectivities in immediate " intuitabil- 
ity, " charged with certain characters of value and practice — 

35 characters that altogether transcend the stratum of the mere 
thing. Thus, in this "pure" or purified theoretical attitude, we 
no longer experience houses, tables, streets, or works of art; 
instead, we experience merely material things. Of those value- 


28 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


charged things, we experience only their stratum of spatio- 
temporal materiality; and similarly, of men and human socie- 
ties, only that stratum of this psychic "nature" which is bound 
to the spatio-temporal "Bodies." [26] 

5 There is still a certain restriction to be made here, however. It 
would not be correct to say that the correlate of mere nature is 
a purely " Objectivating Ego-subject" that in no way performs 
any valuing. To be sure, it is a subject that is indifferent to its 
Object, indifferent to the actuahty constituted in appearances; 
10 that is, this subject does not value such being for its own sake 
and thus has no practical interest in the transformations such 
being might undergo and so no interest in fashioning them, etc. 
On the other hand, this subject does value the knowledge of 
appearing being and the determination of that being by means of 
15 logical judgments, theory, science. Thus it values the " It is so, " 
the "How is it?" Furthermore, it does attach value to matters 
of practice, too ; it is indeed interested in transformations, and 
this subject will produce them in practice by means of experi- 
ments. But it does not do so for their own sake but produces 
20 them only in order to make visible thereby the connections 
which might advance the knowledge of appearing being. The 
correlate of nature is thus not a subject that in no way strives, 
wills, or evaluates. That is unthinkable. Knowledge of nature 
abstracts only from all other values besides the cognitive values: 
25 " I want nothing other than to experience nature more richly by 
means of ' theoretical experience ' and to know, in a theoretical 
knowledge on the basis of experience, just what that which 
appears is, what nature is. " 
Every pure theory, every purely scientific attitude, arises from 
30 a theoretical interest in an objectivity, or a class of objectivities, 
that can be constituted originally. With respect to natural 
science, this objectivity to be constituted originally is nature, the 
real unity of all natural objectivities. The term " natural objec- 
tivity" thereby denotes a class of objects which, as regards their 
35 coexisting exemplars, join together, by essential necessity, to 
form a really connected unity, whereby at the same time it is 
characteristic of these objects that a valuing consciousness, as 
"constituting," has contributed nothing to their essential com- 
position, that is, to the content of their sense. The acts of 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MATERIAL NATURE 


29 


valuing performed by the subject that is experiencing nature, the 
subject pursuing natural science— performed by this subject as 
such — are not constitutive of the Objects with which it has to 
do, and that is precisely why it can be said with justice that 

5 there are no value-Objects or the Uke within its compass. But 
one point must be noted in this regard. The acts of valuing and 
of willing — feeling, willing, deciding, acting — are not excluded [27] 
from the sphere of things that matter here; on the contrary, 
they thoroughly belong to that sphere, even if they do not 

10 present themselves as carriers of value-predicates or of other 
analogous ones. We bear with us the whole of consciousness as 
an object, but we allow ourselves to "constitute objects" only 
through the doxic Objectivating consciousness and not through 
the valuing one. The sphere of things experienceable by us in 

15 this way is what should now determine for us the sphere of 
natural science. From then on we remain purely in the natural- 
scientific attitude, and it is thereby clear to us that in doing so 
we are performing a sort of disengaging, a sort of tnoxt\. In 
ordinary life, we have nothing whatever to do with nature- 

20 Objects. What we take as things are pictures, statues, gardens, 
houses, tables, clothes, tools, etc. These are all value-Objects of 
various kinds, use-Objects, practical Objects. They are not 
Objects which can be found in natural science. 


Chapter Two 

THE ONTIC SENSE-STRATA OF THE THING 
OF INTUITION AS SUCH 


§ 12. Material and animal nature 


5 We are directing our attention to the totality of "real" 
things, to the entire world of things, the "universe," nature, 
which, in its forms of space and time, encompasses all factual 
realities but also includes, obviously on essential grounds, all 
apriori possible realities as well. 

10 Already at first glance what is striking here is the essentially 
grounded difference between nature in a more strict sense, the 
lowest and first sense, i.e., material nature, and nature in a 
second, broadened sense, i.e., things that have a soul, in the 
genuine sense of "living," animal nature. Everything that we 

15 take as existing in the ordinary sense (thus in a naturahstic 
attitude), including therefore, sensations, representations, feel- 
ings, and psychic acts and states of every kind, belongs precisely 
in this attitude to Hving nature ; these are " real " acts or states, 
ontologically characterized precisely in that they are activities or 

20 states of animals or humans and as such are part of the [28] 
spatio-temporal world. Consequently, they are subject to the 
determinations which befall "every individual objectivity what- 
ever." 

Every thingly being is temporally extended; it has its dura- 

25 tion, and with its duration it is fit within Objective time in a 
strict manner. Thus with its duration it has a fixed place in the 
one world-time, which is a universal form of existence for all 
thinghood. Everything else that a thing "is," according to every 
other essential determination which belongs to it, it is that in its 

30 duration, with the more precise determination of its " when." 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MATERIAL NATURE 


31 


We distinguish therefore appropriately between temporal deter- 
mination (the duration of a thing) and real feature, which, as 
such, fills the duration, spreads itself over the duration. Pre- 
cisely thereby it is apriori necessary that every feature of a 
5 thing, throughout its duration, either changes in a continuous 
manner as regards its content or else does not change at all, and 
in the former case single discrete leaps are admissable. If the 
temporal filling of its duration changes either continuously or 
by leaps, then the thing " alters; " if that is not the case, then the 

10 thing remains unaltered.^ 

Furthermore, every thingly being has its place in world-space, 
relative to every other thingly being and alterable in principle. 
The thing is moveable in space, in virtue of the corporeal 
extension which belongs to it by essence and is exclusively 

15 proper to it, and which can constantly alter its location in space. 
These propositions can be understood so universally that they 
hold in fact and apriori for every thingly being whatever. 

Now, however, a distinction arises, precisely with respect to 
corporeal extension, between material thinghood and thinghood 

20 in the sense of animal nature. It was not without reason that 
Descartes designated extensio as the essential attribute of the 
material thing, which, therefore, is also called, simply, corpor- [29] 
eal — over against psychic or spiritual being, which, in its 
spirituality as such, has no extensio but, rather, essentially 

25 excludes it. In fact, what, above all, must be brought to insight 
is that extensio, rightly understood, distinguishes nature in the 
first sense from nature in the second sense, although the fully 
comprehensive essential attribute of material being is not mere 
extension but is, instead, materiality, so far as this latter in itself 

30 requires temporal as well as spatial extension. But what matters 


' It should be discussed expressly whether the duration of a thing has to be filled 
by thingly determinations without a hiatus or whether it is possible for things to 
disappear and then come into existence anew — with the same determinations or with 
ones that have altered in that segment of the duration. This would mean that one and 
the same thing could have several separate durations, and the question would be 
whether such a thing, extending over two separate durations, could be distinguished 
from two things existing one after the other. But for our present context the 
consideration of these questions is not required unconditionally. 


32 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


most here is to know the distinctive manner in which everything 
else that belongs to a material thing is yet related apriori (that 
always means essentially) to its extension. Spiritual nature, 
understood as animal nature, is a complex composed of a lower 
5 stratum of material nature, whose essential feature is extensio, 
and an inseparable upper stratum which is of a fundamentally 
different essence and which, above all, excludes extension. Thus 
even if the comprehensive essential feature of the material thing 
is materiality, yet it is at once understandable how extension 
10 can be taken as the essential distinguishing feature differentiat- 
ing the material from the psychic or spiritual. 


§ 13. The significance of extension for the structure of 
"things" in general and of material things in particular 


What is now of utmost importance is to make clear the 

15 singular manner in which everything that a thing is in other 
respects and by essence is related to the extension which neces- 
sarily belongs to it, and, furthermore, how, quite differently, the 
psychical determinations belonging to animal realities acquire, by 
means of the foundedness of the psychic in the material, the 

20 spatial determination which also is necessary to them. By the 
term spatial (better : corporeal) extension of a thing we under- 
stand the spatial corporeality pertaining to its concrete essential 
content exactly the way it belongs to this content in full 
determinateness. Accordingly, it is not only that every alteration 

25 in magnitude, with a conservation of the same spatial form, 
impHes an alteration of extension, and that the same is true for 
every alteration of the form with a conservation of the magni- 
tude and for every deformation in whatever sense, but also [30] 
every alteration of position is an alteration of the extension. 

30 Extension is thus not a mere piece of space, although it 
coincides with such at every temporal point of the duration of 
the thing. It follows from its essence that neither space itself nor 
any one whatever of its pieces can move; space itself can never 
have a hole, i.e., a place empty of spatiahty and somehow only 

35 afterwards filled up by a supplement. It is absolutely ''fixed;" 
its parts are not "extensions" in the sense we have delimited, 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MATERIAL NATURE 


33 


not "bodies" — for instance, absolutely fixed bodies in the 
sense of physics. 

Now I am saying that this determination as alterable (spatial 
extension or corporeality) has a fully proper place amidst the 
5 constitutive properties of a material thing. There belongs to the 
essence of extension the ideal possibility of fragmentation. It is 
then evident that every fragmentation of the extension frag- 
ments the thing itself — i.e., splits it into pieces, each of which 
once again has the full thingly character, that of material 

10 thingness. Conversely, every partition of the thing into things, 
every fragmentation, as such, of the thing, also fragments the 
extension of the thing. In other words, the thing is not only 
extended in the sense that it is in general endowed, amidst its 
other determinations, with a determination called corporeal 

15 extension. Rather, as regards whatever it is contentwise, both as 
a whole and in its particulars, and as regards, specifically, 
whatever it is in itself (according to its full time-filling essence, 
according to its proper features), the thing is extended, is 
something that fills corporeal space. There is a distinction in 

20 principle between the corporeal extension-determinations of a 
thing, magnitude, form, figure and the like (ideally speaking: 
the geometrical determinations), and its real quahties, i.e., the 
modes pertaining to them in the current circumstances — better: 
in the current phases of time. 

25 Every corporeal quality of a thing "fills the spatial body;" 
the thing spreads itself out in the quality ; in every one the thing 
fills its corporeality (its extension), and the same is true, at the 
same point in time, for all real quahties. And, naturally, what 
holds for the totahty holds for every piece. In particular, each 

30 thing is different, each may have its different spatial extension 
and fill it quahtatively in a very different manner. The manner 
of the filling of the body, the quahfication of the body, the [31] 
filling of space ^ (if we would still use this not quite correct, 
though customary, phrase) may be different, according to the 


' Filling of space has two senses. Qualification of a body produces the concept of 
the corporeal quality, the ** secondary" quality. The body itself as a determination 
C* quality") of the thing is not a part of space but instead "fills" space itself together 
with the secondary qualities that fill and qualify it. 


34 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


kind of features and according as we take into consideration 
enduring qualities or merely real states (in the alteration of 
which, identical qualities manifest themselves) : but the universal 
type is always and necessarily the same. It must be said of every 
5 kind of quality that it may have its own special ways of filling 
spatial corporeahty, covering it, extending itself over it. Yet it is 
necessarily a quality that fills. The thing knows no other 
extensive determinations besides pure corporeality (the primary 
quahty) and the modifying sensuous quaHties, the "qualifying" 

10 secondary qualities. The momentary coloration of a thing (i.e., 
its momentary optical state out of the possible multiplicity of 
optical states in which the unity of the identical optical proper- 
ties of the thing manifests itself while changing) covers the entire 
outer surface of the corporeal thing in a determined way. 

15 Obviously, it is in quite a different manner that warmth fills the 
warm body or that the property of odor fills what smells. It is in 
a still different manner as regards weight and similar real 
determinations. Weight has its extension, to the degree that 
every fragmentation of a thing, no matter how thorough, 

20 fragments the very weight of the thing as well. The thing may, 
in the alteration of the circumstances of its existence, take on 
and then lose again some or other of the filling properfies. 
Without corporeal extension no weight is there whatsoever. Yet, 
to be sure, never can extension be there by itself; its special 

25 position is not that of one real property amidst others. The 
thing is what it is in its real properties, but each one, taken 
separately, is not necessary in the same sense. Each is a ray of 
the thing's being. But corporeal extension is not a ray of real 
being in that same sense; it is not in the same way (properly 

30 speaking, "in no way") a real property. Rather, it is an 
essential form of all real properties. That is why an empty 
corporeal space is, realiter, nothing; it exists only to the degree 
that a thing, with its thingly properties, is extended therein. 
Better: body is a real determination, but it is a fundamental [32] 

35 determination (an essential foundation) and form for all other 
determinations. 

In this sense, extension is thus the essential characteristic of 
materiaHty, although it is — indeed, precisely because it is, in a 
wholly different manner — a "real property;" it is the essential 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MATERIAL NATURE 


35 


attribute, provided the term is used in this way. It expresses the 
characteristic essential form of existence for material or physical 
being (the essential form for all real determinations in which 
thingly existence is explicated), and, therefore, for the mere 
5 physical thing, although not for the full thing altogether, since 
to the essence of thingly being as a whole there also belongs 
temporality. Men and animals have their position in space and 
move in space as sheer physical things. It will be said that it is 
obvious that they do so " by virtue of" their corporeal Bodies. 

10 It would be bizarre, however, to say that only the man's Body 
moved but not the man, that the man's Body walked down the 
street, drove in a car, dwelled in the country or town, but not 
the man. Thus it appears from the first that in this respect too 
there are differences among the properties of the Body. One 

1 5 could say that the Body has properties such as weight, size, etc. 
which we attribute to others and to ourselves as well, though we 
do so in Full awareness that they properly belong only to the 
material Body. It is obviously only insofar as I have a Body that 
I have size and weight. If I attribute to myself a locus, then it is 

20 the locus of my Body, too. But do we not sense from the outset 
a certain difference, by virtue of which locality belongs to me 
somewhat more essentially? But let us consider this matter 
systematically. 


25 


§ 14. The significance of extension for the structure 
of animaha 


The objects of nature in the second, enlarged, sense are, taken 
in full concretion, animal realities, characterized as Bodies with 
a soul. They are founded realities, which presuppose in them- 
selves, as their lower stratum, material reahties, so-called mate- 

30 rial Bodies. Furthermore, they have, and this is what is new 
about them, besides their specifically material determinations, 
still new systems of properties, the psychic ones, in regard to [33] 
which we leave it open whether or not a distinction into two, 
properly speaking, should be made under this heading: a 

35 sensuous (aesthetic) stratum and a properly psychic one. In 
experience, these new properties we speak of are given as 


36 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


belonging to the Body in question, and it is precisely because of 
them that it is called Body or organism, i.e., an "organ ''for a 
soul or for a spirit. On the other hand, we have to say that these 
properties are precisely not material properties, and that means 
5 that by essence they have no extension, that they are not given 
in the way in which all properties are given which fill Bodily 
extension. But whether properties are extended or not, hence 
whether the objects which have these properties are material or 
not — these are not accidental matters but essential ones. People 

10 and animals have material Bodies, and to that degree they have 
spatiality and materiality. According to what is specifically 
human and animal, that is, according to what is psychic, they 
are, however, not material, and, consequently, taken also as 
concrete totalities, they are not material realities in the proper 

15 sense. Material things are open to fragmentation, something 
which accompanies the extension that belongs to their essence. 
But men and animals cannot be fragmented. Men and animals 
are spatially localized; and even what is psychic about them, at 
least in virtue of its essential foundedness in the Bodily, 

20 partakes of the spatial order. We will even say that much of 
what is included under the broad — and, at first, unclarified — 
heading of the psychic has something like spread (although not 
extension in space). In principle, however, nothing on this side is 
extended in the proper sense, in the specific sense of the 

25 extension we described. 


§ 15. The essence of materiahty (substance) 


Before we investigate further the distinctions, open to greater 
clarification, between localization and extension, and so before 
we explore the mode of connection in general between material 

30 Body and that which gives animality fullness, i.e., the psychic, 
we want first of all to consider somewhat more closely the 
respective terms of the connection. 

The physical or material thing is res extensa. We have already 
exposed the sense of its "essential attribute," extensio. Well, 

35 now, what makes up the concept of this res, what is meant by [34] 
extended reality, by reality at alll One also speaks of extended 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MATERIAL NATURE 


37 


substance. But just what, we now ask, is meant by this substan- 
tiality, considered in its fullest possible universality? 

The material thing fits under the logical category, pure and 
simple individuum ("absolute" object). To it are referred the 

5 logical (formal-ontological) modifications: individual property 
(here, the quality of being a thing), state, process, relation, 
complexion, etc. In every domain of being we find analogous 
variations, and so the goal of phenomenological clarity requires 
us to go back to the individuum as the primordial objectivity. It 

10 is from it that all logical modifications acquire their sense- 
determination. 

a) Phenomenological analysis of the givenness of the thing 
as a way toward determining the essence, "material thing" 

If we would touch on the thing itself, then it is required of us, 

15 assuming! we wanted to grasp the essence of the thing and 
determine it conceptually, that we not be content with vague 
locutions and traditional philosophical preconceptions but instead 
draw from the very source of clear givenness. Thus we have to 
go back, as exemplary, to the consciousness in which things are 

20 given to us originarily and so perfectly that we can be lacking 
nothing for grasping the universal essential form which pres- 
cribes the apriori rule for such objects. To bring things in this 
way to exemplary givenness calls not simply for a mere percep- 
tion or for a distinct phantasizing of oneself into an act of 

25 perception. That is not sufficient at all It is not enough to see 
this table and to cast on it a perceiving regard, or even to take 
together several perceptions of the table and, in addition, 
perceptions of other things. Rather, it is necessary to ''follow 
up " the perceptually meant in a perceiving and experiencing, be 

30 it actually experiencing or just phantasizing. The task is to 
presentify to oneself (if need be, by free fiction) series of 
perceptions connecting up together in a continuous way, in 
which the perceived object is one and the same and thereby 
shows, in the progression of the perceptions, in an ever more 

35 perfect way, what Ues in it, what belongs to its essence. ^ 


Cf. pp. 96 f. 


38 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


In the noema of the act of perception, i.e., in the perceived, [35] 
taken precisely as characterized phenomenologically, as it is 
therein an intentional Object, there is included a determinate 
directive for all further experiences of the object in question. 
5 The table is indeed now given in the perceiving act, but it is 
given each time in a determinate way. Perception has its 
perceptual sense, its meant, just as it is meant, and lying in that 
sense are directives, unfulfilled anticipatory and retrospective 
indications, which we only have to follow up. The table- 
10 appearance is a table appearing from the front side with a 
front-side color, front-side shape, etc. It belongs to the sense of 
this meant that the meant shape or meant color points on to 
ever new appearances of the form or of the color in a 
determinate progression, by means of which not only does what 

15 has already actually appeared achieve a better appearance, but 
the sides which did not appear (though they are indeed sides 
which were co-meant in a more or less indeterminate way) 
attain a givenness which does exhibit them. All the different 
directions of determination which lie in the meant thing as such 

20 are thereby traced out in advance, and that holds for each of the 
possible motivated courses of perception belonging to it, to 
which I can give myself over in freely forming phantasy, and to 
which I must give myself over— at least if I want to bring to 
clarity the sense of the modes of determinateness in question 

25 and, therewith, the full content of the essence of the thing. It is 
only if one interrogates the thing-noema itself, the so-to-say 
thing-meaning, by bringing it to a givenness which unfolds itself 
in all directions, and, further, only if one lets the answer come 
from it itself in the actual carrying out of its directives, only 

30 then does one actually gain the essential components of thing- 
ness and the necessary essential interweavings, without which 
what is meant by a thing at all cannot be thought. 

This method, supposing we wanted to pursue it in extenso, 
would result in very many foundational constatations with 

35 respect to the essence of the thing. We shall have to content 
ourselves with a few especially remarkable ones. 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MATERIAL NATURE 


39 


b) Mobility and alterability as constituents of the [36] 

material thing; the thing-schema 

To begin, we can easily convince ourselves of the fact that the 
possibilities of motion and rest, of quaUtative change and 

5 qualitative permanence, are based in principle on the essence of 
the material thing in general. A thing can, e.g., be unmoved and 
unchanged de facto, but it would be countersensical to claim that 
it is unmovable and unchangeable in principle. On the other 
hand, it can be absolutely unchanged; in intuition we can grasp, 

10 by means of fitting examples, the idea of a thing which is 
unchanged in all respects (even if only as an ideal limit-case). If 
we take this idea as our point of departure and hold fast to the 
thing in itself, disregarding the nexus in which it is a thing, then 
it strikes us that we would henceforth have at our disposal no 

15 means at all for distinguishing the essence of the thing from the 
essence of an empty phantom, and that by which the thing 
exceeds the phantom would then not be given to us in actual, 
exhibiting, givenness in the sense we have specified. For exam- 
ple, it is a mere phantom that faces us when we learn, in a 

20 stereoscope, to bring fitting organizations into corporeal fusion. 
We are then seeing a spatial body, regarding which meaningful 
questions can be raised about its form, its color, and even about 
its smoothness, roughness, and other, similarly classified, deter- 
minations, questions which can therefore be answered in confor- 

25 mity with the truth, by saying, perhaps, this is a red, rough 
pyramid. On the other hand, what appears can be given in such 
a way that questions of whether it is heavy or Ught, elastic, 
magnetic, etc. do not make any sense, or, better, do not find 
any support within the perceptual sense. What we are seeing is 

30 precisely not a material thing. The entire class of material 
determinations is missing from the sense-content of the apper- 
ception we performed in the example above. It is not just that 
they are undetermined and left open, as is indeed the case in 
every perception of a thing, where, by virtue of the components 

35 of indeterminateness in the apprehension, much is left open. For 
example, concerning the determinate color of the invisible 
backside, already somehow apperceived as red, is it completely, 
uniformly, red, or does it contain stains and streaks? Or again. 


40 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


concerning the form of the thing, apprehended only as some- 
how consistent, what is it really Uke where it passes into 
invisibility? Or, is the body solid or soft, metallic or non- 
metallic, etc? It is rather the case that, without detriment to the 
5 otherwise indeterminate elements which still remain open, essen- 
tial groups of features are not represented in the apprehension at 
all namely, those of materiality as we have specified it. This is [37] 
the way in which we also see a rainbow, the blue sky, the sun, 
etc. We therefore draw the conclusion that a fulfilled spatial 
10 body (a qualified body), fulfilled through the extended quaHta- 
tive fining, is not yet so much as a thing, a thing in the usual 
sense as material-real. It is equally clear that every sensuous 
thing, in its givenness, requires as a basic piece of its essence 
(hence, forever, irremovably) this kind of fulfilled spatial body. 
15 Thus it is always necessarily given as a fulfilled spafial exten- 
sion, but it is sfiU given as more. We say that a sensuous schema 
belongs to the essence of a thing, and we understand by that 
this groundwork, this corporeal ("spatial") shape, along with 
the filling which extends over it. The thing which appears at rest 
20 and unchanged quahtatively "shows" us no more than its 
schema or, rather, than the apparent, whereas it is nevertheless 
apprehended at the same time as something material. But in this 
respect is does not "show" itself, it does not properly come to 
view, to originary givenness. If the whole stratum of materiality 
25 were stricken from the apperception, it would change nothing as 
regards what is "properly" given. In fact, that is thinkable. In 
original experience, perception, "body" is unthinkable without 
sensuous quahfication; the phantom, however, is originally 
given, and thereby thinkable as well, without the components of 
30 materiahty, whereas these latter for their part are unable to 
stand alone (unilateral detachment). If we take into consider- 
ation the different alterations, the extensive (change of place, 
deformation) and the qualitative, then we again observe the 
same thing: what comes to actual perceptio for us in the 
35 perception of thingly alterations and, specifically, of alterations 
in the proper content of the appearing thing, are only contin- 
uous courses of sensuous schemata, or, as we can also say, the 
sensuous schema of the thing undergoes continuous alteration. But 
once again it is clear that nothing is given here which could not 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MATERIAL NATURE 


41 


also be given as pure "phantom." Phantoms, too, (in the sense 
specified of pure spatial givenness without the stratum of any 
apprehension of materiality) can move, deform themselves, and 
change qualitatively in color, brightness, sound, etc. Again, [38] 

5 therefore, materiality can, from the outset, be co-apprehended 
and yet not co-given. 

It should now be emphasized at once that the concept of 
schema (the concept of phantom) is by no means restricted 
merely to a single sense-sphere. A perceived thing also has its 

10 tactual schema, which comes to light in tactual grasping. In 
general, there are precisely as many strata there to be distin- 
guished in the full schema as there are to be found classes of 
sensuous data which are spread over the spatial extension 
(appearing as something identical) of the thing. Yet the schema 

15 does not become multiple on account of this manifold filling. 
The sensupus qualities fill the one, absolutely identical, spatial 
corporeality and do so on several strata which, because of this 
identity and because of their essential inseparability from exten- 
sion, cannot, in principle, disperse into further distinct sche- 

20 mata. 

Let us consider this still a little more closely: let there be 
given one and the same body, the form of which is one and the 
extension of which is one, but which presents itself in a two-fold 
way, as a corporeality that is both seen and touched. The body 

25 is colorful; that is, it is colored in all its parts and in its total 
extension, either in a uniform way or with different colors for 
the different parts of its extension (its surface). Nevertheless, the 
body is colorful only in its "optical appearance." In "tactual 
space, " in the tactually appearing (tactually given) corporeality, 

30 no color is given. ^ On the other hand, smoothness is given 
tactually; just as brightness is visually. Wetness cannot be 
seen — only touched. It can at best be "co-seen," just as the 
apprehension of silky tactuality co-presentifies a dull lustre. 
Roughness can be touched and "seen" as well; and so can a 


' To be sure, the expressions "visual space'' and ''tactual space" are quite 
problematic, however common they might be. The space, the one space, presents itself 
and appears both visually and tactually. The question is how we are to understand 
the identity and to what extent we can speak of strata here. 


42 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


ribbed surface. There is an exact analogy between the mode or 
form of the visual filling of corporeahty and the tactual; i.e., 
each has the form of a hved experience of transition within a 
contmuous apprehension; the form is the same. Likewise for 
5 the thmg-structure itself, for the pure spatial corporeality, there [39] 
exists, It seems, this analogy in complexion-form, despite the 
different mode of sensuous givenness. 

Here, however, we want to speak not of analogy but of 
identity. How does one arrive at a positing of identity? It is the 
10 same Objective property which announces itself in the brightness 
and in the smoothness. In any case, I take the body as the same. 
The body has but one structure, one extension, or, better: the 
thing of perception has but one spatial corporeahty (spatial 
structure). In addition, the thing has its color, its brightness 
15 (grasped in seeing), its smoothness (grasped tactually), etc 
Furthermore, now it sounds, radiates warmth or coldness', etc. 
The body's motion, too, can be grasped by means of several 
different senses, as a change in place of thingly spatial corpor- 
eality. 

20 Impact and pressure cannot properly be seen; one can only 
see what results from them as regards space and form. Nor is it 
by pure and simple touch that pressure, pull, and resistance are 
to be perceived. One has to "exert the muscles," ''brace oneself 
against," etc. But I do grasp visually all sorts of occurrences 
25 when one body presses on another: e.g., I see that a body 
having an impact on another is pushing it aside, that the motion 
of a body, owing to an impact, is accelerating or decelerating 
accordingly, etc. I grasp something similar, even if it is not so 
easy, by means of touch and the muscle sense. A distinction 
30 arises here between geometrical and mechanical movements, 
and the mechanical is not judgeable exclusively by one sense! 
Moreover, we find a parallelism between sensuous quahties and 
extensional events: warmth and coldness occur together with 
expansion and contraction in a regulated way. Everywhere, 
35 apprehension includes in itself, by the mediation of a ''sense,"' 
empty horizons of "possible perceptions;" thus I can, at any 
given time, enter into a system of possible and, if I follow them 
up, actual, perceptual nexuses. We can say that the spatial body 
is a synthetic unity of a manifold of strata of "sensuous 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MATERIAL NATURE 


43 


appearances" of different senses. Each stratum is in itself 
homogeneous, pertaining to one sense; it is a matter of one [40] 
apperceptive perception or a perceptual manifold which homo- 
geneously runs its course and continues. Every perception (and 
5 series of perceptions) of that kind has its complements of 
parallel apperceptions of other strata, which constitute a ''co- 
givenness " (not an actual givenness) making possible a subse- 
quent fulfilling in actual perception. The given optical fulfill- 
ment of the visual schema refers to the tactual side of the 

10 schema and perhaps to the determined fulfillment of it. "Asso- 
ciatively," the one recalls the other. Experience teaches me to 
recognize new fulfillments, which are apprehended not as newly 
arisen but as having been there already and as continuing to 
belong to it. This is already the case for a single stratum by 

15 itself. I see the front side of the schema, and much remains 
indeterminate in the back. But a back side it certainly does 
have. In a like manner, the body also has a tactual side (or 
stratum); it is just that it is still undetermined. The body is a 
unity of experience, and it hes in the sense of this unity to be an 

20 index for a manifold of possible experiences in which the body 
can come to givenness in ever new ways. Therewith, we have 
first taken the body as independent of all causal conditioning, 
i.e., merely as a unity which presents itself visually or tactually, 
through multiplicities of sensations, as endowed with an inner 

25 content of characteristic features. Some of the examples chosen 
(the apperception of the mechanical qualities) have, however, 
already gone beyond this restriction. 

But, in what we have said, it is also implied that under the 
presupposition referred to (namely, that we take the thing 

30 outside of the nexuses in which it is a thing) we do not find, as 
we carry out experiences, any possibihty for deciding, in a way 
that exhibits, whether the experienced material thing is actual or 
whether we are subject to a mere illusion and are experiencing a 
mere phantom. To appeal to the existing coordination of 

35 different senses would come down to a misunderstanding of our 
problem. The thing-positing (the doxa) which lies in perception 
is obviously motivated by what is at present actually given, 
hence by the apparent schema, and it is also obvious that a 
schema which appears under more aspects must have more 


44 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


motivating power. Yet were the materiality of the thing not to 
be given actually and properly from elsewhere (genetically [41] 
speaking: if in similar cases the content of determination of 
what is specifically material had never been given to us), then 
5 indeed there would be there nothing in reference to which the 
intuition of the schema could have a motivating function. 


c) Exhibition of the materiahty of the thing by way of 
its dependence on circumstances 

It is now the time to repair a deficiency, i.e., to take up the 
10 presupposition we have been allowing. Up to now we have 
taken the thing in isolation. But it is in relation to "circum- 
stances " that the thing is what it is. If we juxtapose the change 
of a phantom and the change of a thing, then we see cleariy that 
these two are not the same and that they are not to be 

15 distinguished from each other by means of sheer content, which, 
under the title, materiality, in the one case would belong and in 
the other would be lacking. It is obvious that changes in a thing 
can occur while the sensuous schema does not change at all, and 
conversely, the thing can remain unchanged while the schema 

20 changes. An example of the latter obtains if the same 
unchanged thing is perceived under a changing dayhght or 
under a chromatic illumination which is in the process of 
changing, etc. 

Reality in the proper sense, here called "materiahty," does 

25 not lie in the mere sensuous schema and could not be attributed 
to the perceived, if something hke a relation to "circumstances" 
did not apply to the perceived and had no sense for it; rather, it 
lies precisely in this relation and in the corresponding mode of 
apprehension. In a changing illumination, hence in relation to 

30 something else that is illuminating, the thing looks constantly 
different and does so not in just any way but in a determinate 
way. Here there are evidently functional connections which 
relate the schematic modifications of the one aspect to those of 
the other aspects. It pertains to the sense of the apprehension of 

35 a thing as thing (but not of a mere phantom) that such 
schemata, ones which run their course in determined series of 
modifications, and which, in a determinate way, now change 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MATERIAL NATURE 


45 


and now do not, are experienced as intimations of one and the 
same thing. But such is how we experience them insofar as they 
run their course as "dependent" on the "real circumstances" 
which pertain to them. Thus in our example we experience one 
5 and the same thing with respect to its optical properties, which 
maintain their unity and determinateness throughout the change [42] 
of illumination produced by the corresponding sources of the 
light. Insofar as the schemata are fulfilled by color, this unity 
permeates them. What is constituted therewith is the "Objec- 

10 tive" color, the one had by the thing no matter whether it is in 
sunlight or in dim daylight or in the darkness of a cupboard, 
and this is the case for any of the lighting conditions, to which 
belong, thereby, in a functional way, quite definite schemata, 
including the complete filling of a visual schema. 

15 So long as the circumstances remain unchanged, the schema 
remains unchanged as well. A continuous change of the circum- 
stances entails continuous alteration of the schema; and, like- 
wise, continuous non-change, invariabihty in the behavior of 
the appearances which are functioning as circumstances, entails, 

20 in the same span of time, continuous non-change of the schema 
dependent on them. 

In this way, absence of change is the limit-case of change; it 
conforms to the rule decreeing that to similar circumstances 
belong similar functional dependencies. Let us take another 

25 example. A steel spring, once struck, executes certain oscilla- 
tions and runs through certain successions of states of relative 
change of place and deformation: the spring has the real 
property of " elasticity." As soon as a certain impetus is given, 
there occurs a corresponding deviation from the state of rest 

30 and a certain corresponding mode of oscillation. As soon as a 
certain other impetus acts, there occurs a corresponding other 
change in the spring, though one of a similar intuitive type. 
Failing any impetus, other circumstances can yet undergo a 
change and work in a way that is similar to the action of an 

35 impetus. If the circumstances (all the ones that are "circum- 
stances" precisely with respect to elasticity) remain unchanged 
throughout, then the spring remains in a state of non-change. 
Under similar circumstances, similar consequences: so with 
similar changes of circumstances, similar modes of oscillation. 


46 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


The general rule, to which absence of change conforms as the 
limit-case of change, does not, as such, come to consciousness; 
here it expresses a form intrinsic to the apperception of the real 
property. The apperception of the real property includes this 
5 articulation in circumstances and includes the functionally 
dependent changes of the schemata in such a way that there is 
this dependency in any given case, and it is not merely 
something abstract, either. On the other hand, however, thing 
and property are grasped in an Objectifying way, but schema [43] 

10 and circumstances (taken Hkewise as schematic) are not. 

It is precisely in this way that every "Objective," "real" 
property of the phenomenal thing is constituted. What is real of 
the thing itself is as multiple as it has, in this sense, real 
properties, ones which are, throughout, unities with respect to 

15 manifolds of schematic regulations in relation to corresponding 
circumstances. 


d) The schema as real determinateness of the material thing 

By virtue of this realizing apprehension (i.e., as constitutive of 
the real thing as substrate of real properties), the current 

20 schema acquires the character of a real determinateness of a 
particular sense. Over against the real unitary property, in our 
example the unchanged Objective color, there stands the 
momentary real state, which corresponds to the "circum- 
stances" and which changes according to rules. The state 

25 coincides with the schema; yet it is not a mere schema (the thing 
is indeed not a mere phantom). Corresponding to the changed 
apprehension is a changed correlate. That is to say, in the 
thing-apprehension the schema is not perceived as an extension 
filled merely sensuously but is perceived precisely as primal 

30 manifestation or "documentation" (originary manifestation) of 
a real property and, precisely thereby, as a state of the real 
substance at the point in time involved. The property itself 
comes to actually filhng — i.e., originary— givenness only if an 
originary unfolding is achieved by the functional series in which 

35 the dependencies on the corresponding circumstances (i.e., the 
causal dependencies) come to originary givenness. In this case, 
the causalities are not merely supposed but are "seen/* '*per- 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MATERIAL NATURE 


47 


ceived." It is thereby obvious that the direction of the regard in 
the intentional grasp of the real property and the one in the 
intentional grasp of the causal dependency of its current states 
on the respective circumstances (which themselves then attain to 

5 an objectifying grasp) are different ones, although in both cases 
the regard, in a certain way, traverses the schema or, rather, 
traverses the corresponding stratum of its fullness. Even if it is 
the one same state of the concrete situation, pre-given for these 
various graspings, yet there is again a change in the direction of [44] 

10 the regard on the thing itself as the identical substrate of this or 
that self-manifesting property or as the substrate of the states 
currently related to these or those circumstances. There are as 
many directions of unity prefigured in the causal apprehension 
of the schema (i.e., directions for possible series of perceptions 

15 in functional relation to series of perceptible circumstances) as 
there is multiplicity in the way in which the reality-thing, the 
unitary material "substance/'^ is determinable according to 
properties corresponding to the apprehended sense itself. And 
the thing has these properties {real, substantial properties) in 

20 actuality if the fulfilling experience exhibits them originarily in 
the thingly states (or relational modes) dependent on the 
circumstances. Moreover, the thing-apprehension, such as it is 
established already with every individual perception and series 
of perceptions, bears in itself different modes of determinateness 

25 and indeterminateness. To be sure, the perceived enters con- 
sciousness as what is real of the given states but only as what 
is more or less determined. Yet the manner in which the 
indeterminateness can be determined more precisely is predeli- 
neated by the formal essence of thing-apprehension as such and, 

30 for the rest, by the particularity of the particular apprehension 
then current, i.e., precisely by that which the thing-apprehension 
leaves open in this particularity. 


' Substance signifies here nothing more than the material thing as such, considered 
to the extent that it is the identical something of real properties, that which actualizes 
itself temporally in regulated manifolds of states in regulated dependency on 
concomitant circumstances. 


48 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


e) More precise determination, redetermination, and 
cancellation of the thing-experience 

It pertains further to the universal essence of thing-apprehen- 
sion that, in the progression of the experiences in which the 
5 current thing is primordially manifest in a more and more rich 
manner, there also arise ever richer directions of determination, 
and in them ever new empty points of determinabihty can 
estabHsh themselves. Apriori only in the progression of ongoing 
experiences which are primordially manifesting can it be exhi- 

10 bited what the current thing is. Hereby (according to what we 
have already indicated previously) there continually stand side 
by side, as possibiHties in principle: 1) the possibility of 
thoroughly concordant experiences, ones which do nothing [45] 
except determine more precisely; 2) the possibility of partly 

15 concordant, partly discordant, experiences: i.e., experiences 
which go to determine the same thing but in new and different 
ways; 3) the possibiHty, finally, of irreconcilable discrepancies, 
by means of which is exhibited the non-being of the thing which 
was experienced in erstwhile concordance or the non-being of 

20 the thing which was determined as "new and different" in its 
particulars. But if the thing is, then it is as the identical real 
something of its real properties, and these are, so-to-say, mere 
rays of its unitary being. It is as such an identity that the thing 
is posited, in a motivated way, by every experience, be it ever so 

25 imperfect and leaving so much still open, and the legitimating 
power of the motivation grows along with the richness of the 
primordial manifestations which show up in the progression of 
the experience. The thing is constant in that it comports itself in 
such and such a way under the circumstances which pertain to 

30 it : reality (or, what is here the same, substantiality) and causality 
belong together inseparably. Real properties are eo ipso causal 
ones. To know a thing therefore means to know from experi- 
ence how it behaves under pressure and impact, in being bent 
and being broken, when heated and when cooled, etc., i.e., to 

35 know its behavior in the nexus of its causaHties: which states 
does the thing actually attain and how does it remain the same 
throughout these states. 

To pursue these nexuses and to determine the real properties 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MATERIAL NATURE 


49 


in scientific thinking, on the basis of progressive experience, that 
is the task of physics (in a broad sense), which, led in this way 
from the most immediate unities in the hierarchical sequence of 
experiences and of what is primordially manifest in these 
5 experiences, goes on to ever higher unities. 


§ 16. The constitution of the properties of the thing in 
multiple relations of dependency 

A unity, as we have seen, traverses all changes of state with 
reference to the real circumstances, both the actual and the 

10 possible, in such a way that, as far as the apprehension is 
concerned, every change of state, pertaining either to the same 
property as unchanged or to properties which have changed 
either continuously or intermittently, takes place or can take 
place as univocal in the given real nexus. The thing as the unity 

15 of its properties can, therefore, in the alteration of any of its [46] 
states or modes of comportment, change "itself" or remain 
unchanged. Every real property is, as real, changeable. Hence, 
the unities of primordial manifestations, in their temporal 
continuity, are apprehended, in their dependence on unities of 

20 circumstances, as phases of a unity of duration which persists in 
them. Iron melts and changes its state of aggregation, which, for 
its part, obviously has the character of a real property in our 
sense. While a material body is moving towards one of the poles 
of the earth, its weight changes continuously, etc. Considered 

25 more precisely, the formation of unity as the formation of an 
identity in the stream of temporal change is nothing specifically 
proper to a thing. To the essence of each unity, including each 
non-substantial unity as mere unity of duration, pertain, 
apriori, possibilities that the very duration is endowed with a 

30 temporal fullness which is either the same throughout or, 
abstraction made from isolated leaps, is changing continuously. 
And to this there belongs everywhere the consciousness of unity, 
which, in such temporal continuities, is consciousness of the 
identical as something individual and which, if possible, inten- 

35 tionally grasps the identical which endures there and changes. 
For example, the tone, the pure datum of sensation, which is 


50 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


indeed not something substantially real, changes "itself" with 
respect to its intensity, yet in doing so it remains unchanged as 
regards pitch, etc. Now it must be noted that the constitution of 
real properties can also be accomplished at higher levels, 
5 meaning, therefore, that hierarchical formations are possible,' 
according to which still higher unities, in turn, make themselves 
manifest in unities of primordial manifestation and, if need be, 
are determined therefrom by means of the thinking grounded in 
experience. And this is valid universally. 
10 Previously we had arrived at the principle of the co- 
ordination of whatever is given schematically, namely that in 
the apperception of the real what is formally determinate is: 
similar circumstances — similar consequences. But this principle 
requires a certain modification of the sense which was first 
15 accorded to it up to now— where the circumstances were 
schematic givens and so were the consequences. 

There is no problem if we are only dealing with properties of 
the lowest level and are experiencing the real as an enduring 
unity of one and the same unchanged property. 
20 But in the essence of any thing (as we grasp it in the essence 
of experience, thus in ideally possible experience) there lies the [47] 
ideal possibihty of its (the real's) changing. E.g., the spring is 
elastic. Under similar schematic circumstances we experience 
(or, ideally speaking, can experience) how there occur similar 
25 schematic series of change or of permanence : the same modes 
of oscillation invariably occur under impacts of the same vector 
and the same force, passing gradually into the limit-case in 
which the impact is O and henceforth the oscillation is O. 
The impact can be so strong, however, that the "limit of 
30 elasticity" is exceeded. Then the spring breaks and falls apart in 
a heap of disconnected pieces. No longer do we have there the 
unity of one real thing with the one elastic quahty. Or, to take 
another example, the spring is made red hot and thereby loses 
its elasticity; or at least the elasticity is changed, insofar as it 
35 does still remain. 

These are property-changes, and the changed property once 
again obeys, with respect to its schemata, the formal rule : under 
similar circumstances, similar consequences. But now the fac- 
tual functional connection, the coordination between the sche- 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MATERIAL NATURE 


51 


mata and the circumstances, is, despite a sameness in form, 
different. And should the piece of steel be heated until it melts, 
the elasticity would quite vanish. It is a changed thing, whether 
it preserves its properties, though they have altered, or whether 
5 it loses properties and acquires new ones of a different type, 
perhaps exhibiting changes also in the properties of the type 
which still subsists after the loss of the former properties, etc. 
Thus we not only have unity in the changes of properties and 
in the individual changing property, as, in general, we have 

10 unity in series of changes, but a new unity traverses the 
property-changes; that is to say, the thing is of such a kind 
that, under wholly determined changes of the real circum- 
stances, it changes precisely its real properties in a determined 
way. The series of changes of the real properties, in their 

1 5 dependence on the changes of the real circumstances, once again 
manifest ^ unity. For all property-changes we have correspon- 
ding chaifiges in the circumstances. In all its modes of behavior 
the thing is dependent on circumstances, and it is in relation to 
circumstances that the thing is what it is. And in these modes of [48] 

20 behavior there lies a unity, as a unitary property, insofar as 
there occurs such a relation to circumstances that the thing is 
seized in states which are dependent on the states of the 
circumstances in such a way that motivated changes of circum- 
stances are possible with which go hand in hand regulated 

25 changes of the states of the thing. And this happens precisely in 
such a way that similar series of changes of circumstances of 
one and the same kind induce "again and again," within the 
respective span of the duration of the thing, similar series of 
changes of state of a corresponding kind. " Again and again : " 

30 i.e., again and again I can bring the thing, which has its 
identical unchanged optical character, under different illumina- 
tions and series of illuminations. Again and again I can strike 
the thing, which is elastic and which has its unchanged elastic 
character, in different ways, etc. 

35 Thus I have a segment in the duration of the thing, in which 
the thing has precisely the unity of a real, and unchanged, 
property. If the spring is made red hot, then a new segment of 
thingly being begins; now it is inelastic and once more has a 
corresponding, though new, property "in place of" elasticity. 


52 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


The same holds if the thing has lost its chromatic coloring by 
becoming completely faded. 

In this way the duration of the being of the thing, with respect 

to any property, disperses itself into segments. But the overriding 

5 unity of the thing is still there; each first-degree property is 

changeable, yet the changes of the properties are again subject to 

rules of dependence in regard to circumstances. 

Dependencies and constitutions of properties of a first degree 
distinguish themselves everywhere from those of a higher 

10 degree, and the formation of unity of higher degree is once 
more a formation of real properties, since, precisely in the nexus 
of experience, the changes of property of the lower degree are 
not unmotivated but, for their part, again present themselves as 
dependencies on real circumstances. Iron does not, of its own 

15 accord, become red hot and change thereby certain complexes 
of its real circumstances given in experience; instead this 
happens under real circumstances, ones which can themselves be 
experienced and which can be known, and originally experi- [49] 
enced, in their correspondence to rules. In the duration of a 

20 thing ever new properties or changes of a property emerge, and 
at times they are discontinuous as far as appearances are 
concerned; yet a unity of reality traverses the totality of 
changes, a unity of thoroughly regulated relations to real 
circumstances, a unity of such a kind that each change which 

25 already belongs on the level of reality is itself once more 
causally regulated. 

The intuitable thing is not apprehended just in the full rigor 
of this idea of reahty, although this idea, as one can see, is 
already contained in the very formation of unity given in the 

30 apprehension of it without further ado. It was the new science 
of nature which first grasped this idea of a strict identity in the 
absolutely determined and unequivocal dependencies of causal- 
ity (an idea that has to be set off from any empirical apprehen- 
sion) and which developed the demands implied in this idea, 

35 demands which determine essentially the course of the scientific 
research into nature. Connected to this is the fact that natural 
science, in strict universality, seizes on the principle already 
contained in the original apprehension of the thing, namely, 
under similar circumstances, similar consequences, precisely as 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MATERIAL NATURE 


53 


the correlate of the strict idea of the thing (the real). Likewise, it 
holds to the principle : no change without cause, no alteration 
without an identical thing altering. Accordingly, therefore, a 
miracle, in the form of a metamorphosis of a thing into a 

5 second thing, is, in truth, out of the question. All there can be, 
in the best of cases, is a leap (perhaps proving to be only 
apparently discrete) from main groups of properties into others, 
but even this would only be in relation to circumstances and 
according to fixed causal laws.^ Yet these are certainly not 

10 matters of apriori necessity. It is indeed quite thinkable apriori 
that a thing would change of its own accord, that it would 
transform itself as to its real properties. Let us look a little more 
closely. Would it be thinkable, for instance, that a thing lose its 
elasticity of its own accord, that a coloration fade on its own, 

15 that water dry up by itself? 

In the apprehension of a thing— e.g. of a thing as colored, 
elastic, etc. — there lies precisely that apprehension of property 
of which we spoke, with its relation to circumstances. Included [50] 
therein is the ideal possibility that, related to certain circum- 

20 stances, the property remains unchanged. Certain properties can 
change, without it having any influence on the thing at all. This 
then means that much can be occurring in the surrounding 
world while the given thing (insofar as we have it in intuition) 
manifests no change whatsoever. These circumstances are not 

25 ones with a real influence; they do not belong to the causal 
nexus which is constitutive for the reality of the thing according 
to any at all of its aspects. Once again, it may be that certain 
dependencies subsist, that certain changes of circumstances have 
consequences with regard to the thing, i.e., the corresponding 

30 changes of state unfold in the thing in such a way that one and 
the same unchanged real property announces itself. And if the 
same series of circumstances unfold, the same series of states 


' Certainly no special discussion is needed concerning the formation of a complex 
of real properties of such a kind that through a casual relation to complex 
circumstances unitary characters of a thing come to the fore in experience, characters 
which, meanwhile, in a more precise causal analysis, are dissolved into partial 
properties. 


54 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


unfold as well, and thereby the property remains unchanged. A 
special case is the one in which there takes place in the causal 
circumstances a lapse of non-change (unchanged duration) 
instead of a process of change; "nothing is changing." Cau- 
5 sally, then, nothing can change, if it is a case of the conse- 
quences depending simply on such circumstances. 

Yet the naive understanding believes that a thing could change 
on its own. Every apprehension of a thing takes place in the 
midst of a co-apprehension of circumstances as conditioning. 
10 But the thing never achieves a perfect givenness. And as to the 
assertions we make about the thing, by no means do they follow 
from what is actually given at that time. For, what the 
apprehension of a thing requires, concerning the thing in 
general and according to its concrete content, is not exhibited, 
15 and the assertion is not governed merely by what is exhibited,' 
by the fulfilUng givenness. That is, perception is not an experi- 
ence which provides a full report about the thing. What arises 
for reflection thereby is that we have to distinguish, regarding a 
thing, between external and internal circumstances, between 
20 externally caused and internally caused changes, processes, 
etc. 

Consideration must be taken of the fact that what natural 
science claims about a thing, namely that it is constructed out of 
molecules and atoms, is already predelineated as a possibihty in 

25 the intuited thing, at any rate in the way in which a thing is 
possible as a thing-aggregate with causal connections. 

The theme of division is one of foremost importance; I refer to [51] 
the apprehension of a thing as a thing-system, its construction 
out of molecules, etc., where it is precisely this constructing that 

30 is the problem. The idea of a real totality of real pieces, which 
pieces, for their part, again function as things — how is that to 
be grasped apriori? Which apriori possibihties do in fact exist 
here? What about the apriori possibility of the "continuous" 
fining of space, and precisely as a real filhng; and so what about 

35 the possibihty of an apprehension of the totality of natural 
Objects as one continuous thing and the possibility of a 
multiplicity of natural Objects which are spatially separated, but 
each is, in itself, continuous? And, consequently, what about 
the possibility of an apprehension of a continuous thing as a 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MATERIAL NATURE 


55 


continuum of things? In the ideal division of one continuous 
thing, can each part be grasped as a continuous unity of things? 
What constitutes the unity of such a real continuum? Or is the 
real fragmentation required apriori, according to which each 
5 thing by necessity is really simple in itself or is composed out of 
real pieces which are simple? And in such a way that what is 
really simple indeed fills space continuously but does so in such 
a manner that the ideal geometrical division does not, and 
cannot, lead to a division in the real? What would bonding or 

10 composition mean in that case? Here everything seems to be 
easier than it is under the aspect of continuity. What distin- 
guishes physical from chemical division? One could speak in this 
way: a thing is in itself really [reell] composed if it is an 
aggregate of things which stand in certain relations of reciprocal 

15 action and, to be precise, in such a way that, over against 
external qausalities, they exhibit a unity of lawful relations and 
have a tdtal state which leads back to the elements' singular 
states, ones ruled by laws, and which does so, in general, in such 
wise that the "totality" heh^wQS formaliter hke a thing, with 

20 reference to certain encompassing classes of "circumstances." 
But then, in other appropriate circumstances, the totality does 
"break down" into its parts, ones which can again be for 
themselves just as they are in the totahty. On the other hand, 
there is no need for a totahty to contain its parts as separate, 

25 which would be evident in the apprehension of continuity as 
well, though under certain circumstances there does result a 
thing-plurality of separate things which previously, in the 
"totality," did not exist for themselves (Chemistry). A process 
initiated by means of an external causal action, at first directly [52] 

30 exerting itself on one "molecule," propagates itself in the 
aggregate by virtue of the real-causal connections there. And 
thus all sorts of things are still occurring in the aggregate after 
all the external processes have ceased exercising their power. To 
be sure, the external circumstances are still there, and they still 

35 are circumstances. But such as they now are, and perhaps they 
have not changed at all, they are irrelevant with regard to the 
changes in the interior of the thing. Yet here, too, nothing 
occurs "of its own acccord." Whatever occurs does so as a 
consequence of prior external processes and by virtue of the full 


56 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MATERIAL NATURE 


57 


lawfulness of causality, which holds sway throughout both the 
external and the internal. ^ 

Nevertheless, can one really say it is excluded that a thing 
change of its own accord, "transform " itself by itself regarding 
5 its properties, and on its own "disappear " from the world? And 
all this obviously on the basis of the essence of thing-appercep- 
tion. Whatever can be seen and found in scientific experience is 
already prescribed by universal thing-experience. Only what 
remains open idealiter can exhibit itself in the course of 

10 experience and in more precise determinations. Idealiter, a 
disappearing of things, a self-modification that has no grounds, 
could be possible, and yet we would have a right to reject it. 
Indeed the course of actual experience can raise a protest 
against such claims as: that is excluded by the character of 

15 natural-scientific experience, countless apparent transformations 
have been sufficiently explained, etc. 

The preceding suffices for an understanding of the universal 
type of the constitutive thing-construction in the sphere of 
intuition, in its remarkable stratification which, as can be seen 

20 after all, is only a sort of continuation of an other, though 
analogous, stratification, one in which the sensuous schema, the 
lowest level of the formation of unity now considered by us, is [53] 
already constituted, for its part, as a unity. 

Appendix 

25 It will be observed that in our analyses we have limited 
ourselves to a determinate type of material thinghood : namely, 
that of the solid body. This restriction is not an arbitrary one; 
on the contrary it can be shown that here is where we have to 


' In this connection is also to be considered the problem of inertia and of uniform 
motion. Then are these somehow equivalent: qualitative unchange and uniform 
quahtative change, and, accordingly, rest and uniform motion? What sort of 
lawfulness is that, the one of inertia? It does not say that uniform motion and 
qualitative change are without cause, but it does say that once they have begun (even 
if the cause " disappears, " which is possible) they continue (or that the motion or 
change, which was non-uniform as long as there was a cause, is transformed into a 
uniform one) : a law of the change of effects. 


see the foundation of the constitution of material nature. Sohd 
bodies are constituted as things with a rigid spatial figure which, 
in movement, is transported. There can be things in a medium 
which also is thingly, Uke frogs in water, which, as lake or 

5 stream or pond, is a thing and bears things in itself.^ All the 
things of the original "world" are, hence, in the medium of air, 
which, however, for the most part is not noticed and which is 
first grasped as a medium by means of voluntary and vigorous 
movements of the hand, etc., or by means of some other body's 

10 rapid motion making one feel the "breeze." A medium can be 
"thicker" or "thinner" and so allow motion more grudgingly 
or more easily. The resistance can be so slight that it becomes 
unnoticeable. Media can be transparent and visible, or transpar- 
ent and invisible, or, finally, even non-transparent. 

15 While the solid body which was given as first is constituted as 
something identical throughout motion and rest, in qualitative 
change and permanence, as something which is identifiable as 
being for itself in relation to the normal case of kinematic and 
qualitative permanence, and is constituted from the start, by 

20 means of the sense of sight and touch, in two strata which are 
relatively closed and which offer the qualitatively filled Gestalt 
"completely" — on the other hand, with the media, things are 
quite different. They, too, are constituted for us as bodies (fluid 
or gaseous ones) in the sense of material things, but they present 

25 themselves as a filling of space or as filled spatialities which 
contain in themselves or can contain, as moveable therein 
against greater or lesser resistance, material things of the first 
and originally constituted kind, viz., solid bodies. Media are not 
constituted as bodies having a fixed shape but, instead, only 

30 have shape when another body is there either serving as a 
"container" or exercising in some different way an influence 
which can determine a shape for them. 

If we take into consideration the possibility of a fluid body, 
then we have to say that such a thing cannot be perceived 

35 originally but can only be acquired by means of indirect 
processes of experiencing and thinking. But it is important here 


On the concept of a medium, cf. also p. 65. 


58 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MATERIAL NATURE 


59 


to follow up the sequence of the levels of constitution and to do 
so by beginning with the things which are given primordially 
and which exhibit themselves primordially, and these are the 
solid bodies. 
5 Transparent solid bodies themselves already represent a 
deviation from the normal case of original constitution. E.g., in 
a certain orientation, a flat, colorless, glass plate, large enough 
to fill the entire visual field, is not visible. It has no surface 
colors, and it presents no visual aspect whatsoever. But with 

10 changes in the orientation, "edges" emerge, by virtue of its 
relation to other bodies, and thereby visual appearances emerge 
as well, which, yet, do not deliver up the total Object as a visual 
schema, because brightness (which can even conceal the color of 
non-transparent bodies), reflections, and images of the things 

15 seen through it stand in the way. Thus it is touch which gives 
these bodies as normal bodies, though to "normal" constitu- 
tion there belongs precisely a parallel givenness for sight and 
touch. 


§ 17. Materiality and substantiahty 


20 


In our considerations we have purposely allowed the univer- 
sal of thinghood, i.e., "reahty," to come to the fore with more 
strength versus what belongs to materiality as such as the 
specific character of extensive reahty. This universal— for 
which, surely, "reahty" would be the best term— is called 

25 substance. (Unfortunately, all these philosophical expressions 
are laden with equivocation and lack any clarification in 
depth.). On the contrary, we have here obtained, out of 
intuition, a firm essential content, whose fundamental meaning 
is evident. In order to distinguish these genuine " reahties " from 
the common, widest sense of the word, where every individual 
(or temporal) being would be included, we will speak of 
substantial reality; and this is precisely what is to be understood 
from now on whenever we speak simply of substantiality or 
substance or thing. Accordingly, extensive substance is to count 

35 for us only as a particular type of substance. We have already 
spoken above of the role of extension (corporeality). From that, 


30 


[54] 


it is clear that determinations such as site, figure, etc., as 
pertaining to extension, are not substantial properties. Instead, 
they are causal properties through and through. As to their 
mode of givenness, they are not unities of primordial manifes- 
5 tation; rather, they belong already to the schema. This does not 
prevent these, too, i.e., the figure and site of a thing, from being 
dependent on circumstances, as regards change and perma- 
nence, or from being experienceable in this causal dependency. 
Related to this, the specific determinations of extension become 

10 primordial manifestations of the real properties characteristic of 
a thing, on which, for their part, the properties which primor- 
dially manifest themselves in the fullness of the schema are 
functionally dependent. In this way we experience, in the thing, 
solidity and fluidity, elasticity, etc. E.g., to react to an impact by 

1 5 way of vibrations, and, according to the circumstances, by way 
of vibrations of a certain kind and frequency, is a primordial 
manifestation of elasticity and, in fact, of a definite and 
particular elasticity, that, say, of a watch spring. These then are 
substantial properties as are the others; they belong to the 

20 material thing, which is extended in space with them as with all 
its substantial properties and which has its spatial form and its 
site, these latter for their part not being material properties. 


[55] 


Chapter Three 

THE AESTHETA IN THEIR RELATION 
TO THE AESTHETIC BODY ^ 


§ 18. The subjectively conditioned factors 
5 of the constitution of the thing; 

the constitution of the Objective material thing ^ 

Our entire analysis has been moving in a determinate narrow 
frame, the limits of which we must fix. The real unity, which 
was constituted for us in levels, has nevertheless, with all these 

10 levels, not reached the ultimate one, the level on which the 
Objective material thing is actually constituted. What it is that 
we have described is the thing constituted in the continuous- 
unitary manifold of the sense intuitions of an experiencing Ego 
or in the manifold of " sense-things " of various levels: multipli- 

15 cities of schematic unities, of real states and real unities on 
various levels. It is the thing for the solitary subject, the subject 
thought of ideally as isolated, except that this subject in a 
certain sense remains forgotten to itself and equally forgotten 
by the one who is doing the analysis. 


20 


a) The intuitive quahties of the material thing in 
their dependencies on the experiencing subject-Body 

Nevertheless, this self-forgetfulness is hardly appropriate for 
the restoration of the full givenness of a thing, a givenness in 


' Aestheta refers here, as it does in the previous chapter, to material things as such 
in their aesthetic structure. 

2 Concerning this paragraph, see also the third chapter of Section Two. 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MATERIAL NATURE 


61 


which the thing exhibits its actual reahty. We need only consider 
how a thing exhibits itself as such, according to its essence, in 
order to recognize that such an apprehension must contain, at 
the very outset, components which refer back to the subject, 
5 specifically the human (or, better: animal) subject in a fixed 
sense. 

The quahties of material things as aestheta, such as they 
present themselves to me intuitively, prove to be dependent on 
my qualities, the make-up of the experiencing subject , and to be 

10 related to my Body and my "normal sensibility. " 

The Body is, in the first place, the medium of all perception ; it 
is the organ of perception and is necessarily involved in all 
perception. ^ In seeing, the eyes are directed upon the seen and 
run over its edges, surfaces, etc. When it touches objects, the 

15 hand slides over them. Moving myself, I bring my ear closer in 
order to hear. Perceptual apprehension presupposes sensation- 
contents, which play their necessary role for the constitution of 
the scheniata and, so, for the constitution of the appearances of 
the real things themselves. To the possibility of experience there 

20 pertains, however, the spontaneity of the courses of presenting 
acts of sensation, which are accompanied by series of kinesthetic 
sensations and are dependent on them as motivated : given with 
the localization of the kinesthetic series in the relevant moving 
member of the Body is the fact that in all perception and 

25 perceptual exhibition (experience) the Body is involved as freely 
moved sense organ, as freely moved totality of sense organs, and 
hence there is also given the fact that, on this original founda- 
tion, all that is thingly-real in the surrounding world of the Ego 
has its relation to the Body. 

30 Furthermore, obviously connected with this is the distinction 
the Body acquires as the bearer of the zero point of orientation, 
the bearer of the here and the now, out of which the pure Ego 
intuits space and the whole world of the senses. Thus each thing 
that appears has eo ipso an orienting relation to the Body, and 

35 this refers not only to what actually appears but to each thing 
that is supposed to be able to appear. If I am imagining a 


[56] 


On this point, cf. also pp. 135 fT. 


62 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


centaur I cannot help but imagine it as in a certain orientation 
and in a particular relation to my sense organs: it is "to the 
right" of me; it is "approaching" me or "moving away;" it is 
"revolving," turning toward or away from "me" — from me, 
5 i.e., from my Body, from my eye, which is directed at it. In 
phantasy, I do look at the centaur; i.e., my eye, freely moved, [57] 
goes back and forth, accommodating itself in this or that way, 
and the visual "appearances," the schemata, succeed one 
another in motivated "appropriate" order, whereby they pro- 

10 duce the consciousness of an experience of an existing centaur- 
object viewed in various ways. 

Besides its distinction as a center of orientation, the Body, in 
virtue of the constitutive role of the sensations, is of significance 
for the construction of the spatial world. In all constitution of 

1 5 spatial thinghood, two kinds of sensations, with totally different 
constituting functions, are involved, and necessarily so, if 
representations of the spatial are to be possible. The first kind 
are the sensations which constitute, by means of the apprehen- 
sions allotted to them, corresponding features of the thing as 

20 such by way of adumbration. For example, the sensation-colors 
with their sensation-expansions: it is in the apprehension of 
these that the corporeal colorations appear together with the 
corporeal extension of these colorations. Likewise, in the tactual 
sphere, thingly roughness appears in the apprehension of the 

25 roughness-sensations, and corporeal warmth appears in relation 
to the sensation of warmth, etc. 

The second kind are the " sensations " which do not undergo 
such apprehensions but which, on the other hand, are neces- 
sarily involved in all those apprehensions of the sensations of 

30 the first kind, insofar as, in a certain way, they motivate those 
apprehensions and thereby themselves undergo an apprehension 
of a completely different type, an apprehension which thus 
belongs correlatively to every constituting apprehension. In all 
constitution and on all levels, we have, by necessity, "circum- 

35 stances," related one to the other, and "that which is depend- 
ent on" all the circumstances: everywhere, we find the "if- 
then" or the " because-therefore. " Those sensations which 
undergo extensional apprehension (leading to the extended 
features of the thing) are motivated as regards the courses they 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MATERIAL NATURE 


63 


take either actually or possibly and are apperceptively related to 
motivating series, to systems, of kinesthetic sensations, which 
freely unfold in the nexus of their familiar order in such a way 
that if a free unfolding of one series of this system occurs (e.g., [58] 
5 any movement of the eyes or fingers), then from the interwoven 
manifold as motive, the corresponding series must unfold as 
motivated. In this way, from the ordered system of sensations in 
eye movement, in head movement freely moved, etc., there 
unfold such and such series in vision. That is, while this is 

10 happening, there unfold, in motivated order, "images" of the 
thing that was perceptually apprehended to begin the eye 
movement and, Hkewise, the visual sensations pertaining to the 
thing in each case. An apprehension of a thing as situated at 
such a distance, as oriented in such a way, as having such a 

15 color, etc., is unthinkable, as can be seen, without these sorts of 
relations pf motivation. In the essence of the apprehension itself 
there resides the possibiHty of letting the perception disperse 
into ''possible " series of perceptions, all of which are of the 
following type: //the eye turns in a certain way, then so does the 

20 " image; " if it turns differently in some definite fashion, then so 
does the image alter differently, in correspondence. We con- 
stantly find here this two-fold articulation : kinesthetic sensations 
on the one side, the motivating; and the sensations of features on 
the other, the motivated. The hke holds, obviously, for touch 

25 and, similarly, everywhere. Perception is without exception a 
unitary accomplishment which arises essentially out of the play- 
ing together of two correlatively related functions. At the same 
time, it follows that functions of spontaneity belong to every 
perception. The processes of the kinesthetic sensations are free 

30 processes here, and this freedom in the consciousness of their 
unfolding is an essential part of the constitution of spatiaHty. 


b) The significance of normal perceptual conditions for 

the constitution of the intuited thing and the significance 

of abnormalities (change of the Body, change in the thing) 

35 Now the processes of perception, in virtue of which one and 
the same external world is present to me, do not always exhibit 
the same style; instead, there are distinctions which make 


64 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


themselves noticeable. At first, the same unchanged Objects 
appear, according to the changing circumstances, now this way, 
now in another way. The same unchanged form has a changing 
appearance, according to its position in relation to my Body; [59] 
5 the form appears in changing aspects, which present "it itself" 
more or less ''advantageously, " If we disregard this and instead 
consider real properties, then we find that one and the same 
Object, maintaining one identical form, does have different 
color appearances (the form as filled), according to its position 

10 relative to an illuminating body; furthermore, the color appear- 
ances are different when it stands under different illuminating 
bodies, but all this happens in an ordered fashion, one which 
may be determined more precisely in regard to appearances. At 
the same time, certain conditions prove to be the "normar' 

1 5 ones : seeing in sunlight, on a clear day, without the influence of 
other bodies which might affect the color-appearance. The 
"optimum" which is thereby attained then counts as the color 
itself, in opposition, for example, to the red light of the sunset 
which "outshines" all proper colors. All other color properties 

20 are ''aspects of," "appearances of," this pre-eminent color- 
appearance (which latter is called "appearance" only in an 
other sense: namely, with respect to a higher level, the physical- 
istic thing, still to be discussed). Yet it is inherent in the thing 
that its normal color keeps changing, precisely in dependence on 

25 whatever illuminating bodies are involved, whether the day is 
one of clear Hght or is hazy, etc., and it is only with the return 
of the normal circumstances that the normal color re-appears. 
" In itself" there belongs to a body a color as being in itself, and 
this color is grasped in seeing, but it ever appears differently, 

30 and the aspect it presents depends thoroughly on the Objective 
circumstances, and it can be distinguished there either more or 
less easily (with the limit case of complete invisibihty). And the 
degree of visibiHty affects the form, too. 

It should also be examined whether from the very start all 

35 Objective circumstances are apperceived as causal, as emanating 
from things. Certain circumstances exhibit periodic changes — 
e.g., the relations of night and day — and correspondingly the 
things which otherwise are experienced as unchanged, for 
instance things given as unchanged for the sense of touch, 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MATERIAL NATURE 


65 


undergo periodic changes in the unfolding of their visual 
characters. With regard to the visual mode of givenness, which 
brings out the color characteristics as well as the form charac- 
teristics that become visible along with them, a privilege 
5 attaches to clear daylight, such that there not only does the form [60] 
become visible in a particularly favorable way up fo its finer 
details, but also in this light such global characteristics are 
visible through which properties of other sense spheres are 
co-announced at the same time, properties given in the nexus of 

10 these experiences as not affected by the change of color (e.g., 
the material attributes, which are disclosed when the surface 
structure become visible). Therefore in the series of possible 
appearances a certain givenness of the thing is privileged in that 
with it is given, of the thing as a whole, what is relatively the best, 

15 and this acquires the character of what is especially intended: it 
is the prefiominating focus of the "interest," what the experi- 
ence is tending toward, terminates in, is fulfilled in; and the other 
modes of givenness become intentionally related to this "opti- 
mal" one. 

20 Included in the normal experience, in which the world is 
originally constituted as world, "the way it is, " are still other 
conditions of normal experience: e.g., seeing in air — which 
counts as immediate seeing, seeing without any mediating 
things — touching by immediate contact, etc. If I interpose a 

25 foreign medium ^ between my eye and the things seen, then all 
things undergo a change in appearance; more precisely, all 
phantom-unities undergo a change. It will be said: the same 
thing is seen, but through different media. The thing has no 
dependency on such changes; it remains the same. Only the 

30 "mode of appearance" of the thing (in this case, the appear- 
ance of the phantom) depends on whether this or that medium 
is mediating between the eye and the thing. Transparent glass is 
indeed a medium that can be seen through, but it changes the 
images of things in different ways according to its different 

35 curvatures, and, if it is colored, it transmits its color to 
them — all that belongs in the realm of experience. Finally, if I 


Cf. above, p. 57. 


66 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


put on colored lenses, then everything looks changed in color. If 
I knew nothing of this medium, then for me all things would be 
colored. Insofar as I have experiential knowledge of it, this 
judgment does not arise. The givenness of sense-things counts, [61] 
5 with regard to the color, as seemingly given, and semblance 
again means a mode of givenness which could possibly also 
occur in this way within the system of normal givenness, under 
the appropriate circumstances, and which would induce an 
Objectively false apprehension where there are motives prompt- 
10 ing a mixup, something those circumstances are very Hkely to 
bring about. The ''false" lies in the contradiction with the 
normal system of experience. (The change of appearance is a 
uniform one for all the things, recognizable as a uniform change 
according to type.) 
15 The case is the same if we take, instead of an interposition of 
a medium between organ and thing, an abnormal change of an 
organ itself If I am touching something with a bhster on my 
finger, or if my hand has been abraded, then all the tactual 
properties of the thing are given differently. If I cross my eyes, 
20 or if I cross my fingers, then I have two " things of sight " or 
two "things of touch, " though I maintain that only one actual 
thing is present. This belongs to the general question of the 
constitution of a thingly unity as an apperceptive unity of a 
manifold of different levels which themselves are already apper- 
25 ceived as unities of multiplicities. The apperception acquired in 
relation to usual perceptual conditions obtains a new appercep- 
tive stratum by taking into consideration the new "experience" 
of the dispersion of the one thing of sight into a pair and of the 
fusion of the pair in the form of a continuous overlapping and 
30 convergence in the regular return to the former perceptual 
conditions. The doubled things of sight are indeed completely 
analogous with the other things of sight, but only the latter have 
the additional meaning of "things;" and the lived experience 
has the meaning of a lived experience of perception only as 
35 related to a certain ''position of the two eyes, " the homologous 
one or one from the system of normal eye positions. If a 
heterology now occurs, then I indeed have analogous images, 
but they mean things only in contradiction to all normal 
motivations. The images now once again obtain the apprehen- 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MATERIAL NATURE 


67 


sion, "actual thing," precisely through the constitutive nexus, 
i.e., the motivation which puts them in a concordant relation to [62] 
the system of motivated perceptual manifolds. If I take my eyes 
out of a normal position into a disparate crossed position, then 
5 two semblant images arise; "semblant images:" i.e., images 
which would, each for itself, present "the thing" only if I lent 
them normal motivations. 

A further important consideration deals with other groups of 
abnormalities. If I ingest santonin, then the whole world 
10 "seems" to change; e.g., it "alters" its color. The "alteration" 
is a " seeming. " Afterwards, as is the case with every change of 
colored lighting, etc., I once again have a world which matches 
the normal: everything is then concordant and changes or does 
not change, moves or is at rest, as usual, and it displays the 
15 same systems of aspects as before. 

But heire it must be observed that rest and motion, change 
and permanence, get their sense by means of the constitution of 
thinghood as reality, in which such occurrences, especially the 
limit cases of rest and permanence, play an essential role. 
20 ^^ Therefore the global coloring of all seen things can easily 
"change," for example when a body emits rays of light which 
"cast their shine" over all things. There is more to the 
constitution of the "change of things according to color" than 
just a change of the filled schemata with respect to color: 
25 change of things is, from the very outset, constituted as causal 
change in relation to causal circumstances, as, for example, each 
advent of an illuminating body. I can apprehend the change 
without seeing such an illuminating body, but in that case the 
causal circumstance is, in an indeterminate way, co-apperceived. 
30 These causal circumstances, however, are of the order of things. 
The relativity of the spatial things with reference to other ones 
determines the sense of the change in things. But the psycho- 
physical conditionalities do not belong here in the least. This must 
be kept in mind. It goes without saying, however, that my Body 
35 is indeed involved in the causal nexuses: if it is apprehended a^ 

a thing in space, it is certainly not apprehended as mere schema [63] 
but instead as the point of intersection of real causalities in the 
real (exclusively spatio-thingly) nexus. Belonging to this sphere 
IS, for example, the fact that a stroke of my hand (considered 


68 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


purely as the striking of a corporeal thing, i.e., excluding the 
lived experience of the "I strike") acts exactly the same as a 
stroke of any other material thing, and, similarly, the fall of my 
Corporeal body is Hke any other fall, etc. ^ 
5 Now concerning the intake of santonin, this too is therefore, 
abstracting from all ''concomitant psychic facts," a material 
process, one which could very well, if required by the constitu- 
tion of the world of experience, or by the further elaboration of 
the constitution of the experience of this world in the course of 

10 new experiences, enter into a real relation with the optical 
change of the rest of the material world. In itself it is thus 
thinkable that I would find experiential motives for seeing a 
general change in the color of the entire visible world and for 
regarding the change, in this apprehension, as a real-causal 

1 5 consequence of the material process of ingesting santonin (with 
its Bodily-material consequences). It would be a normal percep- 
tion just like any other. As long as, and whenever, I experience 
the change of all visible colors as an optical change of the 
things, I must assume a causal relation between whatever 

20 causing thinghoods there might be; it is only in the causal nexus 
that a change is precisely a change of a thing. As soon as 
experiential motives arise in opposition, then there must neces- 
sarily take place a transformation in the apprehension, in virtue 
of which the "change" that is seen loses the sense of a change 

25 and forthwith acquires the character of ''seeming. '' A semblant 
change is a schematic transformation apprehended as a change 
under normal conditions, thus in relation to experiences consti- 
tutive of causaHty. But now it is given in a way which cancels 
the causal apprehension. The causal apprehension is suggested 

30 by the given schematic transformation: it is as if it would 
present a change, but this is, under the given circumstances, 
excluded. The intake of santonin is not, with respect to the [64] 
general "change in color, " a process which is or which could be 
apprehended as a cause. The shift in color of all seen things is 


' To be sure, it still remains to be discussed to what extent the solitary subject has 
the possibility of apprehending his Body as a material body like any other. C/ 
pp. 165 ff. 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MATERIAL NATURE 


69 


such that there is not even an incentive to regard it at all as a 
real change of the illumination (e.g., in the manner of a hght 
source emitting colored rays). It is therefore that it presents 
itself as a semblant change; everything looks "as though" there 
5 were a new source of Hght shining, or "as if," in some other 
way, real causes were there effecting a general optical change 
(even if these causes were undetermined, unknown). But such 
causes may not now be presupposed; they are, given the total 
experiential situation, excluded. 

10 We have to ask: what can, on the basis of a transformation in 
the sense-thing, totally cancel the apperception of real change in 
this way, in opposition to the cases in which such an appercep- 
tion, already accomphshed, merely undergoes a modification 
(by the fact that a different causal nexus is substituted for the 

15 one that had been supposed, that is, the assumed cause aban- 
doned but another cause accepted)? The answer is a modifica- 
tion in the sphere of psychophysical ''causality " or, rather, 
"conditionality," to say it better. (For a causa in the proper 
sense is precisely a real cause. The subjective, however, is, in 

20 opposition to reality, an irreality. Reality and irreality belong 
together essentially in the form of reality and subjectivity, which 
on the one hand mutually exclude one another and on the other 
hand, as is said, essentially require one another). Besides the 
relations of the real to the real, which belong to the essence of 

25 everything real as spatial, temporal, and causal relations, there 
also belong to this essence relations of psychophysical condi- 
tionahty in possible experience. Things are "experienced," are 
"intuitively given" to the subject, necessarily as unities of a 
spatio-temporal-causal nexus, and necessarily pertaining to this 

30 nexus is a pre-eminent thing, "my Body," as the place where, 
and always by essential necessity, a system of subjective condi- 
tionality is interwoven with this system of causaUty and indeed 
in such a way that in the transition from the natural attitude 
(the regard directed in experience to nature and life) to the 

35 subjective attitude (the regard directed to the subject and to 
moments of the subjective sphere), real existence, and manifold [65] 
real changes as well, are given as in conditional connection with 
subjective being, with a state of being in the subjective sphere. 
Something thingly is experienced (perceptually apperceived, to 


70 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


give privilege to the originary experience) in such a way that, 
through a mere shift of focus, there emerge relations of depen- 
dency of the apperceived state of the thing on the sphere of 
sensation and on the rest of the subjective sphere. Here we have 
5 the primordial state of psychophysical conditionality (under this 
heading are included all conditional relations which run back 
and forth between thingly and subjective being). To every 
psychophysical conditionality there necessarily appertains soma- 
tological causality, which immediately always concerns the 
10 relations of the irreal, of an event in the subjective sphere, with 
something real, the Body: then mediately the relations with an 
external real thing which is in a real, hence causal, connection 
with the Body. 


c) The significance of psychophysical conditionality 
15 for the various levels of constitution 

The real world is originally constituted in levels, in such a 
way that the manifold of sense-things (the manifold of the full 
schemata) is erected as substratum in the unity of the spatial 
form. The sense-things are thereby constituted in the subjective 

20 way of " orientation " and are constituted for us (whether or not 
this is a matter of necessity is a special problem) such that a 
distinctive sense-thing, the "Body," is given as the constant 
bearer of the center of orientation. The realizing is then 
completed in such a way that the sense-things become states of 

25 real things; the system of real qualities is constituted, a system 
of regulated reciprocal relations of the sense-things under the 
heading, causality. 

It is the constitution of the substratum which bestows on all 
things in experience, i.e., insofar as they are, in their momentary 

30 states, sense-things, the most original psychophysical condition- 
ahty. The sense-things are what they are as unities "in" a 
manifold of perceptions and kinesthetic constellations of subjec- [66] 
tivity, and they are thereby always in consciousness as motivat- 
ing with regard to the corresponding aspects as motivated. Only 

35 in this nexus are the aspects aspects of sense- things. There is 
involved here essentially a possible change of attitude by means 
of which the sense-thing, in its givenness, is made conditionally 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MATERIAL NATURE 


71 


dependent on Corporeahty, on my opening my eyes to look, on 
my eye movements, on my running my hands, hands moved by 
subjectivity, over things in order to feel them, etc. This total 
system of conditionality, which connects sense-things and sub- 

5 jective occurrences in a regulated way, is what underlies the 
higher stratum of apperception and then becomes the psycho- 
physical conditionality between, on the one side, my Body and 
its causal interweavings in extra-Bodily nature, and, on the 
other side, the subjective courses of sensation, courses of 

10 changing aspects, etc. To this primordial state of psychophysical 
conditionalities, new conditionahties are then added, ones which 
already presuppose their constitution, i.e., ones arising from 
abnormalities of the Body. 

In the system of normal — " orthoaesthetic " — appear- 

1 5 ances, which coalesce into the unity of one concordant experi- 
ence, occasionally breaks occur. All things suddenly appear 
changed, the Body as well. The system of the orthoaesthetic 
appearances of the same thing falls apart in groups, and 
discordant appearances can arise by groups. If we limit our- 

20 selves to these groups, in which the thing already appears for 
itself as concordantly identical, then, with the transition from 
the earlier nexuses in the same group to the new ones, the thing 
presents itself as "suddenly changed," whereas it is given as 
unchanged in the other groups. By itself each partial system, as 

25 a perceptual system, has equal rights. Thus we get discordance, 
and at first it means nothing to say summarily that perceptions 
of the one sense could be " rectified " by those of the other 
senses. Supplemented perhaps, insofar as they all contribute 
constitutively to the givenness of the thing. The appearing thing 

30 thus refers back to all of them and leaves open much, as 
momentary appearance, in the various sense spheres, which can 
be determined more precisely, hence supplemented, by means of 
new perceptions and by recourse to perceptions of a sense [67] 
sphere which was not involved but to which we were referred 

35 indeterminately. 

To begin, let us take the case in which only one sense is 
impaired, one sense organ happens into an abnormal state, 
while the other senses continue to function normally. The 
impaired sense being excluded, we have a world-apprehension 


72 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


that is concordant throughout, and up to the moment of the 
impairment, we have the same for that sense too. 

The sense organ in question can be experienced by the other, 
normally functioning, ones, and so can the particular thingly 
5 causal circumstances to which it is subject. I see, for example, 
how my hand is burnt, or I see that my hand is swollen, etc. 
Moreover, abnormal sensations within the field of sensation of the 
organ in question will arise, thus ones issuing from the side of 
aesthesiological Corporeality. The changed data of the field of 
10 touch are indeed still apperceived according to appearances 
but precisely as anomalies, versus the concordant appearances 
of normally functioning sensibility, in which the same things are 
given in relation to the equally concordant and normally 
appearing parts of the Body and in relation to the whole Body. 
15 The change of the sense organ in question conditions, in this 
relation, a group of anomalous givennesses of the thing. 
Thereby I experience: it is the same thing which is given— in a 
modified way by the injured hand, in a normal way by the 
sound. Concordance is not cancelled altogether; something not 
20 unhke is appearing, just "colored" differently for the hand 
which seems to be such and such, i.e., which is given by the 
other senses as such and such. In short, for sense organs 
changed in a certain way all things appear in a corresponding 
way, and this modified givenness refers back to the normal. 
25 Within the domain of the subjective perceptual conditions as 
well, there thus results an ''optimum " of appearance (which 
may— with the healing of the originally injured organ or by the 
use of artificial aids — only appear subsequently in opposition 
to the former "normal" perception). 
30 The constitution of nature by the subject must of course be 
accompHshed in such a way that at first is constituted normally 
precisely a nature with a Body, within an open horizon of [68] 
possible experience of further properties of things and of the 
Body. The normal constitution is the one which constitutes the 
35 first reality of the world and of the Body, the reality which has 
to be constituted to make possible thereby the constitution of 
apperceptive transformations precisely as transformations, as 
incorporating "anomalous " experiential circumstances, taking 
into account the reality of higher strata as the new relations of 
40 dependence. 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MATERIAL NATURE 


73 


The system of causality into which the Body is interwoven in 
normal apperception is of such a kind that the Body, throughout 
all the changes it undergoes, still remains within the compass of 
an identity of type. The changes of the Body, as a system of 

5 perceptual organs, are free movements of this Body, and the 
organs can, without compulsion, return again to the same base 
position. They do not thereby change in a way that would 
modify the type of the sensibility; they can always accomplish 
the same thing and always in the same way: namely, for the 

10 constitution of outer experiences. (Likewise, there is a normal 
praxis of voluntary getting hold of, and working upon, the 
sensible world.) "Sensibihty" here refers to what is Objective: 
in a normal way I have to be able to grasp rest precisely as rest, 
non-change as non-change, and therein all senses must 

15 accord. 

Anomalies emerge when real-causal changes of the Body first 
disturb the normal function of individual organs as perceptual 
organs. E.g., the finger is burnt, and this change of the physical 
Body (of the finger as material) has the psychophysical conse- 

20 quence that the touched body in its thingly content as touched 
appears to be endowed with quite different properties than 
before, and this applies to every body touched by this finger. In 
our example — the injury of a hand — the possibiUty of thing- 
constitution is preserved. But we have two hands, and the entire 

25 surface of the Body serves as a touch surface, and the Body 
itself as a system of touch organs. All these furnish the touch 
properties, only in different degrees of perfection and also, I 
might say, with different ''colorings." At least the two hands 
can take each other's place and give essentially similar [69] 

30 "images." But in any case the same thing-property is consti- 
tuted versus the differences in the tactile images. 

But what if the sense of touch were completely impaired or 
underwent a total pathological change? Then again, what if 
both eyes were diseased and yielded images changed in an 

35 essential way, images in which things would appear as changed, 
with changed sense quaUties? With the other organs, of course, 
I do not see and I have no grasp of colors, the specifically visual 
quahties. 

Yet the identity of the thing endures — in the sense of touch — 


74 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


and, furthermore, so does the relation of the visual " images " 
to this same thing. The coordination of the senses, even if in a 
changed way, remains preserved (otherwise I would, e.g., have 
colored spots in the field of sensation but no appearances of 
5 things). It is still the same thing which I touch and which I see. 
The fact that the spatial forms have not changed and that the 
haziness is a mere subjective modification of the appearances, 
similar to a normal seeing, but without the proper accommoda- 
tion, is due to the sense of touch and to the earlier stretches of 
10 visual perception, prior to the pathological change. It is not that 
the sense of touch as such has a priority. But there belongs to 
the thing its optimal constitutive content, to which all other data 
intentionally refer back; and if the sense of sight from the very 
outset yielded only hazy contours, while the sense of touch 
15 provided sharp and more subtle differentiations, then the seen 
form would indeed ''coincide" with the touched, but the form 
as touched would acquire a priority. To speak more accurately: 
the thing itself does not have two forms which are superimposed 
but instead one form (and likewise one surface) which can be 
20 both touched and seen. Ideally, every sense can yield the same 
data and do so equally well, but de facto one sense often 
provides more than another, and a good pair of spectacles can 
transform my chronic and accustomed blurry vision into one so 
good that the sense of sight achieves a priority. 
25 To be sure, color is not a quality that is given as the same by 
means of several senses in different modes of appearance. If the 
normal Hghting circumstances (dayhght, etc.) are absent, or if I 
am completely Wind, then for me it becomes night. I do not see 
anything, all I have in my visual field is darkness. The same is 
30 true if I shut my eyes or cover them. It will be said that the [70] 
objects still have their color, but I do not see them. I do not 
have them in sight, but they do not cease to be, and I can 
indeed perceive them by touch. By means of the sense of touch, 
I am always in the world perceptually, I am able to find my way 
35 around in it, and I can grasp and get to know whatever I want. 
But I can also see (visually, the world is not continually given; 
that is rather a privilege of the sense of touch), and it is the 
same things which have color, even if I do not exactly see them, 
for, unless I am hindered, I can easily go there until I see, or 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MATERIAL NATURE 


75 


perhaps just raise my eyelids, turn my head, focus my gaze, etc. 
In this, the sense of touch always plays its part, as it is indeed 
obviously privileged amongst the contributors to the constitu- 
tion of a thing. 
5 It has become night, all things retain their color, but it is 
permanently night, light is now no more — could such a con- 
sciousness aiise for me, as solipsistic subject, if I became blind, 
for instance by being struck on the eyes? Or is this the 
consciousness that is more likely to be motivated: there is day 

10 and night as before, but I do not see any longer? It depends on 
the apperception of the respective Objective and subjective 
perceptual circumstances as such. In any case one fact remains: 
I still have eyes, which touching tells me, but I do not see with 
them any more. For normal persons, things are not constituted 

15 as things by building them out of seen things and touched 
things. There is but one and the same thing, along with its 
properties, some of which are predominately or exclusively (as, 
e.g., colors and their distinctions) grasped by vision, others by 
touch. The thing is not split apart by the two groups of 

20 appearances; on the contrary, it is constituted in unitary 
apperception. The visualness does not offer any property- 
complexes which could be taken away, as if the thing itself had 
in itself a visual element as something it could gain or lose. It 
makes no sense to assign to each sense its property-complexes 

25 as separate components of the thing any more than it makes 
sense to claim that the "primary" properties are somehow 
doubled when grasped by the different senses. But the color, 
which does indeed present itself as something of the thing itself, 
as constitutive property, is given perceptually precisely only in 

30 seeing. It is unthinkable that it would appear, as color, by 
means of touch. To be a mirroring surface, to shine, these also [71] 
are visible properties. But to brightness as seen property corre- 
sponds smoothness as touched, and are these not, in the thing 
itself, one and the same? Thus color could have a parallel in the 

35 sphere of tactile appearances, could have exactly parallel series 
of distinctions, corresponding to parallel series of changes under 
similar circumstances. In that case the same would obtain here 
as occurs with the primary properties. We would then say, 
"What appears in a certain way only to the sense of vision 


76 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


would appear, in a parallel way, to the sense of touch as well, in 
the way appropriate to touch." But as a matter of fact, this 
does not obtain for the constitutive appearances of sense-things 
(including perception-things). Color is seen and nothing but 
5 seen, and yet it belongs to the thing; it should hence be 
thinkable that any sense which in general lets the thing appear 
originarily would also do so for every property of this thing. The 
color is the color of the spatial form, just as the smoothness is 
the smoothness of the spatial form ; the color is precisely there 

10 where the smoothness is. One could thus declare it to be an 
ideal requirement for each and every sense : insofar as it claims 
to give the thing in the original, there must exist an ideal 
possibiHty of series of appearances of this sense, in which every 
constitutive property of the thing would come to originary 

15 givenness. 

On the other hand, we need to consider whether, where this 
ideally possible correction by means of the other senses does not 
exist, the apperception is possible: things "lose their color." It 
is said, indeed with a certain justification, "The color changes 

20 along with the illumination and disappears when night comes. " 
Color disappears in twihght, passes into " colorlessness, " but 
then it is not only the color of the things that disappears, but 
the things too become more and more indistinct until finally 
they are no longer visible at all. Obviously, we must hereby 

25 distinguish sensation-color (in a generalized sense), which flows 
over into blackness, and the thing's own color, which actually 
disappears for us. 

As long as the thing " is constituted for me, " as long as the 
possibility (the faculty) remains open to me of experiencing the 

30 properties of a thing and specifically of experiencing colors 
under the experiential circumstances which belong to the con- 
tent of the constitutive apperception, then I legitimately judge 
that things are colored and do so determined by motives which 
either lie in the apperception of the thing itself or lie mediately [72] 

35 in the apperceived nexuses which are attached to other experi- 
enced things. In that case I do not for the moment need to see 
the color of the thing or to see anything at all. (What is essential 
is that the Body is co-experienced as functioning in the percep- 
tion. That the things, in their "what," work causally, in percep- 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MATERIAL NATURE 


77 


tion, on the Body and its affected organs, and that the 
sensation, etc., is tied up with them in psychophysical condition- 
ality — all this also belongs here constitutively, hence quite 
obviously. Yet anomalies occur.) Anomalies as such can there- 
5 fore occur only in this form, namely that the normal world 
remains constitutively preserved, i.e., experienced, by the rest of 
the perceptual organs, the ones which, functioning reciprocally 
for each other as such organs, continue to give us experiences in 
the normal way. On the other hand, the abnormal organ and 

10 the causation which has altered it also belong, by virtue of these 
other senses, to the normally given world. But the abnormal 
organ loses, together with its normal form, its normal psycho- 
physical conditionality, and a new one is substituted. All things 
perceived by such an organ appear in other aspects, not the 

15 normal ones. The "injured" or diseased organ, in its function- 
ing in perception, occasions changed appearances of things. Or, 
rather, tlie things are not such as they then seem; they appear 
perhaps as changed things would normally appear, but this is 
mere semblance. It is a regular psychophysical-conditional con- 

20 sequence of the disease of the organ. Thus what does the world 
gain thanks to such experiences? The material world remains an 
experienced world. It presents itself as it is, if the Corporeality is 
normal; but if the Corporeahty is abnormal, then it is given in 
anomalous appearances (yet these are normal sense-things or, 

25 more clearly expressed, phantoms). Hence this is the case if the 
experiencing subject, within the persistent system of normal, or 
what is the same, confinuous, world-constituting experiences, 
discovers an abnormal part of the Body and thereby encounters 
its " unfitness, " " uselessness, " or reduced usefulness, for 

30 "rightful" experiential functions, or if the subject experiences 
therein its own anomalous type of psychophysical conditionah- 
ties. There can then also be the experience of the " return to 
health, " of the abnormahty as temporary (as is the case when [73] 
one is struck sharply), etc. If the function of the organ is 

35 disturbed, or if it has, on its own, changed abnormally, let us 
say "pathologically," without the subject's knowing anything 
about it, then the subject will obviously experience, in the 
"experience by means of this organ," changed thinghoods, 
provided the new sense data can be apprehended as phenomenal 


78 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


sense-things, wholly analogous to normally motivated ones, and 
are in fact apprehended accordingly. The healthy sense organs 
in that case present contradictory " reports. " The senses conflict 
with one another, but this conflict can be resolved in view of the 
5 fact that precisely afterwards an organ must be rejected as 
abnormal. All the other senses together furnish a world prog- 
ressing harmoniously, whereas the rejected sense, the one which 
does not concord with the course of the earlier experience, 
demands a general and unmotivated world-change, something 

10 avoided in the case of the reports of the rest of the senses, if 
they have normal vaUdity. Obviously, the conflict can remain 
completely unresolved, because it is possible that no experiential 
preference goes to one side (N.B.: as long as we take the 
experiencing subject as solipsistic). 

15 It is a matter of experience, already for the soKpsistic subject 
too, that eating also has effects on the Body and specifically of a 
kind as to influence the sensibility of the senses and the 
perceptual function of the parts of the Body. E.g., santonin has 
effects just Hke spectacles with yellow lenses do, and its other 

20 effects are to provoke paralyses, make the Body partially or 
totally anesthetic, etc. 

The only thing important is that I have experience of these 
effects, that, in perceiving, I know at once that my Body is in an 
abnormal state, and that then in a corresponding one, to be 

25 determined further in the course of experience, there occur, as 
consequences of the abnormal modification of the Body, 
changed modes of sensation or the loss of certain groups of 
sensation, and thereby also changed modes of givenness of 
things. The inclusion of the abnormalities therefore enlarges the 

30 original system of psychophysical conditionaHties which, along 
with the normal constitution, is detectable through a mere 
change of attitude. There is the one normally constituted world as 
the true world, as "norm" of truth, and there are multiple 
semblances, deviations of the modes of givenness, which find [74] 

35 their "explanation" in the experience of the psychophysical 
condifionality. Thereby we see that anomalies cannot contribute 
anything toward the constitufion of things, and neither can 
psychophysical conditionaHties. What they do contribute is only 
the rule of my subjectivity, which precisely resides in this, that 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MATERIAL NATURE 


79 


things for subjects are experienceable things and that condi- 
tioned rules of the series of sensations are conjoined with 
Corporeal-thingly causalities. 
The result of this is that perceptual activities, considered 
5 purely as relations of physical causality (the purely physical 
aspect of touching, smelHng, seeing, etc.) are not just any causal 
relations between the Body and the things to be perceived; what 
we have here are, rather, causalities of a typical kind. The Body, 
as a thing like any other, admits, still beyond these, an infinity 

10 of causaHties, namely every kind of causahties whatsoever which 
belong at all to things with such physical qualities. If, hence, the 
typical is transgressed, the psychophysical consequences which 
deviate from the typical remain possible. But the typical here is 
the conjunction of regulated groups of sensation, apprehensible 

15 and actually apprehended as normal appearances of things, 
though of such a kind that they interrupt the harmonious 
experiencje of nature. There also remains open, however, the 
possibiHty of such a change of the relevant parts of the Body 
that no sensations whatsoever occur or only ones which can no 

20 longer be apprehended as appearances of things. All such 
groups of appearances and sensations stand out as ruptures 
from the system of " orthoaesthetic " perceptions in which one 
and the same reality is experienced harmoniously. The Body is 
said to be functioning throughout orthoaesthetically or "nor- 

25 mally" as long as the psychophysically dependent perceptions 
or appearances are orthoaesthetic. For a solipsistic subject to 
speak of a pathological, abnormally functioning. Corporeality 
only makes sense if this subject has its system of orthoaesthetic 
experiences and has thereby, continuously over against itself, 

30 the one spatio-temporal-causal nature. This again presupposes 
that its Body is constituted in systems of orthoaesthetic percep- 
tions: thus the Body cannot be pathological throughout but 
must be "normal" at least to this extent, that some of its [75] 
organs are functioning normally, by virtue of which the patho- 

35 logical organs and parts can be given as they Objectively 
actually are. 

Hand in hand with the changes of the Body which condition 
modifications in the appearances of things go other modifica- 
tions which pertain to the subject according to its psychic life. 


80 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


Also dependent on Bodies are the reproductions and therewith 
the apperceptions. The reproductions stand within the associa- 
tive nexus of subjectivity. The apperceptions are determined 
through them, and that is again significant for the things which 
5 stand over and against the subject. It depends on the Body and 
on what is proper to the psyche, what it is that, as world, stands 
over and against the subject. Even abstracting from reproduc- 
tive elements which enter into the apperception of a thing, the 
psychic gains significance for the givenness of the external 

10 world, in virtue of the relations of dependence which exist 
between the Bodily and the psychic. The use of stimulants, as 
well as corporeal diseases, affect the occurrence of sensations, 
sensuous feelings, tendencies, etc. Conversely, a psychic state 
such as cheerfulness or sadness exercises an influence on Bodily 

15 processes. And thanks to these connections, the appearing 
external world shows itself as relative not only to the Body but 
also to the psychophysical subject as a whole. Hence a distinction 
is made here between the identical thing itself and its subjec- 
tively conditioned modes of appearance, i.e., its subjectively 

20 conditioned features which persist in relation to me, my Body, 
and my soul. 

In the sphere of intuition, there stands out from the series of 
multiplicities of appearances the "optimal givenness" in which 
the thing comes to the fore along with the properties that '' befit 

25 it itself." Yet even this givenness is givenness under certain 
Objective and subjective circumstances, though it is still ''the 
same" thing which under these or under other circumstances 
presents itself in a more or less " favorable " way. 


d) The physicalistic thing 

30 The Objectification accompHshed in these relativisms of expe- 
rience within the experiential nexus posits the thing as the 
identical substrate of identical properties. Of course, the thing [76] 
appears differently depending on whether or not I press the eye 
(double images), whether or not I take santonin, etc. But for 

35 consciousness it is the same, and the alteration of the coloring 
does not count as an alteration, or, rather, a change, of the 
property which is announced by the color, which is given in it. 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MATERIAL NATURE 


81 


And this holds universally. The thing is what it is in its thingly 
nexus and "in reference" to the experiencing subject, but it is 
still the same in all changes of state and of appearance it 
undergoes as a consequence of the altering circumstances. And 
5 as the same thing it has a stock of "lasting" properties. This 
reminds us of the formal logic which treats of objects in general 
and formulates conditions of possibility for any objectivity 
whatsoever to be able to count as identical, i.e. as maintaining 
its identity harmoniously throughout. Every object is what it is; 

10 in other words, it has its own proper quahties, properties, in 
which it displays its identical being, and with these properties, 
which are its permanent ones and which belong to its identity, it 
enters into relations, etc. 

If the thing is (and concordance in the positing of being 

15 within the nexus of experience is an original ground of reason 
for the assertion, "It is"), then it must be determinable in a 
way whith determines what is non-relative from among the 
relativities and, on the other hand, determines it out of that 
which contains all grounds of right, out of the data of experi- 

20 ence, thus out of the sensuous relativities. Of course, experience 
does not exclude the possibihty that it be annulled by future 
experience or even that the real not be at all, though it had been 
given in a concordant way. But now there are rightful grounds 
for positing being and consequently for the possibihty and neces- 

25 sity of positing the goal of logico-mathematical determination. 

As we work these matters out, notice should be taken of the 

different role given to the geometrical determinations of a thing 

versus the "sensuous quahties;" this comes to be expressed, at 

the beginning of the modern age, in the distinction between the 

30 primary and secondary qualities. In the constitution of a thing, 
which is accomphshed for the solitary subject with reference to 
a relative constancy of Corporeality, we must first of all 
distinguish as a lower level: 

1) The thing itself (as it itself is) with its constitutive features 

35 as they themselves are, versus the different modes of givenness, 
more perfect or less perfect as the case may be. The features [77] 
which pertain to the thing "itself" are then the "optimal" 
ones. This apphes to all features, to the geometrical as well as to 
the sensuous qualities. 


82 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


2) Now once the "sense-thing" is itself constituted, and so is, 
founded with it, the real-causal thing at the level of genuine 
experience, sense experience, then a new constitution of a higher 
level results in regard to the relativity of this " thing " with 
5 respect to the Corporeahty constituted in a similar fashion. It is 
this relativity which demands the constitution of a physicalistic 
thing manifesting itself in the intuitively given thing. But in this 
relativity the geometrical determinations and the specifically 
"sensuous quahties" play quite different roles (both taken, in 

10 their own constitutive sphere, as " themselves, " as optimal). The 
geometrical determinations pertain to the physicalistic Object 
itself; what is geometrical belongs to physicalistic nature in 
itself But this is not true of the sensuous qualities, which 
thoroughly belong in the sphere of the appearances of nature. 

15 Hence it must be shown presently that and why, particularly for 
this relativism, they and they alone come into consideration. ^ 

e) Possibility of the constitution of 
an " Objective nature " on the solipsistic level 

We have pursued the constitution of material nature through 
20 various strata and have seen that already for the "solipsistic" 
subject— the subject in isolation— there exist motives for the 
distinction between an "appearing" thing, whose qualitative 
content is relative to my subjectivity, and the "Objective" 
thing, which remains what it is even if changes occur in my 
25 subjectivity and, dependent on it, in the "appearances" of the 
thing. Thereby we have to understand under the heading 
"true" or "Objective" thing still something double: 

1) the thing as it presents itself to me under ''normal" 
conditions, in opposition to all other thing-like unities which, 

30 constituted under "abnormal" conditions, are degraded to 
" mere semblance. " [78] 

2) the identical content of qualities which, abstraction made 
from all relativity, can be worked out and fixed logico- 
mathematically: i.e., the physicaHstic thing. Once this is known 


For a more precise treatment of the physicaHstic thing, see below, pp. 89 fT. 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MATERIAL NATURE 


83 


and once we have, in addition. Objective knowledge of the 
psychophysical character of experiencing subjects, as well as of 
the existing conditionaHties between thing and subject, then 
from that it can be determined Objectively how the thing in 

5 question must be intuitively characterized for the respective 
subjectivity — the normal or the abnormal. ^ 

The question now, however, is whether or not the motives for 
the necessary distinction between the subjectively conditioned 
thing and the Objective thing, motives which do present them- 

10 selves in solipsistic experience, are sufficient or have to be there 
at all. As long as we take cases in which changes of the external 
world, feigned for us by an abnormal perceptual organ, are 
shown up as "semblances" by the testimony of the other 
organs, to that extent the distinction between " seeming" and what 

15 actually is is always given, even if it may remain undecided in 
particular cases what is semblant and what is actual. But if we 
assume for once that a subject would always have only normal 
perceptions and would never undergo a modification of any of 
its organs, or on the other hand would undergo a modification, 

20 but one that allowed for no possibihty of correction (loss of the 
entire field of touch, or mental diseases which alter the entire 
typical character of perception), then the motives of the distinc- 
tion between "semblance" and "actuality," assumed up to 
now, would be eliminated, and the level of "Objective nature" 

25 could not be attained by such a subject. But the danger, that 
under the assumed conditions the constitution of Objective 
nature could not be attained, is removed as soon as we lift the 
abstraction we have maintained up to now and take into 
account the conditions under which constitution takes place de 

30 facto: namely, that the experiencing subject is, in truth, not a 
solipsistic subject but is instead one among many. 

f ) Transition from solipsistic to intersubjective experience [79] 

Let us consider a little more closely the possibility of a 
solipsistic world, something we have assumed up to now. I 


• Thus are determined, as will later be shown in full, the tasks of physics, 
psychophysics, and psychology. 


84 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


(everybody should substitute here his own " I ") would experi- 
ence a world, and it would be exactly the same as the one I 
actually do experience; everything would be the same, with the 
only exception that in my field of experience there would be no 
5 Bodies I could apprehend as Bodies of other psychic subjects. If 
this apperceptive domain is lacking, then it neither determines 
my apprehensions of things, and insofar as it does usually 
determine these apprehensions in my actual experience, then its 
influence would be absent from my world-image as now modi- 

10 fied. Moreover, I now have the same manifolds of sensation; 
and the "same" real things, with the same properties, appear to 
me and, if everything is in harmony, exhibit themselves as 
"actually being," or otherwise, if discrepancies of a known 
kind occur as exceptional, the things show themselves as being 

15 "different" or as not being at all. Seemingly, nothing essential 
has changed; seemingly, only a fragment of my world of 
experience is missing, the world of animaha, as well as the 
group of causalities precisely involved with it in a world-nexus. 
Let us then imagine, however, that at a point of time within the 

20 time co-constituted along with the solipsistic world, suddenly in 
my domain of experience Bodies show up, things understandable 
as, and understood as, human Bodies. Now all of a sudden and 
for the first time human beings are there for me, with whom I 
can come to an understanding. And I come to an understanding 

25 with them about the things which are there for us in common in 
this new segment of time. Something very remarkable now 
comes out: extensive complexes of assertions about things, 
which / made in earlier periods of time on the ground of earlier 
experiences, experiences which were perfectly concordant 

30 throughout, are not corroborated by my current companions, 
and this not because these experiences are simply lacking to 
them (after all, one does not need to have seen everything others 
have seen, and vice versa) but because they thoroughly conflict ^ [80] 
with what the others experience in experiences, we may suppose. 


' Of course, this conflict should not be considered total. For a basic store of 
communal experiences is presupposed in order for mutual understanding to take place 
at all. 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MATERIAL NATURE 


85 


that necessarily are harmonious and that go on being progres- 
sively confirmed. Then what about the actuality exhibited in the 
first period of time? And what about myself, the empirical 
subject of this actuahty? The answer is clear. As I communicate 
5 to my companions my earlier lived experiences and they become 
aware of how much these conflict with their world, constituted 
intersubjectively and continuously exhibited by means of a 
harmonious exchange of experiences, then I become for them an 
interesting pathological Object, and they call my actuality, so 
10 beautifully manifest to me, the hallucination of someone who 
up to this point in time has been mentally ill. One may imagine 
perfection in the exhibition of my solipsistic world and raise 
that perfection to any height, still the described state of affairs 
as an apriori one, the ideal possibility of which is beyond 
15 question, would not change at all. 

Light must now be shed on a certain problem : the relation to 
a multipllicity of people who have dealings with one another — 
how does that enter into the apprehension of a thing and come 
to be constitutive for the apprehension of a thing as " Objective 
20 and actual"? This "how" is at first very puzzling, because 
when we carry out an apprehension of a thing we do not, it 
seems, always co-posit a number of fellow men and, specifically, 
co-posit them as ones who are to be, as it were, invoked. One 
might also wonder if we are not entangled here in a circle, for 
25 surely the apprehension of one's fellow man presupposes the 
apprehension of the Body and consequently also presupposes 
thing-apprehension. There is only one way to solve this problem, 
the way prescribed for us by phenomenology. We must interro- 
gate the thing-apprehension itself, there where it is an experi- 
30 ence of an " Objectively actual " thing, and we must interrogate 
the experience which is not yet exhibiting, but is in want of 
exhibition, as to what, inherent in it, is in need of exhibition, 
what components of unfulfilled intentions it harbors. (In this 
regard it must be observed that we have in fact described the 
35 constitution of the thing incompletely by investigating only the 
manifolds of sensation, the adumbrafions, schemata, and, in 
general, visual things in all their levels. We must overcome in a [81] 
decisive point the Ego's self-forgetfulness we touched upon 
previously.) Each thing of my experience belongs to my " envi- 


86 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MATERIAL NATURE 


87 


ronment, " and that means first of all that my Body is part of it 
precisely as Body. It is not that we have here a matter of 
essential necessity in any sense. That is precisely what our 
solipsistic thought-experiment has taught us. Strictly speaking, 
5 the solus ipse is unaware of the Objective Body in the full and 
proper sense, i even if the solus ipse might possess the phenome- 
non of its Body and the corresponding system of experiential 
manifolds and know them in just as perfect a way as the social 
man. In other words, the solus ipse does not truly merit its 
10 name. The abstraction we carried out, for justifiable theoretical 
reasons, does not yield the isolated man, the isolated human 
person. This abstraction does obviously not consist in our 
arranging for a mass murder of the people and animals of our 
surrounding world, sparing one human subject alone. For in 

15 that case the remaining subject, though one and unique, would 
still be a human subject, i.e., still an intersubjective object, still 
apprehending and positing himself as such. But, on the con- 
trary, the subject we constructed knows nothing of a human 
environment, knows nothing of the reahty or even just the real 

20 possibihty of "other" Bodies, understood in the sense of an 
apprehension of the human, and thus knows nothing of his own 
Body as understandable by others. This subject does not know 
that others can gaze upon the same world, one that simply 
appears differently to different subjects, such that the appear- 

25 ances are always relative to "their" Bodies, etc. It is clear that 
the apprehension of the Body plays a special role for the 
intersubjectivity in which all objects are apprehended "Objec- 
tively" as things in the one Objective time and one Objective 
space of the one Objective world. (In every case the exhibition 

30 of any apprehended Objectivity whatsoever requires a relation 
to the apprehension of a multiplicity of subjects sharing a 
mutual understanding.) The thing which is constituted for the 
individual subject in regulated manifolds of harmonious experi- 
ences and which, as one for sense intuition, stands continuously [82] 

35 over and against the Ego in the course of perception, obtains in 


On this point, cf. the segments on the constitution of the Body, pp. 165 ff. 


that way the character of a merely subjective "appearance" of 
the "Objectively real" thing. Each of the subjects who are 
intersubjectively related in mutual understanding in regard to 
the same world and, within that, in regard to the same things, 
5 has his own perceptions of them, i.e., his own perceptual 
appearances, and in them he finds a unity in the appearances, 
which itself is only an appearance in a higher sense, with 
predicates of appearance that may not, without any further ado, 
count as predicates of the appearing " true thing. " 

10 Thus we come here, in considering mutual understanding, to 
the same distinction we already demonstrated as possible on the 
solipsistic level. The "true thing" is then the Object that 
maintains its identity within the manifolds of appearances 
belonging to a multiplicity of subjects, and specifically, again, it 

15 is the intuited Object, related to a community of normal 
subjects, or, abstraction made from this relativity, it is the 
physicalistic thing, determined logico-mathematically. This phy- 
sicaHstic thing is obviously the same, whether it is constituted 
solipsistically or intersubjectively. For logical Objectivity is eo 

20 ipso Objectivity in the intersubjective sense as well. What a 
cognizing subject comes to know in logical Objectivity (hence in 
such a way that this presents no index of a dependency of its 
truth-content upon the subject or upon anything subjective) can 
be similarly known by any cognizing subject as long as he 

25 fulfills the conditions any subject must satisfy to know such 
Objects. That is, he must experience the things and the very 
same things, and he must, if he is also to know this identity, 
stand in a relation of empathy to the other cognizing subjects, 
and for that he must have Corporeality and belong to the same 

30 world, etc. 

It pertains to perception s very sense, as well as to that of 
experience in general, that things come to presence there which 
are to be determined in themselves and distinguished from all 
other things. And it pertains to the sense of experiential 

35 judgment to make a claim to Objective validity. If a thing is 
determined in itself and distinct from every other, then it has to 
allow for judgmental, therefore predicative, determination in 
such a way that its distinctiveness as regards all other things 
stands out. 


88 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


The thing given in perception and experience is, in accordance 
with perception's very sense, something spatio-temporal from 
the first, having form and duration and also having a position [83] 
in space and time. So we have to distinguish between the 
5 appearing form and the form itself, between the appearing 
spatial magnitude, the appearing location, and the magnitude 
and location themselves. Everything that we experience of the 
thing, even the form, has reference to the experiencing subject. 
All these appear in changing aspects, in the change of which the 
10 things are present as sensibly changed also. In addition, the 
space between things and the form of this space appear under 
different aspects according to the subjective circumstances. 
Always and necessarily, however, the one and the same space 
"appears" as the form of all possible things, a form that cannot 
15 be multipHed or altered. Every subject has his "space of 
orientation, " his " here " and his possible " there, " this " there " 
being determined according to the directional system of right- 
left, above-below, front-back. But the basic form of all identifi- 
cation of the intersubjective givennesses of a sensuous content is 
20 of such a kind that they necessarily belong to one and the same 
system of location, whose Objectivity is manifest in that every 
"here" is identifiable with every relative "there" as regards 
every new "here" resulting from the subject's "moving on" 
and so also as regards every "here" from the viewpoint of 
25 another subject. This is an ideal necessity and constitutes an 
Objective system of location, one that does not allow of being 
grasped by the vision of the eyes but only by the understanding; 
that is, it is "visible, " in a higher kind of intuition, founded on 
change of location and on empathy. In this way is solved the 
30 problem of the "form of intuition" and of spatial intuition. It is 
not a matter of the senses, although in another respect it is. The 
primary intuitive space is sensuously given though this is not yet 
space itself. Objective space is not sensuous, although it is still 
intuited on a higher level, and it comes to givenness by means of 
35 an identification within a change of orientation, but exclusively 
one the subject itself carries out freely. Oriented space (and 
along with it, eo ipso Objective space) and all appearing spatial 
forms already admit of idealization ; they are to be grasped in 
geometrical purity and determined "exactly." 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MATERIAL NATURE 


89 


The Objective form is Objective as ordered within Objective 
space. Everything else about a thing that is Objective (detached [84] 
from all relativisms) is so through a connection with what is 
fundamentally Objective, viz., space, time, motion. Real proper- 

5 ties manifest themselves as real substantial-causal unities in the 
motion and deformation of the spatial form. These are the 
mechanical properties which express the causal-lawful dependen- 
cies of the spatial determinations of bodies. The thing is always 
form in a situation. The form is, however, in every situation a 

10 qualified one. Qualities are what fills, they extend over the 
surface and through the corporeality of the form. Qualifications, 
however, extend from the things into empty space: rays of light, 
radiations of heat, etc. That means that thingly quahties condi- 
tion quahties and qualitative changes in other things and indeed 

15 do so in such a way that the effect is a constant function of the 
situation: to every change of situation there corresponds a 
change of effect. In virtue of such a subordination to spatial 
relations which may be determined with exactitude, even the 
sense qualities become amenable to exact determination. Thus 

20 we come to an understanding of the physicalistic world-view or 
world-structure, i.e., to an understanding of the method of 
physics as a method which pursues the sense of an intersubjec- 
tively-Objectively (i.e., non-relative and thereby at once inter- 
subjective) determinable sensible world. 


25 g) More precise characterization of the physicaHstic thing 

" PhysicaUstic nature," to which we have now advanced, 
presents itself in the following way iii accord with our 
expositions: the thing itself in itself consists of a continuously or 
discretely filled space in states of motion, states which are called 

30 energy forms. That which fills space lends itself to certain 
groups of differential equations and corresponds to certain 
fundamental laws of physics. But there are no sense quahties 
here. And that means there are no qualities here whatever. For 
the quality of what fills space is sense quality. But, now, filled 

35 space without quality, how is that thinkable? 

To attribute actuaHty to appearing things with their sense 
quahties in themselves is out of the quesfion, as the natural 


90 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


scientists quite rightly say. For the sense quahties change [85] 
according to the kind and the disposition of the sense organs; 
they are dependent on the sense organs and, more generally, 
dependent on the Body and the total condition of the experienc- 
5 ing subject. And it turns out that the true physical facts which 
correspond to the qualitative distinctions of red and green, 
warm and cold, are produced without qualitative transition as 
mere quantitative distinctions of one and the same domain, for 
example, temperature, waves in the ether, etc. 

10 Shall we say that God sees the things as they are in 
themselves while we see them through our sense organs, which 
are a kind of distorting eyeglasses? That things are filled space 
with absolute quality and it is only that we know nothing of it? 
But should the things which appear to us as they appear to us 

15 be the same as the things which appear to God as they appear 
to God, then a unity of mutual understanding would have to be 
possible between God and us, just as, between different men, 
only through mutual understanding is there the possibiHty of 
knowing that the things seen by the one are the same as those 

20 seen by the other. But how would the identification be thinkable 
if not in the sense that the supposed absolute spirit sees the 
things precisely also through sensuous appearances, which, 
likewise, have to be exchangeable in an understanding that is 
reciprocal — or, at least, unilateral — as is the case with the 

25 appearances we share among us men? And if not in that case, 
then God would be blind to colors, etc., and men blind to his 
qualities. Is there any sense, however, to arguing about which 
are the true quahties? The new qualities would again be 
secondary and would be eliminated once more by physics, 

30 which has to be the same for all, if the things are the same. 
Obviously, the absolute spirit would also have to have a Body 
for there to be mutual understanding, and thus the dependency 
on sense organs would have to be there as well. The result is 
that we must understand the sense of the distinction between 

35 secondary and primary qualities correctly and that we are 
permitted to understand the non-Objectivity of the former only 
in the sense that in no way do they escape the relativity of 
appearances, not even in the way we easily overlook insofar as 
we spontaneously think of ourselves as normally sensing in a 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MATERIAL NATURE 


91 


world of beings of normal sensibiHty. A main feature of the 
relativity consists in the dependence upon the subject. To be 
sure, an important distinction is to be found here: subjects who [86] 
in general share a common world of things, to which they 

5 actually relate, hence to which they can relate through appear- 
ances, as is required by thingly being, can in principle be 
relatively "blind" as regards color, sound, etc., i.e., as regards 
individual senses which provide their own particular sorts of 
sense qualities. The senses can also be completely different, 

10 provided they make possible a common understanding and 
constitute a common nature as an appearing one. But in 
principle subjects cannot be blind as regards all the senses and 
consequently at once blind to space, to motion, to energy. 
Otherwise there would be no world of things there for them; in 

15 any case it would not be the same as ours, precisely the spatial 
world, the world of nature. 

Natuire is an intersubjective reality and a reality not just for 
me and my companions of the moment but for us and for 
everyone who can have deahngs with us and can come to a 

20 mutual understanding with us about things and about other 
people. There is always the possibility that new spirits enter into 
this nexus; but they must do so by means of their Bodies, which 
are represented through possible appearances in our conscious- 
ness and through corresponding ones in theirs. 

25 The thing is a rule of possible appearances. That means that 
the thing is a reaUty as a unity of a manifold of appearances 
connected according to rules. Moreover, this unity is an inter- 
subjective one. It is a unity of states; the thing has its real 
properties, and to each moment there corresponds an active 

30 state (for the properties express faculties; they are causal 
properties, related to an "if-then"). Whereas, however, for the 
former consideration, supported by direct experience, the state is 
identical with the space that is filled with sensuous qualities 
(schema), a space which can be an intersubjective unity only as 

35 related to a totahty of normal " Uke-sensing " subjects, on the 
other hand the real possibiUty and actuality of subjects endowed 
with different sense faculties and the knowledge of the depen- 
dence, present in each individual, of the sense qualities on 
physiological processes lead to a consideration of this depen- 


92 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MATERIAL NATURE 


93 


dence precisely as a new dimension of relativities and lead to the [87] 
construction, in thought, of the purely physicalistic thing. Then 
to the same Objective-physicalistic state of the thing pertain 
multiple "filled spaces" related to various sense faculties and 
5 individual sense aberrations. The physicaHstic thing is intersub- 
jectively common in that it has validity for all individuals who 
stand in possible communion with us. The Objective determina- 
tion determines the thing through that which belongs to it and 
must belong to it if it is going to be able to appear to me or to 
10 anyone else in communion with me and if it is going to be able 
to count as the same for every member of the communicating 
society— even for me throughout all possible modifications of 
my sensibiHty. The determinations of space and time are 
common, as is common a lawfulness which, in virtue of its 
15 concepts related to the "physicalistic thing," is a unitary rule 
for all the appearances, of the intersubjective community, which 
constitute the same thing and which must constitute it in 
rational mutual understanding. It is only from the appearances 
(and the intersubjective nexus) that we can draw the sense of 

20 what a thing is in "Objective actuality," i.e., in the actuality 
which appears, and which appears to all communicating sub- 
jects, and which is identifiable by means of intersubjective 
identification. 
The Objectively real is not in my "space," or in anyone 

25 else's, as "phenomenon" ("phenomenal space") but exists in 
Objective space, which is a formal unity of identification in the 
midst of the changing qualities. Whereas it holds for my 
space-phenomena that they can only be given with sensuous 
quahties, it holds for Objective space that it cannot be given 

30 with sensuous quahties but can appear only within subjective 
spaces that have sensuous qualities. This is valid for the solus 
ipse as well and for the space already being constituted therein 
as Objective, though still not as intersubjecfive. (Thus the 
intersubjective thing is the "Objective" spatial form with 

35 "Objective" quahties, the physicahstic ones.) Pure space (the 
purely Objective spatial form) arises out of my appearing space 
not through abstraction but through an Objectification which 
takes as "appearance" any sensuously appearing spatial form 
endowed with sensuous quahties and posits it in manifolds of [88] 


appearances which do not belong to an individual consciousness 
but to a societal consciousness as a total group of possible 
appearances that is constructed out of individual groups. Each 
subject has the totahty of space and has particular spatial 
5 forms, but in intersubjectivity these are appearances. 

In principle, the thing is given and is to be given only through 
appearances, whose appearing content can vary with the sub- 
jects. This content (the appearing thing just as it appears, as red, 
as warm, etc.) is what it is as appearance to an actual subject or 

10 to a possible subject in actual connection with the former. We 
find ourselves led back to a multiplicity of actual subjects and, 
in connecfion with them, still possible subjects who intuit a 
thing, accompUsh an experience, etc., in which, as correlate, 
something appearing as such comes to consciousness in a 

1 5 varying mode with moments of appearance such as red, warm, 
sweet, round, etc. These subjects stand in a relationship of 
empathy and, in spite of the variation in the givennesses of 
appearances, can intersubjectively assure themselves of the 
identity of what appears therein. 

20 Thus in principle the thing is something intersubjectively 
idenfical yet is such that it has no sensuous-intuitive content 
whatsoever that could be given as identical intersubjectively. 
Instead, it is only an empty identical something as a correlate of 
the identification possible according to experiential-logical rules 

25 and grounded through them, the identification of what appears 
in the changing "appearances" with their various contents, the 
identification carried out by the subjects that stand in the 
intersubjective nexus along with their corresponding acts appro- 
priate to appearance and to experiential-logical thinking. In 

30 physics as the mere natural study of the intersubjective- 
Objective thing existing "in itself," the thing is Objectively 
determined as an empty something, determined through the 
intersubjectively constituted forms of space and time and 
through the "primary qualities" related to space and time. All 

35 secondary quahties, indeed precisely everything that can be 
given intuitively, including all intuitive spatial and temporal 
forms which are quite unthinkable without secondary filling, all 
differences in orientation, etc. — these do not belong there. 


10 


94 STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 

h) The possibility of the constitution of 

an " Objective nature " at the level of 

intersubjective experience 

Let us now examine analogously, for the intersubjective level 
of experience as v/e have done for the solipsistic, which condi- 
tions have to be fulfilled so that the constitution of an "Objec- 
tive " nature can arise, and indeed must arise. We began with 
relationships as they are present de facto: we found that 
mdividual differences stand out from a fundamental set of 
common experiences and lead to the distinction between deter- 
minations which belong to the thing "itself" versus ones that 
are merely subjectively conditioned. Now other conditions, 
as well, are to be constructed apriori. We can imagine a human 
world in which there would be no illness, in which there would 
15 occur no illusions, hallucinations, or the like. We can further- 
more assume that all the persons who have commerce with one 
another apprehend the world completely ahke (abstraction 
made from the always necessary differences in orientation). In 
that case would the things with their secondary qualities simply 
20 count as the ultimate Objectivity? Or would it be recognized 
that this state of affairs is contingent and not necessary? It is to 
be noted in this regard that the constitution of the sensible world 
IS obviously to be distinguished from the constitution of the 
"true " world, the world for the scientific subject, whose activity 
25 is a spontaneous "free" thinking and, in general, researching. 
That is to say: if we live passively, in the manner of animals, 
" in the world " and in commerce with others who are hke us, 
who are as "normal" as we are, then a world of experience is 
constituted common to us all. Now, we are, however, free 
30 intelligent beings. Even if we encounter no abnormalities, we can 
still perform gratuitous operations on our Bodies or on others', 
and then "anomalies " do appear. We pursue, in thought, the 
causal nexuses and form for ourselves the " physicalistic world- 
image. " 

In any case, we see that on the one hand there exists already 
on the solipsistic level the possibility of advancing to the consti- 
tution of the "Objective " (physicalistic) thing. On the other 
hand, there does not exist, even on the intersubjective level, the 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MATERIAL NATURE 


95 


35 


[89] 


10 


15 


unconditioned necessity to reach that far. But there is — 
abstracting from the circumstance that de facto constitution is 
accomplished intersubjectively — a distinction in principle 
between these two possible ways of constructing an " Objective 
nature. " The soUpsistic subject could indeed have over against 
itself an Objective nature, however this subject could not 
apprehend itself as a member of nature, could not apperceive 
itself as psychophysical subject, as animal, the way this does 
happen on the intersubjective level of experience. ' Obviously, 
this can become evident only if the constitution of animal 
nature is examined. As has indeed been shown in general by the 
exhibition of the relations of dependency between experienced 
nature and experiencing subject, the study of subjectivity is 
unconditionally required for a full clarification of the sense and 
structure of physical nature. 


[90] 


Cf. pp. 165 ff. 


THE CONSTITUTION OF ANIMAL NATURE 


97 


Section Two : The Constitution of Animal Nature 


INTRODUCTION 


§ 19. Transition to the consideration of the soul 
as a natural Object 

5 Let us now proceed to investigate the essence of the soul, the 
human or animal soul, as it is, in its connection with the 
material Body, an Object of natural-scientific research. Here 
also, as is required by a rigorous phenomenological method, we 
want to keep to what originary experience teaches us. We leave 

10 aside all vague experiential lore and all unclarified interpreta- 
tions of what is given as psychic; these may have arisen from 
experience, but in themselves they are confused, whether they 
can be corrected or instead prove to be inappropriate and full of 
contradiction. We renounce all erudition, in a lower or higher 

15 sense, from which we are, rather, led back as from a mediate 
cognitive function precisely to these original experiences. Conse- 
quently, we also keep our distance from all convictions prevail- 
ing in the science of psychology, without, however, disputing 
their rights. What we are seeking does not lie in the conse- 

20 quences of theoretical, mediate thinking but in its beginnings', we 
are looking for its most original presuppositions. No theory can 
overthrow the meaning of the soul prescribed to us by the 
perfect intuition of the psychical. This meaning lays down an 
absolutely binding rule for all theoretical research. Any devia- 

25 tion from it results in absurdity. This is indeed intelHgible on 
absolutely universal grounds. Legitimate theory cannot accom- 
phsh anything other than the predicative determination, in 
mediate thinking, of that which was first posited by originary 
presenting intuition (in our case, experience) in a straightfor- 

30 ward way as a being and thereby as a being of determinate 


[91] 


"content" or sense. There what the "analysis of origin" has 
drawn from originary intuition as the originary sense of the 
object cannot be annulled by any theory. It is the norm which 
must be presupposed and to which all possible theoretical 
5 cognition is rationally bound. Hereby is designated a universal 
rule for the fundamental clarification of all regional concepts — 
thus all concepts which delimit the domain of objects of a 
regional ontology (and therewith of all special and empirical 
discipHnes of the regional sphere in question) — just as of the 

10 concept of the soul Hence the task is "to draw out of 
experience" the authentic concept of the psychic. But obviously 
here, as elsewhere in phenomenology, this does not mean to 
engage straightforwardly in actual experiences, i.e., to proceed 
empirically, as if the empirical thesis, which binds itself to 

15 contingent facts, would be pertinent. The task is rather to 
examine, in eidetic intuition, the essence of the experienced in 
general and as such, precisely as it is made explicit ^ in any 
experience, whether carried out actually or imaginatively (by 
means of a fictional transfer of oneself into a possible experi- 

20 ence) in order then to grasp intuitively, in the unfolding of the 
intentions essentially involved in such an experience, the sense 
of the experienced as such — the sense of the relevant class of 
regional objectivities — and to express this sense in rigorous 
analysis and description. 


25 §20. The sense of the ordinary talk about the "psychic" 

Let us begin our analyses. It is in conniection with what is 
material that the psychic is given to us. Among material things 
there are certain ones, or from an eidetic standpoint there are [92] 
certain ones apriori possible, which are soulless, "merely" 
30 material. On the other hand, there also are certain ones which 
have the rank of "Bodies" and as such display a connection 
with a new stratum of being, the psychic stratum, as it is called 
here. What is included under this heading? What experience 


Cf. p. 38. 


98 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


first discloses to us here is a stream, with no beginning or end, of 
"lived experiences, " of which manifold types are well known to 
us from inner perception, "introspection," in which each of us 
grasps his "own" lived experiences in their originahty. And 
5 when these are no longer originary and "actual," we can still 
grasp them intuitively in inner remembrance, inner free phantasy, 
inner imaginary representation. Similar lived experiences are 
further given, with more or less clear intuitiveness, in the form 
of an interpreting grasp of others' psychic Hves as present 
10 actuahties. 

As the image, stream of lived experience (or stream of 
consciousness), already indicates, the lived experiences, i.e., the 
sensations, perceptions, rememberings, feehngs, affects, etc., are 
not given to us in experience as annexes, lacking internal connec- 
15 tion, of material Bodies, as if they were unified with one another 
only through the common phenomenal Hnk to the Body. 
Instead, they are one by means of their very essence; they are 
bound and interwoven together, they flow into one another in 
layers and are possible only in this unity of a stream. Nothing 
20 can be torn away from this stream; nothing can be separated off 
as, so to say, a thing for itself. 

But in a certain way this unitary stream contains in itself still 
further unities, and is interwoven with unities, which can 
equally be grasped in intuition, given the appropriate viewpoint, 
25 and which must no less be taken into consideration if we wish 
to bring clarity to the phenomenologically original field of the 
psychic. To this field refer indeed the Ego concepts, to be 
grasped in a different sense, as well as the proper concept of the 
soul, which of course in no way coincides with the concept of 
30 lived experience and stream of lived experience. For us the first 
question to be raised here concerns the unity of the pure [93] 
(transcendental) Ego and then that of the real psychic Ego, 
hence of the empirical subject affiliated with the soul, whereby 
the soul is constituted as a reality bound together with Bodily 
35 reality or interwoven in it. The Body will here require special 
study, and so will the question of whether its essential determi- 
nations are only those of a peculiar material thing or whether it 
is the bearer of a new, extra-material, constitutive stratum 
which is to be designated as a psychic stratum in the pregnant 


THE CONSTITUTION OF ANIMAL NATURE 


99 


sense. Under the heading, "empirical Ego," which still needs 
clarification, we find furthermore also the unity "I as man," 
hence the Ego which not only ascribes to itself its hved 
experiences as its psychic states and Hkewise ascribes to itself its 
5 cognitions, its properties of character, and similar permanent 
quahties manifest in its lived experiences, but which also 
designates its Bodily quahties as its "own" and thereby assigns 
them to the sphere of the Ego. 


§21. The concept of "I as man" 


10 Let us immediately proceed from this last Ego-concept, the 
ordinary one, which is especially rich in content. Everyone 
grasps, in "self-perception," precisely himself, and hkewise, in 
the experiential knowledge of another, precisely this other. 
When anyone uses the first person, he speaks of his acts and 

15 states in the form, "I perceive, I judge, I feel, I will." Similarly, 
with the expression, " I am of such a kind," one speaks of his 
personal qualities, of his innate or acquired traits of character, 
abilities, and of his transient and only relatively permanent 
dispositions. Likewise for others. We say that so-and-so is a man 

20 of character, virtuous, cheerful or melancholic; we say that he 
has a choleric temperament, is in love, etc. However, in saying 
that he dances, is a gymnast, eats, writes letters, etc., one is at 
the same time saying that he has psychophysical capacities, is a 
good dancer, a mediocre gymnast, etc. Similarly, someone will 

25 say that he has been beaten, stabbed, or burnt when it is his [94] 
Body that has undergone the corresponding actions, when it, as 
we also say, has been beaten, stabbed or burnt. We say of 
someone that he is dirty when it is his finger that is covered with 
dirt. Furthermore we also say he is anemic or full-blooded, he is 

30 weak in the heart or sick in the stomach, etc. Hence in the 
normal saying of "I" (or in the normal use of personal 
pronouns in general), the expression "I" encompasses the 
"whole" man. Body and soul. It can therefore very well be 
said: I am not my Body, but I have my Body; I am not a soul, 

35 but I have a soul. 

Now, if it is correct that the unity of man encompasses these 


100 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


two components not as two realities externally linked with one 
another but instead as most intimately interwoven and in a 
certain way mutually penetrating (as is in fact established), then 
one can understand that states and properties of either of these 
5 components count as ones of the whole, of the " I as man " 
itself. 

On the other hand, it is easy to see that the psychic has a 
priority and that it is what determines the concept of the Ego 
essentially. When the soul departs, then what remains is dead 

10 matter, a sheer material thing, which no longer possesses in 
itself anything of the I as man. The Body, on the contrary, 
cannot depart. Even the ghost necessarily has its ghostly Body. 
To be sure, this Body is not an actual material thing — the 
appearing materiahty is an illusion — but thereby so is the 

15 affihated soul and thus the entire ghost. 

Considered more closely, we have here various possibihties. 
Either this Body is given perceptually to us as a material reality, 
without any consciousness of an illusion, and in that case what 
we are seeing is not a "ghost" but a real man. Or, on the other 

20 hand, if there is consciousness of an illusion with respect to 
materiality, then we will also give up the man as an illusion, 
though we still do not speak of a ghost. I say " as an illusion," 
because experience teaches us that real spirituahty is connected 
up with material Bodies only and not somehow with mere 

25 subjective or intersubjective spatial phantoms (pure spatial 
schemata). And according to experience the material Body and 
the soul necessarily belong together in the idea of an actual 
man. But this necessity is only an empirical one. In itself the 
case would be thinkable (and an actual ghost would result) that [95] 

30 a psychic being would appear and be actual while lacking a 
material Body, a normal thing of nature as underlying the 
psychic determinations. But this still does not imply that a Body 
in every sense is lacking or could be lacking. We have indeed 
recognized that the specifically material determinations are 

35 founded in those that are included under the heading "pure 
schema" and are at the same time unilaterally separable from 
them. A ghost is characterized by the fact that its Body is a pure 
"spatial phantom" with no material properties at all, which, 
instead, insofar as they do somehow co-appear, are consciously 


THE CONSTITUTION OF ANIMAL NATURE 


101 


stricken out and are characterized as unrealities.^ In itself, then, 
it would be thinkable that ghosts appear not only to one subject 
but also intersubjectively — i.e., manifest themselves as consis- 
tent in an intersubjective experience on the basis of mere 
5 phantom Bodies, possibly even purely visual ones. If thereby the 
apriori (although entirely empty) possibihty of actual ghosts is 
granted, then the immediate consequence is that a psychic 
subject without a material Body is indeed thinkable, i.e., as a 
ghost instead of a natural animal being, but in no way without 

10 a Body of some kind. For a psychic being to be, to have 
Objective existence, the conditions of possibility of intersubjective 
givenness must be fulfilled. Such an intersubjective experience- 
ability, however, is thinkable only through " empathy," which for 
its part presupposes an intersubjectively experienceable Body 

15 that can be understood by the one who just enacted the 
empathy as the Body of the corresponding psychic being. 
Moreover, this Body, in its givenness, requires a comprehension 
of the psychic and can then be exhibited in further experience. It 
is purely as a consequence of this that there arises a priority of 

20 the psychic or, if you will, of the spiritual over against the Body, 
namely due to the fact that the Body will not withstand [96] 
separation. In order to be experienceable Objectively, the spirit 
must be animating an Objective Body (though apriori precisely 
not just a material Body), whereas, conversely, the Objective 

25 experienceabihty of a spatial phantom or of a material thing 
requires no animation. Thus if we consider more closely what 
the anima and animation are and also what is presupposed for 
the possibility of an Objective knowledge of them, we are struck 
by the fact that no mere simple connection and perhaps no 


' To distinguish between a ghost and the real incarnation of a subjectivity with its 
Ego, it is not altogether correct to refer back simply to the phantom. And no 
consideration has been taken of the fundamentally essential role of the vocalization of 
one's own self-produced voice, related to one's own, originally given kinestheses of 
the vocal muscles. This was also missing in the original sketch of the theory of 
empathy, which had to be presented first. It seems, from my observation, that in the 
child the self-produced voice, and then, analogously, the heard voice, serves as the 
first bridge for the Objectification of the Ego or for the formation of the *' alter T i.e., 
before the child already has or can have a sensory analogy between his visual Body 
and that of the "other" and, afortiori, before he can acknowledge to the other a 
tactual Body and a Body incarnating the will. 


102 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


absolutely simultaneous connection can exist here, and in fact 
there is none. The Body is not only in general a thing but is 
indeed expression of the spirit and is at once organ of the spirit. 
And before we engage ourselves here in deeper expositions, 
5 we already recognize that everything properly "subjective" 
and Ego-like lies on the side of the spirit (this side comes to 
expression in the Body), whereas the Body is called "Ego-like" 
only in virtue of this animation, and its states and qualities are 
only thereby called "my" qualities, subjective, of the Ego. It is 
10 the special quality of the animation which accounts for the fact 
that what is Bodily and ultimately everything Bodily from no 
matter what point of view can assume psychic significance, 
therefore even where at the outset it is not phenomenally the 
bearer of a soul. 
15 Now, since, in the unity of the total apperception, "man," 
the psychic, which is attributed to the Body "in empathy," is 
apprehended as really united with this Body, then it is under- 
standable that the Bodily events are apprehended as properly 
belonging to this human subject, i.e., are apprehended as 
20 "mine." 

The situation is somewhat different as regards extra-Bodily 
things which through their relation to man have hkewise 
assumed Ego-meanings, e.g., words, goods, aesthetic values. 
Objects to be used, etc. They have indeed a "meaning," but 
25 they have no soul, no meaning which points to a psychic subject 
really connected to them, connected into a single founded 
reality. This is expressed by the fact that they are indeed called 
my work, my dress, my possession, my darling, etc., but their 
properties are not likewise called mine and are instead at most 
30 apprehended as indications, reflections of my properties. All 
this would still require closer scrutiny and deeper foundation. In 
our further analyses, these same issues will come up often.* [97] 

The Ego-concept we have discussed up to now. Ego, the man, 
leads us back, according to all that has preceded, to a purely 
35 psychic Ego. In this respect, however, we have to draw still 
further distinctions. 


C/ pp. 248 fr. 


Chapter One 
THE PURE EGO 

§ 22. The pure Ego as Ego-pole 

Let us think of a self-perception as accomphshed, but this 
5 time in such a way that we abstract from the Body. What we 
find then is ourselves as the spiritual Ego related to the stream 
of lived experiences — "spiritual" here is used in a mere general 
sense, teferring to the Ego that has its place precisely not in 
Corporeality; e.g., I " think "(cog//o), i.e., I perceive, I represent 

10 in whatever mode, I judge, I feel, I will, etc., and I find myself 
thereby as that which is one and the same in the changing of 
these lived experiences, as "subject" of the acts and states. 
(This subject has absolute individuation as the Ego of the current 
cogitatio, which is itself absolutely individual in itself.) Here, 

15 however, we can draw various lines and do so at first in such a 
way that we arrive at the Ego as pure Ego, precisely the one we 
spoke of at such length in Book One. With this aim in view, we 
limit ourselves therefore to intentional Hved experiences which 
" we " have in each case " accomplished " and throughout which 

20 we, or, let us say more clearly, I, the Ego that in each case 
"thinks," have directed the ray of the Ego onto what is 
objective in the act. We now focus on the Ego in which the " I 
think" reigns, and purely as what reigns therein, hence on the 
Ego given in absolute indubitabihty as the "sum cogitans. " As 

25 what is absolutely given, or what can be brought to givenness in 
the apriori possible view of fixating reflection, it is by no means 
whatsoever something mysterious or mystical. I take myself as 
the pure Ego insofar as I take myself purely as that which, in 
perception, is directed to the perceived, in knowing to the 

30 known, in phantasizing to the phantasized, in logical thinking 


104 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


to the thought, in valuing to the valued, in wilhng to the willed. 
In the accomplishment of each act there lies a ray of directed- [98] 
ness I cannot describe otherwise than by saying it takes its point 
of departure in the " Ego, " which evidently thereby remains 
5 undivided and numerically identical while it lives in these 
manifold acts, spontaneously takes an active part in them, and 
by means of ever new rays goes through these acts toward what 
is objective in their sense. To speak more precisely, the pure Ego 
is further related to Objects in very different modes, according 

10 to the type of the act accomphshed. In a certain sense, in its 
directedness to one same thing the Ego is ever a free Ego; on 
the other hand, the image of "directing oneself to" the 
appearance can only be used imperfectly. Of course, in a certain 
general sense, the Ego directs itself in every case to the Object, 

15 but in a more particular sense at times an Ego-ray, launched 
from the pure Ego, goes out toward the Object, and, as it were, 
counter-rays issue from the Object and come back to the Ego. 
This is how it is that in desire I find myself attracted by the 
desired Object; I am directed to it, but in such a way that I 

20 reach out toward it, without, however, attaining it in mere 
desire. In love I find myself incUned to the beloved, attracted by 
the one I love, perhaps wholly surrendered to and lost in the 
beloved. In hate, on the contrary, I am indeed equally directed 
to the hated ; however, in this case it is a matter of repulsion. 

25 Accordingly, I behave either by following up the attraction or 
repulsion, yielding to it, or by resisting it; at times I am in my 
act of behavior '* moved, " at times unmoved; at times I am one 
who actively moves " himself; " at times one who does not move 
at all. Thus I am, e.g., " sunk'' in passive mourning, in a dumb, 

30 motionless sadness, in a pure passivity. Or, I am filled by a 
passionate sadness, as an "e-motion, " though still passive; or 
again I am moved while holding myself occupied in a controlled 
sadness, etc. Versus this, in activity, I am " into " the thing in a 
pratical way; in the ''fiat " I am first of all engaged in setting 

35 the scene; the action which now unfolds is constituted as having 
happened according to my will, as happening through my 
agency as a freely wilhng being; I am constantly there as 
bringing about the strived for, as aiming in will. And every 
phase of the aiming itself is such that in it the pure wilUng 


THE CONSTITUTION OF ANIMAL NATURE 


105 


subject "attains" the willed as such. The pure Ego not only 
lives in singular acts as accomphshing, as active, and as passive. 
Free and yet attracted by the Object, it goes forth from act to 
act, and it experiences excitations from the Objects constituted [99] 
5 in the " background; " without immediately giving in to them, it 
allows them to intensify, to knock at the door of consciousness; 
and then it surrenders, perhaps even "completely," turning 
from the one Object to the other. In doing so, in the change of 
its acts, it accomplishes particular turns and freely builds up for 

10 itself these or those many-layered act-unities. Thus, as theoreti- 
cal subject in the unity of a thematic nexus, it holds sway by 
relating and connecting, by positing subjects and predicates, by 
presupposing and drawing conclusions. Within the unity of a 
theoretical interest it carries on the theme; occasionally, how- 

15 ever, it lets itself be diverted and then picks up again the 
thematic thread, etc. Thus we find in fact, by studying the 
manifold acts in which the pure Ego lives, all sorts of structures, 
ones which are to be described in each realm of acts, structures 
which concern the proper modes of subject participation and of 

20 the ways of the correlative Object participation and in this latter 
respect the ways in which the Object comes to meet the pure 
subject related to it, for example by attracting the subject or by 
repelling, by eliciting or by hindering, by stimulafing or by 
"determining" in some other way. 

25 The pure Ego exercises its pure "functions" in the acts of 
the multiformed cogito, discrete ones or ones connected by this 
cogito, and to that extent we could call the acts themselves, by 
transferring over the sense of the word, functions. On the one 
hand, we must definitely here distinguish the pure Ego from the 

30 acts themselves, as that which functions in them and which, 
through them, relates to Objects; on the other hand, this 
distinction can only be an abstract one. It is abstract to the 
extent that the Ego cannot be thought of as something sepa- 
rated from these Hved experiences, from its "hfe, " just as, 

35 conversely, the lived experiences are not thinkable except as the 
medium of the life of the Ego. In this connection it is important 
to notice that the pure Ego is not only an accomphshing one, 
such as we up to now have considered it exclusively : that is, in 
acts in the specific sense, those of the form, "cogito." Just as 


106 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


the cogito of the moment sinks down into inactuahty, in a 
certain sense the pure Ego also sinks down into inactuality. It 
withdraws from the act in question, it is no longer in this act as 
an accomplishing Ego, and perhaps it is not carrying out any 
5 act at all. But in that case it is not something separate from all 
lived experience, as if now the consciousness that is not [100] 
accomplishing any act and the pure Ego would be without any 
connection between themselves. Rather, the distinction between 
actuahty and inactuahty points to a distinction in the essential 

10 structure of intentional lived experiences and consequently at 
once to a distinction, inseparable from them, in the "how," in 
the manner in which the Ego has lived experiences. The Ego can 
never disappear, it is always present in its acts but in different 
ways, depending : if they are or if they become acts in actu, then 

15 the Ego steps forth, as it were, in them; it comes to the light of 
day, it exercises an active hving function, it directs itself, in an 
active ray, toward what is objective. But if it is, so to say, a 
latent Ego, then it does not cast an active regard onto some- 
thing; it does not actively experience or have an effect on, or 

20 undergo, anything. Of course, there can be no question here of 
arbitrary possibilities of sudden coming into existence and 
stepping forth out of nowhere in the accomphshment of an act; 
instead it is a matter of a phenomenological alteration of the 
pure Ego-relatedness that is always extant. To be sure, some- 

25 thing new arises thereby, a changed phenomenon, which here 
could be called an active self-directing of the Ego, e.g., casting a 
glance of focused notice onto something, etc., but in such a way 
that already in the former phenomenon, in the one of latency, 
an Ego-structure is extant. This Ego-structure precisely allows us 

30 and requires us to say that the Ego in the stage of the 
specifically " unconscious, " of latency, is not a nothing or the 
empty potentiaHty of the alteration of the phenomena into ones 
of Ego-actuahty but instead is a moment of their structure. 
Thus the images of the stepping forth of the Ego, of the being 

35 actively directed onto something, and of the stepping back or 
sinking back into latency have a real [reell] meaning. We know 
all this, however, in reflection, in which we grasp in retrospec- 
tion precisely not only individual background lived experiences 
but also whole stretches of the stream of consciousness which 


THE CONSTITUTION OF ANIMAL NATURE 


107 


would lack all Ego-activity. In spite of all the obscurity and all 
the confusion which adheres to the proper character of such 
stretches, we can grasp insightfully the most general essential 
properties which have been indicated. 
5 But we still have to add more to the characterization of the 
pure Ego. In addition, it is necessary to clarify more precisely 
the points we have already made. We can at once attach 
ourselves to the possibility of " reflection " we used just now. 


10 


§ 23. The possibiHty of grasping the pure Ego 
(the Ego-pole) 


[101] 


It pertains in general to the essence of every cogito that a new 
cogito of the kind called by us '' Ego-reflection" is in principle 
possible, one that grasps, on the basis of the earlier cogito 
(which itself is thereby phenomenlogically altered), the pure 

15 subject of that earher cogito. It consequently pertains, as we can 
also say (since the same obviously applies to this reflective cogito 
as well) to the essence of the pure Ego that it be able to grasp 
itself as what it is and in the way it functions, and thus make 
itself into an object. Therefore it is in no way correct to assert 

20 that the pure Ego is a subject that can never become an Object, 
as long as we do not limit the concept of Object at the very 
outset and in particular do not limit it to "natural" Objects, to 
mundane "real" Objects, for if we do, the assertion would 
indeed hold in a good and valid sense. Now it is certainly very 

25 significant that the pure Ego occupies a completely isolated 
position as opposed to all that is real and in general to all other 
things which can be designated as " being. " We can in fact say : 
everything that is objective, in the broadest sense of the word, is 
thinkable only as correlate of a possible consciousness or, more 

30 precisely, as correlate of a possible "I think" and consequently 
as referable to a pure Ego. This holds for the pure Ego itself as 
well. The pure Ego can be posited as an object by the pure Ego 
which is identically one with it. 

The essence of the pure Ego thereby includes the possibility of 

35 an originary self-grasp, a '* self-perception, " and in that case also 
the possibility of the corresponding modifications of self-grasp- 


108 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


ing: i.e., self-remembrance, self-phantasy, etc. The essence of 
self-remembrance obviously includes the fact that the pure Ego, 
remembering itself, is conscious of itself as bygone, and the fact 
that, on the other hand, a shift of focus is possible in virtue of 
5 which the pure Ego can grasp itself as the pure Ego of the act of 
remembering and consequently as self-perceived actual pre- 
sence, and, similarly, the fact that it grasps itself as something 
temporally enduring from the past now to the actual flowing 
now of the present. 

10 Obviously, something similar, but with the corresponding 
modifications, holds for the other parallel acts. It is to be noted 
that everywhere the distinction must certainly be made between 
the objectified and the "originally" not objectified pure Ego, 
e.g., between the perceived and the perceiving pure Ego. But no 

15 matter how much a phenomenological transformation is [102] 
expressed hereby with regard to the cogito — which at one time 
is the unreflected, original cogito, the cogito of the originally 
accomplishing pure Ego, and at other times is a reflected cogito, 
hence an essentially transformed, intentional Object or medium 

20 of a new act, by means of which the accompHshing Ego grasps 
the accomplishing of the earher act — yet it is evident, in virtue 
of further reflections at a higher level, that this and the other 
pure Ego are in truth one and the same. It is just that at one time 
it is given, at other times not given; or, in a higher reflection, in 

25 the one case it is straightforwardly given, in the other it is given 
through a further mediating stage. Similarly, the original cogito 
itself and the reflectively grasped cogito are one and the same 
and can be grasped mediately, in a reflection on a higher level, 
as indubitably absolutely the same. In the transition from the 

30 original act to the reflection on it, the whole lived experience is 
certainly changed; the earlier cogito is certainly no longer, in 
the reflection, really [reell] present, i.e., present as it was lived 
unreflectively. But the reflection does not grasp and does not 
posit as being that which, in the present lived experience is a 

35 real [reell] constituent as a modification of the cogito. What it 
posits (as is grasped with evidence precisely by a reflection on a 
higher level) is the identical, which at one time is given 
objectively, at another time not. Now, afortiori, the pure Ego is 
indeed something which comes to be grasped in the cogito in 


THE CONSTITUTION OF ANIMAL NATURE 


109 


question, but not somehow as a real [reell] moment of it. When 
the Ego is objective or again not objective, what changes 
phenomenologically is not the Ego itself, which we grasp and 
have given in reflection as absolutely identical, but the Hved 
5 experience. 

It is to be noted, furthermore, that the unities we are 
considering here throughout, as, e.g., the identical cogito, are 
precisely themselves already unities constituted in consciousness 
as unities of a duration in which they change in this or that way. 

10 In other words, they are constituted in a more profound, 
correspondingly manifold "consciousness" taken in another 
sense, in which all that we have up to now called " conscious- 
ness" or "lived experience" does not occur really [reell] but 
only as a unity of the "immanent time" which is that of its 

15 constitution. We have deUberately left out of consideration in 
our treatise this most profound element, immanent time and all 
the unities of lived experience which partake of it, including 
every coiisciousness that constitutes a cogito, and our investiga- [103] 
tion has remained completely within immanent temporality. 

20 And to this sphere there belongs also the identical pure Ego. Its 
identity is an identity throughout this immanent time. I am and 
I was the same, I who endure and "hold sway" in this or that 
conscious act, although, on the other hand, I am no real [reell] 
moment of it in the manner of a constituent. No real [reell] 

25 moment — that is especially to be considered. Each and every 
cogito, along with all its constituents, arises or vanishes in the flux 
of lived experiences. But the pure subject does not arise or vanish, 
although in its own way it does "step forth" and once again 
"step back." It enters into action and then again retires from 

30 action. What it is, and what it in itself is and does in general, is 
grasped by us, or, rather, is grapsed by it itself in the self- 
perception which is one of its own actions, such a one that 
grounds the absolute indubitability of the grasp of being. In 
fact, the pure Ego is indeed nothing other than what Descartes, 

35 in his marvelous Meditations, grasped with the insight of genius 
and established as such once and for all, the being of which it is 
not possible to doubt and which in any doubt would itself 
necessarily be found again as the subject of the doubt. If there 
were a sense to saying that this Ego is subject to generation 


no 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


and perishing, then we would precisely have to establish this 
possibility in pure givenness ; we would have to be able to grasp, 
in pure intuition, the essential possibihty of generation and 
perishing. But as soon as we set out to do so, the absurdity of it 
5 becomes plain. The pure Ego itself of such intuition, namely the 
regarding, focusing Ego, on the one hand would be living in the 
continuity of this regarding as what is identical in the corre- 
sponding duration, and yet it would have to find at once, 
precisely in this duration, a time-span in which it itself was not 

10 and a beginning point in which it first of all entered into being. 
We would have the absurdity that the absolutely existing Ego, 
in the duration of its being, would encounter itself as not being, 
whereas it is evident that the only way that it is possible for the 
pure Ego not to encounter itself is for it not to reflect on 

15 itself. 

Thus, instead of generatio and corruptio, to the pure Ego 
there pertains only the essential property that it has its stepping 
forth and its receding, that it begins to function and hold sway 
actively and that it ceases to do so. The phrases " it steps forth " 

20 and " acts in the specific sense of the cogito become an event in [104] 
the stream of consciousness " mean the same, since the essence 
of such acts consists precisely in their being intentional lived 
experiences "carried out" by the pure Ego. 


§ 24. " MutabiHty " of the pure Ego 


25 We can discern with evidence the sense in which the pure 
Ego changes in the changing of its acts. It is changeable in its 
practices, in its activities and passivities, in its being attracted 
and being repulsed, etc. But these changes do not change it 
itself. On the contrary, in itself the pure Ego is immutable. It is 

30 not the kind of identical something that would first have to 
manifest and prove itself as identical by means of properties 
remaining permanent throughout manifold states as these are 
determined by the changing circumstances. Therefore it is not to 
be confused with the Ego as the real person, with the real 

35 subject of the real human being. It has no innate or acquired 
traits of character, no capacities, no dispositions, etc. It is not 


THE CONSTITUTION OF ANIMAL NATURE 


111 


changeably related, in real properties and states, to changing 
real circumstances, and thus it is not given in appearance with 
reference to appearing circumstances. In order to know what a 
human being is or what I myself am as a human personality, I 
5 have to enter into the infinity of experience in which I come to 
know myself under ever new aspects, according to ever new 
properties, and in an ever more perfect way. Only this experi- 
ence can exhibit (or perhaps repudiate) what I am and even that 
I am. In principle it is always possible that I, this person, am 

10 not at all; similarly, it is possible that my material Body, or 
some other material thing, is not, in spite of its givenness in 
experience ; it could turn out, in future experience, not to be. On 
the other hand, in order to know that the pure Ego is and what 
it is, no ever so great accumulation of self-experiences can profit 

15 me more than the single experience of one sole and simple 
cogito. It would be countersensical to claim that I, the pure 
Ego, adtually am not or am something altogether different from 
the Ego functioning in this cogito. Everything which "appears," 
everything which, in whatever way, presents and manifests itself 

20 can also not be; I can be deceived by these things. The Ego, 
however, does not appear, does not present itself merely from a 
side, does not manifest itself merely according to discrete [105] 
determinations, aspects, and moments, which, moreover, for 
their part merely appear. Instead, the pure Ego is given in 

25 absolute selfhood and in a unity which does not present itself by 
way of adumbrations; it can be grasped adequately in the 
reflexive shift of focus that goes back to it as a center of 
functioning. As pure Ego it does not harbor any hidden inner 
richness ; it is absolutely simple and it lies there absolutely clear. 

30 All richness lies in the cogito and in the mode of the function 
which can be adequately grasped therein. 


§ 25. Polarity of acts : Ego and Object 


Insofar as every cogito calls for a cogitatum and insofar as 

this latter is related to the pure Ego in the accomplishment of 

35 an act, we find a remarkable polarity in every act: on the one 

side, the Ego-pole; on the other, the Object as counter-pole. Each 


112 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


an identity, but one of a radically different kind and proven- 
ance. 

The Ego is the identical subject functioning in all acts of the 
same stream of consciousness; it is the center whence all 
5 conscious life emits rays and receives them ; it is the center of all 
affects and actions, of all attention, grasping, relating, and 
connecting, of all theoretical, valuing, and practical position- 
taking, of all enjoyment and distress, of all hope and fear, of all 
doing and suffering, etc. In other words, all the multi-formed 

10 particularities of intentional relatedness to Objects, which here 
are called acts, have their necessary terminus a quo, the Ego- 
point, from which they irradiate. Often, if not always, we find 
here, properly spoken, two-fold radiations, running ahead and 
running back: from the center outward, through the acts 

1 5 toward their Objects, and again returning rays, coming from the 
Objects back toward the center in manifold changing phenome- 
nological characters. Thus in theoretically interested experience 
there is the working toward the Object, appropriating it, 
penetrating into it; but there is also here constantly the being 

20 incited by the Object, being captivated, thrilled, determined. 
The coincidence of all acts in the numerically identical Ego- 
center Hes on the noetic side. 

The structure of the acts which radiate out from the Ego- 
Center, or, the Ego itself, is a form which has an analogon in 

25 the centralizing of all sense-phenomena in reference to the 

Body. In absolute consciousness there is always a "field" of [106] 
intentionality, and the spiritual "focus" of the attention 
"directs" itself now onto this, now onto that. The question is 
whether these images have an original meaning and are express- 

30 ing a primordial analogy. That is to say, does there lie in the act 
of attention, abstraction made from the spatial, whence the 
image is derived, something like a directing that emanates from 
a point? Certainly there is a multipHcity of interconnected lived 
experiences and of intentional givennesses, and consequently a 

35 "field," to which changing attentional modifications are joined. 
Each attention-series is, as a series, something Hke a ray, and in 
each series "the same thing" is intentionally grasped. It is a 
series grasping one and the same thing ever more richly and 
more perfectly, analogously to the way in which I, by coming 


THE CONSTITUTION OF ANIMAL NATURE 


113 


closer to an Object, hence in the corresponding series of 
orientations, gain an ever more rich knowledge of the Object 
and grasp it always better and more fully. Thus the metaphor : I 
bring the matter (even if it is non-spatial) closer to me. If we 
5 abstract from this analogy, then what is given is a progressive 
series in which the grasp of an Object approaches the ideal, and 
this takes place in each process of an attentive grasp of an 
Object. And all these rays emanate in lived experience from the 
one single point of departure, the identical Ego. ^ 

10 If we now turn our focus to a unity of a wholly different 
kind, that of the Object (we are assuming that this Object is not 
itself a subject), then it also refers us back to manifolds acts, 
and in a determinate sense it gives them their unity, though in a 
totally different sense than occurs in the relation of the act to 

15 the centralizing subject. 

First of all not just any act, and certainly not all acts, are [107] 
unified in the relation to the Object but precisely only those acts 
which, even if in different ways, are "conscious of" the same 
Object. If we say of these acts that they also are "directed" to 

20 their Object, then it means (to the extent that what we have in 
mind is not rather the Ego directing itself in these acts to the 
Object) something fundamentally different instead. This can be 
seen in the fundamentally different manner of the "coinci- 
dence" of the acts in relation to the same Object, which here, 

25 without prejudice to the unity of coincidence binding all acts, 
actual or potential, in the Ego-center, does not concern the 


^ A more precise clarification of the analogy we formed would require proper 
systematic considerations. Here we can only point in their direction. If we take the 
field of thing-objects which appear to the senses, and which are given in an 
orientation, then the coincidence with the " Ego-orientation " becomes understanda- 
ble : the processes of adaptation (my movements) pertain to the constitution of the 
thing, and, parallel with them, I always grasp more of the thing. And this grasping is 
originally a process of paying attention. Thus here there seems to be a way of 
grasping the centrality of the Ego as an analogon of the parallel orientation and of 
what is intertwined with it. Now, however, spiritual objectivities are intertwined with 
the sensuous; e.g., thoughts are intertwined with verbal signs that are apprehended in 
a certain orientation. The attention passes right through the verbal signs. Or, if I look 
at sense data, then they are presentative of Objective things, hence they are already 
intertwined with an orientation. A question for further consideration would be how 
far one could progress along this path. 


114 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


noetic but, rather, the noematic "side" of the acts, a coinci- 
dence of what, in the acts (through the Ego) is "meant as 
such." For the rest, Ego, act, and object belong together by 
essence; in idea they are inseparable. 


5 


§ 26. Alert and dull consciousness 


The pure Ego, as we said above, steps forth and then steps 
back again. That is, the essence of consciousness in the unity of 
the flux is of such a kind that the pure Ego cannot illuminate 
everything in it but, instead, shines its light on individual acts, 

10 and only on individual acts. For it pertains irrevocably to the 
essence of consciousness that every act have its horizon of 
obscurity, that every act-performance, in the shift of the Ego 
onto new lines of cogitation (action) sink down into obscurity. 
As soon as the focus of the Ego is withdrawn from it, it changes 

15 and is received into the vague horizon. There is nothing in the 
essence of consciousness, however, that would require, in some 
necessary fashion, that in it an active cogito must be being 
accomphshed. Our "alert consciousness" can be interrupted for 
a period by a sleepy, completely dull one, in which there is no 

20 distinction to be made between an active field of focus and an 
obscure background. Everything then is background, everything 
obscurity. Waking from dull sleep, we can bend backward the 
reflexive gaze and grasp what has just past by in its dullness and 
Egolessness, in its loss of the active Ego, the one which grasps, 

25 thinks, undergoes while awake, etc. There is room to doubt 
whether we should say that in the place of this actively 
accompUshing Ego what we have here is a dull one as an other 
Ego-mode, or whether such a mode always exists as a mode 
surrounding the active Ego (corresponding to the obscure 

30 background). For it is difficult to send rays of reflection into the 

realm of obscurities and gain certitude in this sphere of givens. [108] 
That which comes into our grasp as pure Ego in absolute clarity 
and indubitability is not a matter of this postulated mode. 
Hence if we take the pure Ego as we have it before us in this full 

35 clarity, then we are certain at all events of this, that it can step 
forth and can also not step forth. Thereby nothing prevents us 


THE CONSTITUTION OF ANIMAL NATURE 


115 


from thinking that what is familiar to us as an interruption of 
alert consciousness would be extended to infinity. No essential 
necessity interdicts us from thinking that a consciousness might 
be dull throughout. On the other hand, however, it still 
5 includes, as does any consciousness whatsoever, the uncondi- 
tional essential possibihty that it can become an alert conscious- 
ness, that an active focus of the Ego may estabUsh itself at any 
given place in it in the form of a cogito inserting itself into it or, 
rather, springing forth from it, and that this occurrence can 

10 then be repeated, etc. Or, to speak like Leibniz, that the monad 
can pass from the stage of evolution into the one of involution 
and become, in higher acts, self-conscious "spirit." The Ego 
which becomes active here is not something introduced from the 
outside or added on, not something which comes into being for 

15 the first time at the moment of active stepping forth, only to 
vanish again into nothingness. The pure Ego must be able to 
accompany all my representations. This Kantian proposition 
makes good sense if we include here under representations all 
obscure consciousness. In principle the pure Ego can enter into 

20 any unaccomphshed (in a determinate sense: unconscious, 
un-alert) intentional lived experience, it can bring the hght of 
alert consciousness to those lived experiences that have receded 
into the background and are no longer being performed; but 
the Ego holds sway only in the performance, in the cogitations 

25 proper. Yet it can cast its gaze into precisely everything that can 
receive this ray of Ego-function. It can look into everything 
intentionally constituted in the flux of consciousness, it can 
grasp it, take a position regarding it, etc. 


§27. "I as man" as part of the content of the 
30 environment of the pure Ego 


Connected with this is still something else. In virtue of the 
polarity belonging to the essence of the cogito, the alert Ego is 
intentionally related to what is objective in the accomplished [109] 
cogitations. They are its objects and indeed precisely as the very 
35 noematic objects (either posited or quasi-posited, as the case 
may be) of these cogitations. This holds potentially, however. 


116 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


THE CONSTITUTION OF ANIMAL NATURE 


117 


for the objects of the unaccompHshed noeses dormant in the 
background and which, as it were, make up the field of the 
Ego's freedom. Their objects form the field of the spiritual 
regard, the Ego's field of activity. But if we look into the matter 
5 more closely, then what comes into consideration for this field of 
regard are not only the objects of the dormant noeses (it is for 
the Ego as alert that they first become ob-jects in the proper 
sense) but also the objects of the possible noeses to which the 
motivations of consciousness belonging to the content of con- 

10 sciousness lead over. If we proceed from actually experienced 
real objects, then it is not only the environing things, the ones 
actually constituted as background, the ones actually appearing 
or the ones only presentified, that are mine, but what is mine, 
what is the pure Ego's, is the whole "world," the surrounding 

15 world, the whole world with all it contains that is still unknown 
to me but is experienceable by me: i.e., things, fellow men, 
animals, and including that man whom I also designate as I, as 
Ego, namely I, the man called so and so and characterized as 
such and such. I as a man am a part of the content of the real 

20 surrounding world of the pure Ego, which, as the center of all 
intentionality, also accomplishes that intentionality by which is 
constituted precisely I, the man, and I, the person. 

Primordially and most basically, each thing I experience is 
constituted for me, precisely through what is lived in the 

25 experience, as a thing in the spatio-temporal world; and as 
undetermined as this positing is, and no matter how infinite the 
manifolds it leaves open, still it leaves them open in accordance 
with the sense of this apperception. What is grasped in the 
course of continuous experience presents itself as fulfillment of 

30 already extant motivations which are enriched and limited only 
within the unity of that sense. And what holds for the constitu- 
tion of any thing whatever, also holds apriori, corresponding to 
the ontic structure of the thing-nexuses which coalesce into the 
unity of the universe, for the constitution precisely of this 

35 universe. The latter is constituted necessarily, as a closer 
consideration shows, in such a way that, notwithstanding the 
circumstance that the pure Ego is the center of all intentionality 
whatsoever, the empirical Ego in the form, I as man, functions [110] 
as the phenomenal-real central member for the constitution, in 


18] 


appearances, of the entire spatio-temporal world. In all experi- 
ence of spatio-temporal Objectivity, the co-appearance of the 
experiencing man is presupposed, and so is, to be sure, the 
apperceptive relation to his actual or possible companions (men 
5 or animals). 

The pure Ego is, to emphasize it expressly, numerically one 
and unique with respect to "its" stream of consciousness. If it 
posits in its cogito, in its experiences, a man, and in him a 
human personality, then it posits implicitly, as pertaining to 

10 him, a pure Ego with its stream of consciousness. That is to say, 
the intentional lived experiences it posits in the empathizing 
presentification require, for their part, a pure Ego as subject of 
the function, even if the pure Ego may, in the apperception of 
man, become the core-content of an encompassing appercep- 

15 tion. In principle, the empathized pure Ego (and, along with it, 
the empirical as well) is an "other;" consequently if I posit 
many human beings then I also posit many pure Egos, separate 
in principle, and that many streams of consciousness. There are 
the same number of pure Egos as there are real Egos, while at 

20 the same time these real Egos are constituted in the pure 
streams of consciousness, are posited by the pure Egos or are 
positable in motivated possibiHties. Every real Ego belongs, as 
does the entire real world, to the "environment," to the "field 
of vision," of my — and every — pure Ego, as is shown with 

25 apriori necessity by a closer study of the intentional constitution 
of the Objective (intersubjective) world. And so, as has been 
said, every pure Ego that accomplishes the apperception, " I, the 
human being," has the human Ego, the person, as an Object in 
its environment. On the other hand, the pure Ego encounters 

30 itself again as pure Ego in the human being and in the person, 
insofar as these objects are posited with an apprehension-sense 
according to which the real Ego includes the pure Ego as its 
apperceptive nuclear content. 


§28. The real Ego constituted as transcendent Object; 
35 the pure Ego as given in immanence 

Moreover, real Egos, as well as realities in general^ are mere 


118 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


intentional unities. Whereas the pure Egos must be drawn, [111] 
originarily and in absolute selfhood, out of the originary 
givenness of each cogito in which they function and conse- 
quently are, just like the data of pure consciousness itself in the 
5 sphere of immanent phenomenological time, incapable of and in 
no need of constitution through ''manifolds/' the converse holds 
for real Egos and for all realities. These latter are constituted 
unities not only in relation to a pure Ego and a stream of 
consciousness with its manifolds of appearances but also in 
10 relation to an intersubjective consciousness, that is, in relation 
to an open manifold of pure Egos separated from one another 
like monads or in relation to an open manifold of their streams 
of consciousness which, by reciprocal empathy, are unified into 
a nexus which constitutes intersubjective objectivities. 


15 § 29. Constitution of unities within the sphere of immanence. 
Persistent opinions as sedimentations in the pure Ego 

All data of consciousness, levels of consciousness, and noetic 
forms which "can be accompanied'* by the identical Ego of an 

20 actual or possible "/ think " belong to a monad. Now within the 
absolute stream of consciousness of a monad, certain forma- 
tions of unity occur, but ones which are thoroughly different 
from the intentional unity of the real Ego and its properties. ^ 
To those formations belong unities such as the persistent 

25 " opinions " of one and the same subject. They can, in a certain 
sense, be called " habitual," though there is no question here of 
a habitus as what has become customary, the way the empirical 
subject might acquire real dispositions which would then be 
called customary. The habitus that we are concerned with 

30 pertains not to the empirical, but to the pure, Ego. The identity 
of the pure Ego does not only reside in the fact that I {sc. the 


' If we say that these unities too are constituted, since they are objectivities of a 
higher level, built upon more primitive ones, still that does not mean they are 
constituted the way transcendent Objects are. Concerning the constitution of lived 
experiences, cf. above, pp. 108 f. and also Supplement II, pp. 324 f. 


THE CONSTITUTION OF ANIMAL NATURE 


119 


pure Ego), with regard to each and every cogito, can grasp 
myself as the identical Ego of the cogito; rather, I am even [112] 
therein and apriori the same Ego, insofar as I, in taking a 
position, necessarily exercise consistency in a determinate sense : 
5 each " new " position-taking institutes a persistent " opinion " or 
a thema (a thema of experience, of judgment, of enjoyment, of 
will, etc.) so that, from now on, as often as I grasp myself as the 
same as I used to be or as the same as I now am and earUer was, 
I also retain my themata, assume them as active themata, just as 

10 I had posited them previously. And that means that themata are 
posited originally, either on their own or from motives (absence 
of motives taken as the null-point of motivation), and on the 
basis of the same motives I, the Ego that takes a position, 
cannot behave differently. My thesis, my position-taking, my 

15 deciding from motives (the null-point included) is something I 
have a stake in. As long as I am the one I am, then the 
position-taking cannot but " persist," and I cannot but persist in 
it; I can carry out a change only if the motives become 
different. As long as and as far as I am an actually rational Ego 

20 that takes a position on the basis of insight, I can decide only 
one way, the rational way, and in that case my decision is 
identical with the one that would be made by any rational 
subject whatsoever that shared the same insight. Or, if an other 
cannot have the same motives, he can at least understand mine 

25 and can, in a rationally insightful way, approve of my decision. 
I can (allowing, once again, the specific case of reason to be 
universalized) become "unfaithful" to myself in my position- 
taking, can become "inconsistent," only in this, that I have 
become precisely an other inasmuch as I have succumbed to 

30 other motivations. In truth, however, I am not unfaithful to 
myself, I am constantly the same, though in a changing stream 
of lived experience, in which new motives are often consti- 
tuted. 
Thus here I see a law of essence of the pure Ego. As this 

35 identical, numerically one. Ego, it itself belongs to "its own" 
stream of lived experience, which is constituted as a unity of 
endless immanent time. The one pure Ego is constituted as a 
unity in relation to this unity of the stream, and that means that 
it can, in the course it takes, discover itself as identical. It can 


120 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


therefore, in retrospective remembering, look back on earlier 
cogitations and become conscious of itself as the subject of these [113] 
remembered cogitations. Already herein there lies a kind of 
consistency in the Ego. For a "steadfast and persistent" Ego 
5 could not be constituted if a steadfast and persistent stream of 
lived experience were not constituted, thus if the originarily 
constituted unities of lived experience were not assumable once 
more, were not capable of emerging anew in re-remembering, 
and did not appear in the assuming of their being-quahty (as 

10 being in immanent time), and if there were no possibihty of 
bringing clarity to the obscure, of exploiting, according to its 
immanent reality, what maintains itself consistently, and, there- 
fore, if there were no possibility of having recourse to rational 
consistency. At all events, this too is certainly an essential law of 

1 5 the identity of the same Ego and consequently is co-given in the 
cognition of the identity, namely the law that I can retain an 
inner active position-taking and acknowledge and assume it as 
mine in repeated acts. Hence this also is a law : each " opinion " 
is an instauration which remains a possession of the subject as 

20 long as motivations do not arise which require the position- 
taking to be "varied" and the former opinion abandoned or 
require, with respect to its components, a partial abandonment, 
and with respect to the whole, a variation. As long as there are 
no motives for striking it out, each opinion of one and the same 

25 Ego remains necessarily within the chain of rememorations. 

We still need to examine more closely how the persistence of 

"the" lived experience is to be understood. I have a lasting 

conviction, or I "nurse a grudge." At different times I do have 

different lived experiences of the grudge (or of the judgment), 

30 yet it is only "the" grudge coming again to givenness; it is a 
lasting grudge (or a lasting conviction). The judgment of 
determinate content as lived experience lasts a while (immanent 
duration) and then is irretrievably gone. A new lived experience 
of the same content can subsequently emerge — but not the 

35 same lived experience. It may emerge in such a way, however, 
that I have the consciousness that it is only the former 
conviction returning again, the former conviction which had 
been carried out earlier and is now again being carried out, but 
it is the one lasting conviction, the one I call mine. The various 


THE CONSTITUTION OF ANIMAL NATURE 


121 


enduring hved experiences, belonging to spans of duration 
which are discrete within phenomenological time, have a rela- 
tion to one another and constitute something that lasts and 
endures (the conviction, the grudge), which once, at such and [114] 
5 such a point in time, and from these or those motives, origi- 
nated. From then on it has been a lasting property of the Ego, 
existing also in those intervals of phenomenological duration in 
which it was not being constituted as a hved experience. The 
same applies to the unity of a decision, a desire, an enthusiasm, 

10 a love, a hate, etc. ^ 

For a more precise clarification of these formations of unity, 
the distinctions between noesis and noema must be introduced. 
If I now execute a judgment "originarily," e.g., in describing a 
landscape, and subsequently once again execute "the same" 

15 judgment in originary description, then the judgment is, in the 
logical sense, the same. This holds equally if I execute, with 
insight, a mathematical judgment at various different times. 
Nevertheless, the unity of the conviction we have been speaking 
of is not like that; we therefore have here two different things. 

20 If I "acquire anew" an old conviction, while executing the 
appropriate judgment, then the acquired conviction (a " lasting 
acquisition") "remains" with me as long as I can assume it 
"again," can bring it again to givenness for me (in a new 
execution). I may also abandon the conviction, now rejecting 

25 the reasons for it, etc. Then again, I can turn back to "the 
same" conviction, but in truth the conviction had not been 
persistent throughout. Instead, I have two convictions, the 
second of which restores the first after it has broken down. The 
relations obtaining here can be studied already in the simple 

30 case of straightforward perception. I experience something, I 
perceive. The perception extends itself originarily over a dura- 
tion (immanently speaking). I then have an objectivity which 
appears, is intended, is appearing in a certain aspect, under the 
given circumstances, with such and such an objective content, 

35 and is apprehended, as motivated, in this or that way. This is 
then made explicit in a determinate manner and perhaps 


' Such unities can also be constituted intersubjectively, but in the present context 
this can be disregarded. 


122 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


grasped conceptually and asserted. I have originarily "my 
judgment" about it. In remembering, we look back once again 
on these matters that once were. Perhaps what was is taken as 
enduring. From the outset it had a future horizon in the [115] 
5 perception, over which it extends as enduring, and it is appre- 
hended as an enduring being at rest or as a periodical move- 
ment which endures by recurring (e.g., the turning of a mill 
wheel). The matter is now there not merely in general as past 
(and perhaps as enduring) but as remembered, I can remember it 

10 as often as I like, and in these new memories what is past and 
remembered stands over and against me as the same again and 
again. Thereby I can at the same time have memories of the 
earlier memories, and a unity persists with regard to the chain 
of lived experiences of memory : the unity of the same thing 

15 remembered as such, the same memory. What is it here that is 
preserved as lasting? In each memory, I have the same aspect of 
that which was, the same " previous perception " with the same 
meant as such, with the same previous appearance and thesis of 
being. The memory-" content" is the same. Thereby the unity is 

20 not intended in such a way that it allows for differentiation with 
respect to the clarity or unclarity of the given. It is the correlate 
of the memory's positing, the "memory thesis," that which was, 
but in the mode of memory, in which it presents itself to me as 
identical in repeated possible memories. In repeated memories, 

25 this unity reaches coincidence; it stands out as something 
Objective. If I relate this unity in memory to the phenomeno- 
logical time in which all individual lived experiences of memory 
are integrated, in which they exist as a multiplicity, as a 
succession of lived experiences, fulfiUing spans of time, then this 

30 unity extends itself in time and permeates time in a characteris- 
tic manner. There is a first lived experience in which "the" 
memory is established, and throughout the time-spans in which 
it is absent it remains as something, as one and the same in the 
subsequent actual and possible hved experiences of memory. If I 

35 now take it up, then it is in itself motivated, and at each place in 
time the repetition of this memory would be something moti- 
vated. The memory "persists" the whole time, as long as 
motives do not arise which annul it and thereby invalidate the 
original memory. The cancelling crosses out every future 


THE CONSTITUTION OF ANIMAL NATURE 


123 


remembering of this content and every past memory back 
through to the originary perception (which is preserved in each [116] 
memory as motivating). The content of the memory as matter 
for the memory thesis in that case remains indeed as something 
5 identical, but the thesis is no longer there. 

The unity we are discussing here is not a mere abstraction, an 
idea, but a concrete unity of Hved experience. The idea of 
memory A is not "the" memory A, which I might possess as a 
unity that is constantly valid (even if for all that it is not yet 

10 Objectively vahd). The same applies here just as in the case of 
"the" predicative conviction, which is my lasting sustained 
conviction, my possession, and which I can grasp in repeated 
acts, and in acts repeatable as often as I like, as the one and the 
same conviction, as the one that I constantly have. I arrive at 

15 the conviction on the basis of a dehberation and through certain 
motives; here it is instaurated as my lasting conviction. Later, I 
return to it as to a familiar conviction of mine; a memory 
arises, clearly or unclearly, the motives, the reasons for the 
judgment, perhaps completely obscure; my old conviction, 

20 estabhshed I no longer know when, has its reasons, and perhaps 
I am seeking them, which is not the same as seeking new 
reasons for it. It is not a question here of the conviction's 
content, everywhere identical, as an ideal unity, but of the 
content as identical for the subject, as proper to the subject, as 

25 acquired by him in earlier acts, and which does not pass away 
along with the acts but instead belongs to the enduring subject 
as something which remains lastingly his. The conviction 
remains the same if the testimony remains the same. It is a 
judgment; more precisely, it is judgment-material with a con- 

30 comitant thesis and related to certain reasons. In the course of 
time, however, the reasons can change. Possibly new reasons 
become attached; or, by repetition, reinforcement can increase: 
" For a long time I have had the conviction, and in the course 
of time it has always been reinforced and confirmed. . . " The 

35 relation to the motives of the judgment can thereby be very 
unclear, and so can the relation to the various cases of renewal 
and reinforcement of the conviction. Yet it is clear that the 
unity constituted here is not the unity of the lived experience of 
the one who is judging, but it is the unity of "the" judgment. 


124 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


which persists for the judging subject who grasps it as the same 
in relation to various cases of remembering again and renewing 
again — as something proper to this subject, but precisely only [117] 
as something re-assumed and re-grasped. The thesis of belief 
5 must here once more (as is the case with the memory of 
something perceived) be ''taken up;" otherwise it would mean 
that it was my conviction but is not any longer. Hence these 
unities, which we are calling convictions, have their duration', 
they can cease to be and then perhaps be instaurated anew. If I 

10 acquire a conviction and if I represent to myself thereby a 
future in which I would come back to this conviction, then I am 
representing myself immediately as "taking up" or "taking 
part in" the conviction and not merely as remembering again 
the lived experience of it. In order to relinquish the old 

15 conviction, annulling reasons are needed. To be sure, one will 
ask what is included in this "are needed." What we have here is 
no empirical-psychological factum; instead it is indeed a matter 
of pure consciousness prior to the constitution of the real 
psychic subject. The earher conviction (experience, etc.) remains 

20 valid for me, and this says nothing other than that I "assume" 
it; by reproducing it, I participate in the behef. It is not an 
approving or an affirming of the kind that occurs in a question, 
a doubt, or a simple presumption. And yet I have to do 
something hke give approval, insofar as we can indeed distin- 

25 guish the two strata: the memory connected with the earlier 
subject, the earlier belief, conviction, experience, etc., with the 
present subject not taking part in them. And, on the other hand, 
the same things, but now with participation, whereby, to be 
sure, the participation is not a proper separate step, not an 

30 affirmation in the proper sense, but instead, in a homogenous 
unity of the memory, the remembered is there for me and the 
quality of the present positing enters into the remembered. The 
same applies to acts of every class, to lived experiences qualified 
in all sorts of ways. 

35 Nevertheless, in all these cases memory seems to play its role 
and everywhere in the same way. In the case of lasting memory, 
that S was p, memory plays a double role. This lasting memory 
is constituted in distinct experiential acts, at the head of which 
stands the act of the earlier perception as primordial instaura- 


THE CONSTITUTION OF ANIMAL NATURE 


125 


tion. At the least, I see in a chain of such acts that the memory 
is actually one. (The unity of ''experience " is almost the same: I 
see now that A is, and thereby the experience is " instaurated." 
From then on it is my experiential possession, my experience, [118] 

5 that A was at this particular point in time.) 

If now, for example, we have the unity of a lasting mathema- 
tical conviction, then what institutes the unity is not a percep- 
tion as an act that posits a temporally fixed being. To be sure, 
every act is an " impression," is itself a being in inner time, is 

10 something constituted in the consciousness that constitutes time 
originally. We can reflect on each act and in so doing turn it 
into an object of an act of immanent " perception." Prior to this 
perception (to which belongs the form of the cogito), we have 
the "inner consciousness" which lacks this form, and to this 

15 consciousness there corresponds, as ideal possibihty, the inner 
reproduction in which the earlier act again comes to conscious- 
ness in a reproductive way and consequently can become the 
object of a reflective memory. Hence given therewith is the 
possibility of reflecting, in the reproduction, on the earlier 

20 having-perceived, even if it was not one in the proper sense, 
thus on the having-originarily-lived-through as having-had- 
an-impression. 

Therefore in the case of a mathematical conviction, the 
originating act is the relevant judging (in inner consciousness it 

25 is an act constituted originarily, as an impression, and is of such 
and such a duration in immanent time). It is judgment-material 
along with a positing of being. This material contains nothing 
of temporahty. A non-temporal state of affairs is posited as 
being. In repeated emergence of the judgment we may have 

30 chains of reproductions of the original judgment-impression. 
The regard can be focused on them and can penetrate into 
them. In that case I have possibilities for memories of various 
levels. I recall my earlier memory; I now have a reproduction of 
a second level and can focus on it; in that case I have a memory 

35 of a memory. Or my regard can penetrate into it; I focus on the 
state of affairs which was intended in the reproduced reproduc- 
tion, on the earlier judgment. The same occurs in each case in 
which I look back, in a reproductively repeated series of acts, on 
the noematic content of the original act. (It should be noted 


126 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


THE CONSTITUTION OF ANIMAL NATURE 


127 


here that it is one thing to conceive, and indeed originarily, the 
mathematical conviction in several temporally distinct acts, and 
it is another thing to come back to the old conviction. And I 
can simultaneously conceive the conviction anew and be con- 
5 scious of the fact that I had already once, or perhaps more than 
once, formed it.) The lasting conviction is persistent and 
remains one and the same, extending itself throughout, not in 
reference to a new conception that may arise, but in reference to 
the mere assumption of the old one, already instituted and 

10 accepted again as valid. 

Hence this is vaUd for all acts, and, in addition, in the acts of 
perception we find this pecuharity that in them there takes place 
the following doubUng: 1) they are themselves perceptions, they 
constitute a temporal being and in this regard are originarily 

1 5 giving ; 2) as acts of inner consciousness they are impressions, in 
inner consciousness they are originarily given. Inner conscious- 
ness is, for them, originarily giving. Consequently, in them a 
double memory occurs : 

1) The memory of what was in transcendent time; 
20 2) the memory of what was given in immanent time, the 
memory of the earlier perception and of that which was 
perceived in it as such, or the reproduction of the earher 
perception and of its^ perceptual theme. 

In all cases, the constitution of the unity of the lasting theme 
25 relates to this second memory. That which is posited by an act 
of the cogito, the theme, is, with reference to repeated reproduc- 
tions and repositings, which extend "throughout" the chain of 
reproductions, of the original theme reproduced in them, some- 
thing lasting, at least as long as the reproduction is precisely not 
30 merely just any reproduction but is a '' repositing " or, better, an 
actual taking part in the positing, an assumption of what was 
posited "earlier." 

All the unities we have discussed are unities in reference to a 
pure Ego, whose stream of consciousness they belong to and as 
35 whose "possessions" they are constituted. And the stream of 
consciousness, as a totahty, builds itself up as a phenomenal 
unity. All my lived experiences, the successive and the co- 
existing, on which I focus, have the unity of a flux of time. That 


[119] 


which belongs immanently to a flux of time possesses a 
perceivable, adequately graspable, unity. The unity of imma- 
nence is the unity of a constant flux, in the nexus of which all 
immanent duration and change are constituted. All unities of 
5 duration which are built up in the continuous flux of immanent 
time merge into the unity of the monadic stream of conscious- 
ness which is constantly becoming and changing, together with 
the concomitant pure Ego. Thereby, this pure Ego is established 
by means of a cogito determined in any way whatsoever. It 

10 extends itself therein onto the total sphere of what is, in the 
sense of ideal possibiHty, absolutely immanently experienceable 
by it, rememberable, expectable, and indeed even phantasizable, 
according to all temporal modes. If, for example, I yield to the 
phantasy that I undertook a trip to Mars and had there lived 

15 experiences similar to Gulliver's, then these fictional lived 
experiences of consciousness would belong to me, though as 
empty phantasies. The fictional world is a correlate of a 
fictional Ego, which, however, is phantasized as the same as my 
actual Ego. Consequently, the idea, not only of the actual world 

20 posited by me but also of each and every possible and phanta- 
sizable world, as a world for this pure Ego, has, precisely 
through the relation to the actual pure Ego, fixed bounds. 


[120] 


Chapter Two 
PSYCHIC REALITY 


§ 30. The real psychic subject 

We distinguish, ever faithful to what is given intuitively, 
5 between the pure or transcendental Ego and the real psychic 
subject, the psyche or soul, the identical psychic being which, 
connected in a real way with the respective human or animal 
Body, makes up the substantial-real double being: the animal, 
man or brute. We will only later be able to consider to what 

10 extent soul and psychic subject are to be distinguished, for 
example in this way, that the psychic subject is inherent in the 
soul but is not simply to be identified with it. Provisionally, we 
are not taking this distinction into account. By emphasizing the 
substantial reahty of the soul, we mean that the soul is, in a 

15 sense similar to that of the material Body-thing, a substantial- 
real unity, versus the pure Ego, which, according to our 
exposition, is not such a unity. The task is now to seek for 
greater clarity than has been achieved hitherto. The psychic [121] 
Ego, or the soul, is a unity quite different from the pure Ego, 

20 though in principle similarly related to a monadic nexus of 
consciousness. We come to know what is essential in it if we 
proceed from the psychological Ego-idea, from speaking about 
human or, in general, animal subjects and go on to clarify, in 
conformity with our method, the sense of such talk by means of 

25 a return to actually exhibiting experience. By doing so, it 
becomes evident that what is meant by this psychic Ego, e.g., 
the human (but excluding all Corporeahty), is not the monadic 
flux belonging to this Body experientially, nor is it something 
that occurs as a real [reell] moment of this flux, but rather is a 

30 unity indeed essentially related to the flux, though in a certain 


THE CONSTITUTION OF ANIMAL NATURE 


129 


sense transcending it. The subject is now a substrate of proper- 
ties (personal properties in a determinate, very broad sense), 
analogous to the way a material thing is a substrate of 
thingly-real properties. Just as not everything a material thing 
5 has, e.g., its extension or its schema, is a real property in the 
specific sense, so it is the same as regards the psychic subject. It 
is related to the lived experiences of consciousness in such a way 
that it has them, lives them, and lives in them; however, these 
lived experiences are not its properties but merely its modes of 

10 comportment, its mere "psychic states." The subject also *'has" 
his Body, and, as it is said, his psychic lived experiences are 
"bound" to the Body. Yet it is clear that the psychic subject is 
not primarily related to his Corporeal body as a material thing 
and is only mediately related to the lived experiences connected 

15 up to it, but, rather, the reverse: the psychic subject has a 
material thing as his Body because it is animated, i.e., because 
he has psychic lived experiences which, in the sense of the 
apperception of the human, are one with the Body in a 
singularly intimate way. The analogy between the psychic unity 

20 and the unity of the material thing extends so far that we can 
say there exists a full analogy, according to form, between 
material properties, manifested in the changing physical behav- 
ior of the thing, and psychic properties, manifested in corre- 
sponding lived experiences as psychic modes of behavior. Psy- 

25 chic properties therefore are "unities of manifestation." Among 

the psychic properties, in the sense being elaborated here, are [122] 
included every personal property, the intellectual character of 
the man and the totality of his intellectual dispositions, his 
affective character, his practical character, every one of his 

30 spiritual capacities and aptitudes, his mathematical talent, his 
logical acumen, his magnanimity, amiability, self-abnegation, 
etc. In addition, his senses and the dispositions of sense 
behavior which are properly his own, which are characteristic 
of him, his phantasy disposition, and so on, are psychic 

35 properties. Every psychic property, in accordance with the sense 
just exempHfied, has a relation to determined groups of actual 
and possible lived experiences. These groups belong together 
and relate to the psychic property in the same way that every 
material property is related to the actual and possible schematic 


130 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


"appearances" in which it manifests itself or would manifest 
itself. In both cases, consequently, the way is predelineated in 
which the respective properties would come to an intuitive 
givenness of their essence and being, i.e., to an actually exhibit- 
5 ing intuition and experience. Simply to look at a thing, i.e., to 
bring to givenness its extension and the concomitant sensuous 
fullness (thus the momentary schema of it) is not yet the same 
as having actually experienced the thing as a material thing. 
One needs to follow exactly the nexus predelineated in the 

10 present thing-apprehension, in which a schematic multiplicity 
unfolds in a unity-consciousness in which the property in 
question is not merely manifest but is primordially manifest by 
way of a constant fulfillment of the apprehending intentions. 
The psychic properties in like manner refer back to multiplici- 

1 5 ties of psychic experience, to lived experiences which correspond 
to them and belong to them and which, in the apprehension, are 
connected in one consciousness of unity. These lived experi- 
ences, in the way they run their course, flow into one another, 
and are connected, manifest the relevant character-properties, 

20 and they do not merely manifest them in a vague manner but do 
so in a fulfilling manner, and in an originary way they 
primordially manifest them, or, in other words, bring them to 
an experience that exhibits them. In both cases, the material and 
the psychic, there is a certain fixed regulation in the relation 

25 between properties and an infinity of actual and possible states, 
something we learn about obviously only in reflection upon the 
foundation of the experiential nexus which constitutes both the 
properties and the states inseparably, whereas, unreflectively [123] 
living in the relevant experiential consciousness (or putting 

30 ourselves into such a consciousness by means of phantasy) we 
get sight of the relevant lasting property in the unfolding of 
states, and we experience the property in the full sense and with 
the appropriate form of evidence in the unfolding of a primor- 
dially manifesting series of states. In each case, the unities are 

35 ones of multiple levels. In the psychic sphere, we find groups of 
dispositions as properties of an inferior level and, built on them, 
though not in the manner of mere "summation" but instead in 
that of a "constitution," we find unities of property of a higher 
level as ones which consequently manifest themselves, as uni- 


THE CONSTITUTION OF ANIMAL NATURE 


131 


tary, in the properties of the inferior level and in their experien- 
tial changes. This is how, to borrow an example from the sphere 
of sense, the unitary, variable property, "visual acuity" mani- 
fests itself in the visual faculty which alters according to 
5 circumstances. Thereby, just as is the case with the thing itself, 
so the soul itself is nothing more than the unity of its proper- 
ties; in its states it "behaves" in such and such a way, in its 
properties it "is," and each of its properties is a sheer ray of its 
being. This can also be expressed as follows: the soul is the 

10 unity of the "spiritual faculties;" these are built upon the 
inferior ones of sense (and they have once again, amongst 
themselves, levels), and the soul is nothing more than that. 
When the old psychology was a theory of faculties, then it was, 
as a theory of the soul, precisely what it purely and simply could 

15 be and had to be. If it failed, its failure was not due to its being 
an alleged "false faculty-psychology" but was due to its 
breaking down methodologically; i.e., it did not develop the 
method predelineated to it as a theory of the soul, as a doctrine 
of faculties rightly understood. It failed, speaking generally, 

20 especially in that it neglected, or took too lightly, the systematic 
study of the psychic states, hence, at bottom, the "states of 
consciousness," whereas these, in fact, as the material for the 
primordial manifestation of everything psychic, should have 
called for the most radical study. ^ 

25 The main point sustaining the analogy must yet be expressly [124] 
noted. The modes of behavior, as real modes in the material 
sphere, refer back to " real circumstances," and it is only in the 
reciprocal play between modes of behavior and circumstances of 
behavior that the substantial-real property manifests itself pri- 

30 mordially in the framework of originarily giving experience. The 
same holds for the soul as the real something primordially 
manifesting itself in the lived experiences of a monadic nexus 
(lived experiences which obviously have thereby undergone a 


• For our present purposes it does not have to be shown how it failed in another 
respect too, i.e., insofar as it did not reahze that a distinction has to be made between 
psychology as a natural science and psychology as a human science. Inchned, as it 
was in general, toward the human sciences, it did not grasp the tasks and methods of 
a natural science of the soul. (For modem psychology the situation is exactly the 
reverse.) 


132 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


corresponding apperception). The soul (or the psychic subject) 
behaves as it does under the pertinent circumstances and in a 
regulated way. Here, as everywhere in analogous cases, this is 
not merely an Objective fact but is included in the experiential 
5 apprehensions; hence it can be drawn from them phenomeno- 
logically. In the modes of behavior apprehended in reference 
to the circumstances which pertain phenomenally, the psychic 
property in question manifests itself or primordially manifests 
itself in originary experience. Here, too, the apprehension of the 

10 psychic Hved experiences, as modes of behavior of something 
real, is a phenomenologically peculiar one. The rule of the 
belonging together is, in phenomenological thinking, a second- 
ary recognition, since the type of the experience is already given. 
For only from the essence of the type of experience, and not 

1 5 inductively-empirically, can one gain knowledge of the regula- 
tion constitutive for that type of unity of reahty. 

If we now look back on the pure Ego, then, in comparison 
with the psychic, it is to be noted that as regards the pure Ego 
too, insofar as it is active in its acts, passive in them, etc., it is 

20 said then to "behave" in them in such and such a way. In 
addition, as regards the pure Ego too, and in a broader or 
stricter sense, one speaks of states (as occurs, e.g., when one 
opposes states as passivities to activities). But it is clear that this 
concept of modes of behavior and of states is totally different 

25 than the one which applies to the sphere of reality, where all 
modes of behavior or states are, in conformity with the consti- 
tuting apprehension, causally related to "circumstances." This 
is a radical distinction in sense, for causality and substantiality 
are by no means extrinsic annexes but point instead to funda- 

30 mental types of apperception. According to the case, the [125] 
grasping regard can be directed differently, onto the state, onto 
the causal dependence, etc., and all the acts which take form 
thereby we call acts of real experience. 

Finally, it must be said that just as, with the material thing, 

35 nothing of what is distinguishable in the schema of the moment 
escapes regulation from the point of view of reality, so likewise 
nothing escapes in the sphere of lived experience. At least, the 
empirical apprehension of the soul is such that eventually 
everything apprehendable as real state in the relevant sphere is 


THE CONSTITUTION OF ANIMAL NATURE 


133 


actually apprehended by it that way. Thereby it is a matter for 
the experience which determines more precisely to construct the 
series of experiences in which the property, perhaps only 
vaguely postulated, would manifest itself primordially. The term 
5 experience is ordinarily employed in the limited sense of experi- 
ence of the real (briefly, in the sense of " real experience "). Thus 
what is designated thereby is the self-giving (and, at bottom, 
originarily giving) act, in which a reality is given as mere 
substrate of real properties primordially manifested in real 

10 states and in causal relation to circumstances. 

According to our considerations, two types of real experience 
rightfully stand side by side: "external experience, physical 
experience, as experience of material things, and psychic experi- 
ence, as experience of psychic realities. Each of these experiences 

15 is foundational for corresponding experiential sciences: the one 
for the sciences of material nature and the other for psychology 
as science of the soul. 


§31. The formal-universal concept of reality 


The analogies that we have established between matter and 

20 soul, and that no doubt could be pursued further, are grounded 
in a commonaHty of ontological form, which, in our analyses, 
came markedly to the fore and through which is determined out 
of originary sources a formal-universal, and obviously extremely 
important, concept of reality, namely, substantial reality. 

25 Accordingly, if we speak in one breath of material and of [126] 
psychic reality, then the common word expresses a common 
sense or a common form in the two different concepts. On the 
level of formal universality the concepts real substance (con- 
cretely understood as a thing in a very broad sense), real 

30 property, real state (real behavior) and real causality are con- 
cepts which belong together essentially. I say real causalities 
because with the states we are referred back to real circum- 
stances in the form of the dependence of one real on another 
real Realities are what they are only in reference to other actual 

35 and possible reahties in the interweavings of substantial "cau- 
sality." These dependencies are dependencies of change (of which 


134 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


unchange is a mere limit-case and plays, furthermore, as a mode 
of change in a broad sense, the same role that every other mode 
plays) and specifically are dependencies of the change of the 
real, in its properties, on the change of other real things in their 
5 properties. In the relation between real properties and modes of 
behavior these dependencies imply functional dependencies, in 
the exchange of the corresponding multiplicities on both sides, 
on possible modes of behavior in such a way that a thorough 
reciprocal regulation takes place as to change and unchange, 
10 according to everything these realities are as well as according 
to everything they have. 


§ 32. Fundamental differences between material 
and psychic reality ^ 

The question now arises concerning the extent to which one 

1 5 can speak of reaUty, in the sense we have indicated, in the same 
way as regards material and as regards psychic nature. As to 
causality, it is a constitutive idea for material nature, for the 
idea of the physical thing. That is, all ''inner" features of the 
thing as a lasting being, a duration, are themselves persistent, 

20 and each such feature expresses a persistent behavior (a persis- 
tent lawfulness in behavior) in the causal nexus of change. 

But now, what about the reahty of the soul? It, too, is a [127] 
persistent being versus changing circumstances, but a more 
precise examination is required to know what kind of " circum- 

25 stances" these are and what kind of "persisting" this is. The 
soul is the bearer of a psychic life together with the subjective 
possessions of that hfe, and as such it is a unity extending 
through time (the same time in which the Body endures). It 
"acts" upon physis, and it undergoes actions coming from 

30 there. It exhibits an identity in that, on the whole, it " behaves " 
in a regulated way in its reactions under given physical circum- 
stances, e.g., it senses and perceives in such and such a manner, 
etc. Owing to these regulated modes of behavior, psychophysical 


Cf. also § 3 of Supplement XII, pp. 355 ff. 


THE CONSTITUTION OF ANIMAL NATURE 


135 


properties ^ are attributed to it. These, however, are not the 
same kind of persistent properties as the thingly ones. To make 
this clearer, we have to recall how thingly properties are 
constituted and how the psychic are. The thing is constituted as 
5 a unity of schemata or, more precisely, as a unity of a causal 
necessity within the nexus of dependencies which present them- 
selves in manifolds of schemata. The soul, on the other hand, 
does not allow of schematization. To speak with more precision, 
the manifold, which, for what is material, functions as state, is 

10 of the type: schema (sensuously fulfilled corporeal extension). 

The schema is itself already a unity of manifestation. More 

precisely, it is a unity in the manifolds of adumbrations. The 

pure spatial schema is the mere corporeal form (the extension 

without sensuous filling) which is necessarily given, in empirical 

15 intuition, merely from one side and ever and again only from 
one side. In originary primordial manifestation the form is 
presented in a multiplicity of originarily given sides, in a 
manifold of aspects, which we can grasp, at any time, with the 
appropriate shift of focus (which, as a turning of the spiritual 

20 regard away from the normal attitude occupied with the thing 
itself, is directed upon the form, i.e., upon aspects of the thing, 
its modes of appearance, its appearing sides). The aspect of the 
moment is necessarily related to the zero-point of orientation, to 
the absolute "here," and to the concomitant system of the [128] 

25 depth dimension (fore-back), and of the breadth and height 
dimensions (right-left, above-below). Thereby indeed a universal 
form is designated in which all that appears as spatial-thingly 
and, in the first place, all extension of it, must be given. We note 
also that the aspects themselves are already constituted unities 

30 and that they, corresponding to the essence of their appercep- 
tive constitution, harbor unities in various directions and on 
different levels, in a certain sense implicitly co-constituting 
them. These unities still precede the appearing corporeal form 
and in relation to them are likewise designated as aspects. If we 

35 hold fast to the visual sphere pure and simple and to the 


' For a fuller treatment of the "psychic properties" mentioned on pp. 129 f. but 
left out of consideration here, i.e., the so-called character-properties, ones that are not 
psychophysical, cf. below pp. 147 ff. 


136 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


constitutive unities existing in it alone, then to each position of 
the eyes (to indicate it in an Objective expression), the body and 
head remaining fixed, corresponds a new aspect of the thing 
seen and especially of its extension. And the same applies to 
5 each change of the position of the head which affects the 
phenomenal orientation (in particular, the one concerning " dis- 
tances"). Each of these aspects and the unfolding of the 
continuously changing aspects are thereby phenomenologically 
related to corresponding "circumstances" and are shown (as 

10 becomes evident in new reflective directions of the grasping 
"spiritual regard") to be related to concomitant complexes of 
kinetic sensations. And this concomitance itself is something 
constituted by consciousness and is graspable in reflection. The 
originary or, in every case, fully intuitive consciousness of the 

15 identity of the form within the continuous change of its modes 
of givenness, which we are calling here its aspects, essentially 
presupposes the continuous unfolding, played out in the back- 
ground of attention, of the concomitant kinesthetic sensation- 
complexes or of the corresponding transitional phenomena 

20 ("kinetic phenomena") of the sensation-complexes which, for 
example, are different according to whether, Objectively spoken, 
the eyes move from their position at the start to this or that 
other position. Thereby, in the consciousness of the concomit- 
tance and in an apperceptively regulated way, the aspects (in a 

25 certain sense, the appearances) related to these circumstances of 
appearance change, and during this unfolding we see, in the 
normal attitude, "in" these aspects (without their becoming 
objects) continuously the one and the same thing or, in terms of [129] 
our foregoing abstractive consideration, the one and the same 

30 form. 

It is now clear, however, that the apperceptive constitution of 
the aspects is of such a kind that aspects of a higher level, in 
suitably distinguished continua of their transformations, are 
constituted as " unities," with regard to which the aspects in the 

35 preceding sense function as "manifolds." E.g., to designate it 
once again with an Objective expression, if we, at will, move 
merely our eyes while the rest of the perceptual circumstances 
remain fixed (fixed position of the body, of the head, etc.) then 
not only the form but also the appearance of the form are given 


THE CONSTITUTION OF ANIMAL NATURE 


137 


to us as one and the same aspect. We can be in such an attitude 
that we are focused not on the thing but on the "thing from the 
side," or we can be focused on the side, on the mode of 
appearance of the thing, and, without paying attention to the 
5 changing movement of the eyes and the corresponding modifi- 
cations of appearance, we see the "appearance" as one and the 
same. The like occurs if we, keeping all other circumstances 
fixed, desire to intuit the object merely phenomenally as " reced- 
ing" or as "coming close," in which case we care only for the 

10 change in the depth-order, whereas it is a matter of indifference 
to us whether, in an Objective respect, owing to corresponding 
apperceptive distinctions, we are conscious that it is the object 
that is receding from us or that it is we who are moving away 
from it. 

15 Again, we have an aspect of a higher level if we both move 
the eyes — and thereby allow the dimensions of height and 
breadth to alter — and at the same time allow a receding into 
the depth. And there always remain transformations of the 
aspect-unity constituted here, which make evident the phenom- 

20 enal difference as regards the form itself. The form is still always 
given in "one" sheer mode of appearance, alongside which 
others are possible; it can turn, gradually rotate, etc. 

Of course, intertwined with all this are still other modifica- 
tions, ones constitutive of formations of unity. For example, 

25 those that find their Objective expression (so to say) in the 
"change of the accommodation." For if we again fix all the 
other circumstances of the appearance and allow only the 
accommodation to change, then "the" appearance, determined 
as a phase within the continuum of the distinctions previously 

30 indicated, has its changing modes of givenness. There are [130] 
obviously great tasks here awaiting the phenomenological anal- 
ysis of the thing. All "strata" of the constitution of the thing 
would need to be examined; what has been indicated here for 
the visual layer would have to be pursued, in systematic 

35 completeness and precision, not only for that layer itself but 
also for all other layers and all constitutive directions in which 
unities distinguish themselves over and against manifolds and are 
constituted in them in terms of appearance. If we go back step 
by step from the present unities to the manifolds constituting 


138 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


them, and from these (insofar as they themselves are again 
unities of manifolds) to the manifolds constituting them in turn, 
then in all cases we arrive finally at the data of the lowest level, 
the sensory data of sensation in immanent time, the sensory 
5 ''representatives" for the "apprehensions" of the lowest 
level. 

Thus we see that the expression " adumbration " is equivocal. 
It can be said of every aspect that the thing is adumbrated in it. 
At bottom, however, it is the manifold data of sensation that 

10 are called adumbrations, for they are the most primitive mate- 
rials in which thingly determinations are "adumbrated." 

Though at the outset we attached our considerations only to 
the form (the extensio) of the material thing, still what we said 
already had a universal significance. What has been worked out 

1 5 obviously applies to the concretely full schema, or to it accord- 
ing to all its components that can be abstracted out, thus also to 
the sensuous qualities which "manifest" and "fill" the form. 
These qualities are constituted as unities in parallel with the 
form and utterly inseparable from it: e.g., the body-colors, the 

20 body-coloration that belongs in a unitary fashion to the body, 
to the appearing extension, including the total coloration 
belonging unitarily, as " the surface coloration," to the surface 
of the body. Moreover, this total coloration, in accord with the 
essence of extension, is "divided" among all the distinguishable 

25 parts of the surface so that to each fragmentation of the 
extension corresponds a fragmentation of the coloring, or, 
speaking universally, to each fragmentation of the schema 
correspond parts that have the full character of a schema. The 
coloration and, thus, in general, the filling "sensuous quality" 

30 are adumbrated in their own way exactly parallel to the visual [131] 
extension. What they "are" is primordially manifest percep- 
tually exclusively in determinate, essentially concomitant, con- 
tinua of adumbrations, so that, e.g., "coloring" without exten- 
sion is unthinkable, just as is extension without coloring. If 

35 corporeal extension or coloring is to appear visually, then that 
is possible apriori only in manifolds of adumbration, in aspects 
of a concomitant sort, and it is only possible if extension and 
coloring are adumbrated in parallel to each other. They cannot 
appear without each other. 


THE CONSTITUTION OF ANIMAL NATURE 


139 


This primordial manifestation through adumbrations is, how- 
ever, despite all the formal mutuality common to all constitu- 
tion of "transcendent" unities in manifolds, something in 
principle quite different than the manifestation of real properties 
5 through states, as we have already expounded eariier. On the 
level of the schema, there can be no question of substantial 
reality and causality. Whereas we then stand, with respect to 
material states, in the sphere of transcendence, this manifesta- 
tion of the unity of the soul, of the psychological Ego, leads us, 

10 it would seem, immediately into the sphere of immanence. 
Psychic states are, abstraction made from higher apprehension, 
no longer transcendent unities but instead are nothing else than 
the immanently perceivable lived experiences of the immanent 
flux of lived experience, of that flux in which all "transcendent" 

15 being is manifest, ultimately through primordial manifesta- 
tion. 

Hence, opposed to one another are the immanently given 
psychic state and, constituted as transcendent unities, the 
momentary states, the manifestations of persistent real proper- 

20 ties, the identical of which is the thing. In the progression from 
the perceptual to the higher constitution of the thing, the 
intuitive thing — as has been dealt with earlier — displays, in its 
optimal givenness, its relativity to normal subjectivity. The 
identity of the thing then requires, if it is to be not only 

25 intersubjective-normal but "thing in itself as correlate of any 
rational subject (any logical subject), a thing-determination of 
logical form, which is an index of nexuses of sense experience 
or, better, an index of thing-qualities of the lower level, given in 
sense intuition. This higher thing-constitution assigns to the [132] 

30 thing a persistent being, a stock of persistent mathematical 
properties, in such a way, however, that the universal structure 
of things, the form of reality-causality, remains preserved. The 
states, too, are mathematized and become indexes of sensuous 
states. The mathematical causality-in-itself is an index of the 

35 manifold of sensuous causahties. If we, on the contrary, take 
the soul and borrow (as Kant did) the idea of substance from 
the mathematical thing, then we must undoubtedly say there is 
no soul-substance: the soul has no "in itself" the way "nat- 
ure" has, nor does it have a mathematical nature as has the 


140 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


thing of physics, nor a nature like that of the thing of intuition 
(since it is not a schematized unity). And as far as causality is 
concerned, we have to say that if we call causality that 
functional or lawful relation of dependence which is the corre- 
5 late of the constitution of persistent properties of a persistent 
real something of the type, nature, then as regards the soul we 
cannot speak of causality at all. Not every lawfully regulated 
functionaUty in the factual sphere is causality. The flux of 
psychic Hfe has its unity in itself, and if the " soul," concomitant 

10 to a Body, stands toward this thingly Body in a functional 
connection of reciprocal dependence, then the soul surely has its 
lasting psychic properties, which are expressions for certain 
regulated dependencies of the psychic on the Bodily. It is a being 
that is conditionally related to Bodily circumstances, to circum- 

15 stances in physical nature. And, similarly, the soul is character- 
ized by the fact that psychic events, in regulated fashion, have 
consequences in physical nature. On the other hand, the Body 
itself, too, is characterized by this psychophysical nexus and its 
regulation. But neither Body nor soul thereby acquire *'nature- 

20 properties" in the sense of logico-mathematical nature. 


Further, the material thing can, as a possibiHty in principle, 
be completely unchanged, i.e., unchanged with respect to its 
properties and unchanged with respect to its states as well. In 
that case, the schematic manifold fills the duration with contin- [133] 

25 uously unchanged sameness. The psychic ''thing," however, in 
principle cannot remain unchanged ; least of all can it abide in 
an unchanged psychic state. By essential necessity, psychic life is 
a flux; obviously, therefore, it lacks everything analogous to a 
spatial form as a form making unchange possible for existing 

30 realities. Along with the necessity of the changing of the states, 
what is then given as regards the soul is the necessity of the 
above-mentioned change of psychic properties through a new 
formation of dispositions. Every lived experience leaves behind 
itself a wake of dispositions and creates something new as 

35 regards psychic reality. Hence this reality itself is something 
constantly changing. This is not to say that it would not 
similarly, together with all other souls, lend itself to a form of 
constancy, just as the material thing does in the spatial form. 


THE CONSTITUTION OF ANIMAL NATURE 


141 


This form of psychic existence, which belongs to the psychic 
essence and its constitution just Hke the spatial form in the 
parallel case, consists in the form of the social community, 
founded on the (proper and still to be exposed) form of 

5 Corporeality (which means much more than materiahty), as a 
community of existence unified by means of the bond of 
reciprocal understanding. Moreover, it has to be noted in this 
connection that what belongs to the full psychic unity as 
manifold (in analogy with the schema of the material thing) is 

10 the current total state of consciousness, whereas the singular, 
abstracted out, lived experiences are, in this respect, "states" of 
the soul in its fullness only insofar as they fit within the total 
consciousness and are, in their total nexus, transitional points 
for particular avenues of manifestation. 

1 5 We have still to emphasize a difference : the material thing as 
res extensa is fragmentable in principle, corresponding to the 
extension with which it coincides throughout, and it can break 
down into real parts. In relation to such possibihties of breaking 
down into extended parts, it is evident that in this or that place 

20 and in this or that piece the thing has these or those qualities, 
and elsewhere it has others. The soul, on the other hand, has no 
places, no pieces. It is absolutely not a fragmentable unity, 
understood in the genuine and strict sense of a soul in which 
souls, as parts, would be distinguishable and, furthermore, 

25 separable into pieces. This does not exclude the possibility that [134] 
the psychic Ego, manifested in the continuity of the nexus of 
consciousness, might transform, either in a rapid gradual tran- 
sition or all of a sudden, some of its dispositions, even entire 
groups and their nexuses, its whole "character," and so become 

30 "a totally different'' Ego. Of course, one can ask whether the 
continuity in reaUty could be broken by itself, just as, in the 
parallel domain, the possibility can be considered as to whether 
in the continuity of the schematic changes the thing could 
transform itself suddenly into an other thing. As we know, 

35 science holds fast to the idea of a reahty persisting throughout, 
even in such cases (which actually present themselves in the 
experience of a lower level). Science refers the transformation of 
reality to unknown and still to be sought causal circumstances, 
but in doing so grasps it as semblant transformation, to the 


142 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


extent that a unity of a higher level manifests itself in what at 
first counts as the real itself; and all real quaHties of the lower 
level, with all its discontinuities, are then reduced to relative 
states of that unity. 
5 Notwithstanding the undoubtedly essential unfragmentabiHty 
(connected to the essential unfragmentabiHty of the flux of 
consciousness into a pluraHty of monadic nexuses) there exists, 
on the other hand, a certain partition of the soul, namely, a 
distinction between strata in the soul, corresponding to strata of 

10 consciousness. Higher levels can be missing, and then the 
stratification of the soul is quite different, as occurs, for 
example, in the case of the soul which is constantly sleeping and 
in which no cogito is accompHshed. Another example is the soul 
of the brute animal, in which the stratum of theoretical thought 

15 in the pregnant sense is lacking, etc. Phenomenology convinces 
us that the ancient doctrines of the "parts of the soul" and the 
kinds of the soul actually contain meaningful problems and, 
what is more, phenomenological problems, insofar as here in 
intuition essential possibiHties can be examined. 

20 At all events, the most important stratification is indicated by 
the distinction between the soul and the psychic subject, the 
latter understood as a reahty, but a reality nested in the soul. 
Without the soul, it is unable to stand alone; and yet again, it is 
a unity which in a certain sense encompasses the soul and which 

25 is at the same time so prominent that it dominates the general 

way of speaking about human and animal subjects. At present, [135] 
however, we have not yet come so far that we can approach the 
difficult problems the psychic Ego entails. For the moment, we 
leave their dehneation somewhat indeterminate and tarry with 

30 the soul in its generality. 

We have not yet considered closely its dependence on "circum- 
stances/' In this regard as well, there arises a certain stratifica- 
tion, in accordance with which we can distinguish: 1) the 
psychophysical (or, better, physiopsychic) side, 2) the idiopsy- 

35 chic side, and 3) the intersubjective relations of dependence of 
psychic reahty. As to the first, it is well known that the psyche 
depends on the Body and thereby on physical nature and its 
many relationships. First of all, this dependency exists through- 
out with regard to the totality of sensafions (including the 


THE CONSTITUTION OF ANIMAL NATURE 


143 


sensuous sensafions of feeling and instinct) and further also 
with regard to their concomitant reproductions, and thereby the 
whole life of consciousness is already affected by this dependency, 
since sensations and reproductions of sensations (phantasms) 
5 play their role everywhere. It does not have to be discussed here 
how far the dependency extends with regard to the manifold 
phenomena of consciousness, over and beyond this mediation; 
at any rate, with regard to the life of the oul there exist 
"physiological" dependencies that are very far-reaching, indeed 

10 in a certain way penetrafing all conscious processes. Correspon- 
ding to them, there is a physiopsychic side to psychic reality. 
Obviously, nothing else is meant by this than that the apprehen- 
sion constitufing psychic reality assigns to it real properties 
which find their "circumstances" in the Body and in the Bodily 

15 causahties. 

As to the second, consciousness presents itself (if we at first 
let speak the apprehension already there rather than outside 
theories that would interpret it away) as, so-to-say, dependent on 
itself Within one and the same soul, the present stock of lived 

20 experiences, as a totality, is dependent on earlier stocks of lived 
experiences. Or again, if, under given inner circumstances, that 
is, within the present total state of consciousness, a change [136] 
supervenes in the form of a newly emerging state, then that too 
depends on what had been an earlier state of the same soul. But 

25 this dependency is certainly not simply the one mentioned as 
regards the first case, for even where a sensation occurs as an 
"effect of external stimulation," the mode of its "acceptance 
into consciousness" is co-determined by this new regulation. 
The earlier lived experiences did not vanish without a trace; 

30 each one has its after-effect. To the essence of the soul pertains 
a continuous new formation or re-formation of disposnvictions, 
of orientatiar titles : associafion, habit, memory, and also moti- 
vated change in sense, motivated change of convictions, of 
orientations of feeling (disposifions toward taking positions as 

35 regards feehngs or toward the corresponding abstentions), and 
of orientations of will, which certainly, in accord with the sense 
of the apprehension, are not reducible to mere association. Thus 
the soul has complexes of dispositions and, thereby, real 
qualities, which manifest themselves in it as having originated 


144 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


THE CONSTITUTION OF ANIMAL NATURE 


145 


from it itself out of its own influence rather than out of a 
relation to something external. It is clear that this type of 
dependency is still less to be considered an analogon of physical 
causahty than is the conditionality through external circum- 
5 stances. We can not yettain, that even the states of the soul 
whichs certain, that even the states of the soul which are so 
named by us (and the soul encompasses indeed the whole course 
of lived experiences) are dependent from both points of view : 
i.e., either merely through the sensuous substrate or as a 
10 totahty. 

§ 33. More precise determination of the concept of reality 

After our expositions of the differences between material 
nature and what is psychic, the idea of reality consequently 
needs a more exact dehmitation. Both material nature and the 

15 psychic are included under the formal idea, "unity of lasting 
properties in relation to pertinent circumstances." But a differ- 
entiation must be made as to the special kind of ''properties" 
and "circumstances." The "circumstances," as we saw, can be 
either outer or inner or again partly the one, partly the other. 

20 Inner circumstances obviously are not states of something real 
itself in the given span of time to which the consideration 
relates. Rather, we take the total state, hence the real as it is in a [137] 
given point of time, and inquire into that on which it, as real 
state, depends. And now something remarkable shows itself, 

25 namely the fact that material things are conditioned exclusively 
from the outside and are not conditioned by their own past; 
they are history-less realities. This results from the fact (and at 
the same time it clearly determines the sense of our exposition) 
that the possibihty of material identity throughout all the 

30 sequences of changes is inherent in the essence of material 
reality and is so in such a way that thereby no augmentation or 
fragmentation of materiahty takes place (both of which indeed 
equally belong as ideal possibihty to the essence of such a 
reahty). Similarly, in this essence inheres the ideal possibihty 

35 that the material thing might come back in cyclical processes to 


identically the same external circumstances under which it had 
already stood, even if something like that in any given case be 
most improbable. But material reahty is so constituted that in 
such a cyclical return it would have to have identically the same 
5 total state. On the other hand, it pertains to the essence of 
psychic reality that as a matter of principle it cannot return to 
the same total state: psychic reahties have precisely a history. 
Two temporally contiguous cycles of external circumstances 
would affect the same soul in similar fashions, but within the 
10 soul itself the psychic unfolding of states could not be the 
same, for the earlier state functionally determines the following 

one. 

Hence it appears, speaking in principle and formally, that 
realities are to be divided into mere natural realities, supematu- 

15 ral realities (not of nature, having no natural sides, no natural 
determinations), and mixed realities, ones which, Hke the soul, 
have a natural side and an idiopsychic side. The second 
possibility is for us an empty possibihty, and it is problematic 
whether it can be demonstrated at all. Such reahties cannot be 

20 in the "Objective" spatio-temporal world. 

Accordingly, we have, on the one hand, a set of lasting 
properties which are, as to their "in itself," determinable 
logico-mathematically and, on the other hand, "properties" of [138] 
a completely different kind, unities which, by their very essence, 

25 are involved in a constantly flowing reformation and develop- 
ment, and in principle admit of no mathematization. 

If we take the essence of the material thing as our point of 
orientation for the concepts "nature" and "reahty," then we 
have to say accordingly that these concepts do not appertain to 

30 the psychic as such. But through its connection with the 
corporeal, the psychic is linked to nature and *' existence*' in a 
second sense, existence in space, existence in space-time. And 
thus it also has, we can say, a quasi-nature and a quasi- 
causality, to the extent that we broaden precisely the concepts 

35 nature, or substance and causahty, and designate everything 
existing, related to conditional circumstances of existence and 
standing under laws of existence, as substance (thingly, real 
existence) and designate as a causal property every property 
constituted here as conditionally determined. The above-men- 


146 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


tioned "link" to the Corporeal body, however, procures for this 
" quasi-nature " an insertion into the nexus of nature in the 
strict sense. I grasp the "human being" as a concrete unity in 
"outer experience." In this apperception there is a system of 
5 experiential indications by virtue of which an Ego-life with 
partially determined content and with a horizon of indetermi- 
nateness, of unknownness, is given as one with the Body and is 
"there" bound with it. And it resides in the character of this 
apperception that from the start relations of dependence 

10 between the psychic and the Bodily are apprehended in con- 
sciousness and enter into the thematic focus by means of the 
corresponding attention. The Bodily itself is again given as 
interwoven in the causal nexus of physical nature. Here the 
human being is a human being in nature and is in nature only 

15 because, first and foremost, the Body is a material thing in 
spatial nature. Psychic reality is constituted as reaUty only 
through psychophysical dependencies. It has its unity in itself, 
but here it is considered as a unity in a nexus. To be sure, in a 
psychophysical consideration I observe one single sensation, one 

20 perception, one nexus of memory, etc. But these are moments of 
the subjective stream of consciousness and are states of the 
"soul," which, as unity, is a seat of causalities (in an enlarged [139| 
sense). It is in just this way that I isolate the individual physical 
state, e.g., of the optic nerve, and follow it up to the process in 

25 the brain. But it is precisely a brain process; the nerve is an 
organ in the nervous system, and the nervous system is that of a 
Body closed on itself, which, as Body, is a bearer of relations of 
psychophysical dependence. All this inheres in the essence of the 
dominant, sense-determining, apperception. The unity of the 

30 soul is a real unity in that, as unity of psychic life, it is joined 
with the Body as unity of the Bodily stream of being, which for 
its part is a member of nature. 

The result of the consideration which was to enlighten us on 
the sense of what is meant in speaking of the "soul" and 

35 "psychic nature" leads us back accordingly to the point of 
departure of our entire discussion : what we have to oppose to 
material nature as a second kind of reaHty is not the " soul " but 
the concrete unity of Body and soul, the human (or animal) 
subject. 


THE CONSTITUTION OF ANIMAL NATURE 


147 


§ 34. Necessity of the distinction between the naturalistic 
and the personahstic attitudes 

Before we can enter into a more precise treatment of the 
constitution of this reality, we must, in order to dispel obvious 

5 objections, insert a brief remark. In relation to the psychic Ego, 

taken as the unity that we have thought as constituted by 

physiopsychic ^ and idiopsychic dependencies, the following 

difficulties arise : 

That which is given to us, as human subject, one with the 

10 human Body, in immediate experiential apprehension, is the 
human person, who has his spiritual individuaUty, his intellec- 
tual and practical abilities and skills, his character, his sensibil- 
ity. This Ego is certainly apprehended as dependent on its Body 
and thereby on the rest of physical nature, and likewise it is [140] 

15 apprehended as dependent on its own past. But one thing is 
striking : the apprehension in which the human being is given to 
us in the human Body, the apprehension in which the human 
being is given as a person who lives, acts, and undergoes, and of 
whom we are conscious as a real person who behaves under the 

20 circumstances of his personal Hfe now in this way and now in 

that way, seems to contain a surplus which does not present itself 

as a mere complex of consfitutive moments of apprehension of 

the type we have described. 

Let us consider: the human subject, e.g. I myself, a person, 

25 live in the world and find myself dependent on it. I find myself 
in an environment of things. The things there are dependent on 
each other, and I on them. From this we take account of the 
fact that my Body stands precisely within a thingly nexus and 
that certain of its material changes have, in a determinate 

30 fashion, psychophysical correlates. This state of affairs enters 
into the apprehension insofar as I can at any time say meaning- 
fully : my hand has been struck by a stick and that is why I sense 


' As the following considerations will show, the physiopsychic dependencies are 
not sufficient for the constitution of the psychic subject and its properties, as we 
grasped them at the outset (pp. 129 f.) On the contrary, the concept of "external 
circumstances" has to be extended to the Objects that motivate the behavior of the 
subject. 


148 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


a contact, pressure, light pain. On the other hand, however, it is 
remarkable that I find myself determined by things in so many 
ways without such psychophysical dependencies seeming to play 
a role, i.e., in the apprehension itself. Among the things of my 
5 environment, that one there steers my regard onto itself; its 
special form ''strikes me.'* I choose the fabric /or the sake o/its 
beautiful color or its smoothness. The noise in the street 
"irritates" me; it makes me close the window. In short, in my 
theoretical, emotional, and practical behavior — in my theoreti- 

10 cal experience and thinking, in my position-taking as to pleas- 
ure, enjoyment, hoping, wishing, desiring, wanting — / feel 
myself conditioned by the matter in question, though this 
obviously does not mean psychophysically conditioned. Just as 
in my own case, so I apprehend everyone else as directly 

15 dependent, in such relations, on the matters in the same way 
(though by no means psychophysically conditioned). If I know 
the person, then I know, on the whole, how he will behave. For 
this reahzing apprehension, the psychophysical relations do not [141] 
play, obviously, any actual essential role, even if they may be 

20 included in this apprehension of the man. Even the idiopsychic 
apprehensions, although they are co-functioning, cannot emerge 
as constitutive for such realization. I apprehend myself as 
dependent in my behavior, in my acts, on the things themselves, 
on their beautiful color, on their special form, on their pleasant 

25 or dangerous properties. I do not therein apprehend myself as 
dependent on my Body or on my history. The same apphes in 
an even more striking way to the dependencies in which persons 
know themselves as dependent on others, and not merely on 
individual persons but on communities of persons, social 

30 institutions, the state, morals, the law, the church, etc. The 
apprehension of the man as a real personahty is determined 
throughout by such dependencies. A man is what he is as a being 
who maintains himself in his commerce with the things of his 
thingly, and with the persons of his personal, surrounding world 

35 and who, in doing so, maintains his individuality throughout. 
And furthermore, he maintains himself over against the powers 
of the Objective spirit, which, like legal institutions, morals, and 
religious prescriptions, stand over against him precisely as 
Objectivities. In these relations a man now finds himself bound 


THE CONSTITUTION OF ANIMAL NATURE 


149 


and constricted, now unbound and free; also, he feels himself 
now receptive, now creatively active. But in any event, he finds 
himself really related to his thingly and spiritual surrounding 
worlds. How a man behaves there is not a matter of mere 
5 chance ; someone who knows him can predict his behavior. His 
reality as a person consists precisely in having real properties (as 
personal properties) which possess relations, under rules, to this 
surrounding world. On the one hand now it is certainly clear 
that in the apprehension of the subject, with respect to all states 
10 of acts, the physiopsychic and idiopsychic dependency is some- 
how assumed, but that, on the other hand, in all specifically 
personal contexts in which the personality manifests its personal 
properties, they, properly speaking, play no role. What is 
remarkable thereby is that we say the psychic Ego and the 
15 personal Ego are, in their underlying basis, the same. The whole 
consciousness of the personal Ego, together with all its acts and 
the rest of its psychic basis, is precisely nothing other than the [142] 
psychic Ego's consciousness. We are even inclined to say that it 
is the same Ego. And yet the same state of consciousness is 
20 standing under two totally different apperceptions. In the one 
case the system of real circumstances provides the ''surrounding 
world/* in the other case, it is provided by the mere Body and 
the elapsed nexus of consciousness. 

A puzzHng situation indeed. One who is wont to think in the 

25 way of natural science will immediately say here that "in 

Objective truth " the individuahty in the nexus of individualities 

dissolves into a nexus of Bodies in physical nature, with which 

is linked a system of psychic correlates to which idiopsychic 

regulations belong (to the extent that these latter cannot just be 

30 reduced to psychophysical regulations). Thereby, in a way to be 

explained by "natural science" (physical and psychological), it 

happens that, in the psychic unities. Ego-subjects are constituted 

and therewith acquire representations of other people and of a 

surrounding world in the widest sense and work out modes of 

35 representation in which they see themselves as directly related to 

this surrounding world. 

The question will be whether this answer suffices. At any 
event, if we, in the way indicated, let the psychic* Ego be 
constituted by physiopsychic and idiopsychic components of 


150 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


apprehension alone, we are still not making a decision in favor 
of this answer. To describe faithfully we must instead recognize 
here two modes of apprehension (not only as facts given in 
experience but also in phenomenological ideation) as essentially 
5 different modes of apprehension still to be clarified by a proper 
penetrating analysis. 

In what follows we remain at first in the attitude in which we 
think of the psychic Ego as constituted exclusively through its 
dependencies; we are powerless against the fact that the per- 

10 sonal Ego, which functions so-to-say as the ruler of the soul, is 
co-present; but it is now for us dissolved, according to all its 
acts and states, into the psychic. We are and we remain in the 
attitude in which material nature is precisely actually there. The 
Bodies are actually there, and, psychophysically one with them, 

15 so are the psychic data that belong, as correlates, to the central 
physiological processes, and causally interwoven with these data 
are dispositional after-effects of the earlier lived experiences of 
the same soul. 

Later, we will examine extensively each of the attitudes, or 

20 apprehensions, in their mutual relations and in their significance 
for the constitution of different worlds and sciences. Termino- 
logically, we distinguish psychological apprehension and experi- 
ence from human-scientific (personal) apprehension and experi- 
ence. The Ego that is apprehended "psychologically" is the 

25 psychic Ego; the one apprehended in the way of the human 
sciences, the spiritual sciences, is the personal Ego or the 
spiritual individuum. Psychological experience fits within natu- 
ral-scientific experience in a broad sense, i.e., within the science 
of physical nature and of the Bodily-psychic nature founded in 

30 the physical. Parallel with this, talk about man can have two 
meanings : man in the sense of nature (as Object of zoology and 
natural-scientific anthropology) and man as spiritually real and 
as member of the spiritual world (as Object of the human 
sciences). 


[14^ 


Chapter Three 

THE CONSTITUTION OF PSYCHIC REALITY 
THROUGH THE BODY 


§ 35. Transition to the study of the 
5 constitution of " man as nature " 

Now, the theme of the following considerations is to be the 
constitution of the natural reality, man (or animal being), i.e., 
the constitution of man as he presents himself to a naturahstic 
point of view : as material body upon which are constructed new 

10 strata of being, the Bodily-psychic. It is possible that in this 
constitutive consideration much will have to be included that 
subsequent investigation will show as belonging to the personal 
or spiritual Ego. It will be possible to provide the ultimate 
distinction between "man as nature" and "man as spirit," as 

15 well as the establishment of their reciprocal relations, only when 
both these Objectivities have been subject to constitutive 
study. 

If we now look for a point of departure for our constitutive 
analysis, then we must take into account what came to light for 

20 us as regards the constitution of material nature, namely, that 
it, with its entire intuitive content, is related to animal subjects. 
Hence when we approach the constitution of the natural Object, 
"man," we may not already presuppose his Body as a fully 
constituted material thing but instead must at first pursue what 

25 is already constituted prior to, or correlative with, material 
nature, as regards the psychophysical subject. And here, as 
before, let us first try to see how far we can advance in a 
solipsistic consideration. 


[144] 


152 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


THE CONSTITUTION OF ANIMAL NATURE 


153 


§ 36. Constitution of the Body as bearer of 
localized sensations (sensings) 

We have seen that in all experience of spatio-thingly Objects, 
the Body ''is involved" ^ as the perceptual organ of the exper- 
5 iencing subject, and now we must investigate the constitution of 
this Corporeality. We can thereby choose immediately the 
special case in which the spatially experienced body, perceived 
by means of the Body, is the Corporeal body itself. For this too 
is perceived from the outside, although within certain limits, 

10 preventing it from being considered, without qualification, as a 
thing like any other in a thingly nexus. Thus there are parts of 
this body which can indeed be perceived by touch but cannot be 
seen. 2 At first, however, we may disregard these and begin 
instead with parts that we can both touch and see. I can look at 

15 them and feel them, just Hke other things, and in this respect the 
appearances have entirely the same nexus as do other appear- 
ances of things. But now there is a distinction between the visual 
appearances and the tactual regarding, e.g., a hand. Touching 
my left hand, I have touch-appearances, that is to say, I do 

20 not just sense, but I perceive and have appearances of a soft, 
smooth hand, with such a form. The indicational sensations of 
movement and the representational sensations of touch, which [145] 
are Objectified as features of the thing, " left hand, " belong in 
fact to my right hand. But when I touch the left hand I also find 

25 in it, too, series of touch-sensations, which are "localized " in it, 
though these are not constitutive of properties (such as rough- 
ness or smoothness of the hand, of this physical thing). If I 
speak of the physical thing, " left hand," then I am abstracting 
from these sensations (a ball of lead has nothing Hke them and 

30 likewise for every "merely" physical thing, every thing that is 
not my Body). If I do include them, then it is not that the 
physical thing is now richer, but instead it becomes Body, it 
senses. " Touch "-sensations belong to every appearing Objec- 
tive spatial position on the touched hand, when it is touched 

35 precisely at those places. The hand that is touching, which for 
its part again appears as a thing, likewise has its touch- 

' Cf. pp. 60 fT. and pp. 134fr. 

^ As to the constitution of the Body as a thing, cf. pp. 165 fT. 


sensations at the place on its corporeal surface where it touches 
(or is touched by the other). Similarly, if the hand is pinched, 
pressed, pushed, stung, etc., touched by external bodies or 
touching them, then it has its sensations of contact, of being 
5 stung, of pain, etc. And if this happens by means of some other 
part of one's Body, then the sensation is doubled in the two 
parts of the Body, since each is then precisely for the other an 
external thing that is touching and acting upon it, and each is at 
the same time Body. All the sensations thus produced have their 
10 localization, i.e., they are distinguished by means of their place 
on the appearing CorporeaUty, and they belong phenomenally 
to it. Hence the Body is originally constituted in a double way: 
first, it is a physical thing, matter; it has its extension, in which 
are included its real properties, its color, smoothness, hardness, 
15 warmth, and whatever other material qualities of that kind 
there are. Secondly, I find on it, and I sense "on" it and ''in" 
it: warmth on the back of the hand, coldness in the feet, 
sensations of touch in the fingertips. I sense, extended over 
larger Bodily areas, the pressure and pull of my clothes. Moving 
20 my fingers, I have motion sensations, whereby a sensation in an 
ever changing way extends itself over and traverses the surface 
of the fingers, but within this sensation-complex there is at the 
same time a content having its localization in the interior of the 
digital space. My hand is lying on the table. I experience the [146] 
25 table as something solid, cold, and smooth. Moving my hand 
over the table, I get an experience of it and its thingly 
determinations. At the same time, I can at any moment pay 
attention to my hand and find on it touch-sensations, sensations 
of smoothness and coldness, etc. In the interior of the hand, 
30 running parallel to the experienced movement, I find motion- 
sensations, etc. Lifting a thing, I experience its weight, but at 
the same time I have weight-sensations localized in my Body. 
And thus, my Body's entering into physical relations (by 
striking, pressing, pushing, etc.) with other material things 
35 provides in general not only the experience of physical occur- 
rences, related to the Body and to things, but also the experi- 
ence of specifically Bodily occurrences of the type we call 
sensings. Such occurrences are missing in "merely" material 
things. 
40 The locahzed sensations are not properties of the Body as a 


154 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


THE CONSTITUTION OF ANIMAL NATURE 


155 


physical thing, but on the other hand, they are properties of the 
thing, Body, and indeed they are effect-properties. They arise 
when the Body is touched, pressed, stung, etc., and they arise 
there where it is touched and at the time when it is touched : only 
5 under certain circumstances do they still endure after the 
touching takes place. Touching refers here to a physical event. 
Even two lifeless things can touch one another, but the touching 
of the Body provides sensations on it or in it. 
We must now give heed to the following: in order to bring to 

10 perception here the tactual thing, paperweight, I touch it, with 
my fingers, for example. I then experience tactually the smooth 
surface of the glass and the deHcate crystal edges. But if I attend 
to the hand and finger, then they have touch sensations which 
still linger when the hand is withdrawn. Likewise, my finger and 

15 hand have kinesthetic sensations, and precisely the same sensa- 
tions which function as indicational or presentational with 
respect to the thing, paperweight, function as touch-effects of 
the paperweight on the hand and as sensings produced in it. In 
the case of the hand lying on the table, the same sensation of 

20 pressure is apprehended at one time as perception of the table's 
surface (of a small part of it, properly speaking) and at another 
time produces, with a '' different direction of attention," in the 
actuaHzation of an other stratum of apprehension, sensations of \\A!% 
digital pressure. In the same way are related the coldness of the 

25 surface of a thing and the sensation of cold in the finger. In the 

case of one hand touching the other, it is again the same, only 

more complicated, for we have then two sensations, and each is 

apprehendable or experienceable in a double way. 

Necessarily bound to the tactual perception of the table (this 

30 perceptual apprehension) is a perception of the Body, along 
with its concomitant sensation of touch. This nexus is a neces- 
sary connection between two possible apprehensions : pertaining 
correlatively to that, however, is a connection between two 
thinghoods that are being constituted. It is shown empirically 

35 by the possibility of a representation of the world in those blind 
from birth that everything can come into play in the extra- visual 
sphere and that here the apperceptions have to be ordered in 
such a way that these correlations can be constituted. 


§ 37. Differences between the visual and tactual realms 

We find now a striking difference between the sphere of the 
visual and that of the tactual. In the tactual realm we have the 
external Object, tactually constituted, and a second Object, the 
5 Body, likewise tactually constituted, e.g., the touching finger, 
and, in addition, there are fingers touching fingers. So here we 
have that double apprehension: the same touch-sensation is 
apprehended as a feature of the "external" Object and is 
apprehended as a sensation of the Body as Object. And in the 
10 case in which a part of the Body becomes equally an external 
Object of an other part, we have the double sensation (each part 
has its own sensations) and the double apprehension as feature 
of the one or of the other Bodily part as a physical object. But 
in the case of an Object constituted purely visually we have 
15 nothing comparable. To be sure, sometimes it is said that the eye 
is, as it were, in touch with the Object by casting its glance over 
it. But we immediately sense the difference. An eye does not 
appear to one's own vision, and it is not the case that the colors 
which would appear visually on the eye as localized sensations 
20 (and indeed visually localized corresponding to the various parts 
of its visual appearance) would be the same as those attributed 
to the object in the apprehension of the seen external thing and [148] 
Objectified in it as features. And similarly, we do not have i 
kind of extended occularity such that, by moving, one eye could 
25 rub past the other and produce the phenomenon of double 
sensation. Neither can we see the seen thing as gliding over the 
seeing eye, continually in contact with it, as we can, in the case 
of a real organ of touch, e.g., the palm of the hand, glide over 
the object or have the object slip past the hand. I do not see 
30 myself, my Body, the way I touch myself. What I call the seen 
Body is not something seeing which is seen, the way my Body as 
touched Body is something touching which is touched.* A 
visual appearance of an object that sees, i.e., one in which the 
sensation of Ught could be intuited just as it is in it — that is 


' Obviously, it cannot be said that I see my eye in the mirror, for my eye, that 
which sees qua seeing, I do not perceive. I see something, of which I judge indirectly, 
by way of "' empathy," that it is identical with my eye as a thing (the one constituted 
by touch, for example) in the same way that I see the eye of an other. 


156 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


THE CONSTITUTION OF ANIMAL NATURE 


157 


denied us. Thus what we are denied is an analogon to the touch 
sensation, which is actually grasped along with the touching 
hand. The role of the visual sensations in the correlative 
constitution of the Body and external things is thus different 
5 from that of the sensations of touch. All that we can say here is 
that if no eye is open there are no visual appearances, etc. If, 
ultimately, the eye as organ and, along with it, the visual 
sensations are in fact attributed to the Body, then that happens 
indirectly by means of the properly localized sensations. 

10 Actually, the eye, too, is a field of localization but only for 
touch sensations, and, like every organ " freely moved " by the 
subject, it is a field of localized muscle sensations. It is an 
Object of touch for the hand; it belongs originally to the merely 
touched, and not seen. Objects. "Originally" is not used here in 

15 a temporal-causal sense; it has to do with a primal group of 
Objects consdtuted directly in intuition. The eye can be 
touched, and it itself provides touch and kinetic sensations; that 
is why it is necessarily apperceived as belonging to the Body. All 
this is said from the standpoint of straightforward empirical 

20 intuition. The relation of the seen color of the thing to the 
seeing eye, the eye "with which" we see, the "being directed" 
of the open eye onto the seen thing, the reference back to this [149J 
direction of the eye which is part of having visual appearances, 
and, furthermore, growing out of this, the relation of the color 

25 sensations to the eye — all that will not be confused with the 
givenness of these sensations in the manner of localized " sens- 
ings. " 

The same applies to hearing. The ear is "involved," but the 
sensed tone is not localized in the ear. (I would not even say 

30 that the case of the "buzzing" in the ears and similar tones 
subjectively sensed in the ear are exceptions. They are in the ear 
just as tones of a viohn are outside in space, but, for all that, 
they do not yet have the proper character of sensings and the 
localization proper to them. ^ ) It would be an important task to 

35 thoroughly examine in this regard the groups of sensations of 
the various senses. However important that would be for a 
completely elaborated theory of the phenomenological constitu- 


C/ Supplement III, p. 324. 


tion of material thinghood, on the one hand, and of the Body, 
on the other hand, for us now the broad distinctions will suffice. 
To make ourselves sure of them, we must be perfectly clear on 
the fact that localization of sensings is in fact something in 
5 principle different from the extension of all material determina- 
tions of a thing. The sensings do indeed spread out in space, 
cover, in their way, spatial surfaces, run through them, etc. But 
this spreading out and spreading into are precisely something 
that differs essentially from extension in the sense of all the 
10 determinations that characterize the res extensa. The sensing 
which spreads over the surface of the hand and extends into it is 
not a real quality of a thing (speaking always within the frame 
of intuitions and their givenness) such as, for example, the 
roughness of the hand, its color, etc. These real properties of a 
15 thing are constituted through a sensuous schema and manifolds 
of adumbrations. To speak in a similar way of sensings would 
be quite absurd. If I turn my hand, bring it closer or take it 
away, then, for one, the unchanged color of the hand is given to 
me as constantly different. Yet the color itself presents itself, 
20 and the color constituted first (that of the sensuous schema) 

manifests a real optical property of the hand. Roughness, too, [150] 
presents itself and does so tactually in manifolds of touch 
sensations which constantly flow into one another and to each 
of which a spreading-out belongs. The touch-sensings, however, 
25 the sensations which, constantly varying, lie on the surface of 
the touching finger, are, such as they are lying there spread out 
over the surface, nothing given through adumbration and 
schematization. They have nothing at all to do with the 
sensuous schema. The touch-sensing is not a state of the 
30 material thing, hand, but is precisely the hand itself, which for 
us is more than a material thing, and the way in which it is mine 
entails that I, the " subject of the Body," can say that what 
belongs to the material thing is its, not mine. All sensings 
pertain to my soul; everything extended to the material thing. 
35 On this surface of the hand I sense the sensations of touch, etc. 
And it is precisely thereby that this surface manifests itself 
immediately as my Body. One can add here as well : if I convince 
myself that a perceived thing does not exist, that I am subject to 
an illusion, then, along with the thing, everything extended in its 


158 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


THE CONSTITUTION OF ANIMAL NATURE 


159 


extension is stricken out too. But the sensings do not disappear. 
Only what is real vanishes from being. 

Connected to the privilege of the localization of the touch 
sensations are differences in the complexion of the visual-tactual 
5 apprehensions. Each thing that we see is touchable and, as such, 
points to an immediate relation to the Body, though it does not 
do so in virtue of its visibility. A subject whose only sense was the 
sense of vision could not at all have an appearing Body; in the 
play of kinesthetic motivations (which he could not apprehend 

10 Bodily) this subject would have appearances of things, he would 
see real things. It cannot be said that this subject who only sees 
sees his Body, for its specific distinctive feature as Body would 
be lacking him, and even the free movement of this " Body," 
which goes hand in hand with the freedom of the kinesthetic 

15 processes, would not make it a Body. In that case, it would only 
be as if the Ego, in unity with this freedom in the kinesthetic, 
could immediately and freely move the material thing, Body. 

The Body as such can be constituted originarily only in 
tactuality and in everything that is localized with the sensations 

20 of touch: for example, warmth, coldness, pain, etc. Further- 
more, the kinetic sensations play an important role. I see how [151 
my hand moves, and without it touching anything while mov- 
ing, I sense kinetic sensations, though as one with sensations of 
tension and sensations of touch, and I localize them in the 

25 moving hand. And the same holds for all the members of the 
Body. If, while moving, I do touch something, then the touch 
sensation immediately acquires localization in the touching 
surface of the hand. At bottom, it is owing only to their 
constant interlacing with these primarily localized sensations 

30 that the kinetic sensations receive localization. But because 
there obtains here no parallelism which is exactly stratified as 
there is between temperature sensations and touch sensations, 
so the kinesthetic sensations do not spread out in a stratified 
way over the appearing extension, and they receive only a rather 

35 indeterminate localization. Yet this is indeed not without signif- 
icance; it makes the unity between the Body and the freely 
moveable thing more intimate. 

Obviously, the Body is also to be seen just hke any other 
thing, but it becomes a Body only by incorporating tactile 


sensations, pain sensations, etc. — in short, by the localization 
of the sensations as sensations. In that case the visual Body also 
participates in the localization, because it coincides with the 
tactual Body, just as other things (or phantoms) coincide, ones 

5 which are constituted both visually and tactually, and thus there 
arises the idea of a sensing thing which "has" and which can 
have, under certain circumstances, certain sensations (sensations 
of touch, pressure, warmth, coldness, pain, etc.) and, in partic- 
ular, have them as localized in itself primarily and properly. 

10 This is then a precondition for the existence of all sensa- 
tions (and appearances) whatsoever, the visual and acoustic 
included, though these do not have a primary localization in the 
Body. 


15 


§ 38. The Body as organ of the will and 
as seat of free movement 


The distinctive feature of the Body as a field of localization is 
the presupposition for its further distinctive features setting it 
off from all material things. In particular, it is the precondition 
for the fact that it, already taken as Body (namely, as the thing 

20 that has a stratum of localized sensations) is an organ of the will [152] 
the one and only Object which, for the will of my pure Ego, is 
moveable immediately and spontaneously and is a means for 
producing a mediate spontaneous movement in other things, in, 
e.g., things struck by my immediately spontaneously moved 

25 hand, grasped by it, lifted, etc. Sheer material things are only 
moveable mechanically and only partake of spontaneous move- 
ment in a mediate way. Only Bodies are immediately sponta- 
neously ("freely") moveable, and they are so, specifically, by 
means of the free Ego and its will which belong to them. It is in 

30 virtue of these free acts that, as we saw earlier, there can be 
constituted for this Ego, in manifold series of perceptions, an 
Object-world, a world of spatial-corporeal things (the Body as 
thing included). The subject, constituted as counter-member of 
material nature, is (as far as we have seen up to now) an Ego, to 

35 which a Body belongs as field of localization of its sensations. 
The Ego has the "faculty" (the "I can") to freely move this 


160 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


THE CONSTITUTION OF ANIMAL NATURE 


161 


Body — i.e., the organ in which it is articulated — and to 
perceive an external world by means of it. 


§ 39. Significance of the Body for the constitution 
of higher Objectivities 

5 Now, besides this, the Body is involved in all other "con- 
scious functions," and that has its various sources. Not only the 
sensations which exercise a constitutive function as regards the 
constitution of sense-things, appearing spatial Objects, not only 
these sensations have a localization given in immediate intuition 
10 along with the relation to a Body grounded therein, but that is 
also true of sensations belonging to totally different groups, e.g., 
the " sensuous " feehngs, the sensations of pleasure and pain, 
the sense of well-being that permeates and fills the whole Body, 
the general malaise of " corporeal indisposition," etc. Thus here 

15 belong groups of sensations which, for the acts of valuing, i.e., 
for intentional lived experiences in the sphere of feeling, or for 
the constitution of values as their intentional correlates, play a 
role, as matter, analogous to that played by the primary sensa- 
tions for what is intentionally lived in the sphere of experience, or 

20 for the constitution of Objects as spatial things. Moreover, all [153| 
kinds of sensations, difficult to analyze and discuss, belong here 
as well, ones that form the material substrate for the hfe of 
desire and will, sensations of energetic tension and relaxation, 
sensations of inner restraint, paralysis, hberation, etc. All these 

25 groups of sensations, as sensings, have an immediate Bodily 
localization. Thus, for every human being, they belong, in a way 
that is immediately intuitable, to the Body as to his particular 
Body, i.e., as a subjective objectivity distinguished from the 
Body as a mere material thing by means of this whole stratum 

30 of localized sensations. The intentional functions, however, are 
bound to this stratum; the matter receives a spiritual forming, 
just as, discussed above, the primary sensations undergo appre- 
hension, are taken up in perceptions, upon which, then, percep- 
tual judgments are built, etc. Hence in this way a human being's 

35 total consciousness is in a certain sense, by means of its hyletic 
substrate, bound to the Body, though, to be sure, the intentional 


lived experiences themselves are no longer directly and properly 
localized: they no longer form a stratum on the Body. Percep- 
tion, as the touching apprehension of form, does not have its 
seat in the touching finger in which the touch sensation is 

5 localized; thinking is not actually localized intuitively in the 
head, the way the impressions of tension are, etc. That we very 
often speak as if it were so is no proof that we actually 
apprehend it that way in intuition. The co-intertwined contents 
of sensation have a localization which is actually intuitively 

10 given, but the intentionalities do not, and only metaphorically 
are they said to be related to the Body or to be in the Body. 


§ 40. More precision concerning the localization 

of the sensings and concerning 

the non-thingly properties of the Body 

15 Now, if all that belongs to the matter is Bodily localized or is, 
by means of localization, related to the Body and is constitutive, 
therewith, for the Body in the Objectivity proper to it, then we 
need to ask how this constitution is to be understood and what 
it is that institutes unity here. The physical Body is, of course, a [154] 

20 constituted unity, and only to it does the stratum of the sensings 
belong. How is the content of the sensation connected to what 
is constituted, and how does the Body, which is equally a 
material thing, have in itself and on itself the contents of 
sensation? It is certainly not in the way in which the sensation- 

25 content, tone quality, and the sensation-content, intensity, have 
an essential unity, nor is it the way in which the sensation- 
content, color, is unified with the moment of spread (we do not 
mean here spatial extension, talk of which makes no sense with 
regard to sensation-contents). Here we have on the one side not 

30 sensation-contents but constituted real unities instead, and is it 
really the case that we have mere sensation-contents on the 
other side? Let us reflect. If an object moves mechanically over 
the surface of my skin, touching it, then I obviously have a 
succession of sensings ordered in a determinate way. If it always 

35 moves in the same way, with the same pressure, touching the 
same parts of the Body at the same pace, then the result is 


162 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


THE CONSTITUTION OF ANIMAL NATURE 


163 


obviously always the same. All this is " obvious," it is there in 
the apprehension; precisely under such circumstances this Cor- 
poreal body behaves in such a way that it is not to be stimulated 
in just any way but is stimulatable in a definite way under 
5 definite circumstances, and such that all effects of stimulation 
have their system, and to the system of thingly bodies appearing 
in it there correspond distinctions as to place, whereby, how- 
ever, to each such place pertains a definite, dependent on the 
type of the stimulation-effect, further dimension of possible 
10 distinctions. To the place in the extension corresponds a place- 
moment in the sensation, and to the degrees of stimulation and 
kinds of stimulation correspond definite moments which render 
the sensation concrete and modifiable according to more or less 
known ways. Thus there lies in the sensations an order which 
15 "coincides" with the appearing extension; but that is already 
implicit in the apprehension from the outset, in such a way that 
the stimulation-effects do not appear as something alien and as 
just an effect, but rather as something pertaining to the appear- 
ing Corporeal body and to the extensive order, and as some- 
20 thing ordered in a coincident order. In each Bodily sensation, 
the mere sensation is not grasped, but it is apprehended as 
belonging to a system of possible functional consequences which 
corresponds exactly to the extensive order, consequences that 
the material real must undergo in consistent parallels with [15| 
25 possible material effects. We must also note that the fields of 
sensation in question here are always completely filled, and each 
new stimulation does not provoke a sensation as if for the first 
time, but rather, it provokes in the sensation-field a correspon- 
ding change in the sensation. Hence the field undergoes an 
30 apprehension as something changeable in manifold ways and as 
dependent on extension in the type of its changeableness. The 
field receives localization, and in the field each new change 
receives localization as a consequence of the particular stimulat- 
ing circumstances. The new stratum the thing has received by 
35 means of the localization of the field acquires, with respect to 
the constancy of the field, the character of a kind of real 
property. The Body, we can say, always has states of sensation, 
and which particular ones it has depends on the concomitant 
system of real circumstances under which it senses. Under the 


real circumstances of the "sting" in this or that part of the 
Body, there emerges in the sensation field (as a field of states) 
the state of sensation, " sting-sensation. " Under the real cir- 
cumstances we call entrance into a hot room, a change occurs in 
5 the total localized field with respect to its total stratum of 
warmth sensation in the sense of rising temperature, etc. The 
sensitiveness of the Body thus is constituted throughout as a 
*' conditional" or psychophysical property. And that enters into 
the apprehension of the Body, as it is perceived "externally." 
10 To the apprehension of Corporeality as such belongs not only 
the apprehension of a thing but also the co-apprehension of the 
sensation fields, and indeed these are given as belonging, in the 
mode of localization, to the appearing Corporeal body. 
"Belonging:" phenomenologically, this term expresses relations 
15 of the phenomenal "if-then": if my hand is touched or struck, 
then I sense it. We do not here have the hand as physical body 
and, connected with it, an extra-physical consequence. From the 
very outset it is apperceptively characterized as a hand with its 
field of sensation, with its constantly co-apprehended state of 
20 sensation which changes in consequence of the external actions 
on it, i.e., as a physical-aesthesiological unity. In the abstract, I 
can separate the physical and aesthesiological strata but can do [156] 
so precisely only in the abstract. In the concrete perception, the 
Body is there as a new sort of unity of apprehension. It is 
25 constituted as an Objectivity in its own right, which fits under 
the formal-universal concept of reality, as a thing that preserves 
its identical properties over against changing external circum- 
stances. The relations of dependency under which it stands 
toward external nature are thereby, however, other than the 
30 ones material things have amongst themselves. (It has already 
been mentioned, and it will be discussed with more precision in 
what follows, that the Body, in addition, as a material thing like 
all others, is fit within the nexus of reality in a more strict sense, 
namely, the one of causal regulation.) 
35 It pertains in general to the intuition of something real to 
leave open, in this intuition's apprehension, further real depen- 
dencies which do not yet belong to the content of the executed 
apprehension in a determinate way (although they may be 
determinate in their specific nature). The real can therefore be 


164 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


THE CONSTITUTION OF ANIMAL NATURE 


165 


related, in new apprehensions and in extensions of old ones, to 
new circumstances as something dependent on them, whereby 
real properties of the same real object are constituted. The sense 
of the expanded apprehension then prescribes the type which 
5 the course of experience has to bear out and determine more 
precisely. With this more precise determination the apprehen- 
sion itself then necessarily takes on fuller form. 

In this way, even the Body is apprehended not only as 
dependent with respect to the primary stratum of sensation, its 

10 properly localized one, but also with respect to the fields of 
sensation and groups of sensation that pertain to it mediately 
and are not properly localized, thus, e.g., with respect to the 
field of vision. How the visual field of sensation is filled, which 
motivations can occur therein, and consequently what in the 

15 visual field can be experienced by the subject, and in which 
modes of appearance it must be exhibited, this all depends on 
certain qualities of the Body, especially on those of the eye, and, 
furthermore, on the eye's Bodily connections, especially its 
connections with the central nervous system, and even more 

20 particularly it depends on this system itself and, on the other 
hand, on the concomitant external stimulations. Along with 
that, hence, are constituted new real properties of the Body, 
which, thereby, is obviously involved as already constituted [isi^ 
from elsewhere. So the capacity to be stimulated in general 

25 becomes a universal title for a class of real properties which 
have quite another source than the properly extensive (and 
therewith material) properties of the thing and which in fact 
pertain to a quite different dimension. For through this stratum, 
through this new group of real properties which display them- 

30 selves as real insofar as they are constituted through a relation 
to real circumstances within the real, the material Body is 
intertwined with the soul. What can be apprehended as localized 
stratum of the Body as well as what can be apprehended as 
dependent on the Body (in the full sense of Body, including this 

35 stratum already) and on the "sense organs," all this forms, 
under the heading of the matter of consciousness, an underlying 
basis of consciousness and undergoes its realizing apprehension 
in unity with this consciousness as soul and psychic Ego. To say 
that this Ego, or the soul, "has" a Body does not merely mean 


that there exists a physical-material thing which would, through 
its material processes, present real preconditions for " conscious 
events" or even, conversely, that in its processes there occur 
dependencies on conscious events within a "stream of con- 

5 sciousness." Causahty belongs, if the word is to retain its 
pregnant sense, to reality, and conscious events participate in 
reality only as psychic states or as states of a psychic Ego. Soul 
and psychic Ego "have" a Body; there exists a material thing, 
of a certain nature, which is not merely a material thing but is a 

10 Body, i.e., a material thing which, as localization field for 
sensations and for stirrings of feeHngs, as complex of sense 
organs, and as phenomenal partner and counter-part of all 
perceptions of things (along with whatever else could be said 
about it, based on the above), makes up a fundamental 

15 component of the real givenness of the soul and the Ego. 


§41. Constitution of the Body as material thing 
in contrast to other material things * 

We have seen how, correlative to the material world, a subject 
of Bodily-psychic faculties (sense faculties, faculties of free [158] 

20 movement, of apperception, etc.) is constituted, whereby the 
Body comes to light, at one and the same time, as Body and as 
material thing. In this regard, however, we made the restriction 
that the Body emerges as a thing of a particular type, so that 
one cannot, without qualification, assign it to nature as a part 

25 just like any other part. This is what we must discuss somewhat 
more precisely. 

a) The Body as center of orientation 

If we consider the characteristic way in which the Body 
presents itself and do the same for things, then we find the 
30 following situation : each Ego has its own domain of perceptual 
things and necessarily perceives the things in a certain orienta- 
tion. The things appear and do so from this or that side, and in 


C/ pp. 152 f. 


166 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


THE CONSTITUTION OF ANIMAL NATURE 


167 


this mode of appearing is included irrevocably a relation to a 
here and its basic directions. All spatial being necessarily 
appears in such a way that it appears either nearer or farther, 
above or below, right or left. This holds with regard to all 
5 points of the appearing corporeahty, which then have their 
differences in relation to one another as regards this nearness, 
this above and below, etc, among which there are hereby 
peculiar qualities of appearance, stratified hke dimensions. The 
Body then has, for its particular Ego, the unique distinction of 

10 bearing in itself the zero point of all these orientations. One of 
its spatial points, even if not an actually seen one, is always 
characterized in the mode of the ultimate central here: that is, a 
here which has no other here outside of itself, in relation to 
which it would be a "there." It is thus that all things of the 

15 surrounding world possess an orientation to the Body, just as, 
accordingly, all expressions of orientation imply this relation. 
The "far" is far from me, from my Body; the "to the right" 
refers back to the right side of my Body, e.g., to my right hand. 
In virtue of its faculty of free mobihty, the subject can now 

20 induce the flow of the system of its appearances and, along with 
that, the orientations. These changes do not have the signifi- 
cance of changes of the things of the environment themselves, 
and specifically, they do not signify a movement of the things. 
The Body of the subject "alters its position" in space; the 

25 things appearing in the environment are constantly oriented 
thereby; all appearances of things preserve their fixed system 
according to form. The form of intuition, the lawful character [159] 
of the adumbrations, and, therewith, the form of the order of 
orientation around a center, all this is necessarily preserved. But 

30 whereas the subject is always, at every now, in the center, in the 

here, whence it sees the things and penetrates into the world by 

vision, on the other hand the Objective place, the spatial 

position, of the Ego, or of its Body, is a changing one. 

Nevertheless, at the present stage of our investigation we are 

35 not at all so advanced that we could assign to the Ego such an 
"Objective place." Provisionally, we must say: I have all things 
over and against me; they are all "there" — with the exception 
of one and only one, namely the Body, which is always 
"here." 


b) Peculiarity of the manifolds of appearance of the Body 

Other peculiar properties of the Body are conjoined with its 
distinctive character as we have described it. Whereas, with 
regard to all other things, I have the freedom to change at will 

5 my position in relation to them and thereby at the same time 
vary at will the manifolds of appearance in which they come to 
givenness for me, on the other hand I do not have the 
possibility of distancing myself from my Body, or my Body 
from me, and accordingly the manifolds of appearance of the 

10 Body are restricted in a definite way: certain of my corporeal 
parts can be seen by me only in a peculiar perspectival 
foreshortening, and others (e.g., the head) are altogether invisi- 
ble to me. The same Body which serves me as means for all my 
perception obstructs me in the perception of it itself and is a 

15 remarkably imperfectly constituted thing. 

c) The Body as integral part of the causal nexus 

If, despite all this, we apprehend the Body as a real thing, it is 
because we find it integrated into the causal nexus of material 
nature. We spoke of the pecuUarity the Body has (as Body) of 

20 being moved "spontaneously" or "freely" by the will of the 
Ego. Besides these free kinesthetic processes, others emerge 
which, instead of being "done by," are characterized as being 
"done to," i.e., as passive processes in which spontaneity plays 
no part. In that case, we have at the same time an experiencing 

25 of the mechanical process of the movement of the Body and a [160] 
givenness of this process with the "psychic" character of 
enduring something— not as if it were something painful or 
repugnant but simply in the sense that "my hand is moved, my 
foot is struck, pushed," etc. Similarly, I experience the mechan- 

30 ical movement of the Body as the movement of a material thing 
like any other thing even in the case of spontaneity, and I find it 
characterized at the same time as a spontaneous movement in 
the sense, " I move my hand," etc. 

Thus movements of my Body are apprehended as mechanical 

35 processes like those of external things, and the Body itself is 
apprehended as a thing which affects others and upon which the 


168 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


THE CONSTITUTION OF ANIMAL NATURE 


169 


others have effects. All the cases mentioned earlier of condi- 
tional relations between things and the Body also admit of 
changes in apprehension, thanks to which the processes in 
question appear as merely physical ones. If a heavy body is 
5 resting on my hand (or perhaps the one hand on the other) then 
I have, abstracting from the resultant sensation of pressure or 
pain, the physical phenomenon of one body pressing on 
another, perhaps deforming it by its pressure. If I cut my finger 
with a knife, then a physical body is split by the driving into it 

10 of a wedge, the fluid contained in it trickles out, etc. Likewise, 
the physical thing, "my Body," is heated or cooled through 
contact with hot or cold bodies; it can become electrically 
charged through contact with an electric current; it assumes 
different colors under changing illumination; and one can elicit 

15 noises from it by striking it. The last two cases, however, are 
different from the earlier ones where there was a psychophysical 
process that could be split apart abstractively into a physical 
process and its "psychical" consequence (or vice versa). But the 
physical process, "red illumination of my hand," is not fol- 

20 lowed by the sensation of red in the same way that the sensation 
of warmth follows the heating of my hand, and the physical 
process to which the sensation of the color is linked — red light 
rays striking my eyes — is not given to me at all. The "turning 
point," which lies in the Body, the point of the transformation 

25 from causal to conditional process, is hidden from me. 


it presents itself as a reality sui generis. That is: on the one 
hand, as a material thing of special modes of appearance, a 
thing "inserted" between the rest of the material world and the 
" subjective " sphere (the subject together with what was just 

5 mentioned in 1), as a center around which the rest of the spatial 
world is arranged, and as being in causal relationship with the 
real external world. On the other hand, the Body appears here 
at the same time as a "turning point" where the causal 
relations are transformed into conditional relations between the 

10 external world and the Bodily-psychic subject. And in virtue of 
that, the Body appears as pertaining integrally to this subject 
and its properties, both the specifically Corporeal and the 
psychic ones bound up with them. That which is constituted in 
the outer attitude is there co-present together with what is 

15 constituted in the inner attitude. 

In solipsistic experience, however, we do not attain the 
givenness of our self as a spatial thing like all others (a 
givenness which certainly is manifest in our factual experience) 
nor that of the natural Object, "man" (animal being), which we 

20 came to know as correlate of the "naturalistic attitude," a 
material thing upon which the higher strata of what is specifi- 
cally animal are built and into which they are, in a certain way, 
inserted, "introjected." In order to attain that, a different path 
has to be followed; one must go beyond his own subjectivity 

25 and turn to the animalia encountered in the external world. 


§42. Character of the Body as constituted solipsistically [16l| 


If we now try, in a short summary, to characterize the way a 
Body is constituted for the solipsistic subject, then we find 
that: 

30 1) viewed from "within" — in the "inner attitude" — it 
appears as a freely moving organ (or system of such organs) by 
means of which the subject experiences the external world. 
Furthermore, the Body appears as a bearer of sensations, and, 
thanks to their intertwining with the rest of psychic life in its 

35 totality, it appears as forming, with the soul, a concrete unity. 
2) Approached from the outside — in the "outer attitude" — 


THE CONSTITUTION OF ANIMAL NATURE 


171 


Chapter Four 

THE CONSTITUTION OF PSYCHIC 
REALITY IN EMPATHY 


§43. Givenness of other animalia 

5 In experience, in the sphere of original constitution, what is 
originally given is a multiplicity of things in space and time, in 
manifolds of appearances, but also originally given are ^©a, 
including men ("rational" living beings), not as amalgamations 
of what is given separately, but as two-fold unities, unities 

10 which allow two strata to be distinguished therein, unities of 
things and subjects, along with the subjects' psychic life. Given 
eo ipso with the act of apperceiving something as human is also 
the possibility of mutual relations, communication, between 
man and man. Then also the identity of nature for all men and 

15 animals. Given furthermore are the more simple and more 
complex social connections, friendships, marriages, unions; 
these are connections instituted between men (on the lowest 
level, already between animals). 

If we unfold what lies in the unitary act of apperceiving a 

20 man, as we have described it, then we have at the lowest level 
the material Corporeal body, which, as a material thing like all 
others, has its position in space and is given to me in manifold 
appearances, variable at will, and in constantly changing orien- 
tations: it is perceived originally. 


25 § 44, Primal presence and appresence 

If we give the name original perception to the lived experience 
in which a subject has the perceived object given in original 


[16; 


presence, then that means the object is there "actually," "in the 
original," and is not merely "co-presented." Hence there is a 
fundamental difference between primal presence and appresence. 
The latter refers back to the former. It is to be noted that primal 

5 presence of an object does not mean primal presence of all its 
inner determinations or proper attributes; some are enough, as 
with all physical things. Yet there exists for the Ego the 
possibility of bringing the object, in continuous original percep- 
tions, to primal presence as regards each of the properties which 

10 belong to it, whereby in this perceptual continuum there is a 
constant consciousness of the object itself in primal presence. 

In that case, perceptual objects (thus, individual objects, 
objects that have a temporal presence and a temporal duration) 
break down into : 

15 1) objects which can be primally present not just to one 
subject, but, if they are primally present to one, can be given 
identically as primally present idealiter to all other subjects (as 
soon as these are constituted). The totality of objects that can 
be given as primally present and that make up a domain of 

20 common primal presence for all communicating subjects is 
nature in the first and original sense. It is spatial-temporal- 
material nature : the one space, the one time, the one world of 
things for all : the one that can be given as primally present to 
all. 

25 2) what is subjective over against the Objective. And the 
subjective is the individual-unique, the temporal, the total 
content of original presence which can be given to only one 
subject in primal presence. Each subject belongs here itself 
along with all its acts, states, noematic correlates, and, further- 

30 more, with the Corporeality and the properties, or faculties, 
constituted in it in the inner attitude. 


§45. Animaha as primally present Corporeal 
bodies with appresented interiority 

We now have to note, however, that what is experienceable in 

35 the original sense, being which can be primally present, is not all 

of being, is not even all experienceable being. There are realities 


[163] 


172 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


THE CONSTITUTION OF ANIMAL NATURE 


173 


that cannot be given to several subjects in primal presence, 
namely, animalia, for subjectivities are included in them. They 
are Objectivities of a particular kind, given originally in such a 
way that they presuppose primal presences, whereas they them- 
5 selves cannot be given in primal presence. Human beings as 
components of the external world are originally given insofar as 
they are apprehended as unities of corporeal Bodies and souls. 
The Bodies which are externally standing over against me are 
experienced by me in primal presence just like other things, [16| 
10 whereas the interiority of the psychic is experienced in appre- 
sence. 

In my physical surrounding world I encounter Bodies, i.e., 
material things of the same type as the material thing consti- 
tuted in solipsistic experience, "my Body," and I apprehend 
15 them as Bodies, that is, I feel by empathy that in them there is 
an Ego-subject, along with everything that pertains to it and 
with the particular content demanded from case to case. Trans- 
ferred over to the other Bodies thereby is first of all that 
"localization" I accompHsh in various sense-fields (field of 
20 touch, warmth, coldness, smell, taste, pain, sensuous pleasure) 
and sense-regions (sensations of movement), and then in a 
similar way there is a transfer of my indirect localization of 
spiritual activities. 
In conformity with the experienced localization, there then 
25 also takes place a continual coordination of the physical and the 
psychical, and rightly so. For the dependencies, accompanying 
the locaHzation, of what is localized, i.e., dependencies upon the 
physical substrata, give rise, where similar dependencies occur, 
to an accompHshment of a coordination : e.g., localization of 
30 psychic processes in the brain, in the frontal lobes, etc. To be 
sure, this is not an experienced localization, which would be a 
proper apperception. My hand and other parts of my Body are 
appearing ones, and they appear as really connected with sense 
data. But the lobes of my brain do not appear to me. The 
35 functional coordination between the hand and the hand's field 
of touch is such that whenever I experience contact (as a 
physical process) with the hand, "contact sensations" emerge in 
my field of touch, or, in case it is someone else's hand making 
contact with something, sensations are co-given to me in the 


mode of appresence. But my frontal lobe is not the bearer of a 
field of touch and is for me not at all something appearing. And 
even as regards the other's brain, I cannot "intuit" in imme- 
diate appresence the psychic processes which pertain to it. 
5 But the Body as physical Object is subject to physical 
influences to which psychic "consequences" are linked without 
my knowing precisely how they are connected. And finally I 
arrive at the brain, its structures and the physical processes 
occurring therein which are in correspondence with the psychi- 
10 cal processes, a correspondence that includes in itself functional [165] 
alterations and dependencies. If a process in the brain alters, 
then there occurs an alteration of the corresponding set of Uved 
experiences, the set of psychical events, and perhaps the con- 
verse also holds. In the case of the hand, at first I find only that 
15 contact conditions the alteration of the field of touch in a 
corresponding way. But subsequently I discover a determinate 
structure of the hand, sensory nerves, and finally the corpuscles 
of touch and the physical processes there, and I will say 
naturally that the field of touch "pertains" especially to these 
20 nerve-ends. But I cannot " see" that this is the case, and, should 
I excise these nerve ends, I will not be able to feel that it is the 
case either. Hence this is originally an empirical coordination 
which belongs to appearances, and then it is an empirical 
coordination that belongs to what has been worked out theore- 
25 tically. 

What requires a closer examination is the system of appresen- 
tations, which, on the one hand, in the case of the solipsistic 
subject, has its original basis in original connections of regular 
co-existence in such a way that the connected members and 
30 series of members in their co-presence are not just there together 
but refer to one another. And, on the other hand, this system 
develops as a system of ordered indications only by means of 
continuous experience of other people, who are already consti- 
tuted by empathy. In the case of the solipsistic subject we have 
35 the distinctive field of touch in co-presence with the appearing 
Bodily surface and, in union with that, the field of warmth; in 
second place we have the indeterminate localization of the 
common feelings (the spiritual ones as well) and, further, the 
localization of the interior of the Body, mediated by the 


174 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


localization of the field of touch. For example, I ''feel my 
heart." When I press the surface of the Body "around the 
heart," I discover, so to say, this ''heart sensation," and it may 
become stronger and somewhat modified. It does not itself 
5 belong to the touched surface, but it is connected with it. 
Likewise, if I not only simply contact the surface of my Body 
but press on it more strongly, press into the flesh, i.e., with my 
touching finger "feel through" to my bones or inner organs 
Gust as, similarly, with other bodies I feel through to their inner 
10 parts), then particular new sensations, which are attributed to 
the relevant felt-through Bodily parts, join to the general 
sensations of pressure and touch. Besides, solipsistically there [U 
belongs to every position of my eyes an " image "-aspect of the 
seen object and thus an image of the oriented environment. But 
15 also in the case of touching an object, there belongs to every 
position of my hand and finger a corresponding touch-aspect of 
the object, just as, on the other side, there is a touch-sensation 
in the finger, etc., and obviously there is visually a certain image 
of my touching hand and its touching movements. All this is 
20 given to me myself as belonging together in co-presence and is 
then transferred over in empathy : the other's touching hand, 
which I see, appresents to me his soHpsistic view of this hand 
and then also everything that must belong to it in presentified 
co-presence. 
25 Yet to the appearance of the other person there also belongs, 
in addition to what has been mentioned, the interiority of 
psychic acts. In this connection it should be noted that the point 
of departure is here, too, a transferred co-presence : to the seen 
Body there belongs a psychic life, just as there does to my Body. 
30 If, however, a point of departure for understanding the other's 
psychic life is given, then various appresented indications, in 
themselves undetermined, work together. What is then under- 
stood is psychic being, which is co-given to the spectator along 
with Bodily movements in co-presence, and indeed as conform- 
35 ing to rules, movements which now for their part frequently 
become new signs, that is, for the psychic lived experiences 
which were indicated or surmised earlier and as well in cases 
where these were not indicated in another fashion. Gradually, in 
this way, a system of indications is formed, and there is finally 


THE CONSTITUTION OF ANIMAL NATURE 


175 


in actuality an analogy between this system of signs "express- 
ing" psychic events, both the active and passive, and the system 
of signs of language for the expression of thoughts, abstracting 
from the fact that language itself, as actually spoken, also 

5 belongs to the former system. Precisely from here one could 
embark upon a systematic study of the "expression" of psychic 
life (and this has in fact already been attempted) and elaborate, 
as it were, the grammar of this expression. Since here this 
manifold expression appresents psychic existence in Corporeal- 

10 ity, thus there is constituted with all that an objectivity which is 
precisely double and unitary: the man— without "introjec- 
tion." 


§46. Significance of empathy for the constitution [167] 

of the reality "I as man" 

15 Therefore, under the title "the other man," we have a Body, 
and we have this Body in union with sensorial fields and, as it 
were, psychic fields, i.e., in union with a subject of acts. This 
appurtenance or conjunction obviously exists also for me 
myself. Parts of these appurtenances were certainly given to me 

20 originarily as regards myself (and could only be given as regards 
myself); the rest is then empirical extension, transfer in thinking 
based on experience. But now it would not occur to me at all in 
the attitude of " self-experience " to take all that is psychic in me, 
my Ego, my acts, my appearances as well, with their sense data, 

25 etc. and seriously place, i.e., "introject," all this into my Body. 
It is also out of the question that in solipsistic self-experience I 
encounter all that is subjective about me, along with my 
perceptually given Body, as a reality, i.e., in the form of a 
perception, although my Body has such a multifarious unity 

30 with what is subjective. It is only with empathy and the constant 
orientation of empirical reflection onto the psychic life which is 
appresented along with the other's Body and which is contin- 
ually taken Objectively, together with the Body, that the closed 
unity, man, is constituted, and I transfer this unity subsequently 

35 to myself. 

Concerning the experience of others, every person, in virtue 


176 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


THE CONSTITUTION OF ANIMAL NATURE 


177 


of his Body, stands within a spatial nexus, among things, and to 
each Body for itself there pertains the person's entire psychic 
life, grasped in empathy in a determinate way, so that therefore 
if the Body moves and occupies ever new places, the soul, too, 
5 as it were, co-moves. The soul is indeed ever one with the 
Body. 

Moves " as it were : " " If something is bound to something 
else that moves, then it is co-moved by that movement, and, 
likewise, the whole formed by those two moves." i This applies,' 
10 however, only if the connection is that of a physical whole. But 
the soul is nowhere, and its connection with the Body is 
founded only on functional nexuses: the Body is "organ" of 
the subject, and all appearances are related to Corporeality, [1681 
through the connections the sensations have with the Body, etc! 
15 The "being-somewhere" of a person certainly has a valid 
meaning, but it is one thing "to be regularly integrated with 
something else and thereby localized," and it is another thing 
"to be in space on one's own." In order to estaWish a mutual 
relationship between myself and an other, in order to commu- 
20 nicate something to him, a Bodily relation, a Bodily connection 
by means of physical occurrences, must be instituted. I have to 
go over and speak to him. Thus space plays a major role here 
and so does time, but this role must always be understood 
according to its sense and its function. The legitimate " natural- 
25 ization" of consciousness consists in the fact that Body and 
soul form a genuine experiential unity and that, in virtue of this 
unity, the psychic obtains its position in space and time. It is as 
localized and temporalized in this way that the other subjects 
are there for us. To the compass of that which is appresented 
30 with the seen Body pertain also the systems of appearances in 
which an external world is given to these subjects. Because we 
grasp them in empathy as analogons of ourselves, their place is 
given to us as a "here," in opposition to which everything else is 
"there." But with this analogizing, which does not result in 
35 anything new over against the Ego, we have at the same time 
the other Body as "there" and as identified with the Body- 
as-here phenomenon. I then have Objective movement in space. 


Aristotle, De anima. A 3. 


the other Body is moved just like any body whatsoever, and, in 
union with it, the man " himself" with his psychic hfe moves. So 
I have an Objective reahty as the conjunction of two sides, i.e., 
the man as inserted into Objective space, into the Objective 
5 world. I then posit with this reality an analogon of my Ego and 
of my surrounding world, thus a second Ego with its "subjec- 
tivities," its sense data, changing appearances, and things 
appearing therein. The things posited by others are also mine: 
in empathy I participate in the other's positing. E.g., I identify 
10 the thing I have over and against me in the mode of appearance 
a with the thing posited by the other in the mode of appearance 
p. To this belongs the possibility of substitution by means of 
trading places. Each person has, at the same place in space, 
"the same" appearances of the same things — if, as we might 
15 suppose, all have the same sensibility. And on this account, even [169] 
the "view" of a thing is Objectified. Each person has, from the 
same place in space and with the same lighting, the same view 
of, for example, a landscape. But never can the other, at exactly 
the same time as me (in the originary content of hved 
20 experience attributed to him) have the exact same appearance as 
I have. My appearances belong to me, his to him. Only in the 
manner of appresence can I have, co-given with his Body, his 
appearances and his " here," to which they are related. But from 
that " here" I can then consider even my own Body as a natural 
25 Object, i.e., from that "here" my Body is "there," just as the 
other's Body is "there" from my "here." is there at a point in 
Objective space, and I consider it like any other thing that is 
identical not only for me but for every other, and I represent it, 
the Body, in just the way that it is given to any person who 
30 encounters a man as one with it. I place myself at the 
standpoint of the other, any other whatever, and I acknowledge 
that each encounters every other as the natural being, man, and 
that I then have to identify myself with the man seen from the 
standpoint of external intuition. Man as Object is thus a 
35 transcendent external Object, an Object of an external intuition; 
that is, we have here an experience of two strata : interwoven 
with external primally presenting perception is appresenting (or 
introjecting into the exterior) empathy, in an apperception, 
specifically, which realizes the entire psychic life and psychic 


178 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


THE CONSTITUTION OF ANIMAL NATURE 


179 


being in a certain sort of unity of appearance, namely that of an 
identity of manifold appearances and states localized therein, 
which are united in the form of dispositions. 


§ 47. Empathy and the constitution of nature 

5 Empathy then leads, as we saw earlier, to the constitution of 
the intersubjective Objectivity of the thing and consequently 
also that of man, since now the physical Body is a natural- 
scientific Object. The natural-scientific Object is the x of 
"mathematical" qualities, toward the substruction of which 
10 causal analysis and the thinking based on it impel. The things 
that are seen, actually experienced, as well as the actually 
experienced causalities prove to be, as to their intuitive qualities, 
subjectively conditioned. Consequently, man acquires, as a [170j 
natural-scientific Object, a particular structure. The physical 

1 5 Body is a mathematical (" theoretical ") substruction which refers 
back to "merely subjective" appearances (originally these are 
called "things"). The higher stratum is subjectivity, localized 
in the substructed mathematical spatial bodies, the soul with its 
conscious lived experiences, but also what is intentionally meant 

20 in them, including the Objects of original experience as they are 
experienced by this subject. The Objects of my experience, just 
as I experience them, are now incorporated in me, the man, as 
"appearances" belonging to me and as being in the mode of 
"appearances." If I posit, in my experiential research, a thing as 

25 Objectively actual, then I am thereby also positing, for every 
posited subject, existing unities of appearance, i.e., unities of 
validity which are indices for rules of lived experiences of 
perception and of possible perception that are intentionally 
related to these "appearances." All these "phenomenal" things 

30 are what they are only as noematic correlates of the perceptual 
Hved experiences of the man in question. They are merely 
"subjective," they have a "merely subjective truth" (merely 
subjective "being"). In the apprehension of nature, physical 
nature is posited absolutely, and so is the aesthesiological, just 

35 as are, Hkewise, all lived experiences. Furthermore, the things 
that are experienced by the subject in question, and that have 


their true correlates in the mathematical world, are posited as 
unities of appearance. They are not posited as mere noemata 
but as relative existences, and the truths pertaining to them have 
their relative and subjective truth. They exist relatively : that is, 
5 only if the subject (the man) exists and actually has the kind of 
Body that corresponds and actually has the concomitant psy- 
chic hfe in the concomitant relation to the thing itself " existing 
in itself" (the physicalistic thing). 
There are as many such subjective worlds as there are human 
10 individuals in "nature," which is for them the corresponding 
truth in itself. The strata of the constitution of nature which 
have been exhibited teach us how this apprehension is to be 
evaluated : at the lowest level there is constituted, in the manner 
previously described, the intuitive material world and, correla- 
15 tive to that, the experiencing subject, one that has Body and 

soul but is not yet the real unity " man, " is not yet an Object in [171] 
nature. Then there are constituted the other subjects, apperceived 
as analogons of oneself and, at the same time, as natural 
Objects; nature is constituted as intersubjectively common and 
20 as determinable Objectively (exactly), and oneself as subject is 
constituted as member of this " Objective nature." The relativity 
of the things of experience in relation to individual men is thus 
incontrovertible, and it is also beyond doubt that the positing, 
accomplished in empathy, of an intersubjective world in the 
25 form of natural science allows that which is intersubjectively 
posited to be determined ''theoretically" in such a way that the 
content of the determination becomes independent of the indi- 
vidual subjects, i.e., in such a way that this content consists 
exclusively of determinations any subject can acquire, out of 
30 what is given to him in appearances, by means of the methodo- 
logical procedure of natural science and with a sense that is 
identically the same for every subject involved in natural- 
scientific research. And the determination is such that each 
subject can refer the determinations back to himself, to his 
35 appearances in their dependency on him as subject. Hence it is 
doubtlessly correct to say that the experienced things, with their 
sensuous-intuitive experiential properties and experiential 
dependencies, exist relatively only. They are dependent on one 
another for the content of their being, and they are co- 


180 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


dependent on the Bodies, and on the souls, of those who 
experience them. And in all this there is documented an 
"Objective" nature which is determinable as the intersubjective 
that belongs to all subjective existences (unities of appearance), 
5 as what "appears" there in a higher sense. As such, and 
according to this sense, it can also be seen as an index of the 
intersubjective regulation of the unities of appearance in rela- 
tion to their subjects. This whole apprehension presupposes, 
however, that which can never be transformed into an " index : " 
10 the absolute subject with its lived experiences, its intentionally 
meant, its acts of reason, etc., the subject for which is consti- 
tuted the totality of nature, physical as well as animal. Nature is 
a unity of appearance posited by subjects and to be posited by 
them, to be posited, specifically, in acts of reason. But these 
15 absolutely presupposed subjects are not subjects as nature, men, 
for the latter are themselves intersubjective Objectivities'. The 
Bodies are the identical x's as indices of lawful regulations of [17| 
Bodily appearances of subjects in the nexus of the whole of 
physical nature. The souls bound with these Objectively deter- 
20 minate x's, in substantial-real unity with them, are also Objec- 
tively determinable: they are unities which are dependent on the 
natural Objects, "physical Bodies," and which are bound to 
them in an Objectively real way as realities in space and time. 
The analysis of nature in our consideration of nature thus 
25 proves to be in need of supplementation. It harbors presuppo- 
sitions and consequently points beyond to another realm of 
being and of research, i.e., the field of subjectivity, which no 
longer is nature. 


Section Three: The Constitution of the Spiritual World 


§48. Introduction' 

The following investigations are dedicated to the clarification 
of a group of interconnected distinctions in metaphysics and 

5 scientific theory, all of which have their source in the difficult 
distinction between soul and spirit, which, thus, is the funda- 
mental one in this entire group. On it obviously are dependent 
the oppositions between nature and the world of the spirit, 
between the natural sciences and the human sciences, the 
10 sciences of the spirit, between a natural-scientific theory of the 
soul on the one hand and theory of the person (theory of the 
Ego, Egology) as well as the theory of society (theory of 
community) on the other hand. Our entire world-view is 
determined, essentially and fundamentally, by the clarity of 

15 these distinctions. To them corresponds within phenomenology 
vast domains of research. Already decades ago, reactions 
asserted themselves against the naturalistic interpretation, self- 
evident in the age of natural science, of the human sciences as 
mere descriptive natural sciences. In the first rank Dilthey has 

20 here earned for himself everlasting merit. It was he who for the 
first time recognized the essential distinction here and first 
reached a lively awareness of the fact that modern psychology, 
being a natural science of the psychic, is incapable of providing 
for the concrete human sciences the scientific foundation they 

25 require according to their specific essence. What is needed is a 
new "psychology" of an essentially different type, a universal 
science of the spirit that is neither "psychophysical" nor 
natural-scientific. Dilthey, a man gifted with the intuition of 
genius, though not a man of rigorous scientific theorizing, saw, 

30 to be sure, the problems leading to the goal and the directions 
of the work to be done, but he did not penetrate through to the 
decisive formulations of the problems and to the methodologi- 
cally certain solutions, no matter how great was the progress he 


[173] 


For another draft of the introduction, see Supplement IV, pp. 325 ff. 


182 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


made here especially in the years of his wise old age. The power 
of his thought is demonstrated by the fact that Hermann 
Ebbinghaus's elegant critique, one which, however, undermined 
only the inadequate scientific elaboration of the ideas of Dil- 
they, could not, in spite of the universal approval of the natural 
scientists, arrest the course of development of those ideas. Ever 
new significant investigations joined up with Dilthey's research. 
Wmdelband, Rickert, Simmel, Munsterberg, and others tried 
their utmost to do justice, from new sides, to the opposition in 
question. Yet following them we do not penetrate to the 
actually decisive clarifications and rigorously scientific concep- 
tions and foundations. Only a radical investigation, directed to 
the phenomenological sources of the constitution of the ideas of 
nature. Body, and soul, and of the various ideas of Ego and 
15 person can here deliver decisive elucidations and at the same 
time further the rights of the valid motives of all such investi- 
gations. 


10 


Chapter One 

OPPOSITION BETWEEN THE NATURALISTIC 
AND PERSONALISTIC WORLDS 


§ 49. The personalistic attitude versus the naturalistic 

5 We link our considerations to what has been established in 
carrying out the pure phenomenological analyses of the preced- 
ing sections. In those sections our investigations were related to 
the naturalistic attitude. It was in that attitude that we carried 
out our analyses. It is easy to understand, however, that all the 
10 investigations will assume the character of pure phenomenology 
simply by our performing, in the appropriate way, the phenom- 
enological reductions. As long as we live in the naturaUstic 
attitude, it itself is not given in our field of research; what is 
grasped there is only what is experienced in it, what is thought in 
15 it, etc. But if we carry out phenomenological reflection and the 
phenomenological reduction, make the attitude itself thematic, 
relate to it what is investigated in it, and lastly carry out an 
eidetic reduction and purification of all transcending appercep- 
tions, then all our investigations are transformed into purely 
20 phenomenological ones. As subject of the naturalistic attitude 
we have then the pure Ego. To be sure, we will at first find 
ourselves in reflection as empirical Ego; we perform the 
reflection at first precisely as a new naturalistic attitude, which 
thus, in the phenomenological reduction, belongs in brackets. 
25 The ultimate subject, the phenomenological one, which can 
never be bracketed and is the very subject doing all eidetic 
phenomenological research, is the pure Ego. For the rest, all 
that has been "put out of play" remains for us, here as 
elsewhere, preserved in the bracketing-modification : i.e., the 
30 whole worid of the naturaUstic attitude, "nature" in the 
broadest sense of the term. 


[174] 


184 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


185 


As we know, it pertains to the essence of this nature — which 
consequently emerges here as the pure sense of the acts that 
make up the natural attitude, as their constitutive correlate — 
that a thorough grounding is accompHshed as the positing of 
5 nature in the first sense, that of physical nature, in which 
everything else that is called nature has the source, of its sense, 
as something founded therein. Thus were built on one another, 
with respect to the constituting basic characters of the apprehen- 
sion: the experience of the physical as foundational and, resting 

10 on it and enveloping it, the experience of the Body, which is 
constitutive of man and animal; based on the latter, as consti- 
tutive stratum, is the experience of the soul. The total system of 
naturalistic experiences encompasses the whole of nature as the 
total domain of the natural sciences in the stricter and in the 

15 broader sense. Belonging here, therefore, is psychology, too, as [175| 
the natural science of the psychic being of animalia (humans 
and animals) which thus fits within anthropology and so within 
general zoology as natural sciences. Psychic being includes the 
psychic Ego-subject, the Ego-subject as nature. We recall, how- 

20 ever, that there are difficulties and objections related to this 
Ego, namely ones regarding a distinction which obtrudes but 
which yet does not impose itself as it should, i.e., a distinction 
between this Ego and the Ego as person or as member of a social 
world. It is this distinction we want to investigate, and specifi- 

25 cally by research in constitutive phenomenology. 

a) Introjection of the soul as presupposition 
even for the naturalistic attitude 

Let us begin with the soul. For natural science, it is nothing 
per se', it is merely a stratum of real occurrences in the Body. In 

30 material nature — obviously this is the Objectively true nature, 
with respect to which appearing nature (the thing-world with 
" secondary " qualities), appearing to me and to everyone else, is 
precisely mere appearance — there occur, as we all agree, within 
the naturalistic attitude, certain pre-eminent things, ones distin- 

35 guished by means of a stratum of real qualities that are not 
specifically physical, not "material" or "extensive;" I refer, of 
course, to the properties of stimulatability or sensitivity. These 


new properties are constituted in the form of ''localization " and 
are, in conformity with their sense, dependent on physical 
Corporeality and, through that, dependent on physical nature in 
general. The higher stratum, the specifically psychic, is likewise 
5 experienced in a way which is, to this extent, similar to the 
experience of the aesthesiological, that is, precisely as a stratum 
of the Body as thing, insofar as this stratum, too, is, in a certain 
manner, "localized." The soul animates or be-souls the Body, 
and the animated Body is a natural Object within the unity of 

10 the spatio-temporal world. 

I see a playing cat and I regard it now as something of 
nature, just as is done in zoology. I see it as a physical organism 
but also as a sensing and animated Body, i.e., I see it precisely 
as a cat. I "see" it in the general sense ordinarily meant when [176] 

15 speaking of seeing. A stone is seen in any at all of its perceptual 
appearances, in which, strictly, only very little "of it" is 
presented in " actual, " " proper, " perception. If, on account of 
the one-sidedness and other multifarious imperfections, we were 
not to allow this seeing to count as a "seeing," as a "perceiv- 

20 ing," then talk about seeing would lose its essential sense 
forthwith. There is indeed no seeing of a physical thing that 
would not be "imperfect" in this manner. Perception of 
something physical, in conformity with its essence, includes 
indeterminations — but includes them as determinable. In its 

25 own way, the cat also is seen, and, in the seeing, its existence as 
this animal, cat, is experienced. This experience has the kind of 
imperfections corresponding to the fundamental character of 
experience of animals. But, as always, the cat is present there in 
the flesh — specifically, as a physical thing with sensing surfaces, 

30 sense organs, etc. The stratum of sensation is not there as 
something beside the physical thing; what is there is a Body, a 
Body which has physical and aesthesiological quahties as one. 
Likewise, the Body is also experienced as Body of a soul, and 
the word " soul " indicates again a founded stratum of quahties, 

35 and of course one that is still higher. The soul is not there as 
extended over the Body in the manner of being "locaHzed" in 
the proper sense; it does not offer itself as something hke a 
complex of "psychic fields" — thought in analogy with sense 
fields — which would come, immediately or mediately, to phe- 


186 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


187 


nomenal coincidence with the extensional components of the 
Body, or which would come to a determinate correspondence 
with them, either point for point or part for part. In spite of 
that, the psychic is, in experience, one — that is, realiter one — 
5 with the Body; to that extent it is something at the Body or in 
it, lacking only distinguishable separate location. One could 
employ the expression, misleading to be sure, of introjection : it 
would then express precisely this state of affairs. In the Objec- 
tive world, in the Objective world-space, there appears here and 

10 now this Objectively real cat; it is something physical and 
moves physically just like other things, except that beyond the 
merely physical qualities it constantly has aesthesiological and 
psychic ones. The excess of reality beyond the mere physical 
thing is not something that can be separated off by itself, not 

15 something juxtaposed, but something in the physical thing; thus 
it moves "along with" the thing and acquires its spatial 
determination by its being in something which is itself spatial. 

As we can direct our analyzing regard onto other properties, [11% 
so we can also turn to these psychic ones; they then stand out as 

20 a "stratum," as a really inseparable annex, of the physical Body 
as a thing (which for its part would be thinkable without such 
strata, though, of course, only with the corresponding transfor- 
mation, which is termed decomposition of the organism, 
organic death). All these are not arbitrary inventions but are 

25 pure unfoldings of what lies in the very sense of the naturahstic 
apprehension, " animal-real," an apprehension which is determi- 
nate apriori for the sense of all zoological judgments and 
cognitions, insofar as they indeed originally draw the meaning- 
content of their concepts from such an apprehension. That 

30 which is included apriori in the sense of zoological experience, 
in the sense content of this essential type of experience, " makes 
possible" zoological science in precisely that sense, just as the 
content (with its eidetic laws) enclosed in the essential type 
"physical experience" makes possible the science of physical 

35 nature. If we think the one or the other type of experience as 
cancelled out, then the concomitant experiential concepts, judg- 
ments, and sciences vanish eo ipso. 


b) Localization of the psychic 

Still the following is striking here. Every stratum is a consti- 
tuted unity. We can consider, in conformity with its essence, the 
''matter" of the constitution and abstract from the ("form- 

5 ing") realizing apprehension. We can direct our regard onto the 
sensation-material and leave aside what is contributed by the 
apprehension as the Body's sensing. Similarly, we can direct 
the regard to the unity of the stream of lived experience and 
leave aside the apprehension in which the stream exists as the 

10 lived state of an animal-thing that has lived experiences. We can 
then also find, in the manifold currently presenting itself, unities 
that are henceforth no longer unities of nature. In particular, it 
is to be seen that with such a change of attitude, with such a 
separation from the physical Body of what previously had been 

15 apprehended as psychic, all integration into the Objective world, 
into the world-space and world-time, gets lost. The soul is in the 
Body and is there where the Body presently happens to be. 
What also is there are such and such groups of states of 
consciousness, such and such representations, stirrings of [178] 

20 thought, judgments, etc. As acts and states of, e.g., this cat, 
which has, by means of its Body, its position in Objective space, 
everything that is really one with the cat has position, even 
though it may have per se nothing to do with extension. Just as 
consciousness loses the apperceptive apprehension as psychic 

25 state, as stratum in the Body, and just as it is purely posited as 
itself in the phenomenological (even if not at the same time an 
eidetic) reduction, so it loses its empirical insertion in Objective 
space. Which can also be expressed in this way: consciousness 
in itself, for example this individual cogitatio in its nexus, is 

30 thinkable without a nature, and the apperception of nature itself 
can be posited in itself as "That there!"; however, it is 
thinkable that it, or more precisely that the positing of nature 
implicit in it, may not be able to be demonstrated at all, that 
there is no nature at all. Then, in that case, there is also no 

35 Objective space, and consciousness is not positable as something 
of nature (as state of an animal) ; it is absolutely non-spatial. 


188 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


189 


c) Temporalization of the psychic. 
(Immanent time and space-time) 

The same holds for time. Pure consciousness is a genuine 
temporal field, a field of " phenomenological" time. This must 
5 not be confused with "Objective" time, which is constituted, 
along with nature, by consciousness. It is through the psychic 
apprehension that the conscious lived experiences obtain the 
sense of psychophysical states and consequently their insertion 
into Objective time, the form of Objective nature; to localiza- 
10 tion corresponds temporalization. Since phenomenological time, 
immanent in the stream of consciousness, is a uni-dimensional 
''constant" manifold of properties that are exactly analogous to 
the properties of the time which presents itself (" appears ") in 
the lived experiences of the perception of something physical 

15 and "corresponds" to the latter point for point, and since in 
this appearing time in the ultimate Objectivation the "abso- 
lute " world-time manifests itself, so the temporalization of the 
time of consciousness is an especially deep one, insofar as the 
latter perfectly coincides, in a certain way, with absolute time. 

20 The coincidence is even more perfect than is the case with the 
localization of the field of touch, for that lacks three-dimension- 
ality, precisely what would be needed for an equal perfection in 
the coincidence with the appearing Objective extension of the [179| 
Body; thus what is lacking is the regulated coincidence of three 

25 dimensional constancy with three dimensional constancy. As 
regards time there is now transferred to consciousness the 
Objective physicalistic time-measurement and time-determina- 
tion which belongs exclusively to the material worid. The states 
of consciousness then have, in conformity with the constitutive 

30 sense of the coincidence of their time with the time of physical 
nature, a time that is measurable through primordial manifesta- 
tion by the use of instruments. This is a confirmation which 
certainly must be interpreted precisely in the sense prescribed by 
this state of affairs, and one would be subject to a psychological 

35 falsity if one did not make this sense perfectly clear. It is not our 
task here to carry out this explication completely. 


d) Reflection on method 

In these considerations we have been exercising the right of 
phenomenological reduction, and the redeeming quality of this 
doubtlessly valid fundamental method of the most original 
5 determination of sense is that it frees us from the sense- 
restrictions of the natural attitude and of every relative attitude. 
Natural man, and especially the researcher into nature, is not 
aware of these restrictions; he does not see that to all his results 
adheres a determinate index, one which manifests their merely 
10 relative sense. He does not realize that the natural attitude is 
not the only possible one, that it allows for shifts of focus 
whereby there emerges the absolute, nature-constituting, con- 
sciousness, in relation to which, in virtue of the essential 
correlation between the constituting and the constituted, all 
15 nature must be relative. What is educational in the phenomeno- 
logical reduction, however, is also this: it henceforth makes us 
in general sensitive toward grasping other attitudes, whose rank 
is equal to that of the natural attitude (or, as we can now say 
more clearly, the nature-attitude) and which therefore, just like 
20 the latter, constitute only relative and restricted correlates of 
being and sense. The new correlates thus refer back similarly to 
absolute consciousness in the phenomenological sense. They 
require, for their full clarification, a return to the originary and 
full nexus of the essence of this absolute consciousness. By [180] 
25 means of the reduction to this nexus, we are capable at any time 
of putting in their correct relation, and of exploiting absolutely, 
the givennesses of the various attitudes (or the fundamentally 
different modes of apperception pertaining to them). 

It is such a new attitude that we are now intent on; in a 
30 certain sense it is very natural, but it is not a nature-attitude. 
"Not a nature-attitude:" that means that what is experienced 
in it is not nature in the sense of all the natural sciences but is, so 
to say, something contrary to nature. Obviously, the quite 
exceptional difficulty here lies not only in grasping this opposi- 
35 tion but in understanding it from within, though not by actually 
adopting the attitudes. For if we abstract from the attitude, 
surely artificial, toward pure consciousness, toward this resi- 
duum of the various reductions, then we constantly slip, quite 


190 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


effortlessly, from one attitude into another, from the naturalistic 
into the personalistic , and as to the respective sciences, from the 
natural sciences into the human sciences. The difficulties lie in 
the reflection and in the phenomenological understanding of the 
5 transformation of apprehension and experience and in the 
understanding of the correlates constituted by them. Only in the 
framework of phenomenology, through the relation of the 
ontological distinctions of the constituted objects to the correla- 
tive essential nexuses of the corresponding constituting mani- 

10 folds, is it possible to preserve these distinctions without 
confusion, in absolutely certain distinctness, free from all 
misunderstandings which have their source in the involuntary 
changes in attitude, ones which, from want of pure reflection, 
pass unnoticed. By means of a return to absolute consciousness 

15 and to the totahty of nexuses of essence to be pursued in it, it is 
first possible to understand the meaningful relativities of the 
relevant objectivities of the one and the other attitude together 
with their reciprocal essential relations. 


e) The naturalistic attitude and the natural attitude 

20 Let us now proceed with the investigation. 

What it means to speak of a human being and a human soul as [1! 
nature (the human may suffice for us as a representative of 
animahty in general) we hold as firmly established. It then 
presents no difficulties to say that the human soul has, among 

25 other psychic states, so-to-say I-states, occurrences of the type, 
cogito. They, Hke the psychic in general, are, in naturalistic 
experience, added on to or "inserted into" the physically 
appearing Body and are localized and temporaUzed with it in 
the familiar manner. They belong within the constellation of 

30 real (substantial-causal) nature. This concerns also the empirical 
Ego that lives in these states. That man there sees and hears, 
and on the basis of his perceptions he executes such and such 
judgments, such and such evaluations and acts of will, in their 
multi-formed vicissitudes. That an "I think" emerges "in" 

35 him, in the man there, is a fact of nature, founded in the Body 
and in Bodily occurrences, determined by the substantial-causal 
nexus of nature, which is precisely not mere physical nature, 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


191 


whereas, of course, the physical is founding and co-determining 
for all the rest of nature. The man there succumbs to a 
dreamless sleep or faints ; that has certain physical reasons. The 
"I think" disappears from the stream of his psychic occur- 
5 rences. In the course of these lived experiences, which are his 
natural states and which, as such, have a real relation to 
determining real circumstances, dispositions, quaUties of charac- 
ter, cognitions, etc. manifest themselves and are, for their part, 
natural-real "properties," to be investigated " natural-scientifi- 

10 cally, inductively," in analogy with physical properties. 

Pertaining to the psychic states are also the acts in which the 
man has a consciousness of himself and of his fellows and of the 
rest of the surrounding real actuaUty, sees them in front of 
himself, takes cognizance of them, is related to them in a more 

15 or less lofty way of thinking, and perhaps is also related to them 
in the modes of affectivity and will. Here belong, e.g., the acts in 
which he pursues physical natural science, psychology, history, 
etc., or again, works as a man active in the practical Ufe, utihzes 
the things of his environment, transforming them according to 

20 his purposes, and evaluates them from aesthetic, ethical, and 

utilitarian points of view. Here also are the acts in which he [182] 
places himself in a communicative relation toward his fellow 
men, speaks with them, writes them, reads about them in the 
papers, associates with them in communal activities, makes 

25 promises to them, etc. A countless number of remarkable 
relations between the subject and his "surrounding world" also 
have a place here, all of them grounded in the fact that the man 
"knows " about himself and his fellows and about a surround- 
ing world common to them all. This surrounding world is 

30 comprised not of mere things but of use-Objects (clothes, 
utensils, guns, tools), works of art, Uterary products, instru- 
ments for religious and judicial activities (seals, official orna- 
ments, coronation insignia, ecclesiastical symbols, etc.). And it 
is comprised not only of individual persons, but the persons are 

35 instead members of communities, members of personal unities 
of a higher order, which, as totahties, have their own lives, 
preserve themselves by lasting through time despite the joining 
or leaving of individuals, have their qualities as communities, 
their moral and juridical regulations, their modes of functioning 


192 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


in collaboration with other communities and with individual 
persons, their dependencies on circumstances, their regulated 
changes and their own way of developing or maintaining 
themselves invariant over time, according to the determining 
5 circumstances. The members of the community, of marriage and 
of the family, of the social class, of the union, of the borough, 
of the state, of the church, etc., "know" themselves as their 
members, consciously realize that they are dependent on them, 
and perhaps consciously react back on them. 

10 As soon as we presentify to ourselves in a lively way any of 
these personal relations and, as it were, immerse ourselves in the 
life of the person as bearer of these relations, and as soon as we 
then, in reflection, peer at their modes of givenness through the 
phenomenological magnifying glass, we notice that we are 

1 5 thereby in an attitude that is essentially different as opposed to 
the naturalistic attitude which was ours previously. In the latter, 
the totahty of "Objective" physical nature was, or is, there for 
us, founding, scattered therein, Bodies, sensitivenesses, and 
psychic lives. All men and animals we consider in this attitude 

20 are, if we pursue theoretical interests, anthropological or, more 

generally, zoological Objects. We could also say physio-psychic [183| 
Objects, whereby the inversion of the usual "psychophysical" 
indicates quite appropriately the order of the founding. What 
has been said concerns all our fellow men as well as ourselves, 

25 to the extent that we consider ourselves theoretically precisely in 
this attitude: we then are animated Bodies, Objects of nature, 
themes of the relevant natural sciences. But it is quite otherwise 
as regards the personalistic attitude, the attitude we are always 
in when we Hve with one another, talk to one another, shake 

30 hands with one another in greeting, or are related to one 
another in love and aversion, in disposition and action, in 
discourse and discussion. Likewise we are in this attitude when 
we consider the things surrounding us precisely as our sur- 
roundings and not as "Objective" nature, the way it is for 

35 natural science. We thus have to do here with an entirely 
natural and not an artificial attitude, which would have to be 
achieved and preserved only by special means. In the natural life 
of the Ego we do not always — indeed not even predomi- 
nately — consider the world in a naturalistic way, as if we were 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


193 


doing physics and zoology, as if our theoretical and extra- 
theoretical interest would have to be directed inevitably to the 
psychic only as founded in the Body, as really dependent on the 
Body, as intertwined with it in a real-causal way. That is not 
5 always the case even for the zoologist and naturalistic psycho- 
logist; it is only that such a one has assumed the rigid habit, the 
restrictions of which he normally can no longer break through, 
that as soon as he takes up a scientific attitude at all, he does so 
inevitably in the form of the naturalistic attitude (or, equiva- 

10 lently, in an attitude directed to "Objective" reahty). He wears 
the bhnders of habit. As a researcher all he sees is "nature." As 
a person, however, he lives hke any other person and "knows" 
that he is always the subject of his surrounding world. To live as 
a person is to posit oneself as a person, to find oneself in, and to 

15 bring oneself into, conscious relations with a "surrounding 
world." 

Upon closer scrutiny, it will even appear that there are not 
here two attitudes with equal rights and of the same order, or 
two perfectly equal apperceptions which at once penetrate one 

20 another, but that the naturalistic attitude is in fact subordinated 
to the personalistic, and that the former only acquires by means 
of an abstraction or, rather, by means of a kind of self- 
forgetfulness of the personal Ego, a certain autonomy — [184] 
whereby it proceeds illegitimately to absolutize its world, i.e., 

25 nature. 

Let us try to gain some clarity here. 

We had previously first introduced the person and his per- 
sonal modes of behavior as component parts of nature as 
human. In fact, naturalistically considered, all consciousness, 

30 and, in general, all lived experience, is founded Bodily, and 
hence, in addition, so is the total content of that which, in the 
persons, intentionally constitutes the world and all its proper- 
ties. The person sees things round and about himself, and all the 
thing-apprehensions and thing-positings with their contents of 

35 noetic matter and form are psychical (physio-psychic). Likewise, 
the person evaluates the thing, apprehends it as beautiful or 
useful, as a garment or as a drinking cup, etc., and as such the 
thing is perceptually present to him. The apperceptions which 


194 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


refer back to the spheres of affect and will and everything that 
belongs to them, the sensuous feelings and drives, the modes of 
evaluating and practical consciousness related to things, all this 
pertains phenomenally, in the consideration of nature, to man 
5 as animated Body. The same holds with respect to all social 
acts. Sociality in its entirety is of interest to the psychologist 
and, more generally, to the natural scientist, but is so only as 
the sum total of physical bodies with concomitant psychic 
foundations, whereby are also produced, in the mediate way 

10 prescribed by such foundations, interhuman causaUties. The 
inter-physical causal relations also render possible, by means of 
the provoked excitations distributed among individual Bodies 
and by means of the aesthesiological-psychic occurrences imme- 
diately connected to them in a functional way, the real emer- 

15 gence of psychic lived experiences of "mutual understanding" 
and, as a further consequence, the emergence of the lived 
experiences of social consciousness. All these are here thus 
particular facts of nature, not different than other facts of 
perception and cognition which occur in unity with the Body 

20 and as having such a content that the concomitant Ego has a 
consciousness of these or those things as oriented to it in such 
and such a way and as appearing to it with such and such 
sensuous qualities. Hence all the facts concerning the person 
appear in this naturalistic way of consideration precisely as facts 

25 of nature and, as such, require a natural-scientific treatment. [185| 
Obviously this ultimately leads into the domains of physical 
nature and therefore is a psycho-physical treatment in the 
correct original sense. The personal psychic data only form a 
part of the psychic data and of the data of nature in general. 

30 From the standpoint of nature, everything personal is subordi- 
nate. 


§ 50. The person as center of a surrounding world 


On the other hand, if we now examine more closely the 

essence of personal subjectivity, bring it to intuitive givenness, 

35 and wholly immerse ourselves in it, then, as has been indicated 

already, it will be manifest of itself that the attitude in which we 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


195 


live in the personal world, as subjects in the world of subjects, is 
in fact essentially different from the naturalistic attitude and 
that therefore in fact an apperceptive shift is needed first, in 
order to thematize the personal naturally. Let us therefore seek 
5 out the phenomena of the person and try to describe them. 
As person, I am what I am (and each other person is what he 
is) as subject of a surrounding world. The concepts of Ego and 
surrounding world are related to one another inseparably. 
Thereby to each person belongs his surrounding world, while at 

10 the same time a plurahty of persons in communication with one 
another has a common surrounding world. The surrounding 
world is the world that is perceived by the person in his acts, is 
remembered, grasped in thought, surmised or revealed as such 
and such; it is the world of which this personal Ego is 

15 conscious, the world which is there for it, to which it relates in 
this or that way, e.g. by way of thematically experiencing and 
theorizing as regards the appearing things or by way of feeling, 
evaluating, acting, shaping technically, etc. And the personal 
Ego ''relates" to this world in acts upon which it can reflect, 

20 as is the case, for example, when it takes notice of itself as 
personal Ego, just as any other person can reflect on these same 
acts, even if in a correspondingly modified way (reflection in 
empathy), when the other grasps these acts as acts of the person 
in question, for instance whenever the other speaks, with clear 

25 understanding, of that person precisely as a person. And a 
person is precisely a person who represents, feels, evaluates, 
strives, and acts and who, in every such personal act, stands in [186] 
relation to something, to objects in his surrounding world. 
Thus the actual surrounding world of any person whatsoever 

30 is not physical reality pure and simple and without qualifica- 
tion, but instead it is the surrounding world only to the extent 
he "knows" of it, insofar as he grasps it by apperception and 
positing or is conscious of it in the horizon of his existence as 
co-given and offered to his grasp — clearly or unclearly, deter- 

35 minately or indeterminately — precisely in accordance with the 
way it happens to be posited by consciousness. If the person 
knows nothing of the discoveries of physics, then the world with 
the sense-content of physics does not belong to his actual 


196 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


surrounding world. (Obviously, the same holds for the sphere of 
psychological being as regards the discoveries of psychology.) 
Speaking quite universally, the surrounding world is not a 
world "in itself" but is rather a world "for me," precisely the 
5 surrounding world of its Ego-subject, a world experienced by 
the subject or grasped consciously in some other way and 
posited by the subject in his intentional lived experiences with 
the sense-content of the moment. As such, the surrounding 
world is in a certain way always in the process of becoming, 

10 constantly producing itself by means of transformations of 
sense and ever new formations of sense along with the concom- 
itant positings and annullings. 

To begin with, the world is, in its core, a world appearing to 
the senses and characterized as "on hand," a world given in 

15 straightforward empirical intuitions and perhaps grasped 
actively. The Ego then finds itself related to this empirical world 
in new acts, e.g., in acts of valuing or in acts of pleasure and 
displeasure. In these acts, the object is brought to consciousness 
as valuable, pleasant, beautiful, etc., and indeed this happens in 

20 various ways, e.g., in original givenness. In that case, there is 
built, upon the substratum of mere intuitive representing, an 
evaluating which, if we presuppose it, plays, in the immediacy of 
its hvely motivation, the role of a value-" perception " (in our 
terms, a value-reception) in which the value character itself is 

25 given in original intuition. When I hear the tone of a violin, the 
pleasantness and beauty are given originarily if the tone moves 
my feelings originally and in a lively manner, and the beauty as 
such is given originally precisely within the medium of this 
pleasure, and similarly is given the mediate value of the violin as 

30 producing such a tone, insofar as we see it itself being played 

and grasp intuitively the causal relation which is founding here. [181 
Likewise, the beauty of the violin's external structure, its elegant 
form, is given immediately and originally, whereby the particu- 
larities and connections motivating the pleasure come actually 

35 to the fore in the unity of the constituting intuition and exercise 
their motivating power. The consciousness of value, however, 
can also arise in the mode of non-originary pleasure and in the 
mode of the evaluation of the pleasurable as such without the 
feehngs being moved "originally" and in a lively way; that 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


197 


would be the analogon, in the sphere of feelings, of obscure 
representations as opposed to the clear. For example, if at a 
first glance, I find the violin "beautiful" and a "work of art," 
the pleasure is then incomplete, if the beauty itself is present at 
5 all. I can see the violin and find it to be beautiful, without my 
feelings being aroused in any "genuine" way. 

The same holds for the objects of desiring and practical acts. 
The experienced objects, as objects of this empirical sense, excite 
my desire or perhaps fill needs in relation to certain circum- 

10 stances constituted in consciousness, e.g., in relation to the need 
for food which makes itself felt very frequently. Afterwards, the 
objects become apprehendable as in the service of the satisfac- 
tion of such needs according to this or that property, and in 
that case they offer themselves to the apprehension as a means 

15 for nutrition, or as use-Objects of various sorts: heating mate- 
rial, choppers, hammers, etc. For instance, I see coal as heating 
material; I recognize it and recognize it as useful and as used for 
heating, as appropriate for and as destined to produce warmth. 
I see that something is burning or is glowing; I approach it and 

20 heat radiates out from it. I also know that from experience, and 
now the object is "hot" even if I do not feel any degree of 
warmth. To be hot is an Objective property, manifesting itself in 
act in the sensation of warmth and in the apprehensions of the 
heat radiating out from the object. The object suffuses heat, and 

25 as its Objective property it is perhaps one unchanging, ever the 
same, heat, whereas I, in approaching and stepping back, have 
dissimilar sensations of it. Experience teaches me, further, that 
an object itself starts to glow by being rubbed or by being 
ignited by a body that is itself already burning or glowing. This 

30 object is "combustible" material (at first without any practical [188] 
bearing). Henceforth I can use it as fuel ; it has value for me as a 
possible source of heat. That is, it has value for me with 
reference to the fact that with it I can produce the hearing of a 
room and thereby pleasant sensations of warmth for myself and 

35 others. I apprehend it from this point of view: I "can use it for 
that," it is useful to me for that. Others also apprehend it in the 
same way, and it acquires an intersubjective use-value and in a 
social context is appreciated and is valuable as serving such and 
such a purpose, as useful to man, etc. That is how it is first 


198 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


" looked upon " in its immediacy : subsequently it is further seen 
as a "commodity" sold for that purpose, etc. 

All these are founded Objects, which, in apprehension, have 
been constituted for the Ego, in the way described, by means of 
5 founded acts, and again, they are constituted in either an 
originarily giving consciousness by means of such acts or in a 
consciousness which is not giving in that way, in acts which are 
fully developed or authentic, or in unauthentic acts. 

If, however, these sorts of founded acts are accomplished at 

10 all, in whatever mode, then the relevant objects, endowed with 
value characteristics, desirable and practical ones, are again for 
the Ego objects of its surrounding world, and it can relate to 
them in new personal acts. It evaluates them as to the degree of 
their being good or bad, appropriate or counter-productive. The 

15 Ego transforms them, and they then become its "products," its 
"fabrications," and as such they enter once more into its 
surrounding world. For instance, they are given the value of 
works; at the same time they may be recognized as beautiful, 
and perhaps they serve as work-tools for new productions, 

20 which then, for their part, function in position-takings and 
found new strata of apprehension, new Objectivations, etc. 
Consequently, the subject is always carrying out multi-layered 
acts of every possible kind, out of which can arise, by means of 
the appropriate shifts, ever new Objectivations of ever higher 

25 levels. Living in these acts, the subject has the objects constituted 

at present precisely as its " objects," which will then determine 

its further behavior and which the subject will thereby recognize 

as determining itself. 

It is evident what foundational new sense there is to the 

30 relation between man as personal subject and the objects of his 

surrounding world versus the natural relation between the [1891 
naturally understood man (as psychophysical reality) and other 
realities. "Stimuli" are said to be emitted especially by the 
physical Objects of nature, and the sensitive nerves are said to 

35 be stimulated by physical excitations. Perhaps then even the 
soul will be said to be stimulated : the excitations propagated in 
the nervous system terminate in a final excitation within the 
central nervous system, which excitation then for its part 
functions as "stimulus" for the soul and brings about its 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


199 


reaction, the sensation. But if we place ourselves on the terrain 
of the intentional relation between subject and Object, the 
relation between person and surrounding world, then the con- 
cept of stimulus acquires a fundamentally new sense. Instead of 

5 the causal relation between things and men as natural realities, 
there is substituted the relation of motivation between persons 
and things, and these things are not the things of nature, 
existing in themselves — i.e., the things of exact natural science 
with the determinations claimed there to be the only Objectively 

10 true ones — but are the experienced, thought, or in some other 
way intended and posited things as such, intentional objects of 
personal consciousness. Thus it is from the things which, in 
terms of the consciousness of the personal Ego, are " meant " as 
actually existing that "stimuH" arise. Phenomenologically, the 

15 unities of things (the noematic unities) are points of departure 
for more or less "strong" tendencies. Already as conscious but 
not yet grasped (hovering in the background of consciousness), 
they draw the subject to themselves, and if the "stimulating 
power" is sufficient, the Ego "follows" the stimulus, "gives 

20 in" and turns in that direction. Then the Ego exercises on these 
things explicating, conceiving, theoretically judging, evaluating, 
and practical activities. They now engage its interest in their 
being and their attributes, in their beauty, agreeableness, and 
usefulness ; they stimulate its desire to delight in them, play with 

25 them, use them as a means, transform them according to its 
purposes, etc. They then function in ever new strata as stimuli 
for its being active (and also, not to neglect the negative, for its 
being passive). Besides, the subject of the motivation can at one 
time yield to the stimuli and at another time resist them. All 

30 these are phenomenological relations which can be found and 
described only in the purely intentional sphere. In a very broad 
sense, we can also denote the personal or motivational attitude [190] 
as the practical attitude: that is, what we have here always is 
the active or passive Ego and indeed in the proper intrinsic 

35 sense. 


200 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


201 


§ 51. The person in personal associations ^ 

The subject finds consciously in his surrounding world not 
only things, however, but also other subjects. He sees them as 
persons who are engaged in their own surrounding world, 
5 determined by their objects, and ever determinable anew. In this 
attitude, it never occurs to him to "insert" the spirit into the 
Body, i.e., to consider the spirit as something in the Body, as 
something founded in it, as something belonging, with the 
Body, to a reality; thus it never occurs to him to carry out the 

10 corresponding real apperception (the natural one). If it were 
carried out, then humans would themselves be posited as things. 
And in that case the spirit as person, coordinated with our 
person as a member of a personal association, is not given its 
rights. For here the spirit is functioning only as a psychic being 

15 in the sense of a natural consideration, as something causally 
dependent on the Body, upon which it seems to be grafted. 

To treat humans and animals ''as mere things" has, to be 
sure, various senses, a juridical and moral sense and, on the 
other hand, a scientific sense. But both have something in 

20 common. From a moral-practical standpoint, I am treating a 
human being as a mere thing if I do not take him as a person 
related to the moral, as a member of a moral association of 
persons in which the world of morals is constituted. Likewise, I 
am not treating a human being as a subject of rights if I do not 

25 take him as a member of a community founded on law, to 
which we both belong, but instead view him as mere matter, as 
without rights just hke a mere thing. Again, analogously, I treat 
a human theoretically as a thing if I do not insert him in the 
association of persons with reference to which we are subjects of 

30 a common surrounding world but instead take him as a mere 
annex of natural Objects which are mere things and conse- 
quently take him as a mere thing himself. Now, within certain 
limits, this is legitimate, and it becomes an injustice only if we 
do not acknowledge at all that the naturizing of persons and 

35 souls can allow us to recognize only certain relations of [191; 
dependency of Objective existence and continuity which obtain 


Cf, pp. 301 r and the footnote there. 


precisely between the natural world of things and the personal 
world of spirits, insofar as both belong to the unity of the 
Objective spatio-temporal world of realities. Further, it is an 
injustice if we do not acknowledge that nevertheless spirits make 

5 possible and require still an other and more significant mode of 
research precisely in this respect, that they have, as Ego- 
subjects, a being properly their own, that, as such, they are 
required for all matters and all research into these matters 
as the subjective counter-parts, and that they thus, in their 

10 intentional life, relate to the world in the form of their 
surrounding world. He who sees everywhere only nature, nature 
in the sense of, and, as it were, through the eyes of, natural 
science, is precisely blind to the spiritual sphere, the special 
domain of the human sciences. Such a one does not see persons 

15 and does not see the Objects which depend for their sense on 
personal accompHshments, i.e., Objects of ''culture." Properly 
speaking, he sees no person at all, even though he has to do 
with persons in his attitude as a naturahstic psychologist. But 
this needs a more thoroughly grounded exposition. 

20 In the comprehensive experience of the existence of the other, 
we thus understand him, without further ado, as a personal 
subject and thereby as related to Objectivities, ones to which we 
too are related : the earth and sky, the fields and the woods, the 
room in which ''we" dwell communally, the picture we see, etc. 

25 We are in a relation to a common surrounding world — we are 
in a personal association: these belong together. We could not 
be persons for others if a common surrounding world did not 
stand there for us in a community, in an intentional linkage of 
our lives. Correlatively spoken, the one is constituted essentially 

30 with the other. Each Ego can, for himself and for the others, 

become a person in the normal sense, a person in a personal 

association, only if comprehension brings about the relafion to 

a common surrounding world. 

The common surrounding world acquires communal charac- 

35 teristics of a new sense and at a higher level by means of acts of 
personal mutual determination which arise on the basis of 
mutual comprehension. This results in possibilities not only for 
a parallel and mutually understood comportment to objects as 
the ones of the community's surrounding world but also for a [192] 


202 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


203 


joint-unitary comportment of persons to such objects, a com- 
portment in which they participate communally as members of 
a whole that binds them together. Persons apprehend them- 
selves comprehensively not only in the certainly first and 
5 fundamental way, namely that the one understands, as Body, 
the Corporeality of the other belonging to his surrounding 
world and its spiritual sense, thereby interpreting the facial 
expressions, gestures, and spoken words as intimations of 
personal Hfe, but also in such a way that they " determine one 

10 another" and are active not just as individuals but communally, 
i.e., as personally united. 

Just as, in accordance with our previous elaboration, mere 
physical things "motivate," i.e., stimulate the subject of experi- 
ence as appearing things, as experienced actuality, and are the 

15 " occasion " of his behavior (phenomenally this is an immediate 
experiential relation between a worldly Object as object of 
experience and a subject of that experience), so do human 
beings exercise on one another, in a similar general sense, 
"immediate" personal effects that can be intuited. They have 

20 "motivating power" for each other. But they do not have 
effects in the mere way of the things of physical experience, in 
the mere form of stimuli, although occasionally they also do 
(e.g., I see an insufferable man and keep out of his way just as I 
would avoid a repulsive thing). But there is still another form in 

25 which persons influence persons: in their spiritual activity they 
direct themselves toward one another (the Ego toward the other 
and vice versa), they perform acts with the intention of being 
understood by the other and of determining the other, in his 
understanding grasp of these acts (insofar as they are external- 

30 ized in this intention), to certain personal modes of behavior. 
On the other side, it is possible that the one who is determined 
in such a way yields willingly to this influence or that he, being 
unwilling, refuses it, and in turn, by the fact that he not only 
acts accordingly but also makes it be known that he is willing or 

35 unwilhng by communicating it, he determines reactions again in 
the one that was determining him. In this way relations of 
mutual understanding are formed: speaking elicits response; the 
theoretical, valuing, or practical appeal, addressed by the one to 
the other, eHcits, as it were, a response coming back, assent [19| 


(agreement) or refusal (disagreement) and perhaps a counter- 
proposal, etc. In these relations of mutual understanding, there 
is produced a conscious mutual relation of persons and at the 
same time a unitary relation of them to a common surrounding 
5 world. Furthermore, this might be not merely a physical and 
animal (or personal) surrounding world but also an ideal one, 
e.g., the "world" of mathematics. The surrounding world of 
the moment encompasses indeed the totality of "Objectivi- 
ties" — the ideal as well — which "confront" the person (each 

10 of the persons communicating with the others) as the same 
Objectivities in terms of consciousness and upon which he reacts 
in his intentional modes of behavior. 

The surrounding world constituted in experiencing others, in 
mutual understanding and mutual agreement, is designated as 

15 the communicative one. It is, by essence, relative to persons, who 
find themselves in it and find it as what is over and against 
them. That applies to it, therefore, as well as to the "egoistic 
surrounding world " of the person thought as soHtary, i.e., it 
applies to the person who, in his relatedness to the surrounding 

20 world is thought abstractively in such a way that he enjoys no 
relations of understanding with other persons (no social bond). 
Each person has, ideally speaking, within his communicative 
surrounding world his egoistic one insofar as he can "abstract" 
from all relations of mutual understanding and from the 

25 apperception founded therein, or, rather, insofar as he can think 
them as separated. In this sense there exists, therefore, "one- 
sided separability" of the one surrounding world in relation to 
the other, and the egoistic surrounding world forms an essential 
nucleus for the communicative one in such a way that if the 

30 former is ever to be separated off, the processes of abstraction 
needed for it have to come from the latter. 

If, by abstracting them out, we think of a sheer solitary 
subject and therefore also of his purely egoistic surrounding 
world, then the latter gains afterwards, when the abstraction is 

35 lifted and relations of mutual understanding emerge, new 
intentional strata, and thereby is constituted the association of 
persons and the communicative world relative to this associa- 
tion, its surrounding world, which is not only surrounding, 
external, but embraces the association itself. It is to be noted [194] 


204 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


205 


here that just as persons may already belong to an egoistic 
surrounding world, so persons living outside of communication 
(persons outside the relevant social association) may belong to a 
communicative surrounding world. The persons who belong to 
5 the social association are given to each other as "companions/' 
not as opposed objects but as counter-subjects who Hve "with" 
one another, who converse and are related to one another, 
actually or potentially, in acts of love and counter-love, of hate 
and counter-hate, of confidence and reciprocated confidence, 

10 etc. 

The acts of mutual relation in society are, according to the 
above presentation, especially pre-eminent amid the acts of 
one-sided empathetic understanding of the Hfe of the other Ego. 
It is not sufficient that the others are understood as persons and 

15 that the one who understands comports himself unilaterally 
toward the others in such and such a way and takes his 
direction from them ; mutuality of understanding would not be 
needed for that. But this is precisely what is at stake here. 
Sociality is constituted by specifically social, communicative acts, 

20 acts in which the Ego turns to others and in which the Ego is 
conscious of these others as ones toward which it is turning, and 
ones which, furthermore, understand this turning, perhaps 
adjust their behavior to it and reciprocate by turning toward 
that Ego in acts of agreement or disagreement, etc. It is these 

25 acts, between persons who already "know" each other, which 
foster a higher unity of consciousness and which include in this 
unity the surrounding world of things as the surrounding world 
common to the persons who take a position in regard to it. And 
even the physical world has a social character in this appercep- 

30 tive inclusion; it is a world that has a spiritual significance. 

Up to now we have taken the concept of surrounding world 

very narrowly, as the world of what confronts a personal Ego 

(i.e., an Ego within a communicative association), a world that 

encompasses all objectivities and that is constituted for the Ego 

35 through its ''experiences/* through its experiences of things and 
its axiological and practical experiences (into which therefore 
axiological and practical apprehensions also enter). This sur- 
rounding world is, as was said earlier, (pp. 194 f.) a world that 
constantly changes in the course of active experience, in the 


subject's actively occupying himself in natural experience, in [195] 
theoretical thinking, in valuing, wiUing, creating, and in forming 
ever new Objects, etc. 

For each personal individual, however, there is constituted 
5 one surrounding world with an open horizon encompassing the 
Objectivities which could subsequently present themselves, or 
which, under given circumstances would present themselves, in 
connection with the course of his active constitution of sur- 
rounding Objects (things, objects of value, etc.). The experiences 

10 actively performed motivate possibiHties for new experiences; 
the objects for the subject are experienced by it as ones which 
have their existence, their ontological orders, and their depen- 
dencies, all of which can be investigated. The subjects commu- 
nicating with one another belong mutually, for one another, to 

15 the surrounding world which is relative to the Ego that at any 
given time is outwardly circumspecting and is constituting its 
surrounding world. And this Ego itself belongs to its own 
surrounding world in virtue of self-consciousness and in virtue 
of the possibihty of all sorts of self-directed comportment; the 

20 subject is ''subject-Object." On the other hand, it is a sole and 
unique world that is constituted in the intersubjective associa- 
tion, a world in which there are levels. The subjects in commu- 
nication with one another constitute personal unities of a higher 
level, the sum total of which, extending as far as actual and 

25 possible personal ties do, makes up the world of social subjec- 
tivities. To be distinguished from this world of social subjectiv- 
ities is the world correlative to it and inseparable from it, the 
world /or these subjectivities, the world of social Objectivities, as 
one might say. 

30 Therefore various concept-formations are required here. We 
distinguished above, first of all, a subject and its surrounding 
world. We then had to distinguish in addition an association of 
persons and its surrounding world. But the subject, as Objecti- 
vatable and as Objectivated for itself, is included at the same 

35 time in the surrounding world. Thus the former distinction is 
not sufficient, however necessary it may be. For a circle of 
friends, for a union, its "external world" is all the rest of the 
world, thus the remaining spirits, spiritual communities, and the 
physical things, as well as the cultural Objects, the sciences, and [196] 


206 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


207 


the arts insofar as they are precisely objects of its interests and 
concerns, etc. Included in the surrounding world of such a 
circle, or, in general, of a social subjectivity (an association of 
subjects, constituted through communication), is, once again, 
5 this very subjectivity itself insofar as it too can become an 
Object for itself, when the association relates back, to itself, just 
as each individual subject in it can also become an Object. 
Consequently it is useful to distinguish, in the case of the 
individual subject as well as in the case of an association of 
10 subjects (as a social subjectivity), between surrounding world in 
the full sense and surrounding world in the sense of external 
world, which latter then excludes the Objectivated subject. 

Now, however, the task is to gather up into unity all the 
social Objectivities (with the limit case of the ideally possible 
15 isolated individual) that are in communication with one 
another. It should be noted here that the idea of communication 
obviously extends from the single personal subject even to the 
social associations of subjects, which, for their part, present 
personal unities of a higher level. All such unities, as far as their 
20 communication extends, a communication produced factually 
or one yet to be produced in accord with their own indetermi- 
nate open horizon, do not constitute merely a collection of 
social subjectivities, but instead they coalesce into a social 
subjectivity inwardly organized to a greater or lesser degree, 
25 which has its common opposite pole in a surrounding world, or 
an external world, i.e., in a world which is for it. If the 
surrounding world is one that no longer contains subjects (thus 
no subjects standing in a practically possible domain of still to 
be produced communication: e.g., the possible people on Mars, 
30 subjects whose actuahty, hke that of these latter, remains open) 
but only mere Objects, then these Objects are nevertheless still 
Objects for the associated persons and for higher personal 
unities, Objects which can be encountered as such by any 
subjectivity of this kind in its surrounding world, and which 
35 every "companion" could find in his own. This possibility, as 
hypothetically ideal potentiality, is an essential component of 
the sense of the surrounding world. At the same time, there is 
constituted the idea of a world as world of spirit in the form of a 
sum total of social subjects of lower or higher levels (and we [197] 


include here the isolated person as zero limit-case of social 
subjectivity) which are in communication with each other, 
actually or in part actually in part potentially, together with the 
sum total of the social Objectivities pertaining to it. For every 

5 subject that in this way is a member of a social association as a 
totality, there is constituted one and the same world of spirit, 
although from the "standpoint" of this or that subject it is 
apprehended and posited with a corresponding (hence different 
from subject to subject) apprehended sense. An associated 

10 plurahty of subjects, of individual spirits and spiritual commu- 
nities, related to a world of things, a world of " Objects," i.e., an 
actuality which is not spirit but which is actuahty /or the spirit, 
is nevertheless, on the other hand, precisely as actuality for the 
spirit, always spiritualized, spiritually significant, bearing in 

15 itself spiritual sense and ever receptive to new sense of that 
kind. 1 

This world of things is, at its lowest level, intersubjective 
material nature as common field of actual and possible experi- 
ence of individual spirits, soHtary ones and ones in a community 

20 of experience. All individual Bodies have their place on this 
level. And the sensuous feelings and drives arrange themselves 
under sense experience. At a higher level this nature is consid- 
ered as a field of theoretical, axiological, and practical actions, 
activities of spirits on various social levels. Nature becomes the 

25 domain of the natural sciences, the field of aesthetic evaluations 
or of actual and possible practical work, work which, for its 
part, can have scientific, aesthetic, ethical, or other aims. These 
aims are set by the individual or social subjectivity (social on 
whatever level). It is this subjectivity that also orders the ways 

30 and means to the ends, in which case, the ends and the ways 
and means, products of individual and social evaluation, can in 
turn be substrata, can elicit new spiritual reactions, can deter- 
mine new settings of goals, etc. Apperceptions of various levels 
arise, whereby it should especially be noticed that the objects 

35 present at any moment can be apperceived as objects of possible 
or probable evaluations and settings of ends and means. 


On the following passage, cf. Supplement V, p. 328. 


208 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


If we look more closely, then we find that we still need to [198] 
distinguish: 

1) The surrounding world or external world of the communal 
spirit. This is the world of intersubjectively constituted objectiv- 

5 ities, i.e., spirits, spiritual communities, spiritualized states of 
affairs and mere natural factualities, objectivities each subject 
belonging to the community can bring to givenness in his own 
way and from his own standpoint. And each subject can at the 
same time recognize, in virtue of mutual understanding, that 
10 what is given to him and what is given to his companions is one 
and the same. 

2) The merely subjective sphere of the solitary subject. This 
subject has an environment which, in its original mode, is 
merely his own, which therefore can be given originarily to no 

15 other subject. In the communicative society, each member sees 
what I see and hears what I hear, or at least he can do so. We 
experience the same things and events, we experience the 
animals and people there facing us, and we see in them the same 
inner life, etc. Yet each has appearances which are exclusively 

20 his own, and each has lived experiences which are exclusively his 
own. Only he experiences these in their very flesh, utterly 
originarily. In a certain way, I also experience (and there is a 
self-givenness here) the other's hved experiences; i.e., to the 
extent that the empathy (comprehensio) accomplished as one 

25 with the originary experience of the Body is indeed a kind of 
presentification, one that nevertheless serves to ground the 
character of co-existence in the flesh. To that extent, what we 
have here is thus experience, perception. But this co-existence 
C'appresence'' in the previously fixed sense ^) does not, in 

30 principle, allow itself to be transformed into immediate origi- 
nary existence (primal presence). It is characteristic of empathy 
that it refers to an originary Body-spirit-consciousness but one I 
cannot myself accomphsh originarily, I who am not the other 
and who only function, in regard to him, as a comprehending 

35 analogon. 

As a consequence, we come up against a distinction in idea, 
which is obviously significant from the point of view of consti- 


Cf. pp. 170 f. (§44). 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


209 


tutive genesis as well, i.e., the distinction between the "idea" [199] 

1) ofpre-social subjectivity, of the subjectivity which does not 
yet presuppose empathy. This subjectivity knows only: a) inner 
experience, which is absolutely originary and contains no ele- 

5 ments of presentification; it is thoroughly a grasping in the 
flesh, without any co-grasping, even in the form of "horizons," 
and b) external experience, which throughout is only experience 
of such co-positing {" apprehensio'' or " appresentation "), but 
which can be converted in transitions to experiences which do 

10 give in the flesh. 

2) and that of social subjectivity, of the world of the commu- 
nal spirit. Here we have experience of other subjects as well as 
of their inner life, an experience in which their character and 
their properties come to givenness for us, an experience of other 

15 subjects as well as of their inner Hfe, an experience of forms of 
community, community affairs. Objects of the spirit. Every- 
where in this kind of experience, a moment of presentification 
through empathy is involved which can never be converted into 
immediate presentation. Also pertaining to this world of social 

20 subjects are the subjects, as objects, and, in addition, the acts 
(lived experiences) of those subjects, their appearances, etc. But 
these are given in originary perceptio (presentation) only for the 
subjects that they belong to. They are given in purely originary 
perceptio, but only as " immanent " data and not as components 

25 of the intersubjective world with intersubjective time and inter- 
subjective realization: i.e., not as belonging to spatial Corpor- 
eality and thereby to the spatiality of nature. Nevertheless, what 
is Objective (i.e., intersubjective) separates into two groups 
according to the mode of givenness : 

30 1) that which the personal subject (the member of the 
communicative world) can experience immediately and origi- 
narily in terms of his own content even if a form of inclusion, or 
form of reality, to put it better, still pertains to him and which 
belongs to his intersubjective Objectivity. Here also is the place 

35 for all lived experiences of the subject and even the subject for 
himself, as "inwardly" perceptible and as really apperceived 
object, as subject-Object. 

2) that which the personal subject experiences, to be sure, but 
experiences only mediately, insofar as the subject experiences a 


210 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


co-presence on the basis of what is actually perceptively experi- [200] 
enced or what may be perceived in the course of experience, a 
co-presence that is not perceptible itself and which cannot be 
converted into the subject's perceptions, i.e., in terms of his own 
5 content of being. I can have a "direct" experience of myself, 
and it is only my intersubjective form of reality that I cannot, in 
principle, experience. For that I need the mediation of empathy. 
I can experience others, but only through empathy. Their own 
content can be experienced only by themselves in originary 

10 perceptio. Likewise, my lived experiences are given to me 
directly, i.e., the lived experiences in their own content. But 
others' lived experiences can be experienced by me only 
mediately, in empathy. And not even each of my lived experi- 
ences, as components of the "world" (of the Objective spatio- 

15 temporal sphere of reality) is experienceable directly, for the 
form of reality (that of intersubjective Objectivity) is not an 
immanent form. 


Addendum 

Social objectivities are given to us in "social experience." 

20 What is this social experience? I can "understand" what a 
marriage is insofar as I can, in full clarity, put myself into a 
marriage by empathy, if I have myself entered the married state, 
have lived it through, and can now grasp its essence. (This 
would be "perception.") What is thus "given" I can represent 

25 intuitively modified, I can produce intuitive variation-forms of 
marriage and consequently can grasp various essential differen- 
tiations of "marriage," and in that way, I have, e.g., material 
for comparative evaluations. Another example: friendship. I 
stand toward others in relations of friendship. The friendship 

30 may not be an " ideal " one; however, I can modify the intuitive 
representation, which requires me to be able to intuitively bring 
to validity modes of motivation that are not in any given case 
the effective ones or the predominating and regularly effective 
ones, and, in order to do that, I have to, e.g., eliminate these or 

35 those egoistic motivations or represent them as eliminated and 
then examine the modifications essential to the ideal social 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


211 


structure. In the same way I can clarify for myself the essence of 
a union. I begin, for example, with a union of students in which 
I participated in a lively way and of which I played an inner and 
active role as a member. Similarly for a borough. I gain the 

5 fullest understanding as an actively participating citizen, by 
living through all the civil activities which pertain to the life of 
the borough, by coming to know the constitution of the 
borough, and this not only in words, i.e., in that I have read the 
borough's statutes and read about the customs and mores 

10 belonging to this area or have been instructed by others' stories, 
but rather in that I make clear to myself the " sense " of all that 
and make intuitive to myself the laws in their application to 
praxis and according to their function for the regulation of that 
praxis and consequently bring their "essence" to full clarity. If 

15 I cannot do it exhaustively, then it suffices, if need be, that I 
employ examples. 


§ 52. Subjective manifolds of appearance and Objective things [201] 

Belonging to the second class of Objects is the entire infinity 
of appearances of things, of the things of intersubjectively 

20 constituted physical nature. This nature appears to everyone, 
but, as has already been mentioned, it appears to each in a 
different way as a matter of principle. Each has his appearances 
of things; at most, by exchanging the subjective circumstances 
of the experiencing, the one can have appearances comparable 

25 to those the other had previously. But it would never be 
possible for different subjects to have the same appearances at 
the same temporal point of intersubjective ("Objective") time. 
To the extent that the one subject is part of the surrounding 
world of the other, then, to be sure, the store of actual 

30 appearances of the one is part of the surrounding world of the 
other as well. But only to that extent. Such is the case with every 
manifold of constituting phenomena in which is constituted, for 
each subject, an identical reality — constituted as identical, as 
intersubjective Object of a communal world, owing to the 

35 mutual understandings that unify it and that make possible acts 
of intersubjective identification (moreover, the mutual under- 


212 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


Standings may be actual or potential). Thus here belong all the 
sensuous schemata, adumbrations, and sensuous matter that we 
discussed when we treated the constitution of a thing. They are 
specifically "subjective/' 
5 One could here continue along this line and say that the same 
would apply obviously and afortiori as regards the apperceptive 
character of the apprehension and, finally, as regards the whole 
stream of consciousness. Meanwhile we must not overlook the 
essential distinction. In the stream of subjective lived experi- 

10 ences the subject manifests himself as a real person, and the 
lived experiences are at the same time his states. On the other 
hand, the subject does not manifest himself in the sensory 
schemata, in the subjective appearances of things; instead, what 
is manifested there are the things of his surrounding world. The 

15 appearances, of course, are not states of the things themselves, 
for in fact it is in appearances that states of things first manifest 
themselves. That the appearances are not states of the subject is 
clear from the fact that they are transcendent with regard to his 
actual states, his Hved experiences. This is, for us, nothing new; 

20 it shows precisely the fundamental difference in the way the real [202] 
subject is constituted and the way real Objects are constituted. 
This holds as much for the personal subject as for the psychic, 
which will be perfectly clear once we have determined the 
relationship between the two. 

25 If we turn back to what we estabhshed above (pp. 159 f.) 
concerning the subject and the Object-world given him, then we 
see that the person's surrounding world of things, presently 
intuited or intuitable, coincides with the world as it appeared to 
the solipsistic subject. I.e., we have here things appearing in 

30 manifolds of adumbrations, spatially arranging themselves 
around a central "here." 

Other subjects, who stand there confronting me and who I 
am able to apprehend as such in understanding them, can have 
given the same things with the same determinations; but their 

35 actual manifolds of appearance are, as a matter of principle, not 
the same. Each of them has his "here," and that is, in the 
selfsame phenomenal now, different from mine. Every subject 
has his phenomenal Body and his subjective Bodily movements. 
Every subject can indeed make the same places in intersubjec- 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


213 


tively identifiable space (the common surrounding space) his 
here, the same places /, in succession, have just now made my 
here. But for each point of time intersubjectively grasped as 
identical, my here and the other's here are separate. 
5 We have still to demonstrate that it is justified to speak here 
of "intersubjective space" and " intersubjective time." We have 
seen previously that what is psychic undergoes temporalization 
and localization and thereby becomes nature in an enlarged 
sense. But even as spirit, apprehending and positing myself and 
10 others precisely not as nature, / find myself and others in the 
spatial and temporal world. 

I am now, was previously, and will be later. Others are 

contemporary, in the same time (indeed in Objective time); their 

acts and my acts have temporal position in relation to each 

15 other as being contemporaneous or eariier or later, and this 

time is the same as the time of our surrounding world. 

The same applies with respect to space. Everything is related 
to the here which is my here. I, the person, am in space at this 
place. Others are over there, where their Bodies are. They go for [203] 
20 a walk, they pay a visit, etc., whereby indeed their spirits, along 
with their Bodies, change their place in space, in the space of the 
one Objective surrounding world. The local positions are mea- 
sured and determined just like any other spatial position. And 
as for temporal positions, they are measured by means of clocks 
25 and chronometers of every kind, instruments that do have a 
significance in terms of natural science. And all such measure- 
ments refer back to certain spatial measurements to be carried 
out in physical nature, in connection with periodic spatial 
occurrences in the physical world. 
30 Consequently it does seem that there is no essential distinc- 
tion between the natural-scientific conception of the spiritual 
and the conception of it in the human sciences. 

The response to this is that every person as such (essentially) 
has his surrounding world, first of all his subjective world of 
35 appearances and then, by means of a relation to a nexus of 
persons, at the same time a relation to the common Objective 
surrounding world, in reference to which the subjective sur- 
rounding world is mere appearance. To each personal Ego is 
given a physical surrounding world with its definite orientation. 


214 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


215 


and each personal Ego has his center, whence he perceives 
things; he has his Body as the central thing, around which, 
insofar as it encloses the center, all other things appearing to it 
are arranged and present themselves as oriented. Thereby, the 
5 world, along with the Body, is given as over and against the 
Ego, as the environment of the Ego, and is given every moment 
in a mode of appearance relative specifically to this Ego. " I am 
here," which does not mean I am an Object of nature. 
I, a man taken as an Object of nature, am a Corporeal body, 
10 and this is— considered egoistically-subjectively — the Object 
of my environment in the "here," and it is, considered Objec- 
tively, in the place of Objective space which presents itself in the 
subjective ''here." Furthermore, this Body is actually, first and 
foremost, an Object of my environment and, secondly, in view 
15 of everything it is in ''Objective truth," a thing in Objective 
nature (in natural science). This Objective Corporeal body is not 
yet the human being but is still only the bearer of an aesthesio- 
logical and Corporeal-psychic ontological stratum; and this 
totahty is then an Object of the common surrounding world for 
20 all subjects related to it in their pursuit of natural science. Every 
other man is grasped as nature in a still more direct way in the 
attitude of natural science adopted by me and all subjects doing 
research on nature, in which attitude nature belongs to my 
spiritual environment— but, for all that, I am still here not in 
25 the attitude of the sciences proper to the spirit (the personal 
attitude), for I precisely do not thereby have the person and his 
surrounding world in my thematic sphere. In this attitude the 
other man is constituted as a founded being, one that owes its 
spatiality and temporahty to the Body as founding. 
30 But if I am in the attitude of the human sciences, the sciences 
devoted to the spirit, in which the other spirit is thematically 
posited as spirit and not as founded in the physical Body (not as 
founding reality of the total reahty, man in natural history, man 
as zoological being), then this Corporeal body, like everything 
35 which is not spirit, belongs to the surrounding world of things; 
it is a thing, one that has spiritual significance, that serves as 
expression, organ, etc., for a spiritual being, for a person and his 
spiritual activity. Although the spirit is not apprehended here as 
nature, nevertheless it still is assigned to a Body and thereby to 


an Objective part of space. The space of the environing world, 
together with the things belonging to it, is always Objectifiable 
as natural-scientific space, as the space of natural-scientific 
nature. The essence of this state of affairs does indeed include 
5 the possibility of the nature-attitude and the natural-scientific 
attitude as well as the possibihty of research into nature. In this 
way, therefore, the spirit, too, which is naturalizable in the 
determinate way that has been indicated, has "its" place 
assigned to it, its distance from other things of the environment, 
10 etc. The spirit, the human being as a member of the personal 
human world, does not have a place the way things do (nor in 
the secondary sense in which a Body founded in thinghood and 
a man founded in natural history have a place). Yet it does have 
a place; that is, it stands constantly in a functional relationship 
15 to a Body, which for its part has its place in the environing 
world and in the scientific determination of this latter as a 
physicalistic world, perhaps one determinable by the instru- 
ments of physics. 

The same holds from a temporal point of view. Different 
20 persons have their different subjective time, insofar as isolated 
subjects (so long as no empathy has been accomphshed thema- 
tically, and a personal association, in which the person as such [205] 
is constituted, has not yet been produced thematically) for their 
part have their temporality in the course of their consciousness. 
25 Every stepping forth of the pure Ego has its position in this 
time, and every act of the Ego has its temporal extension in it. 
But all constituted unities have their time as well, and it pertains 
to the essence of the constitution of unities of appearance that 
they are constituted temporally in such a way that the consti- 
30 tuted egoistic-transcendent time (essentially) stands in relation 
to the time of the constituting lived experiences and at once in 
such a way that relations of simultaneity, of before, and of 
after, run back and forth in a determinate fashion. The thing of 
appearances constituted primally, a unity of sense intuition, is 
35 there, with regard to its duration, as simultaneous with the 
continuity of perception and its noetic duration. 

This carries over to all unities constituted intersubjectively to 
this extent that, apriori. Objective time and subjective time (my 
immanent time and my space-time) are a single order of time. In 


216 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


217 


the subjective space-times, as "appearances," Objective time 
presents itself in a certain way and "appears," provided appear- 
ance is, in this regard, valid appearance. This temporalization 
and localization of the spirit differ essentially from those of 
5 "introjection." (See pp. 200 f.) 

Hence in a now which, as intersubjective presence, is identical 
for the different subjects who mutually understand one another, 
these subjects cannot have the same "here" (the same intersub- 
jective spatial presence) nor the same appearances. The index of 
10 this phenomenological state of affairs is the impenetrabiUty of 
the different contemporaneous Bodies as such. Two Bodies can 
be Objectively bound into one thing, can "grow together" into 
one, but the concrescence into one thing does not create a Body 
fining the same temporal duration, does not create a here, a 
15 space with phenomenal orientation, and an identity of the 
appearances of things with respect to the world of things 
surrounding both subjects. The appearances two subjects have 
cannot fuse together into identical appearances as do the optical 
appearances provided by one's two eyes. Therefore different 
20 subjects have phenomenal Objectivities that in phenomenal 
intersubjective time are distinct of necessity and in principle are 
not even of the same essential content. The same things can, of 
course, actually appear to them, but the appearances, the things 
"in their fleeting mode of appearance," in their subjective 
25 quahties of standing in relief, of being oriented, of presenting 
just these colors, etc., are different. It is only that there exist 
relations of interchangeability, whereby the same thing, a 
moment ago given to me in a certain mode of appearance, can 
also, with the lapse of intersubjective time, be given subsequently 
30 to the other as well (in totally the same mode), and the reverse. 
To be sure, in another respect interchangeabihty is essentially 
excluded; the central here, to which the modes of appearance 
are related and which confers individuation on their concrete 
essential contents in the respective now, is not interchangeable, 
35 nor are the individual phenomena, nor, in general, is anything 
subjective interchangeable in its individuaHty. Thus, for exam- 
ple, even the ''I move" is proper to me, this Ego, and as such 
can never be "comprehended in empathy" by another Ego. 
What can be comprehended by that Ego is not my Ego but 


precisely his Ego, not mine but his subjectivities in lived 
experiences, in "subjective" modes of appearance, etc. 

Different subjects describe the objects of their surroundmg 
world on the basis of their own respective appearances. To the 

5 extent that the subjects standing in possible communication 
have in fact the same groups of appearances (i.e., actual or, as 
motivated, possible appearances in perception) even if not 
actually the same appearances themselves, in such a way that 
with the simple exchange of their positions in space the appear- 

10 ances of the one subject would have to become the same 
appearances of the other, to that extent the appearing thmgs 
would also be the same for the different subjects and would be 
described by them in the same way. We already know that a 
certain sameness in the totahty of the manifolds of appearance 

15 is a condition for the possibiUty of mutual understanding and 
that consequently differences are possible in certain directions 
only. Such differences come to the fore in the exchange of 
descriptions; on the basis of the intersubjective harmony of 
experience discordance stands out, and only in that way can it 

20 be manifest. 

Thence proceed the guidelines for the possible and famihar [207] 
distinctions between " normar human persons versus the abnor- 
mal This normaUty is related to a multiphcity of persons in a 
communicating association, persons who, on the whole, in 

25 conformity with a predominating regularity, agree with one 
another in their experiences and consequently in their assertions 
about experience, versus other persons of the same association 
who make deviant assertions about the surrounding world in 
some of their descriptions and who thus are apprehended in the 

30 comprehension of the former as persons who experience the 
same things in another way, a way not empirically realizable, by 
the one who understands them, in the framework of the 
motivation then current. Furthermore, from here proceed the 
guidelines for the constitution of physicalistic thing-Objectivity 

35 in intersubjective research into nature. The Objectivity which is 
intuitively constituted for individual subjects and which comes 
to expression in their descriptive statements, as well as the 
Objectivity constituted as correlate of a community of persons 


218 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


219 


who mutually assess each other as normal, itself now has the 
status of mere "appearance" of a "true" Objectivity. And the 
common nature given in intuitive experience has the status of 
mere "appearance" of a nature in itself, unintuitable by 
5 essence, of a nature that can indeed be determined intersubjec- 
tively in theory but cannot be experienced directly. Hence this 
nature is not, strictly speaking, describable, and no concepts of 
immediate experience can go to determine it. In Cartesian 
terms: we distinguish between nature as given in imagination 
10 and nature in pure intellection, and in doing so we abstract 
from the fact that since Kant this nature attained in natural- 
scientific theory is itself, in turn, ordinarily taken as appearance 
of an unknowable, problematic, metaphysical "in itself." (But 
all these modes of expression harbor very dangerous anticipa- 
15 tions which ought not, at the outset, be taken for granted.) 
Every consensus of the subjects of a community with respect to 
the predicates describing the appearance of Objects which 
appear either to an individual or interindividually now counts 
as accidental factum, versus their consensus with respect to all 
20 Objective (physicahstic) determinations produced in rational 
thought of experience, which counts as necessary. There belongs 
here, furthermore, the fact that, by means of these Objective 
theoretical cognitions of nature, all actual and possible differ- 
ences and agreements of subjects as to their phenomena (their [2(4 
25 immediately experienced contents in regard to things) are 
"explainable," hence themselves cognizable as necessary, by 
taking into consideration their Bodily and psychic organization, 
which is itself open to Objective research. 
So again, happily, we have landed in natural science, first of 
30 all in physics and then in natural science in general. The 
differences in "world pictures," i.e., in empirically intuited 
worlds of things, which come to the fore within intersubjective 
consensus and which, despite their discrepancies as to content, 
nevertheless manifest themselves in intersubjective understand- 
35 ing as experiences of the world, of the one and the same world, 
together with the impossibihty, which results, of arriving on the 
basis of actual experience at unconditionally vahd judgments 
about this world, necessitate theoretical research in the form of 
natural science. Natural science brings to cognition "Objective" 


nature, which henceforth belongs for its part to the surrounding 
world of the communal spirit. 


§ 53. The relationship between the consideration of nature 
and the consideration of the spirit 

5 The time has come to recollect. For we sense an uncomfort- 
able difficulty here, a certain tension between the nature which 
stood at the beginning and the nature which has now arisen for 
us out of the context of the community. Our point of departure 
was the naturalistic (natural-scientific) attitude, in which nature 

10 comes to givenness and to theoretical cognition as physical. 
Bodily, and psychic nature. This naturalistically considered 
world is of course not the world. Rather, given prior is the world 
as the everyday world, and within this arise man's theoretical 
interest and the sciences related to the world, among which is 

15 natural science under the ideal of truths in themselves. This 
pregiven world is investigated first with respect to nature. Then 
animalia have their turn, human beings before all others. And 
this is precisely the first task: to investigate them as Ego- 
subjects. We are led back to their hfe. This is— as individual 

20 factical life, like the person himself— inductively determinable, 
in terms of its place in the spatial world, only in a psychophy- 
sical fashion. In any case, we have here a series of psychophy- [209] 
sical investigations. And that is precisely not everything. What 
we have here is the one "Objective" world, with the one space 

25 and the one time, in which "everything" is ordered — persons 
as well, who, in union with their Bodies, lead their personal 
lives. To engage in considerations in this attitude, to reflect, to 
give an account of the world, means to accomplish in advance 
precisely the theoretical positing of "nature," and anything 

30 given acquires, by being approached in this way, insertion into 
nature. E.g., the person is eo ipso apprehended as a being of 
nature, as something annexed to a Body. 

We then delved into the essence of personal being as being of 
persons and for persons. We carried out a segment of actual 

35 personal hfe or we phantasized ourselves into such a segment in 
a full and lively way, and we also, by empathy, entered into the 


220 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


personal life of an other. And then, in a few steps, we described 
the correlation between personal subject and personal surround- 
ing world. We observed how persons established personal 
relationships, how personal associations were constituted as 
5 particular objectivities of a higher level, how a spiritual world 
arose as a world of intersubjective community, and how a 
special world for each personal subject stood out against this, 
that is, how each subject encounters, as his own, endless 
manifolds of appearances and thus, in general, endless objectiv- 
10 ities belonging exclusively to him alone. Hence each subject 
finds himself, or, with the appropriate focus, at any time can 
find himself, as subject, i.e., as bearer of a merely subjective 
world which, for reasons of principle, cannot be the same for 
any other subject, or rather, he finds himself as bearer of a 
15 subjective mode of appearance of the world or as bearer of an 
appearance of the world, in which precisely the selfsame world 
does actually appear. And in this contrast, with regard to the 
relation between appearance and appearing Objectivity, we 
again encountered nature and natural science: nature now as an 
20 Objectivity constituted in the context of the personal world, that 
is, harmoniously experienced in communal experience as being 
identically the same, experienced as such by all rational mem- 
bers of the community, the actual ones or those who may 
possibly still enter in. This understanding of nature is to be 
25 workedout on a higher level in activities of empirical science, in [21 
predicative products known as truth and science. It seems that 
here we got into a vicious circle. For, when, at the beginning, we 
posited nature straightforwardly, in the way done by every 
natural scientist and by everyone else sharing the naturalistic 
30 attitude, and when we took human beings as reahties, ones that 
have a plus above and beyond their physical Corporeality, then 
persons turned out to be subordinated natural Objects, compo- 
nent parts of nature. On the other hand, when we inquired into 
the essence of the person, then nature presented itself as 
35 something constituted in an intersubjective association of per- 
sons, hence presupposing it. 

How are we to find our way here? I said above that 
consideration in depth of the person and his surrounding world 
would by itself bring us into a new attitude, one differing 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


221 


essentially from the naturaUstic attitude, e.g., that of the natural 
scientist. Let us try to clarify for ourselves the opposition 
between these attitudes. 
A change in attitude means nothing else but a thematic 
5 transition from one direction of apprehension to another, to 
which correspond, correlatively, different objectivities. We are 
dealing here with radical changes of such a kind, with transi- 
tions to apprehensions of fundamentally different phenomeno- 
logical types. Hence our question is whether the distinctions in 
10 apprehension and, accordingly, in " experience " are here of such 
a kind that, corresponding to them, the noemata and their 
noematic objectivities (the experienced "as such") differ funda- 
mentally. That is, whether, with regard to the interrelations 
between possible empirical demonstration and the empirical 
15 knowledge based on it, the objects on the two different sides 
belong to fundamentally different "regions." Is it really a 
matter of two different worlds, "nature" on the one side, the 
world of the spirit on the other, separated by cardinal ontolog- 
ical distinctions? This does not have to mean, and should not 
20 mean, that these two worlds have nothing to do with each 
other,' that there are no essential relations between the sense of 
the one and the sense of the other. We know indeed of other 
cardinal distinctions between "worlds" which nevertheless are 
mediated by relations of sense and of essence. We could refer to 
25 the relation between the world of ideas and the world of 

experience, or to the relation of the "world" of pure, phenom- [211] 
enologically reduced consciousness to the world of transcendent 
unities constituted in it, or to the relation between the world of 
things as appearances (the world of the "secondary" quahties 
30 of things) and the world of physicaUstic things.^^ All such 
distinctions are connected to cardinal distinctions in " attitude," 
to fundamentally different types of apprehension and experi- 
ence, and the correlative objectivities, no matter how fundamen- 
tally different they might be, are nevertheless mediated by 
35 relations of sense, which already comes out in the designations: 
things as appearances are precisely appearances of the things of 
physics, pure consciousness is constitutive of such and such 
constituted unities, etc. 

As for the attitude whose correlate is nature (the world of 


222 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


realities in Objective space-time, the world whose causality rules 
the changes occurring therein), we have studied it sufficiently at 
depth and need only now remind ourselves of it. At the lowest 
level, what is to be experienced here is material (physical) 
5 nature, and founded on it is the experience of Bodily and 
psychic being. The aesthesiological and the psychic are an 
''annex " > of the physical Body, localized in it in a broad sense 
and obtaining by means of it Objective spatial position and 
insertion into the time of nature. In this way, therefore, we may 
10 apprehend every man as "nature," positing in his Body psychic 
properties, psychophysically dependent ones. And we can do the 
same as regards ourselves, if that is what we want, although it 
would involve remarkable difficulties. What kind of difficulties 
these are will become clear by itself as we now pass over to the 
personalistic attitude and personalistic experience. 


15 


'Annex means regulated coexistence, and what regulates the change is "causal- 
ity,"' an inductive causality. 


Chapter Two 

MOTIVATION AS THE FUNDAMENTAL LAW 
OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


§ 54. The Ego in the inspectio sui ^ 

5 In this attitude I take myself simply as I ordinarily take 
myself when I say " I " and as the I in any kind of '' I think " (I 
am convinced, I doubt, I hold to be possible, I love, I enjoy, I 
want, etc.). It is absolutely out of the question that I am here 
intending or encountering myself and my cogito as something in 

10 the Body, as founded in it, and as a localized annex of it. It is 
rather the reverse : the Body is my Body, and it is mine in the 
first place as my " over and against," my ob-ject, just as the 
house is my object, something I see or can see, something I 
touch or can touch, etc. These things are "mine," but not as 

15 component pieces of the Ego; hence they are given to me 
through manifold harmonious synthetic perceptions, which I as 
subject carry out, and what I do not perceive of them is 
" co-given " to me precisely through those perceptions : possible 
perceptions are motivated by actual perceptions in a regular 

20 fashion. To be sure, I find the stratum of sensation to be 
localized in the Body, including therefore physical pleasure and 
physical pain; but that only shows that this stratum does not 
belong to the realm of what properly pertains to the Ego. Just 
as the Body in general is over and against the Ego, so is 

25 everything '*not-I" which makes it an object, and only in the 
mode of the "over and against" does it appertain to the Ego, 
precisely as existing object of the Ego's experiences. Each 

' C/ Supplement VI, pp. 329 f. On this § and the following, see also 
Section One. 


[212] 


5 4-11 of 


224 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


thingly objectivity of my experience partakes of the Ego in this 
way, and to that extent each has a subjective character as 
experienced by the Ego and consequently as existing for it in the 
manner of a goal of its attention, a substrate of its theoretical, 
5 affective, and practical acts, etc. 

Furthermore, the Ego can, of course, also reflect on its 
experiences, on its focusings, on its acts of evaluating or wilhng, 
and then these too become objects and stand over and against 
it. But the difference is obvious : these are not alien to the Ego 
10 but are indeed of the Ego; they are operations (acts), states of 
the Ego itself. They do not merely appertain to the Ego in the 
manner of what is experienced and what is thought; they are 
not mere identity-correlates of that which is Ego-like and 
subjective primarily and originally. 
15 To be sure, the Body has it special virtues compared with 
other things, and as a result it is " subjective " in a pre-eminent 
sense, i.e., as bearer of fields of sense, as organ of free [21| 
movements, and so as organ of the will, as bearer of the center 
and as seat of the fundamental directions of spatial orientation. 
20 But all these are Ego-like by the grace of what is originally 
Ego-like, Just as Objects are Objects /or the Ego, are its worldly 
surroundings, in virtue of its apprehendings, positings in expe- 
rience, etc. (i.e., as unities given therein in the mode, "exist- 
ing"), so also this Body is my Body, and indeed mine in the 
25 palpable special sense, because I already am and in a certain 
sense bestow on it its special virtues. E.g., the center of 
orientation belongs to the noematic content of my perception of 
the thingly Body as such, and in experiential positing it belongs 
to the Body as an intuitively constituted Objectivity; thus it 
30 belongs to a level of appearances that already is a constituted 
appearance. Consequently the special status of the Body is by 
grace of the Ego (or of Ego-like originary intuition), which 
obviously does not mean by the haphazard arbitrariness of the 
Ego.^ 

35 Therefore we find, as the originally and specifically subjective, 
the Ego in the proper sense, the Ego of ''freedom," the 
attending, c onsidering, comparing, distinguishing, judging, valu- 

' Cf. Supplement VII, pp. 330 ff. 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


225 


ing, attracted, repulsed, inclined, disinclined, desiring, and will- 
ing Ego: the Ego that in any sense is ''active'' and takes a 
position. This, however, is only one side. Opposed to the active 
Ego stands the passive, and the Ego is always passive at the 
5 same time whenever it is active, in the sense of being affected as 
well as being receptive, which of course does not exclude the 
possibility of its being sheer passivity. To be sure, the very sense 
of the expression, "receptivity," includes a lowest level of 
activity even if not the genuine freedom of active position- 
10 taking. The "passive" Ego (in a second sense) is then also 
subjective in the original sense as the Ego of ''tendencies,'' the 
Ego that experiences stimulation from things and appearances, 
is attracted, and simply yields to the attractive force. In 
addition, the "states " of the Ego are subjective as well, states of 
15 mourning, of cheerfulness, of passive desire, and of renouncing 

as a state. "Being touched" as originating in a tiding is [214] 
something subjective whose source is the Object; to "react" 
against, to revolt against, or to pull oneself together is some- 
thing subjective whose source is the subject. 
20 From the property subjective (the Ego itself and its comport- 
ment—both the active as well as the passive) we must now 
distinguish, on the one hand, the objective, that over and against 
which the Ego comports itself actively or passively, and, on the 
other hand, the material substratum of "stuff" upon which this 
25 comportment is built. For in any life of consciousness what- 
soever the stratum of position-taking, of acts in general, is built 
upon substrata. Here we rejoin what we said eariier (§§4-10). 
The Objects of the surrounding world, over and against which 
the Ego is active in its position-taking, and by which it is 
30 motivated, are, all of them, originally constituted in acts of this 
Ego. Goods, works, use-objects, etc. refer back to valuing and 
practical acts, in which the "mere things" acquired this new 
ontological stratum. When we abstract from these ontological 
strata, we are led back to " nature " as the domain of mere 
35 things and then back further to the syntheses of various levels in 
which the Ego is active as constituting nature. Running 
backwards through the strata of the constitution of the thing, 
we arrive finally at the data of sensation as the ultimate, 
primitive, primal objects, no longer constituted by any kind of 


226 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


Ego-activity whatsoever but, in the most pregnant sense of the 
term, pregivennesses for all of the Ego's operations. They are 
"subjective," but they are not states or acts of the Ego; rather, 
they are what is had by the Ego, the Ego's first ''subjective 
5 possession/' We saw earlier, however, that everything consti- 
tuted in the spontaneous acts of the Ego becomes, as consti- 
tuted, a " possession " of the Ego and a pregivenness for new 
acts of the Ego, For example, the ''sense-things" of various 
levels become pregivenness for the relevant higher syntheses; 
10 and so do the fully constituted intuitive Objects of nature for 
theoretical-scientific activity, for valuing and practical behavior, 
etc. 

Therefore we need to distinguish : 

1) subjective being as being and comportment of the Ego: 
15 the subject and its acts, or states; activities and passivities 

^^^ ' [211 

2) subjective bemg as being for the subject: what the Ego has, 
consisting of the material of sensation and the totality of 
Objects constituted for the subject in the course of its genesis. 

20 Here belong also the properly human Ego, which appears as a 
part of nature, but also already the soHpsistically constituted 
Bodily-psychic unity presupposed for that, and also even the 
somatic Corporeality insofar as it is constituted in the inner 
attitude, although it, Hke the sensation material, has a special 

25 appurtenance to the Ego and is not " over and against " the Ego 
in the same manner as the constituted external world and its 
appearances. Thus what remains of that which is given in the 
inner attitude is only the subject of the intentionality, the subject 
of the acts, as what is subjective in the original and proper 

30 sense. 


§ 55. The spiritual Ego in its comportment toward 
the surrounding world 

This Ego of intentionality is related in the cogito to its 

surrounding world and especially to its real surrounding world, 

35 e.g., to the things and the people it experiences. This relation is 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


227 


not immediately a real relation but an intentional relation to 
something real. Therefore there is a distinction between : 

1) the intentional relation: I have the Object given. I have it 
given as appearing in this or that way, and with the required 

5 direction of focus I have the appearance of the Object given. I 
have the appearance, but I may be focusing my attention on the 
Object; or else I can attend to the appearance itself. 

2) the real relation: the Object T stands in a real-causal 
relationship to me, to me as a human being, thus first of all to 

10 that Body which is called mine, etc. The real relation collapses if 
the thing does not exist; the intentional relation, however, 
remains. That each time the Object does exist a real relation 
runs "parallel" to the intentional relation, namely that in such 
a case waves are propagated in space from the Object (the real 

15 actuaHty), strike my sense organs, etc., and that my experience 
is connected to these processes, all this is a psychophysical fact. 
But nothing of the kind holds for the intentional relation itself, [216] 
which suffers nothing through the non-actuality of the Object 
but, at most, is modified through its consciousness of the 

20 non-actuality. 

If we now consider the comportment of the subject towards 
its surrounding world, as the world posited by it, which includes 
not merely realities but also, for example, ghosts, and if we take 
the subject at first again as the one and only subject, as 

25 solipsistic, then we find a plethora of relations between the 
posited Objects and the " spiritual'' subject, as we are now 
calling the subject of intentionahty, relations which, in the sense 
indicated, are relations between what is posited as reality and 
the positing Ego, which are not real relations, however, but 

30 subject-Object relations. Here belong relations of subjective- 
Objective ''causality," a causaHty which is not real causaHty but 
which has a fully proper sense: namely, the sense of motiva- 
tional causality. Objects experienced in the surrounding world 
are at one time attended to, at another time not; and if they are, 

35 they exercise a greater or lesser "stimulation." They "arouse" 
an interest and, in virtue of this interest, a tendency to turn 
towards them. This tendency then freely unfolds in the turning, 
or else it unfolds only after counter-tendencies weaken or are 


228 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


229 


overcome, etc. All this is played out between the Ego and the 
intentional Object, The Object exercises stimulation, perhaps by 
virtue of its pleasing appearance. The "same" Object can be 
given to me in an unpleasing mode of appearance, and then I 
5 experience a stimulus to change my position appropriately, to 
move my eyes, etc. Presently, a pleasing appearance is given 
once again, and the telos of the movement has been reached. 
Here, once more, movements of the body and of the eyes do not 
enter into the picture as real processes of nature, but instead a 

10 domain of possibihties of free movement is most properly 
present to me, and an "I do" succeeds the "/ can " according 
to the reigning stimuli and tendencies. Correlatively, the end of 
the process has the character of a goal. The Object stimulates 
me in virtue of its experienced properties and not its physicalistic 

15 ones, of which I need know nothing, and if I am acquainted 
with them, in truth that did not have to be. This Object 
stimulates me (within the intentionality of experience or of an [21§ 
indirect experiential knowledge in virtue of properties ascribed 
to it correlatively) to eat it. It is one of the goods belonging to 

20 the class, nutrients, I reach for it so I can eat it. This is a new 
kind of subject-Object "effect." The Object has value qualities 
and is "experienced" as having them, is apperceived as a 
value-Object. I am occupied with it, it stimulates me to occupy 
myself with it ; I observe it, observe how it behaves as such an 

25 Object, how these new properties, which are not properties of 
nature, show themselves, are determined more precisely, etc. Yet 
I am not only a subject that values but also one that wants, and 
I prove to be such and not just a subject of value-experiences 
and a subject of the thinking which judges in this regard, etc. 

30 For I can also creatively transform these objects as well as 
actually use them for the ends they are designed to serve, etc. In 
this way, too, they exhibit their existence as nature on a certain, 
very low, intuitive level. In the opposite case, they are nothing, 
they no longer determine or motivate me in this relation. 

35 Perhaps, however, the illusory Objects as such, the cancelled 
noemata, affect me in their own way, just as previously, in a 
different way, the noemata affected me in their proto-doxic 
ontological character. 

We have here the behavior of reacting to something, by which 


stimuli are experienced and by which there is motivation in a 
determinate sense. I experience the stimulus of the beautiful, 
and I am motivated to turn to it, to pay attention to it, to take 
pleasure in regarding it. Something reminds me of something 
5 else that is similar, and the similarity prods me to compare and 
distinguish them. Something seen very obscurely determines me 
to get up and approach. The room's stale air (which I experi- 
ence as such) stimulates me to open the window. In each case, 
we have here an ''undergoing of something," a being passively 
10 determined by something, and an active reaction to it, a 
transition into action. And this action has a goal. Here belong 
all forming and transforming of physical Objects but also every 
" I move " (I move my hand, my foot, etc.) and similarly every 
" I strike," I push, I pull, I offer resistance to a thing, etc. To be 
15 sure, the occurrence of the mechanical movement of my hand 
and its mechanical effect on the "struck" ball is a physical-real 
process. Likewise, the Object, "this man," "this animal," [218] 
partakes of this event in virtue of his "soul," and his "I move 
my hand, I move my foot" is a process that is psychophysically 
20 intertwined, a process that is to be explained in a real-causal 
manner within the nexus of psychophysical reality. Here, how- 
ever, we are not concerned with this real psychophysical process 
but with the intentional relation. I, the subject, move my hand, 
and what this is in the subjective mode of consideration 
25 excludes all recourse to brain processes, nerve processes, etc., 
and the same holds for the "I hit the stone." The Bodily 
member, the hand, appearing to consciousness in this or that 
way, is as such a substrate of the " I move," is an Object for the 
subject and is, as it were, a theme of his freedom, of his free 
30 action; in the act of striking it is the means "by which" the 
thing, likewise intentionally given to me, can become and does 
become the "theme" of the striking (of the "I strike"). 

Obviously, therefore, the cogito essentially pertains to the 
intentional relation between the subject and the thematic 
35 Object, the cogito, that is, which defines the thematic Object 
(Object for me, for this Ego) or the thematic relation. It is 
therein, in the cogito, that the Object appears, is perceived, 
remembered, emptily represented, conceptually thought, etc. 
The thesis of being (that of experience, of thinking, etc.) can be 


230 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


231 


erroneous— the thing does not exist — and in that case it will be 
said in my subsequent critical judgment, or in someone else's, 
that in actuality I did not strike, dance, or jump. But the 
evidence (the evident lived experience) of the " I undergo " or " I 
5 do," of the " I move," is not affected thereby, is not annulled. 
(One can say that even the "I strike" or the "I dance" is a 
cogito, but such a one as to co-include in itself a thesis of 
transcendence, and in this mixed form it harbors in itself the ego 
sum as well.) The world is my surrounding world. That is to say, 
10 it is not the physicahstic world but the thematic world of my, 
and our, intentional Hfe (including what is given to conscious- 
ness as extra-thematic, co-affecting, and accessible to my the- 
matic positings : my thematic horizon). 
This surrounding world is perhaps, or it harbors in itself, my 
15 theoretical surrounding world. More clearly put, this surrounding 
world can present to me, the actual subject (not me, the man), 
all sorts of theoretical themes, and I can even become a [2$ 
practitioner of natural science by theoretically investigating the 
nexuses of reality. In setting after the real or in elaborating real 
20 actuahty, I arrive at "true nature," which manifests itself in the 
given things of the surrounding world as appearances of it. Here 
also belongs the fact that I can make myself and my psychic life 
into Objects, can pursue the Bodily-psychic nexuses, and can 
investigate myself, the man, as a reality amid realities. In that 
25 case, however, natural science and true being according to 
natural science are a determination pertaining to my surrounding 
world and one that itself occurs within its broad circumference. 
The surrounding world can then be for me the theme of the 
technique of natural science or, in general, the theme of practical 
30 formations in relation to valuations and settings of goals. In that 
case, I am pursuing technique, art, etc. I can thereby posit 
values and accept values; and on that basis I can see and find 
derived values and mediate values. I can regard goals as final 
goals, can deliberate about them in hypothetical-practical con- 
35 sciousness, can choose and then take them in actual praxis, and 
can order to these goals possible means. Yet I can also judge 
about values and in the end raise ultimate questions concerning 
values and goals and in that way pursue the theory of values, the 
theory of rational praxis, the theory of reason. 


That is an overview of the field of proper Egological facts. 
The Ego is always a subject of intentionalities, and that means 
that a noema and a noematic Object are immanently constituted 
("apperception"); consciousness of an Object is produced. In 

5 particular, an Object posited as existing, which is present to 
consciousness in its "how," enters into an "intentional" rela- 
tion with the subject in a new sense : the subject comports itself 
toward the Object, and the Object stimulates or motivates the 
subject. The subject is subject of an undergoing or of a 

10 being-active, is passive or active in relation to the Objects 
present to it noematically, and correctively we have "effects" 
on the subject emanating /row the Objects, The Object "intrudes 
on the subject" and exercises stimulation on it (theoretical, 
aesthetic, practical stimulation). The Object, as it were, wants to 

15 be an Object of advertence, it knocks at the door of conscious- [220] 
ness taken in a specific sense (namely, in the sense of adver- 
tence), it attracts, and the subject is summoned until finally the 
Object is noticed. Or else it attracts on the practical level; it, as 
it were, wants to be taken up, it is an invitafion to pleasure, etc. 

20 There are countless relations of this kind and innumerable 
noematic strata which the Object assumes with these adver- 
tences and which are built upon the original noema, or in the 
case of things, on the pure thing-noema. 


25 


§ 56. Motivation as the fundamental lawfulness 
of spiritual life 


Thus we see that when we speak of the spiritual or personal 
Ego, that is to be understood as the subject of intentionality, 
and we see that motivation is the lawfulness of the life of the 
spirit. Just what motivation is still requires, of course, closer 

30 investigafion. 

a) Motivation of reason 

Let us first of all fix our sight on the way perceptions and the 
like, for example, motivate judgments, the way judgments are 
justified and verified in experience, thus how the attribution of a 


232 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


predicate is confirmed by the concordant experience of it, how 
being in contradiction with experience motivates a cancelHng 
negation, or how a judgment is motivated by another judgment 
in drawing a conclusion, but also how, in quite a different way, 
5 judgments are motivated by affects and affects by judgments, 
how surmises or questions are motivated, how feelings, desir- 
ings, wilHngs are motivated, and so on. In short, the issue is the 
motivation of position-takings by position-takings (for which 
certain '' absolute motivations " are always presupposed : some- 

10 thing pleases me in itself, *'for its own sake," etc., it being of no 
consequence whether or not reason reigns within these motiva- 
tions). 

Nor should reason be excluded here, insofar as there exists 
precisely the pre-eminent case of the motivation of reason, 

15 motivations within the framework of evidence, which, if they 
are reigning in purity, produce constitutive unities of conscious- 
ness of a higher level along with correlates of the region " true 
being" in the broadest sense. Here belongs especially every [23 
instance of logical grounding. So we have to distinguish: 1) 

20 motivations of effective acts by effective acts in the sphere that 
stands under norms of reason. Here the distinction is that 
between the motivation of the Ego and the motivation of the 
acts. 2) Motivations of other kinds. 

Motivation can exist here in the most authentic sense, 

25 whereby it is the Ego that is the motivated: I confer my thesis 
onto the conclusion because I judged such and such in the 
premises, because I have given my thesis to the premises. The 
same occurs in the sphere of valuing; there is a valuing that I do 
for having valued something else, and there is a derived wilHng 

30 as a deciding for having decided something else. In each case 
here I am accomplishing a cogito and am determined in doing so 
by the fact that I have accomplished another cogito. Obviously, 
the thesis of the conclusion is related thereby to the thesis of the 
premises. These are Ego-theses, yet on the other hand they are 

35 not themselves the Ego, and so we also have as motivation a 
particular relationship among the theses. But the theses as 
theses have their "material," and that produces lines of depen- 
dencies as well: the full assertions and, correlatively, the full 
lived experiences have a "connection of motivation." 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


233 


One can speak of motivations of pure reason in a two-fold 
sense : it can refer to mere relations and connections of require- 
ment between ''acts ''properly so called. The subject here is the 
"active" one; in a certain sense the subject is always "doing 

5 something" here, even in purely logical thinking. Reason can 
then be called pure reason if, and insofar as, it is motivated with 
insight and is thoroughly so motivated. Yet this condition does 
not have to be met. Even invalid conclusions belong under the 
heading of motivation of reason. Their "material" is perhaps a 

10 sediment of previous acts of reason, but one which now comes 
forth in a confused unity and in that state maintains the thesis. 
Reason is a "relative" one here. He who lets himself be drawn 
by inclinations and drives (which are bUnd since they do not 
emanate from the sense of the matters currently functioning as 

15 stimuli, i.e., they do not have their source in this sense) is driven 
irrationally. But if I take something to be true or take a demand 
to be a moral one, thus having a source in the corresponding 
values, and if I freely pursue the reputed truth or the reputed 
moral good, then I am being reasonable — yet only relatively so, 

20 for I may indeed be mistaken there. I am projecting a theory in [222] 
relative rationality insofar as I fulfill the intentions predeh- 
neated to me by my presuppositions. But I may have over- 
looked the fact that of one of my presuppositions was wrong. 
Perhaps I am following a blind tendency here. I believed I could 

25 remember that the proposition was demonstrated ; the tendency 
is not completely blind insofar as the memory has its reason. 
Finally we reach in this way the fundamental questions of ethics 
in the widest sense, which has as its object the rational behavior 
of the subject. 

30 The doctrine of the affects in Spinoza and Hobbes deals, by 
and large, with immanent motivations. 


b) Association as motivation 

Furthermore, the entire realm of associations and habits fits in 

here. They are relations established between an earlier and later 

35 segment of consciousness within one Ego-consciousness. But 

motivation occurs in the "present" consciousness, namely in 


234 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


235 


the unity of the conscious stream, characterized as time- 
consciousness (originary consciousness) in act. Here it is not a 
matter of a motivation of position-takings by other position- 
takings (active theses by active theses) but of Hved experiences 
5 of any sort whatsoever. These are, specifically, either "sedi- 
ments" of earlier acts and accomplishments of reason, or ones 
which emerge, in "analogy" with the former, as apperceptive 
unities without actually being formed out of acts of reason, or 
else they are completely a-rational: sensibiHty, what imposes 

10 itself, the pre-given, the driven in the sphere of passivity. What 
is specific therein is motivated in the obscure background and 
has its "psychic grounds/' * about which it can be asked: how did 
I get there, what brought me to it? That questions hke these can 
be raised characterizes all motivation in general. The "motives" 

15 are often deeply buried but can be brought to light by "psy- 
choanalysis." A thought "reminds" me of other thoughts and 
calls back into memory a past lived experience, etc. In some 
cases it can be perceived. In most cases, however, the motiva- 
tion is indeed actually present in consciousness, but it does not [2j| 

20 stand out; it is unnoticed or unnoticeable ("unconscious"). 
The contrast between associative motivations and motiva- 
tions in the pregnant sense of Ego-motivation (motivation of 
reason), which we are dealing with here, can be brought into 
relief in the following way : What is meant by the universal fact 

25 of "passive motivation"? Once a connection is formed in a 
stream of consciousness, there then exists in this stream the 
tendency for a newly emerging connection, similar to a portion 
of the earlier one, to continue in the direction of the similarity 
and to strive to complete itself in a total nexus similar to the 

30 previous total nexus. We thus put the question : how is it that 
this is known? Now, when I reflect on an earlier connection and 
then on a second one, related to the first in the way indicated, I 
expect the initial part to be followed by a similar part, in 
rational motivation, and I then actually find it. Here for us who 

35 question and expect and who establish the fact of association, 
something new emerges: the existence of the similar part 


demands the existence of a similar part complementing it. This 
is a law of motivation', it concerns the existential positings. The 
demand is an "original" one, a demand of reason. Hence there 
are rational motivations for existential positings as well as for 

5 judgments and for taking up positions of belief in general 

(formal-logical position-takings belong here too).^ Likewise 

there are rational motivations for position-taking as regards 

feeling and will. 

Obviously, belief, and any position-taking, is an event in the 

10 stream of consciousness and therefore is subject to the first law, 
that of " habit." Having once believed M, with this sense and in 
a certain mode of representation, there then exists the associative 
tendency to beheve M again in a new case. If I ask whether A is 
and proceed to affirm that A is, then in a new case there may be 

15 joined "by habit" to the question whether A' is (thought as 

similar to A with respect to its matter) the affirmation that it is. [224] 
This is no different : if I have once apprehended a content of 
sensation and have posited it objectively as A, then I may again, 
on another occasion, apprehend and posit as A' a similar 

20 content of sensation (along with its concomitant similar rela- 
tions and circumstances). And in that case we again have in the 
stream forms of processes. It is clear, however, that I must not 
confuse the occurrence of habit with the occurrence of motiva- 
tion in the sphere of position-taking, which, of course, is alone 

25 called motivation in ordinary language. 

To be sure, the one and the other kind of motivation 
intertwine, the "causaHty" in the deep grounds of association 
and apperception and the "causaUty" of reason, the passive 
and the active or free. The free one is purely and completely free 

30 where passivity plays a role only for the delivering of the primal 
material which no longer contains any implicit theses. 

c) Association and experiential motivation 
We have been speaking of unnoticed, "hidden" motivations. 


• Here in the " Ego-less " sphere we speak of the Ego that is motivated. Is the Ego 
then the stream itself? 


* This would be the place to consider the correlative existential motivations in 
what is constituted : for example, the *' under similar objective relations (in nature) 


the similar is to be expected," etc. 


236 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


237 


which are to be found in habit, in the events of the stream of 
consciousness. In inner consciousness, every lived experience is 
itself doxically "characterized as existing." But a great difficulty 
lies here. Is it actually characterized as existing, or is there only, 
5 by essence, the possibiHty of a reflection which in the process of 
objectification necessarily confers on the lived experience this 
ontological character? And even that is not yet clear enough. 
Reflection on a lived experience is originally a positing con- 
sciousness. But is the lived experience itself something given or 
10 constituted in a positing consciousness? If that were the case, 
then could we not always go back a step in reflection, and 
would we not then fall into an infinite regress? 

For now, however, we can put this aside. By all means, there 
are hidden motivations. Even without our performing acts of 
15 beUef, they enter into motivations. Examples of it are provided 
by the realm of experience, the infinite field of motivations 
included in every outer perception, in memory, and (modified, 
however) in every phantasizing of a thing. Apprehensions of 
things and of thingly nexuses are ''webs of motivafion:" they 
20 are built through and through from intentional rays, which, [2l§ 
with their sense-content and their filled content, refer back and 
forth, and they let themselves be explicated in that the accom- 
phshing subject can enter into these nexuses. I have the unitary 
intentionahty in which a thing is given to me in one stroke. 
25 Then from every way of running through it, there results a 
series of continuous acts unfolding in the first-posited sense and 
in a harmonious sense conforming to every further givenness. 
That is to say, everything here is "motivated," including every 
new positing and every phase of the unitary total positing as 
30 well as every new partial positing which may perhaps come to 
the foreground but does not have to. And this applies, in like 
manner, to every new content; what is motivated is precisely the 
positing with its content, its quahty, and its matter, though each 
one of them supervenes here in a different way. In every 
35 moment, I have a "divisible" matter and a unitary quahty 
extending over the matter, hence there are also elements of 
motivation and webs of motivation in co-existence, unities of 
"mutual belongingness " to "one affair." On the other hand, 
"the similar motivates the similar under similar circumstances." 


Better : the givenness of the similar (in posifing consciousness) 
motivates the givenness of what is similar. 

Now, how are they both connected? On the one hand, in 

the unity of a lived experience, or perhaps in the unity of a 

5 nexus of lived experiences, I have, under the heading of 

"motivations," "intentional" connections, tendencies which 

run back and forth, which are fulfilled or remain open. They 

come to the fore and they sustain themselves, and here, too, we 

have motivations of reason: existence motivates co-existence, 

10 etc. It is so everywhere that a "unity of consciousness" is 

related to a transcendent unity of an object within a grasping of 

something given. (One could also ask whether there is not also, 

in the mere unity of the stream of consciousness, a unity in 

which every part motivates the contiguous one.) 

15 On the other hand, we have motivations extending beyond 

the continuity of the contiguous and inner nexus and, likewise, 

beyond the continuity of what is given unitarily on the side of 

the constituted. Here, too, the accomplishing Ego does not have 

to live in the motivations. The similar reminds me of the similar, 

20 and by analogy with what was given with the similar on the one 

side, I expect something similar on the other side. It is asso- [226] 

ciated with it and "reminds" me of it, though as analogon of 

something remembered in the usual narrow sense. 

Now, however, the question could be raised : is the one kind 

25 of motivation actually different from the other? Where I have 

the lived experience of the unity of co-appurtenance, where 

motivations run back and forth continually, there the true state 

of affairs is, one could say, that A refers to B as belonging to it 

because previously, in analogous cases, A occurred intertwined 

30 with B. Hence all thingly apperception and all apperception of 

unities of the nexus of several things and thingly processes 

would have their source in associative motivations. We come 

back to an original togetherness and an original consequence, 

where there is yet nothing of motivation. But to what extent 

35 that would be thinkable, and to what extent the unity of a 

stream of consciousness could be precisely a unity if it is 

without any motivation — that is the question. 

Furthermore, a distinction needs to be made here. In the 
unity of the consciousness of a thing, as a consciousness of 


238 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


239 


co-appurtenance, we have to explicate "conditionalities," a 
"because- thus" according to various directions: If I turn my 
eyes in such a way, if I produce a series of optical experiences in 
a certain way, then I must see such and such, etc. And what I 
5 see presents itself as the unity of a thing with these or those 
parts, and the mode of givenness of one part supports that of 
the other. If they are to be together Objectively as such and 
such, and if the one appears in a certain way, then so must the 
other, in correlation, under the given experiential circumstances. 

10 On the other hand, if we take this case: under the previous 
circumstances, and in the previous nexuses Z, A had occurred, 
and in the present similar circumstances Z', A' is to be expected 
or has already been given as a consequence, then we also speak 
here of the "being-co-given" and the being-motivated of A by 

15 Z, of the A-positing by the Z-positing. But the being-motivated 
certainly has a different sense here. 

d) Motivation in its noetic and noematic aspects 

If we examine the structure of the consciousness that consti- 
tutes a thing, then we see that all of nature, with space, time, 

20 causahty, etc., is completely dissolved into a web of immanent 
motivations. In the unity of the total hved experience, which 
comprises consciousness of a thing there and of an Ego here [2| 
with its Body, we find distinguishable objectivities of many 
kinds, and we also find functional dependencies which are not 

25 dependencies of an actual thing on the actual Body and the 
actual Ego in the world, which, in short, are not natural- 
scientific psychic and psychophysical dependencies. But then 
neither are they dependencies of subjective appearances (as 
possessed by the subject of lived experience) on real Objectivi- 

30 ties that are posited or received as real. We can now consider 
the noetic Hved experiences according to their relations of 
motivation, relations of nexuses of belonging together, by which 
occurs a procession from positing to positing, i.e., positing "in 
consequence of," with this special character. Or, we can con- 

35 sider the thetic correlates, the themata, in their noematic 
co-appurtenance, whereby again, under this aspect, there occurs 
the correlative "in consequence of." 


We have static and dynamic co-appurtenances, and the static 
pass over into dynamic ones in virtue of a change of the lived 
experiences (and these changes have the character of " subjec- 
tive " processes of the " I change," perhaps of the " I go through 
5 arbitrarily"). But here we touch upon the main difficulty. We 
do not say that in the unity of the stream of my lived 
experiences each lived experience is necessary, necessarily condi- 
tioned by the lived experiences which precede it and are 
co-lived. If we say that every lived experience of an act is 
10 motivated, that relations of motivation are intertwined in it, this 
is not to imply that every meaning-intending is one "in 
consequence of." When I become aware of a thing, the thesis 
contained in the perception is not always a thesis "in conse- 
quence of": e.g., when I see the night sky Ht up by a meteor 
15 shower or hear quite unexpectedly the crack of a whip. Still, 
even here a kind of motivation can be exhibited, included in the 
form of inner time-consciousness. This form is something abso- 
lutely fixed : the subjective form of the now, of the earher, etc. I 
can change nothing of it. Nevertheless, there exists here a unity 
20 of co-appurtenance, in virtue of which the judgmental positing 
"Now this is" conditions the futural positing "Something will 
be," or again, "Now I have a lived experience" conditions "It 
was a lived experience previously." Here we have a judgment 
motivated by another judgment, but prior to the judgment the 
25 temporal forms themselves motivate each other. In this sense we [228] 
can say that even the pervasive unity of the stream of conscious- 
ness is a unity of motivation. In the personal attitude this means 
that every act of the Ego is subject to the constant apprehension 
characterizing it as an act "of" the Ego, as "my" lived 
30 experience. 

e) Empathy toward other persons as an understanding 
of their motivations 

This apprehension as "mine" is obviously also included in 

cases of empathy. Here it is an other Ego, a certain one I at first 

35 do not know, but one I nevertheless do know in terms of 

universal Ego-being. I know, in general, what "a person," a 

man, is, and it is a matter for the experience of empathy, in its 


240 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


241 


unfolding, to instruct me about the man's character, about his 
knowledge and abihties, etc. This is analogous to the case of the 
apperception of physical things. In one stroke, I perceive a thing 
having these visible properties. It is "a" thing. What it is 
5 besides, that experience must teach. The extent the perceptual 
apprehension reaches can be different: I can (in the dark) 
recognize the thing as a spatial thing, then, under better 
illumination, it is made more precise as a tree, then as an oak, 
and finally as the well-known oak that I saw yesterday in a 

10 more definite way. Yet there still always remains much that is 
unknown or imperfectly known. So also in the apprehension of 
a man very much is already included. From self-experience we 
know already that implied here is the possibility of a double 
apprehension : as Object in nature and as person. This holds as 

15 well when we consider other subjects. On both sides what is 
common is the givenness of the fellow-man by means of 
comprehension, though it functions differently in the two cases. 
In the first case, what is comprehended is nature; in the other, 
spirit. In the first case, what is introjectively posited is the other 

20 Ego, lived experience, and consciousness, built upon the funda- 
mental apprehension and positing of material nature and appre- 
hended as being functionally dependent on it, as an appendix of 
it. In the other case, the Ego is posited as person "purely and 
simply" and posited, consequently, as subject of its personal 

25 and thingly surroundings, as related to other persons by means 
of understanding and mutual understanding, as member of a 
social nexus to which corresponds a unitary social surrounding 
world, while at the same time each individual member has his [22^ 
own environment bearing the stamp of his subjectivity. 

30 This means that others are apprehended in analogy with one's 
own Ego as subjects of a surrounding world of persons and 
things to which they comport themselves in their acts. They are 
"determined" by this surrounding world, or by the spiritual 
world that surrounds them and encompasses them, and, in turn, 

35 they exercise "determination" on it: they are subject to the 
laws of motivation. 


f) Natural causahty and motivation 

The "because-so" of motivation has a totally different sense 
than causahty in the sense of nature. No causal research, no 
matter how far-reaching, can improve the understanding which 
5 is ours when we have understood the motivation of a person. 
The unity of motivation is a nexus founded in the relevant acts 
themselves, and when we inquire into the "because," into the 
grounds of a personal behavior, we seek to know nothing but 
precisely this nexus. The causahty of nature in the natural 
10 sciences has its correlate in laws of nature, according to which it 
can be determined without equivocation (at least in the domain 
of physical nature) what it is that has to follow under univocally 
determining circumstances. In the sphere of the human sciences, 
on the contrary, to say that historians, sociologists, or cultural 
15 anthropologists "explain" human-scientific facts means that 
they want to clarify motivations, to make intelhgible how the 
people in question "came to do it," came to behave in such and 
such a way, which influences they underwent and which ones 
they themselves exercised, what it was that determined them in 
20 and toward the community of action, etc. If the human scientist 
speaks of " rules" and " laws," to which are subject such modes 
of behavior or modes of formation of cultural structures, still 
the "causalities" in question, which find their general expres- 
sion in the laws, are anything but natural causalities. The 
25 historian asks what the members of the society in their commu- 
nal life represented, thought, valued, desired, etc. How have 
these people "determined" themselves reciprocally, how have 
they allowed themselves to be determined by the surrounding 
world of things, how have they, for their part, shaped the worid 
30 in turn, etc.? 

All spiritual modes of behavior are "causally" linked [230] 
together through relations of motivation. E.g., I surmise that A 
is because I know that B, C... are. I hear that a hon has broken 
loose, and I know a hon is a bloodthirsty animal, and therefore I 
35 am afraid to go out in the street. The servant meets his master, 
and because he acknowledges him as master, he greets him with 
deference. We make a note for ourselves on a memo pad about 
tomorrow's schedule; the consciousness of the schedule in 


242 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


243 


connection with the knowledge of our forgetfulness motivates 
the making of the note. In all these examples, the " motivational 
because" appears. There is no question here of a judgmental 
orientation to something real as such. The " because " expresses 
5 here anything but a causality of nature (a real causality). I, as 
subject of the " premises of the action," do not grasp myself in 
an inductive-real way as the cause of the Ego as subject of the 
"conclusion of the action." In other words, I who conclude and 
decide on the basis of these or those motives grasp neither the 

10 conclusion as a natural effect of the motives or of the lived 
experiences of the motives nor myself as subject of a conclusion 
effected by the Ego as the subject of the motivating lived 
experiences. It is similar as regards every logical conclusion (it 
should not be overlooked that the practical conclusion is 

15 essentially analogous to the logical one, but they are not the 
same) and thus everywhere that I give expression in the 
egological attitude to a motivational situation. If I am able, by 
means of empathy, to ascertain this situation in an other, then I 
say "I understand why he decided in that way, I understand why 

20 he came to that judgment" (in view of what). All these 
"causahties" are exhibitable quite intuitively, since they are 
precisely motivations. 

Thingly (nature-real, natural) causalities are given intuitively 
as well. We see how the hammer forges the iron, how the drill 

25 bores the hole. But the seen causalities are here mere appear- 
ances of the ''true" natural causalities, just as the thing seen is 
a mere appearance of the true thing, the physicalistic thing. The 
true nature, the physicist's, is a methodologically necessary 
substruction of thinking and only as such can it be constituted, 

30 only as ''mathematical" does it have its truth. Versus this, it 
makes no sense as regards motivation, which is to be grasped 
originarily-intuitively, to base it, by means of substructions in 
thought, on something non-intuitive as a mathematical index of 
an infinite manifold of intuitive appearances, of which the 

35 presently given is only one. If I take the spirit, in unity with the 
Body, as a natural Object, then even the spirit is entwined in 
natural causality, which itself is given as mere appearance : for 
the simple reason that one member of the relation of depen- 
dency, the physical member, can only be determined as appear- 


ance and only by means of substruction. Sensations, sensuous 
feelings, reproductions, associations, apperceptions, and the 
whole course of psychic hfe in general that is grounded there, 
even as regards its position-takings, are Objectively (naturally- 

5 inductively) dependent on the physical Body with its physiolog- 
ical processes and its physiological organization; consequently, 
they are dependent on real physical nature. But the physiologi- 
cal processes in the sense organs, in the nerve cells and in the 
ganglia, do not motivate me even if they condition, in my 

10 consciousness, psychophysically, the appearance of sense data, 
apprehensions, and psychic lived experiences. What I do not 
''know," what does not stand over against me in my lived 
experiences, in my representing, thinking and acting, as the 
represented, perceived, remembered, thought, etc., does not 

15 ''determine" me as a spirit. And what is not intentionally 
included in my lived experiences, even if unattended or implicit, 
does not motivate me, not even unconsciously. 

g) Relations between subjects and things from the 
viewpoint of causality and motivation 

20 Now what do we have if we consider subjects as subjects of 
intersubjective motivations and establish that thereby they deter- 
mine others and are determined by them? Is this not a matter of 
causahty? The first thing to say is that if I do something 
because I hear that someone else acted in such and such a way, 

25 then my action is motivated by my hearing and my knowing, 
and this is not natural causality. Yet I apprehend myself here as 
determined by the other man, by the other real Ego. We speak 
indeed of people as reciprocally ''acting" on one another. It is 
similar to the case of an "abominable" din in the street 

30 disturbing me in my work and my finding it precisely abomin- [232] 
able, vexatious, etc. In that case my state of mind is conditioned 
by the hearing of the noise with this determinate acoustic 
content and this sensuous feeling, etc. We say the din vexes me, 
brings about displeasure in me, just as, on the contrary, the 

35 tones of magnificent music bring about joy, admiration, etc. Are 
these not causal relations? Does anyone doubt that air waves 
are propagated up to my ear, etc.? On the other hand, however, 


244 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


245 


we do also say that since M and N are, I conclude that S is ; my 
lived experience is related to M and N, to these facts which 
perhaps are geometrical-ideal, and to which, of course, I can 
ascribe no action on me. 
5 If we consider the relations more precisely, then we observe 
(as we have already done previously) that the relations of 
motivation have various facets. On the one hand, the drawing 
of a conclusion is noetically motivated by the judging in the 
premises, the willing by a seeing, hearing, evaluating, etc. On 
10 the other hand, it pertains to the essence of these motivations of 
acts that there also exist relations between the correlates of the 
acts and the acts on the one side and between the correlates 
themselves on the other side, which also have their " because " 
and "therefore." These correlates might eventually be charac- 

15 terized as actual, and we might thereby have the protodoxically 
positing consciousness of actual things and states of affairs. But 
they enter into these because-relations as these correlates 
"residing in" consciousness itself, the intuited as intuited, the 
fictional as fictionalized, the judged as judged, etc. Precisely for 

20 that reason it makes no essential difference whether or not the 
correlates correspond to actualities, whether or not they have in 
general the "sense" of actuahties. I am afraid of the ghost, 
perhaps it makes me quiver, although I know that what is seen 
is nothing actual. The dramatic action in the theater moves me 

25 deeply, although it is not something real, as I very well know. 
Whatever changes may manifest themselves in feelings and 
conscious acts in general, it makes no matter for our question 
whether I am determined in them by actual things or by the 
mere phantasy- things of art. 

30 Accordingly it is clear that a fundamental distinction is to be 
made here, namely: 

1. between relations of the real subject to real objects (things, [23^ 
persons, etc.), which are actually real effects, hence real-causal 
effects. The objects and persons are thereby posited as nature, 

35 as real, as dependent on one another for their real existence and 
for their being what they are. 

2. relations between subjects (not posited as causal-real 
objects) and the intuited, judged, etc., things '*as such/' i.e., 
between subjects and noemata-things, which relations neces- 


sarily have their reverse side in relations among certain acts of 
the subjects, acts of intuition, of thinking, etc. And hkewise 
here are relations between subjects and other people and their 
acts, which are not actually causal relations but relations, 
5 produced by empathy, between the acts and motivations of the 
one subject and those of the other. Thereby, the subject in 
question, who undergoes the "influences," is motivated by his 
own lived experiences or only by the correlates of these lived 
experiences, that is, by the correlates of empathy as such. 
10 Here the subject may, as indeed he normally does (when he 
does not empathize with imagined subjects and the like), posit 
the empathized subject, the fellow man and his lived experi- 
ences, as actualities and as natural realities, just as he can posit 
himself as such a reahty, and in that case, to be sure, the 
15 relation of motivation can be transformed into a real-causal 
relation, and the motivational "because" into a real "because." 
The din there, outside, vexes me — the apprehension can be 
exactly the same as when I am vexed by the popular song 
haunting me in phantasy. In the case of the first, the correlate is 
20 posited as actual; with the latter, not. And when it is posited as 
actual, I can understand the state of affairs as causal, the 
transformation of the attitude being scarcely noticeable, 
although it is an essential change. The real process outside acts 
causally on me as a reality: the falling of the hammer disturbs 
25 the air, the disturbances stimulate my organs of hearing, etc., 
with the consequence that there is produced in me, as real Ego, 
the noise. 

The same holds by analogy in the case of the intersubjective 
relations of dependency. To be sure, the other person is given to 
30 us in comprehension as related to a Body and as present there, [234] 
one with the Body. Is this unity not therefore a real, psychophy- 
sical unity, a causal unity? But upon closer scrutiny, we do not 
find, living in the comprehension-consciousness (e.g., when we 
converse with other persons, when they address themselves to us 
35 in speaking and we address them, when we receive instructions 
from them and carry them out, etc.), a naturalistic unity 
between Body and soul,* any more than the things we see there 


Here begins the continuation of the text of Supplement VII, pp. 


330-332. 


246 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


247 


as things of the environment are things of nature. The things 
surrounding us are what we have over against us in intuition; 
they have their colors, odors, etc. They are precisely the things 
that our experience at present shows us, although they are given 
5 in it imperfectly, of course. But we only need step up closer, 
look at them "from all sides," in order to know them "per- 
fectly" (i.e., perfectly for our aims). The quahties of the thing 
(the "sensuous," "secondary" qualities) which in this way 
appear ever better are the quahties that are constitutive of the 
10 surrounding things; they are the only ones proper to these 
things, and no extension of experience goes beyond such 
quahties. Hence according to the naively personal and interper- 
sonal experiential apprehension, there are not " physicalistic " 
things somehow behind the actually intuited things, or non- 
15 intuitive ("primary") quahties behind the intuited quahties, 
which would be mere "signs," mere "subjective appearances" 
of them. The things of our socially common world, the things of 
the world of our dialogue and praxis, have precisely those 
qualities we actually (optimally) see them as having. Everything 
20 is here intuited thinghood, and no one apprehends the seeing 
and hearing of them as real-causal processes, neither his own 
such processes nor those of an other. Here one looks precisely 
upon the things, and this looking is an act of the subject but is 
not a natural-causal relation. The subject is not an Object of 
25 natural science; the subject acts, but that is not the theme. 

Now, as to the persons we encounter in society, their Bodies 

are naturally given to us in intuition just like the other Objects 

of our environment, and consequently so are they as persons, 

unified with the Bodies. But we do not find there two things, 

30 entwined with one another in an external way; Bodies and 

persons. We find unitary human beings, who have dealings with [23| 
us; and their Bodies participate in the human unity. In their 
intuitive content — in what is typical of Corporeahty in general, 
and in the many particularities which vary from case to 
35 case — ones of facial expression, of gestures, of the spoken 
"word," of the individual's intonation, etc. — is expressed the 
spiritual life of persons, their thinking, feehng, desiring, what 
they do and what they omit to do. And so is also already their 
individual spiritual character, which, to be sure, comes to 


givenness in an ever more perfect way in the unfoldmg of the 
states which become understandable to us in their nexus as well. 
Everything is here of an intuitive character; as are external 
world and Body, so is the Bodily-spiritual unity of the man 

5 there before me. 

I hear the other speaking, see his facial expressions, attnbute 
to him such and such conscious lived experiences and acts, and 
let myself be determined by them in this or that way. The facial 
expressions are seen facial expressions, and they are imme- 
10 diately bearers of sense indicating the other's consciousness, 
e g., his will, which, in empathy, is characterized as the actual 
will' of this person and as a will which addresses me in 
communication. The will characterized in this way, i.e., the 
empathetic consciousness of this will and consequently the 
15 consciousness that posits in the mode of empathy, then moti- 
vates my counter-wilhng or my submission, etc. There is no 
question here of a causal relation (as, e.g., between the optically 
active thing, the "head" of the other, his face, and his face as it 
appears to me, between his sound production and the stimula- 
20 tion of my ear) and equally no question of any other psycho- 
physical relation. The mien of the other determines me (this is 
already a kind of motivation) to join to it a sense within the 
other's consciousness. And the mien is precisely the one I see, 
and in seeing it, I just as httle take it as causally related to my 
25 sight, my sensations, appearances, etc., as I do with any other 
straightforward sense perception. It is not at all that we are just 
grasping the causality deficiently, superficially. Rather, we are 
altogether outside the attitude required for grasping natural 
causality. In empathy, consciousness is posited in relation to 
30 consciousness, and my will and that of the other are posited in a 
determinate milieu of consciousness, and in a somewhat modi- 
fied way here one act motivates the other, as occurs in the [236] 
individual consciousness. "In a modified way" because at first 
my will and the empathy of the other's will are in a " because " 
35 relation, but in that case so are my will and the other's will 
itself. This motivation has its necessary presuppositions as 
motivation (not real presuppositions as real conscious states), 
familiar ones such as " I see the facial expression of the other." 
To introduce natural causality here would be to abandon the 
40 personal attitude. 


248 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


249 


h) Body and spirit as comprehensive unity: 
"spiritualized" Objects 

The thoroughly intuitive unity presenting itself when we grasp 
a person as such (e.g., when we, as persons, speak to them as 
5 persons, or when we hear them speak, or work together with 
them, or watch their actions) is the unity of the "expression " 
and the ''expressed'' that belongs to the essence of all compre- 
hensive unities.^ This Body-spirit unity is not the only one of 
this kind. When I read the " lines and pages " of a book or when 

10 I read in the "book" and grasp the words and sentences, then 
we are dealing with physical matters. The book is a body, the 
pages are sheets of paper, the lines are black marks and physical 
imprints at certain spots of these papers, etc. Is that what I 
grasp when I "see" the book, when I "read" the book, when I 

15 "see" that what is written is written, what is said is said? It is 
obvious that my attitude is here quite different. I do indeed 
have certain " appearances;" the physical thing and the physical 
occurrences appearing in it are there in space with a determinate 
orientation to "my" center of apprehension, hence they are in 

20 front of me, to the right or to the left, etc. exactly as if I were, in 
my experience, focused on the corporeal. But that is precisely 
what I am not focused on. I see what is thingly about it insofar 
as it appears to me, but I " Hve in the sense, comprehending it." 
And while I do so, the spiritual unity of the sentence and that of 

25 the sentence-nexuses are there before me, and these in turn have 
their character, e.g., the determinate pecuHar style impressing 
itself on me, a style which distinguishes this book, as a literary 
product, from any other of the same genre. 
Now one could say that there is bound to what physically [23f 

30 appears, as a first Objectivity, a second one which is precisely 
the sense "animating" the physical. But in this regard I 
wonder: am I focused on a second Objectivity only externally 
linked to the first? Is not rather that upon which I am focused a 
unity that is fused together throughout and not something that 

35 just stands there next to the physical? It is surely the case that 
this is not a connection in which the parts are "outside one 


Cf. Supplement VIII, p. 333. 


another," a connection in which each part could also exist for 
itself in abstraction from the form which binds them. 

Let us take another example, changed in a fitting way. I have 
here before me a piece of jewelry, and what interests me 

5 exclusively is the beautiful sapphire mounted in it. That is what 
I consider, that is what I am focused on in an experience 
oriented towards it. The rest of the piece of jewelry appears but 
does not fall within the compass of my observing perception. 
Or, as a natural scientist, I look at an organ that I have to 

10 dissect as an organ for itself; the rest of the physical Body, 
whence I excised it, is something I see but do not observe, and 
so on. In the case of the attitude directed to the spiritual, do we 
have the same situation or perhaps an analogous one? Is the 
spiritual a part connected to the appearing Body in a way 

15 similar to the manner in which one physical part is connected 
with another? Do I pay attention to that part and simply not 
observe the Bodily? No, it is obvious that the state of affairs as 
regards the spiritual is totally different. 

Certainly I can say that the physical is animated and is so in 

20 various, yet related, senses. The word, the sentence, the whole 
text (the drama, the essay) have their spiritual content, their 
spiritual "sense." And thereby a nexus of physical nature 
appears. I can at any time attend to this nexus, I can assume my 
attitude in such a way that the observing, experiencing, noticing 

25 regard (the thematic intention) enters into these appearances 
and intends the appearing spatial existence. Then it is precisely 
" there." Furthermore, I can again turn back from there into the 
attitude in which the drama, the essay, or the individual 
sentences it contains are my Object. But then I have an Object 

30 which no longer exists there in space, at this place, and such talk 
makes no sense in that case. 

Further, while reflecting and juxtaposing the one Object as [238] 
Object of the one attitude with the other as Object of the other 
attitude, I can say that the existing book, the existing sheet of 

35 paper, have a special sense, they are animated by an intention. 
The book with its paper pages, its cover, etc. is a thing. To this 
book there does not append a second thing, the sense; but 
instead the latter, in ''animating, "penetrates the physical whole 
in a certain way: namely, insofar as it animates every word. 


250 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


251 


though, again, not each word taken for itself, but rather the 
word-nexuses, which are bound together by the sense into 
meaningful forms, and these later bound into higher formations, 
etc. The spiritual sense is, by animating the sensuous appear- 
5 ances, fused with them in a certain way instead of just being 
bound with them side by side. 

It is clear that this analysis, even if still insufficient, applies in 
the first place to all works of the spirit, to all works of art and 
to all things that have a comprehensive spiritual sense, a 

10 spiritual significance. Of course it therefore applies, mutatis 
mutandis, to all things of ordinary life within the sphere of 
culture, the sphere of actual Hfe. A drinking glass, a house, a 
spoon, theater, temple, etc. mean something. And there is 
always a difference between seeing something as a thing and 

15 seeing it as a useful object, as a theater, temple, etc. Thereby the 
spiritual sense at one time belongs to a purely ideal sphere, and 
has no relation to existence, and at another time does have such 
a relation to existence, although it is never some sort of real 
thing in the proper sense, conjoined as a second existence to a 

20 physically existing thing. It is a question everywhere of a 
fundamental mode of apperception, a particular experiential 
attitude, in which what appears (is pregiven) to the senses does 
not become sense datum, perception, experience, but helps to 
constitute, in its " psychic fiuidum," in the very unity of the 

25 different kind of apprehension, an Objectivity of a proper sort.^ 
Obviously this apprehension thereby has another ''subjective 
function," another subjective mode than in the case of thematic 
external experience. 

More precisely, we should have said the cases are different. 

30 For example, the case of the use-Object and the case of 
sculpture, the literary work, etc. As regards the latter, the [23| 
written signs are inessential but not so the associated word- 
sounds, which, for their part, are not posited as memory, as 
existing, or even as "appearing." As regards the Object of use, 

35 certain sensuous determinations of its existence enter into the 
total apprehension; I look at the form of the spoon, etc., for 


that belongs to the essence of a spoon. Here one will say that 
the perception together with its existential thesis is sheer sub- 
stratum for the grasping of what is spiritual. But even here it 
holds that the spiritual is not a second something, is not an 

5 appendix, but is precisely animating; and the unity is not a 
connection of two, but, on the contrary, one and only one is 
there. Physical being can be grasped for itself (carrying out the 
existential thesis), by means of a natural attitude, as natural 
being, as thingly being; and to the extent one can assume this 

10 attitude, it was "included" therein. But what we have here is 
not a surplus which would be posited on top of the physical, but 
rather this is spiritual being which essentially includes the 
sensuous but which, once again, does not include it as a part, 
the way one physical thing is part of another. In many cases, we 

15 do have a real nature, an existence, as substratum; and in many 
cases— as already indicated above — the substratum is physi- 
cally unreal and has no existence. The harmony of the rhythms 
of a closet drama cannot be posited as a real existence ; just as 
little as the drama is somewhere existing in space is the harmony 

20 somewhere. To the ideal spiritual unity belongs the ideal 
harmony. ^ 

Let us now leave the region of these partially real, partially 
ideal "spiritual Objects," formations of the "Objective spirit," 
and consider again spiritual living beings, those beings animated 

25 in a special sense, i.e., human beings (but of course all animals 

are included). The question above was : is a man a unification of [240] 
two realities, is that how I see him? If I do, then I am grasping 


' The attitude does not itself constitute the spiritual product; the physical-spiritual 
is already pre-constituted, pre-thematized, pre-given. 


' In this presentation (totally insufficient, by the way) these two must be kept 
distinct : 

1 . if I do not accept the idea of a bond here in the manner of an appendix, that can 
be taken to mean there are not two things, external to one another, which are 
connected up and which are joined precisely in conformity with the sense of the total 
apprehension and which, in the movement of the focus from one to the other, would 
appear as parts on an equal level, and thus would form an external unity of parts of 
the same level. 

2. the sensible acquires, as it were, an inner life in virtue of its being a sensuous 
substratum given a spiritual sense (which does not at all imply an external connection 
as in 1.), and as is the case with a literary work (drama), the physical substratum is a 
manifold of sensuous members which are, as manifold, unitarily animated, so that 
even taken this way the spiritual sense is not simply beside the physical. (C/. also 
p. 255). 


252 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


253 


a corporeal existence. But that is not the attitude I am in when I 
see a man, I see the man, and in seeing him I also see his Body. 
In a certain way, the apprehension of a man as such goes 
through the appearance of the body which here is a Body. In a 
5 certain sense, the apprehension does not stop at the body, its 
dart is not aimed at that, but it goes through it. Yet neither does 
the apprehension aim at the spirit joined to the Body; instead, it 
aims precisely at the man. And the apprehension of the human, 
the apprehension of that person there, who dances, laughs when 

10 amused, and chatters, or who discusses something with me in 
science, etc., is not the apprehension of a spirit fastened to a 
Body. Instead it is the apprehension, accompHshed through the 
medium of an appearance of a body, of something that 
essentially includes in itself the appearance of a body and that 

15 constitutes an Object, of which I can say: it has a CorporeaHty, 
it has a body which is a physical thing with such and such 
quahties, and it has lived experiences and lived dispositions. 
And this Object has characteristics both sides possess at once : a 
way of walking, a way of dancing, a way of speaking, etc. Man, 

20 in his movements, in his action, in his speaking and writing, 
etc., is not a mere connection or linking up of one thing, called 
a soul, with another thing, the Body. The Body is, as Body, 
filled with the soul through and through. Each movement of the 
Body is full of soul, the coming and going, the standing and 

25 sitting, the walking and dancing, etc. Likewise, so is every 
human performance, every human production.* 

The apprehension of the man is such that, as "sense," it 
completely penetrates the apprehension of the body. But this 
should not be understood as if there were any question here of a 

30 temporal sequence : first the apprehension of the body and then 
the man. On the contrary, it is an apprehension which has the 
apprehension of the body, constituting the Body, as founding 
substratum for the apprehension of the comprehensive sense. 
Basically and in the main, this is just the way the word-sound is 

35 " Body " for the animating " sense." Furthermore, the imprinted 

page or the spoken lecture is not a connected duality of [24li 
word-sound and sense, but, rather, each word has its sense, and 


Cf. Supplement IX, p. 333. 


perhaps parts of words already have the character of a word, as 
already, in anticipation, sense refers to a new sense and to new 
words, the way words are joined into word-formations, into 
sentences, and sentences into nexuses of sentences, which hap- 
5 pens because of the fact that animating sense has such a 
rhythm, such a texture of sense, such a unity, a unity which yet 
has its support, or, better, its CorporeaHty, in verbal substrata, 
so that the whole lecture is through and through a unity of 
Body and spirit, is, in its articulations, always a unity of Body 

10 and spirit, a unity which is a part of a unity of a higher level, so 
that finally the lecture itself is present as the unity of the highest 
level. 

Exactly the same holds for the unity, man. It is not that the 
Body is an undifferentiated physical unity, undifferentiated 

15 from the standpoint of its "sense," from the standpoint of the 
spirit. Rather, the physical unity of the Body there, which 
changes in such and such a way or is at rest, is articulated in 
multiple ways, in ways that are more determinate or less 
determinate, according to the circumstances. And the articula- 

20 tion is one of sense, which means it is not of a kind that is to be 
found within the physical attitude as if every physical partition, 
every distinction of physical properties, would receive " signifi- 
cance," i.e., significance as Body, or would receive a sense of its 
own, its own " spirit." Rather, the apprehension of a thing as a 

25 man (and, to be more exact, as a man who speaks, reads, 
dances, is vexed and rages, defends himself or attacks, etc.) is 
precisely such as to animate multiple, though distinguishable, 
moments of the appearing corporeal objectivity and to give to 
the individual sense a psychic content, and again it is such as to 

30 unify the already animated individualities into a higher unity 
according to the demands present in the sense and finally unify 
them into the unity of a human being. We have just still to note 
that only very little of the Bodily actually comes to appearance 
at any given time and only very little appears in direct anima- 

35 tion, whereas very much can be "supposed," co-apprehended, 
and co-posited in a more or less indeterminate-vague way, and 
this is co-posited Corporeality and has a co-posited sense. A 
large part can remain completely undetermined and yet still 
contain so much determination: a certain CorporeaHty with a [242] 


254 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


255 


certain spirituality — a certain one, which, as horizon of experi- 
ence, is to be determined further by experience. 

This apperception of spirit is transferred to one's own Ego, 
which, in apperceiving other spirits, obviously does not have to 
5 be apperceived for itself in this way (as comprehensive unity, as 
spirit), and if it is not apperceived that way, then it functions as 
non-Objectivated pure Ego. In my own case, I arrive at the 
apprehension of man (in the sense of spirit) by way of a 
comprehension of others, i.e., insofar as I comprehend them as 

10 centers not only for the rest of the surrounding world but also 
for my Body, which is for them an Object of the surrounding 
world. It is precisely thereby that I comprehend them as 
apprehending me similar to the way I apprehend them, thus as 
apprehending me as a social man, as a comprehensive unity of 

15 Body and spirit. Therein is rooted an identification between the 
Ego I encounter in direct inspection (as Ego which has its Body 
over and against it) and the Ego of the other's representation of 
me, the Ego the others can understand and posit, one with my 
Body, as, for him, an "external" representation, in acts which I 

20 for my part attribute to him. The comprehensive representation 
others have, or can have, of me is of service to me as regards the 
apprehension of myself as a social "man," hence the apprehen- 
sion of myself totally different from the way I grasp myself in 
direct inspection. By means of this apprehension, with its 

25 complicated structure, I fit myself into the family of man, or, 
rather, I create the constitutive possibihty for the unity of this 
"family." It is only now that I am, in the proper sense, an Ego 
over against an other and can then say "we." And then for the 
first time do I become " Ego," and the other precisely an other. 

30 "We" are all human beings, similar to each other, capable as 
such of entering into commerce with each other and establishing 
human relations. All this is accompHshed in the spiritual 
attitude, without any "naturalizing." But we know already that 
we can turn every man as comprehensive unity into a unity of 

35 nature, a biological and psychophysical Objectivity, in which 
pure spirit no longer functions as member of a comprehensive 
unity, but instead a new phenomenal unity, an Objective [24| 
thinghood, is constituted. This is transferred to me myself as an 
Object of nature, in a very mediate way of representation, as 

40 one can see. By means of the change of attitude, the spiritual 


Ego is transformed in my own case, even if in a more mediate 
way than in the case of others, into the psychic Ego of the 
natural-scientific treatment of the soul. 
We have here a fundamental analysis embracing all spiritual 

5 Objects, all unities of Body and sense, hence not only individual 
humans but also human communities, all cultural formations, 
all individual and social works, institutions, etc. 

Now if we have not been permitted to let the relation between 
Body and spirit, wherever it occurs, pass as a junction of two 

10 things, still nothing prevents us, on the other hand, from 
ascribing to the Body a Bodily unity and to the sense a 
sense-unity in such a way that we then acknowledge that the 
Bodily-spiritual unity we call man, state, or church harbors 
two-fold unities, namely: Bodily unities as material-corporeal 

15 unities (the ultimate in all cases in which corporeal existence 
enters into the whole of the " spirituahzed " Object) and spiri- 
tual unities. Consequently a distinction has to be drawn and we 
have to maintain that the individual man is : 

1) unitary Body, i.e., a body which is animated and which 
20 bears sense, and 

2) unitary spirit. In the case of a state, a people, a union, etc., 
there is a plurahty of Bodies, standing in physical relationships, 
something required for intercommerce, either direct or indirect. 
What pertains here has sense. Each Body has its spirit, but they 

25 all are bound together by the overarching communal spirit which 
is not something beside them but is an encompassing "sense" 
or " spirit." This is an Objectivity of a higher level. 

In the case of other spiritual Objects, namely the ideal ones, 
such as drama, literature in general, music, and in a certain 

30 sense also in the case of every other work of art, the situation is 
different, so much so that the sensuous Body is not an existing 
one. (The sensuous Body of a picture is not the picture hanging 
on the wall. It would not be difficult to elaborate this. But it 
would take us too far afield.) 

35 At all events, with respect to the unity of the spirit, which [244] 
makes up the "sense" of the Body, we have to note the 
following, as regards the individual man: 

Empathy into persons is nothing else than precisely that 
apprehension which understands the sense, i.e., which grasps the 


256 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


257 


Body in its sense and in the unity of the sense it has to bear. To 
perform an act of empathy means to grasp an Objective spirit^ 
to see a human being, to see a crowd of people, etc. Here we do 
not have an apprehension of the Body as bearer of something 
5 psychic in the sense that the Body is posited (experienced) as a 
physical Object and then something else is added on to it, as if it 
was apprehended just as something in relation to, or in conjunc- 
tion with, something else. What we have here rather is precisely 
an Objectivation of a higher level superposed on that of the 

10 other stratum of apprehension in such a way that what is 
constituted is the unity of an Object, one which in turn (without 
any kind of binding of parts that would presuppose a prior 
separation) involves Objective strata of lower and higher levels, 
distinguishable only after the fact. 

1 5 The unity given in the apprehension of spiritual being allows 
for differentiation into Body and sense by means of a change in 
the apprehending attitude. The human Body is given in percep- 
tual appearance; as the correlate of perception it presents itself 
as an actuality, and as such it fits within the surrounding 

20 actuality of the one who understands and who, in seeing this 
Body, grasps the human person as a companion. More precisely 
formulated, he does not posit or grasp in the proper sense (in 
the sense of an actively performed thesis) the actuality of the 
Body when he grasps the person expressed therein, no more 

25 than we posit, in reading, the written marks on the paper in an 
active thesis of experience, make it into the "theme*' of 
theoretical or even practical position-taking. The written mark 
"appears," but we "live" in the performance of the sense. 
Likewise, the Body appears, but what we perform are the acts 

30 of comprehension, and what we grasp are the persons and the 
personal states "expressed" in the appearing content of the 
Body. As expressed, they appertain only to the appearing Body 
of my environment; but this appertaining signifies here a special 
relation having anything but the sense of the founded natural 

35 unity, man as an animal being, as zoological Object. On the [24| 
contrary, it precedes the constitution of any such unity. 

In comparison with the unities of word-sound and sense 
brought up earlier, it must be noted that we were dealing there 
with irreal unities. The unity of Body and spirit, however, is 


constituted as a higher unity of two real unities. It requires 
proper constitutive manifolds, something which obviously is 
shown in the exhibition of this unity in the consciousness of its 
explicit givenness. 

5 If a real objectivity of experience is to come to givenness, it is 
necessary to take together the two real unities of Body and soul 
and pursue in experience, in a unitary fashion, their relations of 
dependency on real circumstances and on one another. Instead 
of paying heed merely to the Body and, again, instead of simply 

10 living the understanding and paying heed to the person, we first 
of all have to take the connection produced between expression 
and expressed as a totality and see how it behaves in concordant 
experience. We will have to say, of course, that already prior to 
the turn and grasp of experience this unity of expression and 

15 expressed comes to consciousness, as a unique reality, in the 
unfolding of the concomitant perceptual apprehensions and that 
it is perceptually present as a formation of two levels, in such a 
way that the total formation's dependency on circumstances 
essentially includes the dependency of the events of the higher 

20 level on those of the lower. 

In fact, a unity of realizing apperception is constantly a Hved 
experience, on which the regard of the pure Ego can focus and 
can grasp therein the founded reality as well as its current states 
and circumstances. It must be noticed, however, that the unity 

25 of expression is a presupposition for the constitution of the 
founded reality as one which encloses levels, but that it is not 
already in itself this reahty. We could formulate it in this way : it 
is only by means of expression that the person of the other is 
there at all for the experiencing subject, and the person must 

30 necessarily be there first in order for him to be able to enter, 
precisely as a level, into a real unity of a higher level and indeed 
to do so together with that which serves as expression. 

In itself it is indeed thinkable that the totality of real relations [246] 
between Body and spirit would be reducible to the unity of 

35 expression. Spiritual being would be expressed in the Bodily to 
such an extent that the spirit would be graspable; but psycho- 
physical unity would be lacking, and Body and soul would not 
appear in real connection. Perhaps it will be objected that the 
bond between expression and expressed is itself already appre- 


258 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


259 


hendable as real. If the Body has the pecuHarity that personal 
states, as co-posited, are tied in empirical regularity to its 
general type and especially to certain occurrences in it, e.g., the 
play of facial features, the spoken word, etc., then these 
5 occurrences have precisely real spiritual consequences. Con- 
versely, if certain spiritual states unfold and if, in parallel, 
certain miens, gestures, etc. appear on the Body, then in that 
case the spiritual has real consequences in the Body and, 
accordingly, is experienced as a cause. In the meantime, such 
10 statements have only to be pronounced in order to see that this 
view cannot be sustained. A parallel bond of this kind does not 
create any reality of a higher level. We would have in such a 
case two realities, each of them having its states and its real 
properties. Within certain limits there would exist a correspon- 

15 dence, and conclusions could be drawn from the parallel states 
on the one side to those on the other; the ones could be used as 
intimations of the others. But not a single new real property 
would arise, and neither could there be any question of a 
causaHty joining Body and spirit, for that presupposes both 

20 reahties would assume for one another the function of circum- 
stances with respect to their real states. But as we have 
presupposed the state of affairs here, the cancelling of the one 
reality would not change anything as regards the other, and the 
total manifold of its states would be the same. 

25 The truth is, however, that with the appropriate attitude a 
man stands there confronting us as a real unity with real 
properties, ones we call psychophysical and which presuppose 
causaHty in the relations between Body and soul. It is precisely 
through such a causality that a proper founded unity is made 

30 possible. There is in the sense of the natural apperception of a 
man something like health and sickness in their countless forms, 
whereby sickness of the Body results in psychic disturbances 
and, more generally, in various experienceable consequences for 
the soul. Even inverse causalities are given in experience; e.g., 

35 the will, in that it has the Body as the field of its freedom, leaves 
a wake of Bodily occurrences. Yet it is not necessary to Hst 
individually all the forms of psychophysical causaHty which, 
even if they are always retracted in subsequent philosophical 
argumentation, nevertheless command the straightforward 


experiential apprehension of animal being. What matters here is 
that by means of them something enters into the experiential 
apprehension which is not simply contained in the unity of 
"expression" and "expressed."^ 

5 The Body, which we apprehend as expression of spiritual life, 
is at the same time a part of nature, inserted into the universal 
nexus of causality, and the spiritual life, which we grasp 
through the Bodily expression and understand in its nexus of 
motivation, appears, in virtue of its connection with the Body, 

10 to be conditioned itself by natural processes and to be apper- 
ceived as something of nature. The unity of Body and spirit is a 
two-fold one, and, correctively, a two-fold apprehension (the 
personalistic and the naturalistic) is included in the unitary 
apperception of the human. 


15 


§ 57. Pure Ego and personal Ego as Object of 
reflexive self-apperception ^ 


If we take the personal Ego just as we encountered it in the 
inspectio (thus without regard to its unity with the expressing 
Body, the Body given to us in empathy), then it does not at first 

20 seem to be distinct from the pure Ego. The Body is in that case 
something I have, hence in the broadest sense something over 
against me just like everything pregiven, foreign to the Ego, in 
analogy with the things of my environment. To be sure, the 
Body has here (as we already saw earlier) a particular subjectiv- 

25 ity; it is proper to me in a special sense: it is the organ and 
system of organs of the Ego, the organ of perception, the organ 
of my effects on the " outside," on the extra-Bodily environ- 
ment, etc. I myself, however, am the subject of the actual " I 
live" : I undergo and I do, I am affected, I have my own "over 

30 and against" and am affected by it, attracted, repulsed, and [248] 
motivated in various ways. Or, more clearly : self-perception is a 
reflection (self-reflection of the pure Ego) and presupposes 
according to its essence an unreflected consciousness. The unre- 


^ Cf. Supplement X, pp. 333 ff. 

^ C/. the § with the same title in Supplement X, pp. 337 ff. 


260 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


261 


fleeted life of the Ego in relation to all sorts of pregivennesses, 
in relation to a surrounding world of things, a world of goods, 
etc., alien to the Ego, takes on a distinctive form, precisely that 
of self-reflection or self-perception, which is thus a special mode 
5 of the " I live " in the universal nexus of Ego-life. To expound it 
more precisely, it takes on the form: I perceive that I have 
perceived this or that and that I still continue to perceive, I 
perceive that this or that affected me previously, though was 
unperceived, that it has attracted my attention, that I still 

10 remain fixed on it, that something joyful moved me and still 

does, that I made a decision and stuck to it, etc. By way of such 

reflections I know about my unreflected Ego-life; they bring 

structures of it into the focus of my attention. 

Reflection can be a protracted and continous unity of reflec- 

15 tions. In reflection, I pass from one cogito, which has become a 
grasped object, to another and again to others; and in so doing 
the Ego, the subject in each cogito, grasps its identity according 
to its essence. The manifold activities and passivities of the Ego 
are given originally as those of one identical Ego; and correla- 

20 tively, the manifold possessions, that which affects, that which is 

pregiven, belonging to the immanent or transcendent sphere, is 

given originally as the possessions of one and the same Ego. All 

these are descriptions which are pertinent to the pure Ego. 

Now, while I move thus in the fields of reflection (in the 

25 Objectivated subjectivities), in hving, unreflected acts of 
reflection, I experience thereby how I ''comport" myself under 
different subjective circumstances, i.e., in relation to my sphere 
of current pregivennesses (my surrounding world in a very 
broad sense). And if I enter into the intertwining of the 

30 motivations of my cogito, into the patent and latent intention- 
alities of motivation, then I experience how I am motivated by 
them, how I am wont to be motivated by them, and what sort of 
general character I possess, in terms of experience, as the 
motivational subject of these motivating circumstances ^ : i.e., [249| 


what sort oi personal subject I am.U experience all this at first 
without an accompanying conceptual fixation and without 
thinking about it (without " reflecting," if the word is taken in 
quite a different sense, namely, precisely in the sense of the 
5 comportment of thinking and asserting). So we distinguish 
hQWecn pure-Ego-reflection, i.e., reflection on the pure Ego that 
belongs essentially to every cogito, and reflective thematic 
experience built on the basis of the accrued experiential apper- 
ception, the intentional object of which is this empirical Ego, 
10 the Ego of empirical intentionality, as self-experience of the 
personal Ego in relation to the experiential nexuses in which this 
personal Ego (hence in relation to the acts it carries out under 
the pertinent motivating circumstances) shows itself according 
to its " personal features " or properties of character. 
15 To complete this exposition it should be noted that the inner 
reflection I am carrying out here does not exclude, but rather 
includes, the fact that I apprehend myself thereby as a human 
Ego also in the relations I maintain with others. It is indeed as 
personal Ego that I comport myself in relation to others as ones 
20 who also belong to my surrounding world. But if I keep within 
the content offered by pure and proper self-perception and limit 
myself to the self-preservation of my person under the circum- 
stances of my comportment in the surrounding world, then it is 
clear that I can disregard the stratum of apprehension that arises 
25 from the fact that I represent myself at the same time as the 
same one who is apprehended by others externally through 
empathy. And finally, even if I eliminate every apperception [250] 
bearing on others and consequently all the contributions this 
apperception makes towards the rest of the apperception of the 
30 surrounding world and of myself, then obviously what remains 


' Here we must distinguish between habits which I have but which I did not have 
in various periods of my past, possessing others instead. And, on the other hand, the 
habitual style. But is *' habit" the right word here? As Ego, do I not have my 
position-taking and my way of position-taking not out of mere habit but from 
freedom and facuUies of various kinds? 


» Is this to mean that merely through repeated reflection on the motivations of my 
affections and actions there arises an experiential apperception of the Ego as an Ego 
of affection and action? As personal Ego, however, I am a man among other men. 
What is prior here, the formation of the inductive apperception of the personal style 
of others or of my own style? And is it merely a question of inductive-associative 
apperception? The person is the subject of faculties. A person's faculty is not 
constituted merely as a product of association, and I come to know his formation and 
growth according to the style of experience properly his own, in which free 
association always plays a role. Much is still to be clarified here. 


262 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


is my Ego, which comports itself in a regulated way in my pure 
(natural, thingly) surrounding world, and a limited personal 
apperception. In self-intuition in the proper sense (self-percep- 
tion, self-memory) there enters at the outset nothing of the 
5 representation of the way in which I would appear from a there, 
from an other's point of view.^ 

I, the personal Ego, am something pre-given to myself, after 
the development of the empirical apperception of the Ego, just 
as well as the thing is pre-given to me after the thing- 

10 apperception has developed. Just as "experience," in the sense 
of deliberate observation executed according to developed 
thing-apperception, and in the sense of willfully ordered satis- 
faction of the interest in things, allows me to come to know the 
thing better through series of experiences — which leads to 

15 observational science — so it is with regard to the empirical Ego. 
I purposely enter "into the experience" and come to know 
myself "more clearly," possibly with a purely observational 
interest. Self-perception as personal self-perception and the 
nexus of reflective self-experiences "teaches" me that my pure 

20 Ego-acts unfold in a regulated way under their subjective 


' The personal Ego is the human Ego. I experience the comportment of others 
within the circumstances of their surrounding world, and out of repeated reflection 
on their similar behavior under similar circumstances an inductive apperception 
arises. Insofar as I apperceive myself as a human being in a human nexus and thus 
find occasion enough to observe my own behavior and find it to be regulated (i.e., I 
find habits, active regularities in my behavior), I come to know myself as a personal 
"reality." The personal reflection which I exercise in this way is therefore a very 
mediated one in its intentionahty. 

Yet many questions still remain. 

First, a part of inductive apperception, concerning myself, arises as somatological 
prior to the experience of others. Here it must be seriously considered how the Ego, 
in all this, plays its role as a pole and how an enduring ability is constituted (I can 
move my hand in a certain direction, I can touch things, etc.): my Body as substrate 
of various Corporeal " faculties." And then multiple habits in my subjective sphere, 
whether or not others come into consideration for me. Interplay between the 
observation of others and self-observation, with a continued extension of inductive 
apperception as a consequence. 

With that, however, always and from the very outset there comes into consider- 
ation the faculties proper to the Ego and the somatological faculties of the lower 
stratum. An active faculty is indeed not a habit, not an inductively constituted 
property, not a mere product of association, if we take the latter in the customary 
sense. The analysis of the person is therefore very incomplete here. 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


263 


circumstances. I recognize eidetically, or can recognize, that 
according to these regulated processes the "representation," 
Ego-person, the empirical Ego-apperception, must necessarily 
develop and must incessantly develop further, and that hence, if 

5 I reflect on a series of lived experiences, a course of various 
cogitationes, I must encounter myself constituted as personal 
Ego. The course of the lived experience of pure consciousness is 
necessarily a process of development in which the pure Ego 
must assume the apperceptive form of the personal Ego, hence 

10 must become the nucleus of all sorts of intentions which would 
find their demonstration or their fulfillment in series of experi- 
ences of the type just mentioned. 


§ 58. The constitution of the personal Ego prior to 
reflection ^ 

15 In reflection I therefore always find myself as a personal Ego. 
But originally this Ego is constituted in the genesis pervading 
the flux of lived experiences. The crucial question here is this : is 
the personal Ego constituted on the basis of Ego-reflections, 
hence completely originally on the basis of pure self-perception 

20 and self-experience? We have lawfulnesses, such as those which 
stand under the heading "association," that belong to the 
stream of lived experience with its total content, thus likewise to 
the cogitationes emerging therein as well as to the other lived 
experiences. So the question is whether, merely in virtue of such 

25 lawfulnesses, apperception in general can develop and, in partic- 
ular, those of the personal Ego in its regulated comportment 
relative to subjective circumstances, in such a way that reflec- 
tions on cogitationes play no privileged role there, or whether 
precisely the reflections have here a special and altogether 

30 essential constitutive function. Is it necessary that I, in reflective 
experience, run through my modes of comportment in order for 
the personal Ego to be able to come to consciousness as the 
unity of these modes, or can it already be "conscious" in 
pre-givenness, before it was given originally through such series 


On this §, cf. Supplement XII, pp. 344 ff. 


264 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


of identifying and realizing experiences, which, as reflections on 
the cogitationes, focus on the comportment in relation to [252] 
circumstances? But in that case what is it which is organized in 
the pre-reflective sphere? Surely, ''associations" are formed, 
5 references back and forth develop, just as they do with the 
unnoticed sensuous and thingly "backgrounds." Thus a content 
is already there, and in the subsequent reflection, in the 
remembering, I can and I must encounter something already 
formed. This is the presupposition for the "explication," for the 

10 "fully conscious" exhibition, of the "if" and "then," and for 
that identification of the Ego in relation to the pertinent 
circumstances, in which the Ego is "properly" constituted as 
personal-real unity. (The question arises as to whether some- 
thing similar does not take place regarding the constitution of 

15 the thing, which I have in fact shown in my Transcendental 
Logic.) 

But even abstracting from the associative nexuses, the Ego 
constituted in reflection refers back to another one. Properly 
spoken, I am originally not a unity composed of associative and 

20 active experience (if experience means the same as it does in the 
case of the thing), I am the subject of my Hfe, and the subject 
develops by living; what it primarily experiences is not itself, 
but instead it constitutes objects of nature, goods, instruments, 
etc. What it primarily forms and structures as active is not itself 

25 but things for work. The Ego does not originally arise out of 
experience — in the sense of an associative apperception in 
which are constituted unities of manifolds of a nexus — but out 
of Hfe (it is what it is not for the Ego, but it is itself the 
Ego). 

30 The Ego can be more and can be other than the Ego as 
apperceptive unity. It can have latent capacities (dispositions) 
which have not yet appeared, have not yet been apperceptively 
Objectified, just as a thing has properties that have not yet been 
drawn into the thing-apperception. We make all these distinc- 

35 tions even in the ordinary, personal way of considering a man 
and consequently they are there in the human-scientific (e.g., 
historical) approach, in ordinary experience. No one "knows" 
himself or has "knowledge" of what he is, without learning to 
know himself. Self-experience, self-apperception, is constantly 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


265 


expanding. The "learning to know oneself" is one with the 
development of self-apperception, with the constitution of the 
"self," and this development is carried out in unity with the 
development of the subject itself. 
5 But what about a supposed beginning? In the beginning of [253] 
experience, no constituted "self" is pre-given yet and present as 
an object. It is completely latent for itself and for others, at least 
in terms of intuition. Yet the others can already, in empathy, 
comprehend more of it insofar as the form of subjectivity is 

10 experientially predelineated to them as a form constituted in 
development. The peculiarity of the spiritual subject is that in it 
there arises the apperception, " Ego," an apperception in which 
this "subject" is the "object" (even if it is not always the 
thematic Object). The apperception, "thing," does not arise in a 

15 thing; only subjects have such apperceptions. Therefore we have 
to distinguish between the " I that I am" on the subject side and 
the "I that I am" as Object for myself, an Object which is, in 
the existing "I am," represented, constituted, and perhaps 
intended in the specific sense : the me. What is intended here is 

20 "the person" constituted for me, the Ego which has conscious- 
ness as a self. 

Furthermore, must we not say that, in contrast to the waking 
Ego, the sleeping is complete immersion in Ego-matter, in the 
hyle, is undifferentiated Ego-being, is Ego-sunkenness, whereas 

25 the awake Ego opposes itself to the matter and then is affected, 
acts, undergoes, etc.? The Ego posits the non-Ego and comports 
itself towards it; the Ego unceasingly constitutes its "over and 
against," and in this process it is motivated and always moti- 
vated anew, and not arbitrarily but as exercising " self-preserva- 

30 tion." If we disregard a lower level in which "sensuous objec- 
tivity" arises as a unity "without acts," then the Ego develops 
unceasingly, what it does and what it undergoes always having 
their after-effects. The Ego exercises itself, it habituates itself, it 
is determined in its later behavior by its earher behavior, the 

35 power of certain motives increases, etc. The Ego "acquires" 
capacities, posits goals, and, in attaining these goals acquires 
practical skills. It not only acts, but activities themselves become 
goals, and Hkewise so do systems of activities (e.g., I want to be 
able to play a piece on the piano with ease) and the correspon- 

40 ding skills and faculties. 


266 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


§ 59. The Ego as subject of faculties 

The Ego, as unity, is a system of the "/ can. " In this regard a 
distinction is to be made between the physical "I can" (the 
Bodily and the one mediated by the Body) and the spiritual. I [254 
5 have power over my Body, I am the one who moves this hand 
and who can move it, etc. I can play the piano. But this does 
not last forever. I can forget how, I can fall out of practice. I 
exercise my Body. In the case of the most common activities, I 
do not generally lose my skill. But if I have been laid up sick for 

10 a long while, then I have to learn how to walk again, though it 

comes back quickly. However, I can also have a nervous 

disorder and lose the mastery of my limbs; "I can't do it." In 

that respect I have become an other. 

" I am normal as to the Bodily and the practical" — that is, I 

15 have the abihty, as a permanent normal substratum, to move 
my organs in a "natural and free" way as perceptual organs 
and as practical organs of sensory Hfe. I am spiritually normal 
in my representing if I can freely carry out my spatial experi- 
ences and form my imaginations and can freely run through my 

20 memories; this, however, has a typical natural compass and is 
not unlimited in extent. I have a normal memory, a normal 
phantasy, and likewise a normal activity of thinking : that is, 1 
can draw conclusions, compare, distinguish, connect, count, 
calculate; also, I can evaluate and weigh values, etc. — all this in 

25 the normal way as a "mature man." On the other hand, I do 
have my peculiarities, my way of moving, of doing things, my 
individual evaluations, my own way of preferring, my tempta- 
tions, and my power of conquering certain kinds of tempta- 
tions, against which I am invulnerable. The next person is 

30 different, he has different pet motives, other temptations are 
dangerous for him, he has other spheres in which he exercises 
his individual powers of action, etc., but within the bounds of 
the normal, specifically within what is normal for youth, for 
age, etc. Within this typicality there are, of course, idiosyncratic 

35 developments: conscious self-education, inner conversion, trans- 
formation through the setting of ethical goals, through exercise, 
etc. 

In this way the spiritual Ego can be apprehended as an 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


267 


organism, an organism of faculties and of the development of 
these faculties in a normal typical style following the stages of 
infancy, youth, maturity, old age. The subject "can" do many 
things and, according to its abilities, is determined to act by 

5 means of stimuli, by means of effective motives. The subject is 
ever and again active according to its faculties and, in turn, 
constantly transforms them, enriches, strengthens, or weakens 
them by means of its own action. A faculty is not an empty [255] 
ability but is a positive potentiality, which may now happen to be 

10 actualized but which is always in readiness to pass into activity, 
into an activity that, as it is lived, refers back to the correspon- 
ding subjective ability, the faculty. The motivation, however, is, 
for consciousness, something open, understandable; the "moti- 
vated" decision as such is clear in view of the kind and the 

15 power of the motives. Finally, everything refers back, in an 
understandable manner, to primal faculties of the subject and 
from there to acquired faculties having their source in earlier 
lived actuahty.^ 

In original genesis, the personal Ego is constituted not only as 

20 a person determined by drives, from the very outset and 
incessantly driven by original 'Instincts " and passively submit- 
ting to them, but also as a higher, autonomous, freely acting Ego, 
in particular one guided by rational motives, and not one that is 
merely dragged along and unfree. Habits are necessarily formed, 

25 just as much with regard to originally instinctive behavior (in 
such a way that the power of the force of habit is connected 
with the instinctive drives) as with regard to free behavior. To 
yield to a drive establishes the drive to yield: habitually. 
Likewise, to let oneself be determined by a value-motive and to 

30 resist a drive establishes a tendency (a " drive ") to let oneself be 
determined once again by such a value-motive (and perhaps by 
value-motives in general) and to resist these drives. Here habit 
and free motivation intertwine. Now, if I act freely, then I am 


' Should we say "original character" is nothing else than this, that there is a 
determinate motivation in the beginning and that in the development of the Ego 
every motivation is co-conditioned by the previous ones already carried out de facto'? 
But did we not indeed have to speak of a determinate type of motivation and this 
only with regard to the beginning? But "beginning'* should not be understood here 
only in a temporal sense. 


268 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


indeed obeying habit too, but I am free insofar as it is the 
motive, the reason, that I am obeying in a free decision.* 

But all this has to be kept distinct from the efficacy of the [2| 
"association" in which the personal empirical subject is consti- ^ 
5 tuted. If the personal subject signifies, for the stream of lived 
experience, a certain rule of development and specifically one 
for the types of Ego-behavior under subjective circumstances. 
I.e., if it signifies a certain rule stipulating the way to behave in 
activities and in passivities, then there corresponds to this rule a 
10 certain doxic habit, as it were, a certain famiharity in the 
present behavior of the Ego, certain tendencies of expectation 
or possible tendencies of expectation related to the occurrence 
of the present behavior in the stream of consciousness. Now, 
this behavior is, in the background consciousness, not an 
15 expecting in the proper sense but a protention directed toward 
the future occurrence, a protention which can become an 
expectation with a shift of the attendon of the Ego. But not 
only that; an objectivity is consfituted, precisely the subject of 
the modes of behavior. The system of such protentions and 
20 mtertwinings, which could be transformed into an actual "if- 
then," into actual, hypothetical, and causal motivations, creates 
a new intentional unity or, correlafively, a new apperception. 

Thus on the one side we have tendencies ruling the "I do" 
and the "I undergo" and powers providing rules for it. On the 
25 other side there are tendencies of consciousness which subse- 
quently characterize these acts and the Ego and invest it with an 
apprehension. 

In our entire consideration up to now, we have been speaking 

of the unity of the Ego that is constituted in the stream of life. 

30 In the first place, this is the Ego that develops, is co-formed, 

and is constituted together with all other apperceptions, above 

all in unity with the thing-apperceptions that are formed. But 

' From a phenomenological standpoint, the ** habitually " or the *' experientially " 
has its intentional relation to circumstances. If these circumstances become real, then 
the experiential steps forth as something belonging to them, as something expected. 
An mstinctual drive would also have to be related to circumstances, and to that 
extent we have there an experiential expectation, but this expectation has, in the case 
of genuine habit, an implicit horizon of similar memories. There still remains a 
question concerning the expectation of the yielding, with its increasing power and 
with the growing tendency of the yielding itself. 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


269 


there is more to it. I am of course not only the subject, the Ego, 
that can consider a thing in a certain freedom, can freely move 
the eyes while looking, etc. I am also the subject that is used to 
being pleased by such and such matters, that habitually desires 

5 this or that, goes to eat when the time comes, etc., i.e., the 
subject of certain feelings and of certain habits of feeling, desire, 
and will, sometimes passive, as I said, sometimes active. It is 
clear that certain strata are constituted there in subjectivity, [257] 
insofar as certain groups of Ego-affections, or passive Ego-acts, 

10 are organized for themselves in a relative way and coalesce 
constitutively into an empirical unity. A closer investigation 
would be needed to bring out these strata. 


§60. The person as subject of acts of reason, as "free Ego" 

Above all, however, it is versus the empirical subject, in its 

15 generaUty and its unity, that the "person " is to be delimited in 
the specific sense : the subject of acts which are to be judged 
from the standpoint of reason, the subject that is "self- 
responsible,'' the subject that is free or in bondage, unfree 
(taking "freedom" here in a particular sense, indeed the proper 

20 sense). A passive compHancy in the "I move," etc. is a 
subjective "pro-cedure," and it can be called free only insofar 
as it "pertains to my freedom," i.e., insofar as it, just hke any 
subjective pro-cedure, can be, by the centralized Ego, reined in 
or given its freedom again. That is to say, the subject "con- 

25 sents," says "yes" to the invitation of the stimulus precisely as 
an invitation to yield to it, and gives its fiat in practice. With 
regard to my centralized Ego-acts, I have consciousness of the / 
can. They are indeed activities, and in their entire course we 
have precisely not a mere lapse of events but, instead, the course 

30 they take continuously proceeds out from the Ego as center, 
and as long as that is the case, there reigns the consciousness, " I 
do," "I act." On the other hand, if the Ego is, by some 
affection, " carried off" elsewhere, " captured," then the 
genuine " I do " is interrupted, and the Ego is checked as active 

35 Ego, it is unfree, "moved rather than moving." In the case of 
freedom, there exists for the future phases which lie within the 


270 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


immediate horizon, for the future phases of the action in 
relation to the horizon of unfulfilled practical intentions, the 
consciousness of the free *' I can " and not the mere conscious- 
ness that "it will come," "it will happen." 


5 a) The "I can" as logical possibiHty, as practical possibility 

and impossibihty, as neutrahty modification of practical [2^ 
acts, and as original consciousness of abilities (subjective 
power, faculty, resistance).^ 

Now what does all that mean? What I can do, what is in my 

10 power, what I know myself capable of and am conscious of as 
such, that is what a practical possibility is. It is only between 
practical possibiUties that I can "decide," and only a practical 
possibility can (this is an other, theoretical " can ") be a theme 
of my will, I cannot will anything that I do not have consciously 

1 5 in view, that does not He in my power, in my competence. " I 
cannot will anything that ..." — here the "can" itself may be 
meant as practical, viz., insofar as the will itself is able to be an 
Object of will, and it could only be so to the extent that it is 
within my "power" (the scope of my power), i.e., to the extent 

20 that the performance of the thesis itself is for me something 
practically possible. Prior to the will with its active thesis of the 
''flat " lies the action as instinctive action, e.g., the involuntary 
"I move," the involuntary "I reach" for my cigar; I desire it 
and do it "without any further ado," something which, to be 

25 sure, is not easily distinguished from a case of voluntary wilHng 
in the narrower sense. 

Then just what sort of modification is the "I can," "I have 
the power to," "I am capable of"? 

In experience, the "I can" is distinct from the "I cannot" 

30 according to their phenomenological characters. There is a 
resistanceless doing of things, i.e., a consciousness of an ability 
that meets no resistance, and there is a doing as an overcoming 
of resistance, a doing that has its "against which," and a 

' Lipps (Psychoiogie, 2 ed. p. 24 ff.) presents the first fundamental discussion of 
these. He points out that the most original concept of possession, of the "I have," 
arises here : I have my Bodily parts, I have power over them. Cf. p. 266 above and 
also § 3 of Supplement XH, pp. 349 ff. 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


271 


corresponding consciousness of an ability to overcome the 
resistance. There is (always speaking phenomenologically) a 
gradient in the resistance and in the power of overcoming it, a 
continuum in "active power" versus the "inertia" of the 
5 resistance. The resistance can become insurmountable; in that 
case we come up against the " it won't budge," " I cannot," " I 
do not have the power." Obviously, connected to this is the 
transferred apprehension of action and counter-action outside [259] 
the sphere of my doings and my abilities. After all, things are 

10 "active" in relation to one another, have "powers and counter- 
powers" in relation to one another, resist one another, and 
perhaps the resistance one thing exercises is insurmountable, the 
other "cannot surmount it." 
The genuine apperception of resistance presupposes that we 

15 are not dealing here with something merely thingly, but with 
something of the sort that falls within the sphere of my "will," 
within the sphere of that which I perhaps already have come to 
know as something that is in my power. In the physical sphere, 
all my abilities are mediated by the "operation of my Body," by 

20 my Bodily abilities and faculties, I know through experience 
that the parts of my Body move in that special way which 
distinguishes them from all other things and motions of things 
(physical, mechanical motions); i.e., they have the character of 
subjective movement, of the "I move." And from the very 

25 outset this can be apprehended as something practically possi- 
ble. Indeed, we have to say in general that only what has this 
subjective character admits apriori of such an apprehension. 
Originally, it is only here that the "I will" emerges. Originally, 
it is here and only here that an imagined will can be affirmed 

30 and can become an actual willing. But here I can also come up 
against resistance. My hand is "asleep;" I cannot move it, it is 
momentarily paralyzed, etc. I can also experience resistance in 
the area of the external "consequences" of my Bodily move- 
ments. The hand pushes aside what stands in its way, it " gets 

35 there." At times it gets there "with difficulty," "with not much 
difficulty," or "with no resistance." At times it does not succeed 
at all, the resistance being insurmountable despite all the 
pushing force. 

How does my will take hold when I perform a Bodily activity, 


272 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


273 


what does it do immediately! Do I need to have a knowledge of 
physiology? From an Objective-physical standpoint, obviously 
a material state comes first, although I know nothing about it 
and do not have to. " But how in the world I can do it," one is 
5 wont to say, " is a mystery." " Physical causality is a fact, but an 
incomprehensible one" — that is the opinion one forms, or else 
it is all explained as mere semblance. To be sure, physiopsychic 
causahty is also said to be a mystery. But does this "mystery" 
not belong to the essence of all causation? But that would mean [2^ 

10 that it is not a mystery. "Causahty" belongs to the essence of 
the constitution of the thing, and the special character of this 
causality resides precisely in the experiential apperception. Thus 
it is necessary to experience the thing as a thing and to 
determine phenomenologically the causal apperception more 

15 exactly in examples from actual experience. To demand any- 
thing else makes no sense here. 

The same holds in the realm of the causahty of the will and 
the apperception of the Body, the apperception of a thing with 
" members " which not only are moved but which I move and 

20 which consequently can be moved in the "I will," What is first 
for the will? A presupposition is the apperception of the hand 
together with its phenomenal position, etc. Research in physio- 
logy and knowledge of physiology are not presupposed. Physi- 
cahstic and physiological comprehension is something quite 

25 different from the practical. In the one case, it is a matter of 
knowledge and, more exactly, scientific knowledge of the thing 
as a natural Object in physical (substantial-causal) nature. In 
the other case, we have practical understanding, understanding 
of what happens practically rather than of the process in terms 

30 of its physical causahty. It is a matter of the practical ground 
(the "psychic cause") of the process, its motive. The thing 
moves because "I" have struck it, because I extended my hand 
and struck it. But if I move my hand involuntary? Why does it 
move? Because the position of the hand is uncomfortable. Or 

35 else " I do not exactly know why," I was not paying attention to 
it, though the reason does lie in the psychic and its obscure 
stimulations and motivations. 

To be sure, my hand is a thing too, and if / execute a 
subjective "I move" and am not dreaming or deceiving myself. 


then there is also executed a physical process in nature. Cer- 
tainly, in the perception of the " I move," the perception of the 
physical movement in space is also included, and consequently 
the question of physical causality can be raised here as well. Yet 

5 it does not have to be raised, and it cannot possibly come up in 
the personal attitude, in which alone is posited the active and 
passive person as the motivational subject and the subject of its 
surrounding world. ^ 
Originally, the "I move," "I do," precedes the "I can do." [261] 

10 But there is also a lived "I can," detached from the actual 
doing. I can "represent" to myself that I am moving my hand 
which is now at rest, moving it voluntarily or involuntarily. Can 
I also imagine that I am moving (though not "through" the 
movement of my hand, not by its means) this table? I can, of 

15 course, imagine that the table is moving "mechanically." But its 
movement can never be my moving of it, if not "through" the 
motion of my Body, by striking it, etc. I have power over my 
Body, and I have power in the physical world only on account 
of my power over my Body. If I represent to myself the 

20 movement of my hand in the form, " I move my hand," then I 
am representing an "I do" and not a merely mechanical 
motion. But such a representation is not yet an " I can." In the 
" I can" there obviously resides not merely a representation but, 
beyond that, a thesis, one which thereby concerns not only 

25 myself but also the " doing," not the actual doing but precisely 
the being able to do. 

It is of importance that we elaborate in an exemplary fashion 
the contrast emerging here between possibility in the sense of 
merely "logical possibility^ mere possibility on the basis of 

30 intuitive representation, and practical possibihty as the to- 
be-able-to. 


' One could here have recourse as well to the fact that physical nature and its 
causality dissolve into motivations of consciousness. But these form a closed group, 
the indices of which are the things that are posited and theoretically determined, laws 
of nature, etc. Nor can one say that we have the psychical together with its psychic 
"causation'' in the excess beyond the physical. That would be false, for we have here 
quite different attitudes : in the one case nature is posited purely and simply and is a 
theoretical theme. In the other case, nature is posited as correlate of the motivations 
constituting it. And in the third case, appearing nature is posited but is posited as a 
field for praxis. 


274 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


If in phantasy I imagine a mechanical motion or some other 
natural process, or a thing, or whatever, then I can always 
modify my consciousness of this free fiction in such a way that a 
thesis of possibility, related to what has been imagined, arises 
5 from it. What can be represented, or, in the first place, what has 
been represented, is possible; the "object" as such is, as 
intuitive, a floating substrate of the possibility-predicate; i.e., 
the intended object is a possible one insofar as it can be intuited. 
Thus here again we have a "can." A centaur is a possible 

10 object. "It" is intuited, it is what is identical in these and in [26f 
other quasi-perceptions that I can freely carry out. It must 
indeed be maintained that all intuition allows of being turned 
into an act which posits the intuited "object," the intended 
"what," as possible, and which "experiences" it in originary 

15 givenness. And a positing of possibiHty without intuition is an 

intention which, according to its very sense, finds fulfillment in 

an intuition or in a variation of the intuition which supplies the 

possibihty-thesis in its "genuine" form. 

This possibiUty is doxical-logical possibility (not formal- 

20 logical). Included under this "it is possible" is obviously also 
the "it is possible that I move my hand," if I represent the 
movement of the hand and derive from this representation (a 
neutrahty modification) the sense of the thesis of possibiHty. But 
I do not thereby have the practical "I can," although it is 

25 legitimate to speak of the "to be able to" as regards that 
general class as well. A centaur can exist; the motion of a body 
is possible : i.e., it can move; the " I move my hand " is possible : 
i.e., it can be that I move my hand. And so in general: it is 
possible that A is = it can be that A is. Being possible is being 

30 able to be. But that I move my hand, that I do something, is not 
a matter of the doxical-logical possibility of being. Certainly, 
that I move the table by acting " immediately" cannot be; that I 
move my hand "immediately" can be. That is, the one "I can" 
may be made intuitive, the other not. 

35 But is that all? Does not speaking about the possibility of 
intuition already point to another region? A movement of my 
hand is not only an ontological possibility. 

Here various kinds of neutrality modifications come into 
consideration. The neutrality modification of a doxic conscious- 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


275 


ness (consciousness of objective being) is a ''mere representa- 
tion." In the case of a perception or a memory (originary 
consciousness of present being or of remembered being), the 
neutralization results in a neutrally modified intuition. And 
5 from every neutralized intuition can be derived originally a 
theoretical (doxic) possibility, a being-possible, which presents 
itself as a modification of being-certain, of being pure and 
simple, therefore of that which may be derived from a non- [263] 
neutralized intuition and, most originally, from a "perception" 

10 (present being). In a broader sense, every neutrahty modifica- 
tion of the doxic sphere admits of being turned into a doxic 
consciousness of possibility, even if the possibiHty (the being- 
possible) no longer has the mode of "evidence," self-given- 
ness. 

15 Likewise, from every "practical" neutrality modification one 
can derive — and perhaps derive originally — a practical possi- 
bility. Hence there stand over against one another as correla- 
tives: representing (intuition — neutralized intuition) and being 
(being-representable, being-possible). Similarly, doing and 

20 quasi-doing are correlates, and so are action and possible 
action, just as are fact, the term of the action (as its result), and 
" possible " fact, possible practical result, practical possibility. 
On the side of the subject, to the " I do " corresponds the " I can 
do;" just as in the parallel case to the " I beHeve," " I hold to be 

25 true, to exist" corresponds the " I hold to be possible." On both 
sides, I place myself in the neutrality modification and derive 
possible being and possible action. ^ 

The intuitive representation, hence the quasi-perception, that / 
want something, do something, decide in such a way in the 


Obviously, these parallels must permeate all basic categories. Joy: to be joyful. I 
enjoy myself. Quasi-joy: it could be enjoyable, a possible joy, it would be able to 
bnng me joy. Whether, in a given case, I "actually enjoy" myself is not being 
asserted thereby but only that it could certainly be enjoyable. Or more simply: I take 
pleasure in something— I place myself, or think myself, into a pleasure. If it is 
actually a quasi-pleasure, then I can infer from it a possible pleasurableness, a 
potential pleasure. From a quasi-value I derive a possible value, etc. To actually 
accomplish a quasi-pleasure is the analogon of an actual intuitive phantasizing 
(representing to oneseiO- Empty representation does not include the ability to 
represent the same "actually." Likew^ise for the parallels. Thereby, however, the 
practical ability (e.g., as ability to intuit, etc.) also plays its role everywhere. 


276 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


given situation, choose such a possibiHty rather than another, 
obviously presupposes not only the intuitive representation of 
the current external processes but also the intuitive representa- 
tion of the relevant value characters and practical characters. 
5 Furthermore, it presupposes the originaHty of these characters 
and hence, in the case of actual intuition, the neutrality 
modification of the pertinent acts of feeling and will: it is 
necessary, therefore, that in the modification I evaluate, desire, 
will, etc. in this or that way. 

10 So we see that a great deal depends on the distinction treated [26^ 
in the Logical Investigations as the distinction between authen- 
ticity and unauthenticity in doxic position-takings. I cannot 
intuitively represent that 2x2 = 5; i.e., I cannot intuitively 
represent that I judge, authentically, intuitively, thus with 

15 evidence, that 2 x 2 = 5. I can, however, represent to myself 
that I judge that 2x2 = 5, that is, by accomplishing the 
thema unauthentically, "unclearly," "confusedly." In particu- 
lar, in the case of material for propositions which is still 
unfamiliar to us, which is not graspable as false in immediate 

20 insight or in an insight that is easily attainable, or which reveals 

its falsehood only after a long process of demonstration, it 

becomes clear to me that such material, in the mode of 

unauthentic givenness, is compatible with any thesis. 

This holds, by analogy, for the entire sphere of the acts of 

25 reason (the active acts, properly so called) and of their synthetic 
formations in all spheres, even those of feeling and will. I can 
conceive that I would value something, desire it, want it as an 
end or as a means, something which I, upon closer scrutiny, 
could not value. I can imagine that I could, and that I would, 

30 strive for something as an appropriate means, which, upon 
scrutiny, I would not and could not strive for. In the one case 
the " I can " is there, in the other it is not. The " I could " means 
here that I put myself into it in phantasy, hence carry out the 
neutrality modification of the doxic and valuing acts, and find 

35 the relevant thesis of pleasure, of desire, and of will to be 
compatible with their substratum. 

Two kinds of motivations result here. In the case of unau- 
thenticity, I do indeed have compatibility of sense in the mode 
of "unclarity," hence compatibiHty of unauthentically accom- 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


277 


plished sense (which, however, can be intuitive as to its parts), 
compatibility with any position-taking whatever, with the thesis 
and the the tic modifications. On the other hand, the relevant act 
(the concrete act) does emerge in the nexus of consciousness as 
5 "motivated" in some way or other. And that also holds for the 
neutrahty modification. I.e., if I step out of my actual Hfe in a 
certain way and settle into a "phantasy" Hfe (which comes 
down to saying that in my actual life is inserted a flight of 
"phantasy" in which I accompUsh a quasi-hfe), then this [265] 

10 phantasy life is precisely unity of life, and it is unity there 
through motivation. And the problem is to clarify what is 
specific to this motivation ; for it is not just any motivafion. 

We see, however, that we cannot be satisfied with this 
consideration : I can represent to myself that I would commit a 

15 murder, a theft, etc., and yet I cannot represent to myself that I 
would do so. I could have the representation that I would judge 
that the sum of the angles in a triangle equals three right angles, 
and yet I could not judge it so. What sort of antinomy is 
this? 

20 "I could do it" — that is the neutrahty modification of the 
action and the practical possibility derived from it. " Yet I could 
not do it" — I am lacking the original consciousness of being 
able to do this action or of having the power for this action 
(which, even in the case of a fictional action, is an originary, 

25 non-neutralized consciousness) ; this action contradicts the kind 
of person I am, my way of letting myself be motivated. ^ 

b) The "I can" motivated in the person's knowledge 

of himself. 

Self-apperception and self-understanding 

30 I know myself from experience, I know what my own 
character is like: I have an Ego-apperception, an empirical 
"self-consciousness." Each developed subject is not just a 
stream of consciousness with a pure Ego, but each has accom- 
pUshed a centralization in the form, "Ego." Further, the 


Cf. on this point, and on the entire following sub-paragraph b). Supplement XI, 
pp. 340 ff. 


278 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


cogitationes are acts of an Ego-subject, the Ego is constituted 
out of one's own (active) position-taking, and out of one's own 
habits and faculties, and consequently is an externally appercep- 
tive unity, the kernel of which is the pure Ego. Whence the 
5 evidence, "I am," I can certainly delude myself as to my 
character, but I do have to posit myself with some character or 
other, and I posit myself as Ego with a determinate character 
(abstraction made from the horizons of indeterminateness). If I 
now phantasize, if I settle myself (as the one I am) into a 

10 phantasized actuality or into the world given in the neutrality 
modification, into the familiar world transformed in phantasy 
some way or other, then I am judging how such and such [26| 
motives (more precisely : the quasi-motives of this phantasized 
environment) would affect me, how I, as the one I am, would act 

15 and could act, how I could, and how I could not, judge, value, 
and will. In that way I judge, or I can judge, empirically, on the 
basis of my experiential knowledge of myself, with respect to 
myself, with respect to the Ego constituted for me in empirical 
apperception as experiential Ego, In analogy with the previous 

20 modes of comportment and the previous position-takings as 
regards their underlying grounds and their motives, I anticipate 
subsequent modes of comportment. These are not just expecta- 
tions as conclusions, but instead intentional characters arise 
here : just as the apperception of a thing arises out of experien- 

25 tial systems of "possible" expectations which nevertheless form 
a unity apperceptively. In any event, each feature of the 
intentional object refers back to earlier similar experiences; in 
the apprehension of a thing there is nothing that, in principle, is 
new. If there were, then it would already be the start of the 

30 constitution of a new stratum of unity. 

Nevertheless, can I not think myself into motivational situa- 
tions in which I have never yet been and the likes of which I have 
never yet experienced? And can I not see, or discover in a 
quasi-seeing, how I would then behave, although I might 

35 behave differently, i.e., although it would be thinkable that I 
would decide differently, and this in clear representation, 
whereas in fact, as this personal Ego, I could not behave that 
way? This is the decisive point. Furthermore, I may already 
have been repeatedly in similar motivational situations. Yet I 

40 am precisely not a thing, a thing that always reacts the same 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


279 


way in the same circumstances; in view of which it becomes 
obvious to me that, in principle, things in the same causal 
circumstances can have the same effects. Earlier I was motivated 
in this way, now in a different way, and that is precisely because 
5 I have become an other in the meantime. The motivation, the 
effective motives, might be the same, but the power of the 
various motives is different. For example, in each person the 
strength of sensuality is quite different in youth than in age. The 
sensuous substrate, especially that of the sensuous drives, is 

10 different. Age becomes circumspect and self-centered; youth is 
precipitous, easily disposed to yield to noble transports. Old age 
(having learned through many experiences) is wont to hold 
back, to ponder consequences. The life tempo of youth is a [267] 
quicker one, the phantasy more mobile, while on the other hand 

15 experience is sHght. Youth has not come to know evil conse- 
quences, is not acquainted with danger, still takes fresh original 
joy in the new, in impressions, lived experiences, and adventures 
that have not yet been tasted. 
Thus the substrata of motivation, the orientations and the 

20 powers of the motives are different. How do I come to know 
them? I do so as the one I am, by means of phantasizing 
presentifications of possible situations, in which I "reflect" on 
what kind of sensuous or spiritual stimuli would affect me, what 
power they would have, how I would therefore decide in such a 

25 case, in which direction the pull would be greater, which power 
would prevail, assuming the situation remains the same. It may 
very well be that in any given case still other motives will 
emerge and be operative, that I could feel obscure motives 
without clarifying them, as I am doing now in the reflection of 

30 phantasy. It can be that I am actually "indisposed" toward 
action, having slept poorly, and thus am feeling listless and 
weak, whereas I now phantasize myself into a freshness to 
which would correspond an actual freshness as my present 
habitus, and vice versa. But these are precisely possibilities with 

35 equal rights. I, as spiritual Ego, can also become stronger in the 
course of my development; the weak will can gain strength. 
Upon reflection, I could then say that I, as I used to be, would 
not have been able to resist this temptation or would not have 
been able to do something or other. But at present I can act in 


280 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


that way and would do so. When I say this I am not basing 
myself on experience but on the fact that I can test my motives 
at the very outset and do in fact test them. I can also strengthen 
the power of my freedom by making it perfectly clear to myself 
5 that if I yield, then I would have to despise myself, the subject 
of the yielding, and this would give such strength and impact to 
the moment of non-value I was tending toward that I could not 
do it, could not give in to it. My power of resistance thereby 
increases. 

10 The judgment of experience and the judgment on the basis of 
the understanding of the person as the subject of motivation 
(the subject of actual and possible motivations), i.e., on the 
basis of the understanding of the possibihties of motivation 
proper to him, are, however, often connected with one another 

15 in form as well, so that experience teaches me which motivating [26ffl 
"grounds" are operative in his prevaihng orientation of 
thought, in his well-known forgetfulness, in his habit of indulg- 
ing in unintuitive representations, and the like. "He would 
never have acted this way if the true state of affairs was clear to 

20 him. He would have been charitable (basically he has a good 
heart) if he clearly understood the need of the one who 
appealed to him for help." But he was too much in a hurry, too 
busy, as I know from experience. That which is operative as a 
motive harbors in itself all sorts of intentional implications; this 

25 itself is a source of important new motivations : to examine the 
proper sense of the justification of the discovery of the "truth 
itself" and to let oneself be determined by it in genuine reason. 
Here reside the pre-eminent values, upon which depends ulti- 
mately the value of all motivations and of actual deeds. Here 

30 reside also sources for fundamental formal laws, which, as is the 
case with all noetic norms, are laws of the validity of the 
motivation, and to these belong, furthermore, laws of the power 
of motivation and of personal values. The highest value is 
represented by the person who habitually bestows the highest 

35 motivational power on the genuine, true, valid, and free deci- 
sions. 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


281 


c) The influence of others and the freedom of the person 

The development of a person is determined by the influence 
of others, by the influence of their thoughts, their feelings (as 
suggested to me), their commandments. This influence deter- 
5 mines personal development, whether or not the person himself 
subsequently reaUzes it, remembers it, or is capable of determin- 
ing the degree of the influence and its character. Others' 
thoughts penetrate into my soul; they can exercise various 
influences, either enormous or small, under changing circum- 

10 stances, according to my psychic situation, the stage of my 
development, the formation of my dispositions, etc. The same 
idea has a different effect on different persons in the " same " 
circumstances. Opposed to one another are my own thoughts, 
ones that "arise originarily" in my mind or that are gained by 

15 me myself out of premises (which might perhaps be based on 
the influence of others), and thoughts that are simply appro- 
priated. The same is true of my own feelings, ones that have [269] 
their originary source in me, and the feelings of others, ones I 
have assimilated and adopted, but which are not authentic. 

20 What comes from others and is "taken over" by me, and is 
more external or less so, can be characterized as issuing from 
the other subject, first of all as a tendency proceeding from him 
and addressed to me, as a demand, to which I perhaps yield 
passively, perhaps reluctantly, but by which I am still overpow- 

25 ered. Alternatively, I might annex it on my own accord, and 
then it becomes part of me. In that case it no longer has the 
character of a mere demand to which I yield and which 
determines me from the outside; it has become a position-taking 
that issues from my own Ego and is not merely a stimulus 

30 coming from the outside and retaining the character of a 
borrowing of something that came forth from another Ego, of 
something that has its primal instauration in him. This case is 
similar to what occurs in my egoistic sphere: instauration and 
subsequent reproduction as one's own actualized habitus. 

35 Besides the tendencies which proceed from other individual 
persons, there are demands which arise in the intentional form 
of indeterminate generaUty, the demands of morality, of cus- 
tom, of tradition, of the spiritual miheu: "one" judges in this 


282 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


way, "one " has to hold his fork Hke this, and so on — i.e., 
demands of the social group, of the class, etc. They can be 
followed quite passively, or one can also actively take a position 
with regard to them and make a free decision in favor of 
5 them. 

Therefore the autonomy of reason, the "freedom" of the 
personal subject, consists in the fact that I do not yield passively 
to the influence of others but instead decide for myself. Or 
again, it consists in this, that I do not let myself be " drawn " by 

10 any other inclinations and drives but instead act freely and do 
so in the mode of reason. 

Thus we have to distinguish between the human person, the 
apperceptive unity, that we grasp in self-perception and in the 
perception of others, and the person as the subject of acts of 

15 reason, whose motivations and motivating powers come to 
givenness in our own original lived experience as well as in the 
lived experience, available to us in empathy, of others. Thereby 
the focus is being directed to what is specifically spiritual, the 
life of free acts. 

20 d) General type and individual type in understanding persons [27fl| 

The first question here is what is typical in general with 
regard to the Ego in affection and in action. But after that 
comes the further question of what is typical in particular and 
for the individual : what is typical for this human Ego or, more 

25 clearly, what is typical in the comportment of this Ego, 
belonging to this Body, in the actions and affections of its life, a 
Hfe we are to comprehend. 

I can comprehend in a particular case how this Ego is 
motivated: e.g., this man is now reaching for a cup because he 

30 wants to drink, and he wants to drink because he is thirsty. But 
in its generality, this has nothing to do with his person: it is 
something universally human. On the other hand, that he, for 
example, suddenly lowers the cup, without drinking, because he 
notices a poor child nearby who is hungry and thirsty, and that 

35 he hands the cup to the child, this manifests his "good heart" 
and does pertain to his person. The latter is built up, in 
conformity with its essence, out of special characters within the 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


283 


universal type or character, " human subject," and indeed out of 
such characters which, as the specificities of the lowest level, 
make up the individual type of this human subject. Every man 
has his character, we can say, his style of Hfe in affection and 
5 action, with regard to the way he has of being motivated by 
such and such circumstances. And it is not that he merely had 
this up to now ; the style is rather something permanent, at least 
relatively so in the various stages of Hfe, and then, when it 
changes, it does so again, in general, in a characteristic way, 

10 such that, consequent upon these changes, a unitary style 
manifests itself once more. 

As a result, one can to a certain extent expect how a man will 
behave in a given case if one has correctly apperceived him in 
his person, in his style. The expectation is generally not plain 

15 and clear; it has its apperceptive horizon of indeterminate 
determinability within an intentional framework that circum- 
scribes it, and it concerns precisely one of the modes of behavior 
which corresponds to the style. For example, an "endearing" 
man will, in certain cases, utter empty endearments, and his 

20 ways of talking bear all the while the stamp of his style; but that 
does not mean that we could guess his precise wording with the 
quite definite nuances he has in mind. If we are able to do that, [271] 
then we say the man is a stereotype; once we know him, we 
soon know the whole arsenal of his endearments (or his witty 

25 remarks, if he styles himself a wit), among which we have a 
choice, unless there are grounds, from association, to prefer 
definite individual ones. 

In sum, a person has, in the broadest sense, a typical 
character and properties of character. Everything a person lives 

30 through enlarges the framework of his pregivennesses, can 
emerge again in memory whether clearly or obscurely, can affect 
the Ego and motivate actions. But even without memory, it 
determines the future content of lived experience according to 
laws of the new formation of apperceptions and associations. 

35 The person is formed through "experience." 

The concept of experience here is certainly different than the 
one in which, in nexuses of vaHdity, the question at issue is the 
foundation of cognition through experience, where the term 
"experience" serves as a title for acts that are theoretically 


284 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


285 


founding (Ego-acts of the perceptual grasping of existing objects 
or of grasping in memory, etc.) or that provide a justification 
for theoretical acts. Obviously, every such experience has its 
effects: every active perception, remembering, etc. No less, 
5 however, has every inactive one, and the same holds for every 
judging, valuing, wiUing. Everything has its effects, though not 
in all respects, but only within the limitation of its type. 

Personal life manifests a typicahty, and each personal life 
manifests a different one.^ For certain periods, this typicahty 

10 remains identical, even if the "experiences" (the realm of the 
experiential apperceptions constantly being newly formed) of the 
person grow, and the domain of his pregivennesses changes as a 
consequence. Everything indeed has its effects, though not in all 
respects. On the street, people meet me, cars pass, etc. This has 

15 its apperceptive type, within which the bustle of the street is 
contained, whereas the individual event, instead of occurring in 
this way, can always also occur differently. All these singulari- 
ties, which I hardly notice but which predelineate the horizon of 
my lived experience, do not in the least alter my moral character [11% 

20 or my aesthetic character. As regards these spheres, no motiva- 
tions flow from there. (On the other hand, if motivations arise 
which do operate in the sense of transforming the "character," 
there nevertheless prevails a typicality in the succession of the 
phases of life: the typicahty of the ages of Hfe. And in 

25 conformity with this typicality, if I have sorted in out intuitively, 
I can say that if this person finds himself in these circumstances 
he will behave according to type and that if the circumstances 
change he will still observe the type.) 

That is an experiential apperception, but it presupposes 

30 understanding as well. The Ego, the subject of affections and 
actions, is thereby related to its pregivennesses and is not merely 
taken as subject of individual affections and actions. Indeed, 
here the universal human (or personal) apperception collabo- 
rates essentially. The universal typicality of Corporeality is a 

35 presupposition for empathy, and by empathy an Ego-analogon 
is apprehended. This is already a typicality: the universal 


' Association and apperception are principles of the typology of the totality of 
psychic acts. 


structure " Ego, pregivenness, affection, etc.", the Ego of a life 
together with its total living. 

It belongs also to what is universally typical that people in 
general are determined in their comportment by their previous 
5 experience. Being disappointed in others makes one suspicious. 
Repeated disappointment of fine hopes makes one bitter, etc. 

Just as different kinds of things in experience generally 
change in a familiar way and are judged accordingly in the 
future, the same is true of people. We learn to know Objects 

10 according to their kind, and in any given case the behavior of 
an Object is understandable to us if it follows the general rule of 
its kind. Therefore we are moving in the domain of intuitive 
experience when we are seeking to understand. We capture the 
development of a person if we reconstruct the course of his life 

15 and make it intuitive in such a way that the entirety of his 
development as a man becomes comprehensible in an experien- 
tial way, especially with regard to his manner of letting himself 
be motivated as a subject, together with all the definite actions 
and passions proper to him. "In an experiential way" means 

20 that it occurs there, as it does in human life in general, that the 
acts of the subject and their motivations present themselves so 
as to be empirically understandable. That is "knowing a 
person," "science of the soul," "psycho-logy." 

I enter into relationships with various Ego-subjects and come [273] 

25 to know the typical moments of their pregivennesses, of their 
actions, etc., and I apprehend the latter according to these types, 
but it is not as though I first had the types in abstracto (just as I 
do not first have in abstracto the type, tree, when I apprehend a 
tree as a tree); instead, the type becomes pronounced and gets 

30 impressed on us in multiple experiences, and it determines an 
apperceptive form and then a layer in actual apprehension that 
can be abstracted out. An individual conducts himself in a 
different way all the time, his actual surrounding world is 
constantly different, and so is his field of living and latent 

35 pregivennesses. Yet he is the same not merely as Bodily type but 
as spiritual type. He has his empirical peculiarities, and, as 
spiritual type, he is a comprehensible unity. 

I understand the thought and action of an other according to 
my habitual modes of behavior and motivations, but not every 


286 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


287 


judgment about the other is based solely on the, as it were, 
external style of his Hfe, abstracted out of experience, for which 
I would not have to penetrate into the interior of his motiva- 
tions or even represent them in a lively way. But I do learn to 
5 peer into the interior of the other and to come to know 
inwardly the person himself, the motivational subject, which is 
precisely what bursts into view when I represent the other Ego 
in the way it is motivated. 
What is happening when the character-type of a person 

10 suddenly lights up for us through some one or other of his 
glances, positions, or expressions; when we, so to say, "gaze 
into an abyss;" when the "soul" of the person suddenly 
"opens itself up;" when we "fathom wondrous depths;" etc.? 
What sort of "understanding" is that? The answer is certainly 

15 the following: 

First of all, it would be going too far to claim that empirical 
understanding is the equivalent of achieving full intuition of the 
nexuses of experience. Even nexuses of external nature light up 
very suddenly, before the relations there are analyzed properly, 

20 i.e., plainly and clearly in intuition. That only comes afterwards. 
Similarly, historical nexuses, which may light up in a flash, or 
even logical nexuses, all manifest themselves prior to explica- 
tion, prior to the actual subsequent estabhshment of the nex- 
uses. One speaks here of intuitive " flair," a term which very [211 

25 often signifies just the opposite of intuition, i.e., insight, and is 
instead a presentiment, a pre-seeing without seeing, an obscure, 
specifically symbolic, often ungraspably empty, premonition. 
The actual nexus is then but a goal grasped in anticipation, an 
empty intention, one which is so determined, however, that we 

30 follow the tendency, with its determinate direction, and in the 
fulfillment of it can acquire a chain of actual intuitions 
(straightforward experiential intuitions or logical evidence, etc.). 
To see a man does not mean to already know him. To see a 
man is — as we have found — different from seeing a material 

35 thing. Each thing is of a certain kind. If one knows the kind, the 
rest can be dispensed with. A man, however, has an individual 
kind, and each man has a different one. According to the 
universal, he is a man, but his kind as his character, his person, 
is a unity, constituted in his course of life, as a subject of 


position-takings, i.e., a unity of multifarious motivations based 
upon multifarious presuppositions. And insofar as one knows 
from experience analogous traits in different people, one can 
grasp "with intuitive flair" the particular and peculiar complex 
5 in question here and the unity constituted, and therein one can 
have a guiding line for fulfiUing the intentions in insightful 
intuition, by means of an analysis of the actual nexuses. So, in 
my opinion, this "intuition" as premonition ought not to be 
confused with actual intuition. What we have here is the success 

10 of a more precisely determining apperception, which, like any 

apperception, offers a guiding hne for the confirmation, in the 

course of experience, of the intentional nexuses, often extremely 

complex. 

But the subject is not a mere unity of experience, although 

15 experience and universal type play an essential role, and it is 
important that this be brought out and clarified. I put myself in 
the place of the other subject, and by empathy I grasp what 
motivates him and how strongly it does so, with what power. 
And I learn to understand inwardly how he behaves, and how 

20 he would behave, under the influence of such and such motives, 
determining him with such and such force, i.e., I grasp what he 
is capable of and what is beyond him. I can understand many 
inner correlations, having fathomed him so. It is in this way 
that I grasp his Ego, for it is precisely the identical Ego of these 

25 motivations, ones that have this direction and this power. 

I secure these motivations by placing myself in his situation, [275] 
his level of education, his development as a youth, etc., and to 
do so / must needs share in that situation ; I not only empathize 
with his thinking, his feeling, and his action, but I must also 

30 follow him in them, his motives becoming my quasi-motives, 
ones which, however, motivate with insight in the mode of 
intuitively fulfilling empathy. I co-share in his temptations, I 
co-participate in his fallacies; in the "co-" there lies an inner 
co-living of motivating factors, ones which carry their necessity 

35 with them. Admittedly, there are still unsolved and unsolvable 
remainders here: e.g., the original dispositions of character, 
which, however, I can indeed also, by analogy, make clear to 
myself and understandable. I am phlegmatic for the most part, 
but occasionally I am incited to vivacity and mirth ; they spring 


288 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


289 


up after indulging in stimulants, for example; they have physi- 
cal grounds in a modification of my Corporeality. Analogously, 
someone else is constantly and predominantly disposed toward 
mirth : he is habitually, and from the first, similar to me after I 
5 have had a glass of wine. It is in this sense that I also 
understand other things. Occasionally I have "briUiant ideas," 
occasionally scientific thinking progresses easily in me, and 
broad horizons open up to me — at least I imagine they do. 
According to this analogy, I represent genius, for instance, by 
10 means of quantitative, perhaps even qualitative, augmentation 
(for which I might again have intuitive grounds). 


§61. The spiritual Ego and its underlying basis ^ 

The underlying bases upon which is built the comprehensively 
motivated spiritual life of the other, and in conformity to which 

15 that life runs its course in an individually typical way, present 
themselves therefore as "variations" of my own. I come across 
these bases also when I want to understand someone's develop- 
ment. I have then to describe, going from stage to stage, the 
surrounding world in which he grew up and how he was 

20 motivated by the things and people of his environment just as 

they appeared to him and as he saw them. Here we touch upon [27§ 
facticity, in itself beyond our comprehension. This child takes 
an original joy in sounds, that child does not. The one is 
inclined toward temper, the other toward patience. Natural 

25 causahty enters in as well. Because of a serious fall, someone 
might become a cripple, and that has consequences for his 
spiritual life : certain groups of motivations are defunct from 
then on. We are not interested here in a real-causal analysis of 
these consequences. But medical knowledge can be of service 

30 toward an integration, in the correct way, of the psychic effects 
that are relevant for subjective development and consequendy 
toward giving an account of them in the attempt to clarify 
subjective motivations and subjective development. Here the 
physical is serving as an indication of what is to be inte- 

35 grated. 


Hence if we take the personal Ego in its developmental nexus, 
then we find two layers, which perhaps are separable (e.g., the 
lower level as "pure" animahty), we find a two-fold "subjectiv- 
ity": the higher one is the specifically spiritual, the stratum of 
5 the intellectus agens, of the free Ego as Ego of free acts, 
including all proper acts of reason, the positive ones and the 
negative as well The unfree Ego also belongs here, "unfree" 
taken precisely in the sense in which it applies to an actual Ego : 
I allow myself to be dragged down by the sensual. The 

10 specifically spiritual Ego, the subject of spiritual acts, the 

person, finds itself dependent on an obscure underlying basis of 

traits of character, original and latent dispositions, and thereby 

dependent on nature. 

We rejoin here the ancient distinction, which imposed itself so 

15 early, between reason and sensibility. The latter also has its 
rules, and indeed its intelligible rules of harmony and discord; it 
is a stratum of hidden reason, which first of all at least extends 
as far as the constitution of nature : since indeed all complicated 
relations of the "if-then," all causalities, can become guiding 

20 lines for theoretical, thus spiritual, explications, for clarifica- 
tions in the form : " In the harmony of experience the doxa of 
perception is confirmed; in discordance, the posited existence or 
quiddity is annulled," etc. 
In the sphere of the senses, in the sphere of the basis, grasped 

25 as extensively as possible, we have associations, perserverances, [277] 
determining tendencies, etc. These "make" the constitution of 
nature, but they even extend further, since this constitution is 
also there for spirits : all life of the spirit is permeated by the 
"blind" operation of associations, drives, feelings which are 

30 stimuli for drives and determining grounds for drives, tenden- 
cies which emerge in obscurity, etc., all of which determine the 
subsequent course of consciousness according to "blind" 
rules. 

To these laws correspond habitual modes of behavior on the 
35 part of the subject, acquired pecuHarities (e.g., the habit of 
drinking a glass of wine in the evening). The question can be 
asked whether these are properties of the person's "individu- 
ality," or whether they do not rather belong on the side of 
genuine activities. To be sure, it makes sense to speak of 


Cf. Supplement XII, §§ 1-3 (pp. 344 ff.) 


290 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


291 


individuality as the total style and habitus of the subject, 
pervading, as a concordant unity, all his modes of behavior, all 
his activities and passivities, and to which the entire psychic 
basis constantly contributes. 
5 The nexus of lived experiences of a person is not a mere 
bundle of lived experiences or a mere " stream " of conscious- 
ness in which the lived experiences flow away. Instead, every 
lived experience is a lived experience of an Ego, of an Ego that 
does not itself flow away in a stream as its lived experiences do. 

10 And there is constantly present an underlying basis which is 
pre-given to it, to which it is related, or by which it is driven, in 
various ways. There is also an accomplishment of specific acts 
and, in unity with that, a constant enrichment of the stream of 
lived experiences, an enrichment supphed by the Ego itself: its 

15 reigning as Ego becomes eo ipso 3, lived experience. This basis of 
pregivenness refers back, however, to the other one, the one we 
call the psychic basis of habitus with fixed rules. 

But at the same time the Ego is an actually unitary person still 
in a higher sense if it possesses a certain pervasive unitary style 

20 in the way it decides by judgment and will, in the way it values 
things aesthetically, but also in the way ''sudden ideas" or 
"inspirations" surge up in the person (e.g., this man has clever 
inspirations when he is doing mathematics), in the way meta- 
phors come to him and his involuntary phantasy reigns, and also 

25 in the way he apperceives in perception, or in the specific way [278| 
his memory "operates" (he has a good memory). Distinctions 
come to him easily or with difficulty, he reacts with automatic 
associations either more quickly or more slowly than another 
person does, etc. In all this the man has a general type, 

30 determinate in manifold ways, and each particular man has his 
particular individual type. We are dealing here, on the one 
hand, with the coming and going of hved experiences in general 
and, on the other hand, with the fact that the Ego is a 
"position-taking" subject: a subject of willing, of acting, and 

35 also of thinking. Should we include in addition: a subject that 
represents, perceives, remembers, phantasizes? In a certain 
sense, yes. The subject has objects over against itself; it is a 
"representing" subject, and that is the foundation for its 
"comportment" toward the objects. 


We have to distinguish intentionality as that according to 
which we become conscious of objects, i.e., mere consciousness, 
representing, and intentionality as that which makes up the 
comportment of the acts toward the represented, ''position- 
5 taking," Therefore we distinguish between consciousness of 
objects and position-taking, comportment toward the objects. 
Subjectivity manifests its individual character in its way of being 
conscious of objects as well as in its way of taking positions. As 
to the former, we have to distinguish : 

10 1) the object is there, it is an object of attention (with the 
various levels of attention) 

2) the object is there, one is conscious of it "for itself," it 
stands out, it is delimited and apperceived, but it is not attended 
to. 

15 The turning of the attention is also a "comportment," but it 
is not a position-taking; instead, it is a presupposition for 
position-taking. Here, too, the subject displays his "pecuUar- 
ity," i.e., in what it is that rivets his attention and how it does 
so. One subject jumps easily from object to object, from theme 

20 to theme; another one remains attached for a long time to the 
same object, etc. 

On the other hand, concerning the consdtution in conscious- 
ness of the object prior to the turning of the attention and the 
taking of a specific position regarding it, we are referred back to 

25 the constitution in consciousness of previous objects, to pre- 
vious acts of attention, and perhaps to previous position- 
takings; we are referred back to the data of sensation, to the [279] 
references back and forth which depend on them, etc. Ulti- 
mately we arrive at the "obscure," "hidden," representations 

30 and representafional complexes. Insofar as attention plays a 
role for this constitution of transcendent unities and multiplici- 
ties, we have there implicitly an Ego that is accomplishing some 
kmd of comportment. The ultimate, however, is a background 
that is prior to all comportment and is instead presupposed by all 

35 comportment. 

Following what we have just said, there is a distinction 
between the individual character of the Ego-subject as a habi- 
tual individual way of self-comportment and the individual 
character to be found in the interweaving of the backgrounds. 


292 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


293 


In a certain sense there is, in the obscure depths, a root soil. 

The world of things in which spirits live is an Objective world 
constituted out of subjective surrounding worlds and is the 
Objectively determinable surrounding world of the spirits. As an 
5 intersubjectively persisting rule of possible appearances and, 
prior to that, of possible complexes of sensation of the individ- 
ual spirits, this world refers back to a lower level of all spiritual 
existence. Every spirit has a "natural side." This is precisely the 
underlying basis of subjectivity: its being conscious of sensa- 

10 tions, its having reproductions of sensations, its associations, its 
formation of apperceptions, and, in fact, its apperceptions at 
the lowest level, where unities of experience are constituted. To 
the natural side there belongs immediately the lower life of 
feelings, the instinctual life, and indeed the function of attention 

15 as well, which is a specifically Egological function, just as is the 
general function of turning toward. These form the bridge to 
Ego-being and Ego-life in the specific sense. The lower level is 
the place of the constitution of a world of appearances, or of 
appearing Objects, the world of the mechanical, the world of 

20 hfeless conformity to laws: all these being mere pre-data. 

Spirits are the subjects that accomplish cogitationes, they 
stand upon this basis, and they are interwoven in more encom- 
passing nexuses where motivations in a higher sense rule, i.e., 
motivations of position-taking by position-taking, genuine moti- 

25 vations of reason. In the lived experiences of the lower level a 
sensitive "soul" manifests itself, i.e., insofar as representational 
dispositions and habitual properties manifest themselves 
therein, ones which have nothing to do with the attentive, 
grasping, position-taking Ego itself (with respect to its position- 

30 takings). This is the field of association psychology. The sensory 
soul, the soul of the lower level, is one with the subject of the 
position-taking; the two form a single empirical unity, from 
which only the unity of the personal subject (the position-taking 
Ego) is set off. This soul is "mine," it "belongs" to my 

35 Ego-subject and is inseparably one with it. There is no doubt, 
then, that it belongs to the person as founding basis. 

The soul is here not an Objective (natural) reaUty but instead 
is "spirit-soul; *' i.e., soul in this sense is not defined as a real 
unity in relation to circumstances of Objective nature, thus 


[28(^ 


psychophysical^, or at least does not have to be defined in that 
way. There is an immanent lawfulness to the formation of 
dispositions as substratum for the position-taking subject. On 
the other hand, this regularity is tied up with the psychophysical 

5 one, i.e., it can be apperceived as natural, and so both of these 
are treated in psychology. 

Spirit is not an abstract Ego of the position-taking acts but is 
the fullness of the person, the Ego as human, the " I take a 
position," the I think, I value, I act, I complete works, etc. Then 

10 there also belongs to me a basis of lived experiences and a basis 
of nature ("my nature") which is manifest in the play of lived 
experiences. This nature is the lower psychic layer, but it 
extends even into the sphere of position-taking : the position- 
taking Ego is dependent on its substratum insofar as I, in order 

15 to be motivated in my position-taking, must have precisely the 
motivating lived experiences, and these latter stand in an 
associative nexus and under rules of associative dispositions. 
But even the position-takings themselves are subject to inductive 
rules: with each position-taking, there develop "tendencies" to 

20 take up the same position under similar circumstances, etc. 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


295 


Chapter Three 

THE ONTOLOGICAL PRIORITY 
OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 
OVER THE NATURALISTIC » 


5 §62. The interlocking of the personalistic attitude 

and the naturahstic attitude 

In apperceiving the "underlying basis" of the spirit as a 
" natural side," we come to a point where the two attitudes we 
have kept distinct from one another, namely the naturalistic and 

10 the personahstic, or the attitude of the natural sciences and the 

attitude of the human sciences, or their correlates, the two types 

of reality, nature and spirit, enter into relation with each 

other. 

The flux of the stream of lived experience is subject to the law 

1 5 which has its index in the reality of the soul, as dependent on 
the Body in nature. The reaHty, Corporeal body, expresses an 
intersubjective regulation, one that extends beyond all con- 
sciousness of the union of Body and soul. The reality, soul, 
expresses a second regulation, one that is determinate and is 

20 related to the first: the soul is dependent on the Body. Insofar 
as the spirit is a unity that is related to its surrounding world, 
and insofar as the surrounding world, at the lowest level, 
consists in appearances each person first constitutes for himself 
and then constitutes in a community as communal, components 

25 of the regulations of the somatic, soul and nature, enter into the 
regulation whose index is the spirit. But here an other cut, as it 
were, is performed by the absolute consciousness, and a partic- 
ular regulation running through is indicated in it. In its spiritual 


[2^ 


On this chapter, cf. also Supplements XHI and XIV, pp. 382 ff. and 386 ff. 


acts, the spirit is dependent on the soul, insofar as the stream of 
lived experience lets the acts spring forth from itself (that is, the 
Ego accomplishes them on the basis of the rest of the stream of 
lived experience). Thus the spiritual Ego is dependent on the 
5 soul, and the soul on the Body. Consequently the spirit is 
conditioned by nature, though it does not for all that stand 
toward nature in a relationship of causality. Spirit has an 
underlying basis, on which it has the dependence of condition- 
ahty; as spirit, it has a soul, a complex of natural dispositions 

10 which, as such, are conditioned by physical nature and are 
dependent on it. 

The spirit in its freedom moves the Body and thereby can 
perform a work in the spiritual world. The works, however, as 
factual matters, are at once things in the natural world, just as 

15 the Body is at once Object of the spiritual world (it already is so 
by the fact that it is a bearer of sense for comprehension) as well 
as external thing in nature. My Body is not only an appearance 
for me but it is " animated " for me : in terms of consciousness, 
it is the organ of my original free movements. From it as given 

20 there proceed at any time movement tendencies, to which I can 
yield or which I can resist, and in yielding I move my hand, my 
foot, etc., or the whole Body. And all tendencies proceeding 
from external things, wherever external things become percep- 
tual stimuh (I refer to things as appearances, which alone are 

25 stimuh in the phenomenological sense), are mediated by the 
Body and by Bodily tendencies or by tendencies toward move- 
ments which are apperceived as eye movements and thus as 
movements of "accommodation " in the broadest sense. Wherever 
external things in my sphere of apppearances function as 

30 practical stimuh, wherever tendencies arise — directed to me — 
to move things, work with them, change them, etc., there my 
Body is mediating and so are the tendencies related to it, 
tendencies to grasp, hft, push, resist, strike, etc. Here mere 
tendencies to movement (or free movements as performances) 

35 are connected together, and going hand in hand with them, as a 
new dimension, are performances of power, exertions of power, 
etc. 

For phenomenology, therefore, the Body plays an expansive 
role in the realm of the spirit. What is purely spiritual can be 


[282] 


296 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


297 


found in all effective acts, which are partially actions, partially 
passions. What is Ego-like, what is subjective-spiritual ^ has a 
special "connection" with its own Body. To be sure, this 
connection exists primarily with respect to particular data 
5 (sensations of movement, tendencies, radiating out from Bodily 
sensations, toward courses of sensations of movement), which, 
by being apperceived Bodily, enter into everything related to the 
Body. Allied with this is also the fact of "expression," which 
allows us to interpret, on a broad scale, the other's Body as a [28^ 

10 Body for a spiritual life. The Body, as my Body, is something 
particularly subjective, inasmuch as it mediates my perceptions 
and my actions which extend into the world of things; but it is 
not only for me that it is such. Also as apprehended by the 
other it acquires a significance, a spiritual significance, inasmuch 

15 as it expresses the spiritual (and does not simply intimate the 
presence of sensibility). 

It must always be remembered that every Ego is precisely an 
Ego in itself, a point of identity, on which " stimuli " operate, 
from which acts issue forth, which is active or which is passive, 

20 which turns to or turns away from, which follows tendencies or 
resists them; i.e., it is the Ego of the intentionahties, which, even 
if these intentionahties are not executed, still has a direction, 
one that proceeds from the Ego and into which then the Ego 
perhaps enters actively in the mode of the executing Ego. 

25 Furthermore, it is to be noted that by essence there belong to 
the Ego the subjective "domains" to which it is related. 

As joined to its Body, the spirit "belongs" to nature. In spite 
of this association, however, this linkage, it is not itself nature. 
The spirit has "effects" in nature, and yet it does not exercise 

30 there any causality in the sense of nature. Causality is a relation 
between one reality and its correlative surrounding realities. But 
the reality of the spirit is not related to real circumstances 
residing within nature; rather, it is related to real circumstances 
that exist in the "surrounding world" and in other spirits: this, 

35 however, is not nature. Something similar occurs in the case of 
physical things, only it is reversed : they have their real circum- 

' It should be remembered that what one has, e.g., appearances, are also 
subjective, though they are neither passion nor action and do not belong to the Ego 
as its life but belong to it as field, as medium, as possession. 


Stances in one another and, furthermore, in Bodies and in souls, 
though not in spirits. 

Thus we have to establish a peculiar relationship between 
spirit and physical nature, a relation between two sorts of 
5 realities, a relation of conditionahty yet not of causahty in the 
genuine sense. The same holds for the relation between spirit 
and soul or between spirit and Body as aesthesiological unity 
rather than as physicalistic thing. The Body in this aesthesiolog- 
ical sense belongs to the presupposed surrounding world of 

10 every personal subject and is the field of his free will. This is a 
spiritual and a causal relation. I execute my ''fiat/' and my 
hand moves "because" I will it. As freely moved by me, the 
Body is a spiritual reaUty, and to the idea of its reality there 
pertains the relation to the Ego as a subject of free movement. [284] 

15 And vice versa. The Ego is an individuality, and as such it 
carries out acts upon acts and brings about Bodily accompUsh- 
ments and then further ones. Similarly, however, my represent- 
ing, my phantasizing, my remembering, etc. pertain to my 
spiritual field, and thereby so does the formation of new 

20 apprehensions, etc. The soul is presupposed (as is the Body), 
but it is at once surrounding world, determining the spirit. 

We must indeed say here that the Body is a two-sided reality 
precisely insofar as it is a Body, i.e., abstracting from the fact 
that it is a thing and consequently is determinable as physical- 

25 istic nature. There is constituted then: 

1. the aesthesiological Body. As sensing, it is dependent on 
the material Body; but here we once more have to distinguish 
from the physicalistic Body the material Body as appearance 
and as part of the personal surrounding world. 

30 2. the Body for the will, the freely moving Body. It is 
something identical, even in relation to the various possible 
movements the freely active spirit performs with it. There thus 
results a stratum of reaHty that is its own. 

Consequently the Body as Body presents, like Janus, two 

35 faces, and first of all within intuition. It is a reality with respect 
to nature as the world of things given in intuition and is at once 
a reality with respect to the spirit. Thus it is a double reality, to 
which pertain two lines of real circumstances. Thereby the 
aesthesiological stratum is the substrate for the stratum, "free 


298 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


299 


movement" and is always a presupposition for it, whereas the 
lower stratum, the aesthesiological, can be separate from motil- 
ity. An immotile Body, one that only senses, is thinkable as a 
limit-case, but the question is then whether immotility does not 
5 signify the null-point of movement as paralyzed Body — and 
that is indeed the case. 

Similarly, the soul also has two faces: 

1 . as Bodily conditioned it is physically conditioned, depend- 
ent on the physicalistic Body. As identical reality, it has its real 

10 circumstances in physis; 

2. as spiritually conditioned it stands, with the spirit, in a 
reality-nexus. 

Thus we have two poles : physical nature and spirit and, in [281 
between them. Body and soul. As a consequence. Body and soul 

15 are ''nature in the second sense " properly speaking only accord- 
ing to the side turned toward physical nature. As appearing, 
they belong to the spiritual surrounding world ; but appearance 
denotes precisely appearance of physicalistic nature, and that 
estabUshes a relation to the physicahstic world. At first, this is 

20 valid only for the physical substrate, but as soon as it becomes 
taken physicalistically, the Body, and the soul, also receive a 
physicalistically determined transcendence. 

On the other hand, the appearing Body (and the stratum 
determined by sensation there, the stratum of the sense quali- 

25 ties) and the soul belong to the spiritual surrounding world and 
receive in it such a relation to the Body and to other things that 
they assume the character of spiritual realities: the person has 
an effect on the Body in that he moves it, and the Body affects 
other things of the surrounding world ; thereby the person, by 

30 way of the Body, acts on these things as things of the 
surrounding world. The free movement of my Body and the 
mediate moving of other things is an acting upon nature insofar 
as the Body-thing of the surrounding world is at the same time 
determinable as thing of natural science. The effect of the spirit 

35 on the Body and of the Body on other things is accomplished as 
a spiritual effect in the spiritual surrounding world. But, in 
virtue of the correspondence that holds here, changes in nature 
in the physicalistic sense are accomplished as well. 

We speak of two '' faces," two sides of reality, as regards the 


Body and the soul, but we must take notice of the correct way 
to understand that. The Body as something in the surrounding 
world is the experienced, intuited Corporeal body, and that is 
precisely an appearance of the physicalistic Body. The latter, 
5 and physicalistic nature in its entirety, has nothing to do with 
the surrounding world, the primary surrounding world at least. 
That is, we can say as well that it is a secondary surrounding 
world. Just as the evaluated thing becomes a value-Object and 
then is, as an Objective value, for a second time an Object of the 

10 surrounding world, so physicalistic nature, theoretically deter- 
mined on the basis of the "appearances," is a secondary Object 
of the surrounding world, the primary Object of which is 
precisely the appearance. The Body as a thing is substrate for 
the aesthesiological Body, and with that we have the substrate 

15 for the Body to which the will relates, the freely moving Body, 
and thus the Body stands to the spirit in a relation of causahty. 
Here we are in one homogeneous sphere. 

On the other hand, because the Body in the surrounding [286] 
world is at the same time an appearance of nature in the 

20 physicalistic sense, the Body has a second face ; it is the point of 
conversion from spiritual causality to natural causality. 

The same holds for the soul, which has its share of nature 
insofar as it is related to the Body. Physical (material) thing. 
Body, and soul are constituted in intuition, hence on the one 

25 hand as unspiritual, though on the other hand as something 
which is there for the spirit; or again, on the one hand as 
"matter" of the lowest level for the constitution of merely 
physicalistic thinghood, and further, on the other hand, as 
" spirit-soul," spiritual substrate for the constitution of the soul. 

30 These intuitively constituted unities have, for the spirit, a reality 
side; they are circumstances of the real unity, spirit, and the 
spirit, in turn, is circumstance for these unities. 

It is, of course, not the identity of the thing as reaUty (of 
appearance) that is related to the spirit as real circumstance. 

35 Instead it is the identity of the Body, which, as freely moving, 
receives a proper stratum of reality in terms of the will. And 
likewise it is the soul as dependent on the Body but also as 
integrating psychic events related to the voluntary movement of 
the Body or influenced directly by the spirit in some other 

40 way. 


300 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


If we then pass over to "Objective nature," which excludes 
the spirit as circumstance (since we are abandoning altogether 
the attitude of the human sciences), nothing is left of the 
behavior of the subject and we have mere things, aesthesiologi- 
5 cal dependencies, psychological dependencies, and concomitant 
Objective realities. 

But if we in turn proceed from this attitude to the former, 
then the spirit, within its own attitude, may produce something, 
and, in virtue of the parallelism here, dependent changes in the 

10 Objective world correspond to it. That they are dependent, 
however, has to be established Objectively; I can, and I must, 
come to a conviction about whether or not "in actuaUty" there 
corresponds to the movement of the Body an actual movement 
in nature, etc. From the standpoint of the Objective knowledge 

15 of nature, an act (whenever it is said in the human-scientific 
attitude that "the person is moving his Body") of the "fiat/* 
and indeed as a conscious state, together with the concomitant 
appearances, etc., enters into the Bodily-psychic nexus. And all 
this is a state in Bodily-psychic reality. Spirit is not a reality [2 

20 here, however, and it does not at all exist here as spirit; what 
exists in this case is only the cogito as state, the Ego of it, 
etc. 

The distinction between this conception and the spiritual 
attitude stands out clearly if we now posit theoretically the 

25 Ego-side itself (the person and what he has), whereby once 
again positing Ego-subjects are indeed present, versus the 
subjects that had become theoretical Objects. We posit other 
subjects (and ourselves in reflection) in a theoretical way by 
positing them and ourselves, precisely to the exclusion of all 

30 else, as subjects of lived experiences that are states of our 
subjectivity or theirs, and as subjects of a surrounding world of 
persons and things, taken here exactly in the way they present 
themselves to the subject, i.e., precisely as "environing." So 
these things are not Objects as in natural science — disregarding 

35 the case in which the theoretically posited subjects are natural 
scientists and therefore thought as related to the nature "inves- 
tigated" by them, which they "determine," whose Objective 
predicates they seek, etc. But if the subjects investigating nature 
are themselves Objects, then the nature they investigate is put in 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


301 


brackets. Aside from this case, the things are correlates of the 
respective hved experiences; they are the things we see, grasp, 
and touch, just as we, and other people, see them, grasp them, 
etc. If others see them differently, then what is seen differently is 

5 precisely, as seen by them, their things as correlates, and if they 
see ghosts, then their correlates are precisely ghosts. If the 
theoretically posited subjects are posited as investigators of 
physical and psychophysical nature (to say something about the 
case we excluded), then, obviously, it comes to be posited that 

10 they carry out acts of investigation into nature, that their 
appearances are, in a certain way, constitutive of "Objective 
nature," and that they recognize dependencies between what 
they possess as Objective, their sensations, their acts, etc. and 
the things of nature. But then Objective nature is bracketed. It 

15 is now not posited theoretically itself, but is so only by the 
theoretically posited Ego. Thereby the theoretical Object, human 
being (the zoological, physiological, psychological Object), 
which is included in the theoretical positing of nature, is 
specifically something other than the theoretical Object, human 

20 person. The human being as an Object of nature is not a subject, 

a person, though to every such Object a person corresponds: so [288] 
we can also say that every one of them " involves " a person, an 
Ego-subject, which, however, is never a component part of nature, 
contained as a reality in nature, but instead is something that is 

25 expressed in the environing Object, "human Body." Here the 
human Body is a mere correlate of the positing of the subject, 
taken purely as such, something of which we know that it 
manifests a nature open to Objective research, but which is not 
now undergoing this theoretical positing. The apprehension may 

30 very well be there, but it is not a point through which a 
theoretical positing travels. Likewise, the subject can simulta- 
neously be apprehended as nature, but this apprehension, which 
refers back to an apprehending subject, not itself apprehended 
as nature, is not a point that a theoretical positing passes 

35 through; what is so posited is the subject quite simply, which 
has behind it only the pure subject. ^ 

' According to our presentation, the concepts I and we are relative : the I requires 
the thou, the we, and the ** other." And, furthermore, the Ego (the Ego as person) 
requires a relation to a world which engages it. Therefore, I, we and world belong 


302 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


303 


10 


15 


§63. Psychophysical parallelism and interaction 

We now take into consideration that which we are calhng 
physicalistic nature, or, more broadly, Objective nature in 
general, the correlate of natural science. The latter, for its part, 
is an interpersonal, cultural accomplishment in an association of 
persons and thus presupposes this association, just as the human 
sciences are such cultural accomplishments. The one absolute 
consciousness, a multiplicity of communicating monads and 
pure Egos, is then essentially of such a kind that it has a parallel 
unity of regulation, not a mere two-fold regulation but precisely 
a parallel one, one which ordains the same for two, without 
altering anything in the matters at issue there. 

The one regulation has to do with the natural sciences, the 
other with the human sciences. They complement and penetrate 
one another. But they would just be two sides of something one 
and the same, and would express something one and the 
same in the two sides, if all the nexuses that present themselves 
as facts in the human sciences also emerged in natural science. 


together; the world, as communal environing world, thereby bears the stamp of 
subjectivity. 

In addition, all science belongs within this nexus; science is an intersubjective 
activity, a pursuit in the attitude, " Us and what is actual." Science seeks Objective 
validity; as Objective science it makes assertions about the world straightforwardly, 
i.e., assertions in which nothing of the " us " is to be found. What is spoken of is only 
what is Objective: first and foremost, physical nature. 

Thereby, however, we constantly find ourselves as persons living in the personal 
world, in the life-world, and so do the natural scientists, even in the very activity of 
natural science: it is just that their focus is directed exclusively to physical or 
zoological nature, etc. The apprehension of the world as nature thus fits within 
personal apprehension (the personal attitude). In research I can be focused on mere 
things, but I can also focus on persons in their comportment to them; specifically: 

a. persons as spiritually determined by these things, as motivated by them, 
experiencing them, evaluating them, etc. 

b. on the other hand, persons with respect to their real dependence on these things 
as natural ones, which are apprehended thereby in a two-fold way: 1) as conscious 
correlates of the comportment of the subject, and 2) as correlates of the natural 
scientific cognition that determines them Objectively. 

In the one case, p)ersons are posited theoretically as they are given, as persons in an 
association of persons. In the other case, they are posited as belonging to nature, as 
dependent on the nature of the Body. 


[289| 


simply within a different apprehension. But that is not the 
case. 

The appearing thing is a unity of spatio-temporal causality. 
One could say it is what it brings about in space. States here are 
5 states of force. 

The personal individual likewise is a unity: the human being 
is one and the same in relation to the various circumstances in 
compliance with which his states change. "Considered abso- 
lutely," this means that dependencies exist between the human 

10 Body and other things (both leading, considered intersubjec- 
tively, to certain nexuses of appearance) that are not physicaHs- 
tic. That is, if in a consciousness that finds itself in a nexus of 
intersubjective understanding things are to be able to appear as 
concordant actuahties, then sense data must belong to the 

15 appearances, and if these sense data are to be able to be there, 
then Bodies, too, have to be able to appear and have to have 
their physicalistic actuality. Therefore, this regulation concerns 
groups of appearances and is an intersubjective one. Sense data 
can present themselves only if there exist "in Objective actual- 

20 ity" sense organs, nervous systems, etc. To these correspond 
possible apprehensions of sensuous data and concomitant inter- 
subjective regulations. Can it now make sense to assume that 
even the possibility of any apprehension whatever and of all 
consciousness in general is dependent on the Body and its 

25 Bodily-Objective events, or that apperceptions, position-takings 
of belief, of will, etc. are dependent on the Body in the same 
sense as the data of sensation are? If we think of monadic 
subjects and their streams of consciousness or, rather, if we 
think the thinkable minimum of self-consciousness, then a 

30 monadic consciousness, one that would have no "world" at all 
given to it, could indeed be thought — thus a monadic con- 
sciousness without regularities in the course of sensations, 
without motivated possibiHties in the apprehension of things. In 
that case, what is necessary for the emergence of an Ego- 

35 consciousness in the ordinary sense? Obviously, human con- 
sciousness requires an appearing Body and an intersubjective 
Body — an intersubjective understanding. 

Let us already presuppose a plurality of subjects in mutual 
intersubjective understanding, thus a certain "Objectively" 


[290] 


304 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


305 


constituted world with "Objective" things. Bodies, and real and 
Objective spirits. A certain relation of the sensations to the 
respective Objective Body is thereby already presupposed. And 
let us assume, as it does actually happen, that my Body is a 
5 system of sense organs, related to the central organ B. It is on 
this that the emergence of sensory phantasms and sensations is 
dependent. 

The question is then whether not only these sensuous con- 
tents but also, in the same or in a similar sense, all apprehen- 

10 sions and higher conscious functions can be said to be depend- 
ent on B, and whether and to what extent such a dependence 
would be thinkable. As regards sensations, the dependence 
means that a certain Bodily state (or, rather, a certain form of 
Bodily states, admitting the process of metabolism, which 

15 removes the individual identity of the elements of one and the 
same organ, of the same nerves, ganglia, etc., though it main- 
tains the same particular form) has, as its univocal and Objec- 
tive consequence, a certain sensation in a determinate stream of 
consciousness bound to its respective Body. Can the same be 

20 true regarding all the component parts and moments emerging 
in the stream of consciousness? 

Consciousness of the world is constituted in appearances: 
more exactly, in Bodily appearances. Sensations occur in certain 
apprehensions, in certain intersubjective regulations, and here [29 if 

25 belongs especially the regulation that corresponds to the Objec- 
tive actuality of those hidden organs of the Body we call the 
central organ B, the nerve chords, the sensory nerves, etc. And 
now the occurrence of any sensation S in my consciousness Cm, 
or in a definite individual's consciousness C^ (that of man M) is 

30 to be dependent on the part of that regulation which is here 
called the determinate state B^ of my (the respective individual 
M) Bjn- To the extent that sensations enter into other conscious 
lived experiences as constitutive moments, all these would be 
dependent on B^ and its states. 

35 The same holds for phantasms. If now all sensations and 
phantasms within Cm are dependent in this way on the above- 
mentioned rule concerning apprehended and apprehendable 
sensations and in addition on this intersubjective group of 
possible perceptions (thus of possible theoretical judgments as 


well), then why should not all conscious lived experiences within 
a monadic consciousness Cm, and likewise for every C^ C'm etc., 
be able to depend on precisely such a group Bm that is 
intersubjective and is taken collectively? Why should that 
5 present a difficulty if precisely the psychophysical causation is 
merely grasped as a certain relation of functional regulations, as 
we have done here and as we must do? 

The main point to be examined here is the question of 
whether or not the essence of consciousness, which expresses 

10 itself apriori in essential laws, resists such a universal regulation. 
The essence of consciousness in general does raise claims and 
demands. For example, is it possible, we are asking, for the 
matter here at issue to be understood in such a way that the 
cerebral states (states of the B) precede, in an Objectively 

15 temporal sense, the corresponding conscious lived experiences, 
or must not, for reasons of principle, the brain state and its 
conscious accompaniment be simultaneous, in conformity with 
the absolute sense of simultaneity? Thereby is not a parallehsm 
given eo ipsol Namely, in this way: to every conscious lived 

20 experience in my consciousness Cm there corresponds a certain 
state in my B, a certain organic state. On the other hand, to 
everything without exception that comprises the B there corre- 
spond real events of a certain kind in every subject, and 
consequently also in me: certain real perceptual possibihties, 

25 which, if not corresponding to this state of the brain B, then to 
another state in connection with it in a natural-scientific 
nexus. 

The opposite conception would be that such a universal [292] 
regulation does not exist, or cannot exist, but that, instead, 

30 determinate states of Bm pertain only to the sense data in Cm 
but not to consciousness' noetic aspect, taken in a broad sense, 
whether entirely or within certain limits. And that can again 
mean that this noetic element is either accidental, occurring 
without laws, not determined apriori in a univocal way; or it is 

35 indeed determined univocally, though it does not stand in 
functional dependence or in a relation of parallehsm to the 
physical Body and thereby to physical being in general. If a 
univocity exists, then the consciousness in question (abstraction 
made from its hyletic content) can be determined by rules of 


306 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


inner dependence, rules which prescribe what else must be there 
in consciousness and must occur in it if certain states are 
already given and if in them sense data present themselves in 
such and such psychophysical dependencies. 
5 Here we should also introduce empathy, in virtue of which, in 
the individual consciousness C^, with its psychophysically 
determined content of sensations, there results a simple under- 
standing, one that is not predelineated by psychophysical laws, 
of the psychic life of the other, which life is then given as 
10 existing and determines, by way of motivation, the rest of the 
psychic life C^. This is an "encroachment" of one subjectivity 
on another, mediated by comprehension. A direct encroachment 
would be excluded. All encroachment, as we are now employing 
the word, presupposes that the C„, contains in itself conscious- 
15 ness of the other's psychic Hfe C;, and this consciousness is, 
within C^, what is immediately "operative" in the encroach- 
ment. Thereby, however, this action of soul upon soul, of 
subject upon subject, is always psychophysically mediated, but 
in quite a different manner. Psychophysical causahty is con- 
20 stantly in play, though with the support of peculiar natural laws 
that are purely psychic. They would be knowable only in 
intersubjective experience (including self-experience), i.e., by 
means of knowledge of the general way in which conscious lived 
experiences constitute individualities in the "monads." These 
25 universal empirical cognitions would have their connection with 
eidetic universal laws pertaining to consciousness in general and 
to the constitution in consciousness of any individuahty what- 
ever. 

These are possibilities considered universally. Within the [293} 
30 framework of such considerations, the following important 
problem also arises: de facto there occur Bodies scattered here 
and there in nature, and that is how we do indeed look at 
nature. But it would still remain to think through the possibility 
of what might be involved in that, i.e., whether and to what 
35 extent it would be possible for every physical thing in nature to 
be a Body. 

The decisive question is now the extent to which what is 
essential about consciousness assigns limits to the conceivable 
possibilities. That there are essential laws of consciousness is 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


307 


indeed an absolutely indubitable truth. Is a thorough psycho- 
physical parallelism compatible with them, one that would 
predelineate for every conscious state C^ a dependency, in a 
lawful way, on B^ or a parallel in B^,? 
5 The following reservations impose themselves, and we need to 
examine their pertinence. The changes of B^ are contingent 
changes, subject to natural laws which could just as well be 
different ones. Let us assume that all conscious lived experi- 
ences, just as they are, may be dependent on B^ for their entire 

10 content with its parts and moments and may exist as long as B^, 
exists. If now, as belonging to the apriori essence of conscious- 
ness, there exist certain necessities in the course of its succes- 
sion — the way, e.g., the modes of retention within the constitu- 
tion of time are linked (apriori), as succeeding one another 

15 necessarily, to various impressions — then these nexuses of the 
sequence could not be conditioned by B^ and by the sequence 
of its Objective states. Only that which the essential nexuses 
leave open can be empirically conditioned. For instance, only 
the sensation could be conditioned, but not what is necessarily 

20 linked to it in terms of the retentions. Or perhaps, more 
precisely, what is conditioned would only be the content of the 
sensation and likewise, within the predelineated form of the 
retentional sequence, a content left open by it, that is, differ- 
ences in clarity and distinctness, etc.; in which respect it is 

25 problematic, and to be determined in experience, to what extent 
the content is conditioned psychophysically. In any case we can 
say that if a modification of consciousness is excluded apriori, 
if there exists apriori a law of incompatibility, in virtue of which 
C and C" are altogether incompatible in one consciousness, 

30 then what is bound up with C, which we think as dependent on [294] 
B', is no longer determined purely by a B" bound up with B' or, 
in general, by an interplay of B-states. Instead, there is an 
absolutely fixed lawfulness that does not have any parallel in 
the empirical lawfulness of B. 

35 We also have to note the following: every Hved experience 
has its background, its environment in the order of coexistence 
as well as its environment in the sinking down into the past 
(through which it is constituted as a unity of the living past 
precisely in the sinking down). These are apriori relations; it is 


308 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


this way and cannot be otherwise. Accordingly, we have all 
sorts of phenomena, the reduction of which to a causal depen- 
dence on B-states would be nonsense. * 

On such grounds, it seems to me, one can radically refute 
5 parallelism, and the refutation thereby has a completely differ- 
ent style compared to the usual ones which operate with 
distorted concepts of causality and substance and with tradi- 
tional prejudices of many kinds, refutations that head directly 
for interactionism, as if the question of parallelism versus 

10 interaction were a radical and exhaustive one. In point of fact, 
with the rejection of paralleUsm nothing at all is decided in 
favor of interaction. 

Besides, this is not what comes next. Instead, there has first to 
be determined how far the dependence of C on B extends. 

15 Doubtlessly as far as the sensuous substrate of consciousness. 
Surely the higher consciousness, the properly noetic, becomes 
co-dependent on B, to the extent that it is founded in the 
hyletic. Surely not only are the sensuous sensations in the [295| 
stricter sense determined by the Body, but so are the sensuous 

20 feeUngs as well, and the lived experiences of instincts. Surely a 
good part of individuaUty also belongs here, namely the sen- 
suous dispositions with their individual habitus. 

Obviously, how far all this extends can only be decided 
empirically and if possible by means of experimental psycho- 

25 logy. In particular, whether and to what extent the proper 
character, the rhythm, of the higher consciousness is determined 
by means of its own empirical-psychological rules as well as 
according to what is universally human, though not by essential 


' Furthermore, the following should be brought to validity: it is thinkable that 
there would be no Bodies at all and no dependence of consciousness on material 
events in constituted nature, thus no empirical souls, whereas absolute consciousness 
would remain over as something that cannot simply be cancelled out. Absolute 
consciousness would thus have in itself, in that case, a principle of factual unity, its 
own rule, according to which it would unfold with its own content, all the while there 
being indeed no Body. If we join it to a Body, then perhaps it becomes dependent, 
though in the first place it still retains its principle of unity and does so not just 
through apriori laws of consciousness in general. Thus it becomes dependent in this, 
that it is dependent in its own apriori and individual essence, which means that what 
is in it is indeed conditioned and can in truth not be a mere epiphenomenon of 
something else. But all this is quite problematic. 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


309 


laws, i.e., according to what unfolds within the himian type (the 
type of the human species) and within the individual type, or 
whether these regularities in the type and in the individual are 
sufficiently grounded in the physical organization by the mere 

5 introduction of essential laws : this can by no means be estab- 
lished apriori. 

Now we come to the question of interaction and especially to 
the question of the action, the effects, of consciousness, or 
rather, of the soul, on the Body. Obviously, one may not 

10 operate here with mythical concepts of affecting. What "affect- 
ing " means in the physical world is sufficiently clear. We are led 
back to lawfully regulated nexuses of dependence between 
physical events, and since physical things are what they are as 
unities of appearances, we are led back to interdependencies of 

15 certain intersubjective regulations of consciousness of one and 
the same type. If we speak of "effects" with regard to the 
dependencies of sensation, sensuous feelings, etc., this is a type 
of dependence of an entirely different kind. The occurrence of 
sensations in a monad is dependent on a physical Body in its 

20 environment of nature, thus dependent on a certain subjective 
and, further, intersubjective regulation of appearances and not 
merely of sensations. It is doubtless that the existence of 
sensations in each case refers back to the Body, and since 
sensations and lived experiences in general have no Objective 

25 temporal existence, if not through a relation to the intersubjec- 
tive Body, so then we are already led to the position that the 
relation between sensation and Corporeality must be thought of 
as simultaneous, i.e., that to the sensation must be attributed 
the Objective time of the corresponding Objective cerebral 

30 process. 

To speak of a reverse dependency makes no sense unless we [296] 
assume that the soul has its own causality, an inner empirical 
lawfulness, in the production of sensations, i.e., a causahty that 
can first of all unfold in itself and can lead to a sensation, to 

35 which the state of the B would then be linked as dependent on 
it. Examples: the voluntary production of hallucinations, or, 
just as well, the voluntary production of sensations coordinated 
to certain appearances of things : namely the sensations brought 
about by the voluntary movement of the parts of the Body. It is 

40 problematic that it can ever be decided empirically whether or 


310 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


311 


not there is an empirical succession in time here, i.e., whether or 
not the Objective temporal point of the cerebral stimulation, 
corresponding to the movement of the hand, must be taken as 
the same identical temporal point of the sensation. Everything 
5 depends here on the way of defining the temporal point of a 
determinate state of consciousness, hence on the question of the 
sense of a temporal determination of a conscious lived experi- 
ence. 

For the rest, there comes into consideration what was already 

10 expounded elsewhere^: if I am able to comprehend another 
individual, look into his depths, then I know how he will allow 
himself to be motivated; but that is no different from the way I 
know it as regards myself. Naturally, I say all sorts of things 
about what I would do in a certain case; that is because I have 

15 not become perfectly clear on the circumstances and so always 
leave many things out of account. For that reason I cannot say, 
in an entirely definite way, what I would do in the future under 
circumstances of this or that kind. For until then much will 
have elapsed in my consciousness, and what has elapsed will 

20 extend itself, as motivating, into the time that follows and hence 
will be co-operative. Needless to say, the future cannot be 
predicted with certainty, but only hypothetically, by supplying 
the intermediate parts. On the other hand, the past can be 
encompassed in the understanding by means of clear memory, 

25 and each motivational nexus it had can be comprehended. 
There pertains to every course of consciousness an individuaUty 
that can be understood and "re-felt" as one to which belong 
precisely these modes of motivation and no others. In this, 
everyone is distinct from everyone else. Yet that does not 

30 amount to univocal necessity in the consequences. Everywhere 

natural causaHty, what is Bodily, and what is determined in [297J 
consciousness by the Bodily play their roles together. In no way 
do these determinations need to be universal. The B can indeed 
be a necessary though not sufficient condition. If the latter is 

35 also accepted, then the nexus can indeed be spoken of as a 
necessary one. 


C/ pp. 278 ff. 


§ 64. Relativity of nature, absoluteness of spirit 

From the foregoing considerations, there results a limit to 
possible naturalizing: the spirit can be grasped as dependent on 
nature and can itself be naturalized, but only to a certam 
5 degree. A univocal determination of spirit through merely 
natural dependencies is unthinkable, i.e., as reduction to some- 
thing like physical nature, to something, in the entire type of 
determination, analogous to the goal of univocal determination 
in natural science. Subjects cannot be dissolved into nature, for 
10 in that case what gives nature its sense would be missing. 
Nature is a field of relativities throughout, and it can be so 
because these are always in fact relative to an absolute, the 
spirit, which consequently is what sustains all the relativities. 
The spirit is determined through its surrounding world, and it 
15 even has a natural regulation insofar as it manifests dependen- 
cies of various kinds once it is placed in relation to the nature 
constituted with reference to the personal world. But this does 
not prevent its being absolute, irrelative. That is to say, if we 
could eliminate all spirits from the world, then that is the end of 
20 nature. But if we eliminate nature, "true," Objective-intersub- 
jective existence, there always still remains something: the spint 
as individual spirit. It only loses the possibility of sociaUty, the 
possibility of comprehension, for that presupposes a certain 
Bodily intersubjectivity. We would then no longer have the 
25 individual spirit as a person in the stricter, social sense, a person 
related to a material and, consequently, to a personal world as 
well. Nevertheless we still have, notwithstanding the enormous 
impoverishment of "personal" life, precisely an Ego with its 
conscious life, and it even has therein its individuaUty, its way of 
30 judging, of valuing, of letting itself be motivated in its position- 
takings. 

It is in the spirit's course of consciousness, however, that m 
every case is manifested the spirit's unity and individuaUty. If I [298] 
want to understand these, then I have to investigate this course, 
35 reconstruct it. If I want to understand it according to some 
definite aspect, then I have to extrapolate intuitively the corre- 
sponding nexus in the course of consciousness. The understand- 
ing is intuitive throughout; the Objectivity that is this "individ- 
ual " hereby comes to ^venness in its own proper being. 


312 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


I relive the other's spiritual life and, with that, the other's 

spiritual world, his spiritual Objectivity, and I understand them 

in their individual significance, their spiritual significance: in 

terms of the political situation, the spiritual epoch, contempo- 

5 rary literature, etc. 

It must not be forgotten here that individuality in the spiritual 
sense is something quite different from individuality in nature. A 
thing has its individual essence as that which is here and now. 
But this "what" is itself a "universal" That means that each 

10 thing is an example of a universality; this is already the case as 
regards the thing on the level of mere "sense" experience 
thought as concordant. Any thing can be thought of as repeat- 
able at will. Likewise, physicalistic Objectivity is what it is, and 
according to each of its determinations, as being subject to laws 

15 and determinations, both of which can be formulated mathe- 
matically. 

The thing as real is dependent on real circumstances; it is 
what it is in the nexus of real nature, which in itself is 
constituted as homogeneous throughout. 

20 The purely Objective consideration, which investigates the 
Objective sense of thingness, requires that things be dependent 
on one another as regards their states and that they, in their real 
existence, mutuallly prescribe something to one another, regard- 
ing, specifically, their ontological content, their causal states. 

25 The question now is whether a thing, which indeed remains 
one thing under all circumstances, is the identical something of 
properties and is actually in itself solid and fixed with respect to 
its real properties; that is, is a thing an identity, an identical 
subject of identical properties, the changing element being only 

30 its states and circumstances? Would this not then mean that 
according to the various circumstances into which it can be 
brought, or into which it can be thought to be introduced, the 
thing has different actual states, but that in advance— [299] 
apriori — how it can behave, and, further, how it will behave, is 

35 predehneated by its own essence? But does each thing (or, what 
is equivalent here : does any thing at all) have such an essence of 
its own in the first placel Or is the thing, as it were, always 
underway, not at all graspable therefore in pure Objectivity, but 
rather, in virtue of its relation to subjectivity, in principle only a 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


313 


relatively identical something, which does not have its essence in 
advance or graspable once and for all, but instead has an open 
essence, one that can always take on new properties according 
to the constitutive circumstances of givenness? But this is 
5 precisely the problem, to determine more exactly the sense of 
this openness, as regards, specifically, the "Objectivity" of 
natural science. 

Does the "infinity" of the world, instead of referring to a 
transfinite endlessness (as if the world were something finished 

10 in itself, an all-encompassing thing or a self-enclosed collectivity 

of things, which would nevertheless contain in itself an infinity 

of things), not rather mean an "openness"? But what is the 

sense of that? 

If, as we may do, we think of nature changed in all sorts of 

15 ways, then a nature is always also thinkable in which there 
would be many of the same things, and indeed things of any 
content whatsoever as long as it is representable. It is thinkable 
that there are many things completely the same as to properties 
and causal states, in coexistence as well as in succession. The 

20 one is here, the other there; the one is now, the other then. It is 
also thinkable that one thing return periodically to the same 
identical state. What distinguishes two things that are ahke is 
the real-causal nexus, which presupposes the here and the now. 
And with that we are led back necessarily to an individual 

25 subjectivity, whether a solitary or an intersubjective one, with 

respect to which alone determinateness is constituted in the 

positing of location and of time. No thing has its individuality in 

itself: 

On the other hand, the spirit lives through, takes a position, 

30 is motivated. Each spirit has its way of motivation, and, unhke 
a thing, it has its motivation in itself It does not have individu- 
aUty only by being in a determinate place in the world. The pure 
Ego of any given cogitatio already has absolute individuation, 
and the cogitatio itself is something absolutely individual in [300] 

35 itself The Ego, however, is not an empty pole but is the bearer 
of its habituality, and that implies that it has its individual 
history. 

The lived experiences in the flux of consciousness have an 
essence that is absolutely their own; they bear their individua- 


314 


STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 


tion in themselves. Can more than one lived experience be the 
same, can they be absolutely the same in one flux of conscious- 
ness? Are they distinguishable merely by this-ness? And can 
two lived experiences be distinct merely by the fact that the one 
5 belongs to this and the other to that consciousness (monad)? A 
lived experience now and "the same" Uved experience later, 
"simply repeated," can these be the same in their total essential 
content? In the now, consciousness has a content of originary 
lived experiences and a horizon of past ones which is repre- 

10 sented in the now in the form of a lived horizon of "primary 
memory," of retention, and the originary and the horizonal are 
continuously transformed into one another. Does this medium 
of lived experience make no difference for a lived experience 
that is originarily making its entrance, e.g., that of a new sense 

15 datum? If it is not a matter of indifference, then the lived 
experiences are already distinct. For in the "afterwards" this 
medium is a different one. But, one could object, does the fact 
not remain that every lived experience, together with its horizon, 
in its full concretion, is thinkable as repeated? Certainly, we 

20 answer, I think it as repeated; but I still think it necessarily as 
an individual Uved experience that is the same, as unique, as one 
and self-same. 

The problem can also be stated as follows: is there a 
distinction somehow to be made between full, concrete essence 

25 and individual existence! Or, conversely: is not this distinction 
to be made apriori and everywhere by necessity and must it not 
be said that, in principle, complete sameness of individuals in 
the sphere of lived experience is indeed possible, that every lived 
experience is "idealiter*' an essential content that has its 

30 this-ness, which is not a quality. But is not even this haecceitas a 
universal, inasmuch as every Uved experience in itself has its 
haecceitas? One cannot at all ask, however, what distinguishes 
one this from another this purely as this-es, nor, further, what 
they both have in "common." That would already be confusing 

35 the quaUty and the this. So would speaking of the "essence of 

this-ness." This-ness is a, form. What distinguishes this "some- [301] 
thing" from another "something" precisely as "something"? 
"Nothing," insofar as there are no qualities, no substantial 
contents, which would allow a distinction. The form of the this 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD 


315 


is not a what-ness, and in that sense is not an essence. It is 
universal in the sense of the form. 

Consciousness has its own essence, one in flux and not 
determinable exactly; but to it as an idea an "exact" essence 
5 can be attributed, and with this positing it receives its determi- 
nate this. 

Objective thinghood is determined physicalistically but is 
determined as a this only in relation to consciousness and the 
conscious subject. All determination refers back to a here and 

10 now and consequently to some subject or nexus of subjects. 
What is uniquely and originally individual is consciousness, 
taken concretely with its Ego. All other individuality is appear- 
ance and has the principle of its individuation in actual and 
possible appearing, which, in turn, refers back to an individual 

15 consciousness. 

Absolute individuation enters into the personal Ego. The 
surrounding world of the Ego acquires its individuation essen- 
tially by way of its relation to the Ego that has experience of it 
and that exchanges its experience with other individuals. For 

20 each Ego, any thing has the here and the now as a correlate of 
intuition. An Ego, or an intersubjectivity for itself, constitutes 
the surrounding world, and if it allows itself to be determined 
by its "over and against" in the surrounding world, or itself 
determines this latter actively and perhaps formatively, then this 

25 latter has the secondary individuation of the ''over and against/* 
whereas the originary individuation, the absolute one, resides in 
the Ego itself. The same spirit cannot be twice, nor can it return 
to the same total state, nor does it manifest its individuation 
merely by standing in different nexuses with the same con- 

30 tent. 

Spirits are precisely not unities of appearances but are instead 
unities of absolute nexuses of consciousness; more exactly, they 
are Ego-unities. And appearances are correlates of nexuses of 
consciousness which themselves have their absolute being. And 

35 if appearances are constituted intersubjectively, then we are led 

back precisely to a plurality of persons who can comprehend [302] 
one another. A correlate as such has its support in persons and 
in their lived experiences, and their absolute being precedes the 
relative being of the appearances. All individuation of the latter 


316 STUDIES IN THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF CONSTITUTION 

depends on the absolute individuation of the former, and all SUPPLEMENTS 

natural existence depends on the existence of absolute spirits. 

But then how is it with the soul and with man as nature? Are 
these also merely examples of universals? The answer to that 
5 has surely to be : no, insofar as the soul is naturahzed spirit, and 
individuahty in the specific sense pertains to the spirit. On the 
other hand, we must indeed say that everything by means of 
which the soul is determined as a natural reality is exemplary 
and universal. Individuality does not reside in that which is 
10 nature here. Nature is the X and in principle nothing but the X 
which is determined through universal determinations. The 
spirit, however, is no X but is that which is itself given in 
spiritual experience. 


SUPPLEMENTS 


Supplement I (to Sections One and Two): Attempt at a step-wise 

description of the constitution of the merely material thing, the Body, the 

animate thing or the living being, and then the personal subject, etc. 

5 If we investigate the constitution of the realities nature and spirit, in their 
interrelatedness, then we can distinguish idealiter the following strata. 
Complying with the order of constitution, we have to begin with the 
constitution of the sphere of the mere thing, the sphere of material nature. 
On the lowest level, we can segregate out there sensuous things as correlates 

10 of the Ego that has not yet been realized and that is thought of as solitary. 
It has its sense perceptions together with the concordant perceptual multi- 
plicities belonging ideally to them, in which, by steps (the order of these 
steps is not a present concern), real things are constituted by means of 
presentation, things which have to be characterized, given the presupposed 

1 5 lack of higher strata of apperception, as individual-subjective. In the case of 
these merely material things it is precisely these things which function as real 
circumstances, and on this lowest level, for which no dependence on the 
Body has yet been taken into account, it is only such things: a material 
thing is thinkable only as causally related to material things and hence as a 

20 member of a material environment. This statement remains valid even later 
on, after further realizations have been added, ones which count for us, 
moreover, only as ideal possibilities and not as ideal necessities. 

The next step consists in the introduction of the Body of the solitary 
Ego-subject and of the relations of dependency which hold between it and 

25 these realities. ' Among the individual-subjective things that are constituted 
first, one is pre-eminent as the subject's Body, constituted as an aesthesio- 
logical unity, etc. The things which are thought as constituted without 
reference to the Body as such (but instead only in reference to the Body as 
one material thing among others), acquire, according to the new sort of 

30 phenomenal dependencies the Body introduces, a new stratum of apprehen- [306] 
sion (a stratum belonging essentially to all constituted things) and thereby 
acquire the rank of mere "appearances" of the true things presenting 
themselves in them. The sensuously appearing thing as such, the sense-thing 


C/ pp. 63 ff. 


320 


SUPPLEMENTS 


SUPPLEMENTS 


321 


(any possible sense-thing), which previously was the thing pure and simple, 
changes its sensuous quality, its color for example, when I put on blue 
spectacles; yet the true thing, which here is but presenting itself, does not 
change its " true " quality. The sensuous quahty is not illusion but is that 
5 appearance of the true, non-sensuous quahty demanded by the given 
circumstances. The putting on of the blue spectacles changes the " normal " 
sense-thing; the circumstances of the seeing deviate from the ordinary rule. 
The normal thing counts as the thing pure and simple; i.e., its relation to 
the given circumstances (within the doxic characterization of " being") does 

10 not come to the fore as long as these circumstances remain precisely 
constant in their ordinary constellation. This normahty and abnormahty 
are interchangeable with each other, insofar as the characters of what is 
ordinary and what is out of the ordinary can exchange roles and the 
extraordinary become ordinary. In the latter case no privilege of true 

15 objectivity is constituted; instead, in the thorough functional dependence of 
the changes of the sense-things on concomitant changeable circumstances 
which now happen to be determined as such and such, something identical 
shows itself and " appears " according to these circiunstances as sensually 
qualified now this way now that way. 

20 Here also belongs the complex of dependencies of sense-things included 
under the heading health and sickness of the Body. Here, too, there is a kind 
of normality and abnormality, by means of which the manifold of appear- 
ances in its entirety, in which a sense-thing appears as unitary, is brought 
into dependency on the Body, which itself appears as a sense-thing. Hence 

25 in regulated ways all sense-things, together with their sensuous properties, and 
all their sensuous parts and moments, "involve" the sense- thing, Body. To 
the Body correspond apprehensions of a higher level, which at the very 
outset apprehend in a unitary way what appears here and there (the unity 
of any given group of sense-things), as the following expressions illustrate : 

30 if my eye is in a " normal " state, and if the circumstances are normal — i.e., 
seeing in "broad daylight" without the interference of any colored 
medium, etc. — then the object appears to me in the corresponding way; if 
my eye is in an abnormal state then the object again appears in a different 
corresponding way, in a way more or less familiar, and, insofar as the latter 

35 is the case, in a way which must be further determined in perception, 
though it is always a regulated way. None of the " sensuous quahties," e.g., 
the colors, with which ** the " object " appears," pertain to it " in itself," but 
instead each quality pertains to the object "itself" only in relation to [307f 
certain circumstances. These components of indetermination in the appre- 

40 hension indicate ways of experiental determination which in actual 
experience, insofar as it runs its course harmoniously, entail, along with the 
further determination, also a validation of the apprehension or of the 
positing of the being of the object of the sense constituted through it. If the 
object is, then it has, over and against all phenomenal colorations, the 

45 "Objective" color proper to it. That means it is in this relativism that it is 
determined how it will (or would) comport itself in experience (as object of 
its sense). This Objective color is not a sensuous color but is a nonsensuous 


unity "presenting" itself as an intentional unity in the manifold of 
sensuous data related to the resp)ective circumstances. It is only sensuous 
insofar as it is precisely something intentionally unitary that can essentially 
be given originarily only as such a unity of sense quaUties. The apprehen- 
5 sion of the higher level inserts into the sensuous (itself already a " unity " 
over against a " multipUcity ") the nonsensuous, which is to a certain extent 
an index for a relativism of dependencies of a higher level or, put noetically, 
an index for possible, determinately structured, lived experiences which in 
their actual unfolding were pervaded by consciousness of the ever richer 

10 originary givenness of the identical Objective thing. Its theoretical determi- 
nation would take us, of course, in a different direction and would require 
essentially new series of acts founded in such experiences. The Objectivity 
of this thing is still essentially related to the individually solitary subject 
and to the Body constituted for it. 

15 If we bring comprehension and its constitutive accomplishments into the 
compass of our considerations, then the Ego previously thought of as 
solitary now grasps certain of " its " Objects as "other Bodies " and in unity 
with them, other Egos, which, however, are not yet thereby constituted as 
real subjects. At first new "Objective" physical things in the pregnant 

20 sense, i.e., inter subjective things, can be constituted, and subsequently can 
be constituted Bodies as intersubjectively identifiable unities. 

We assume first of all a "normal" Ego-community and Bodies of 
"normal," i.e., typically "standard," structure; we assume them in general 
in such a way that for all Ego-subjects the same sense-things and 

25 subjective-Objective things are constituted, differing only in the way they 
are given — by way of an orientation that necessarily changes from one 
subject to another. Now, subjects can exchange their "positions." If we 
think such exchanges as having taken place, then their actual appearances 
(the actual things in the how of the modes of their sensuous appearance) [308] 

30 are exchanged also, always presupposing the same " adaption " — taken 
here in an enlarged sense that is easily understood. In this exchangeability, 
resting on comprehension, is founded the possibility of the identification of 
Objects originally relative to isolated subjects : we see the " same " Object, 
each of us from his own position, but also with the mode of appearance 

35 which would be ours if we were, instead of here, there in the other's place. 
We then add to that the dependencies manifested by the totality of the 
multiplicities of perceptual appearances which show no concordance from 
one subject to another, due to abnormal Bodily structuration (e.g., color 
blindness, congenital deafness, etc.). 

40 Thus the essence of empathetic apprehension includes the sense that my 
physical surrounding world is the same as the one of my fellow man, that 
we all have the "same" multiplicities of appearance, with the "same" 
stock of unities of appearance, with the same regulated modes of givenness 
according to possible orientations. The only difference is that each subject 

45 has a Body which is exclusively his own, with the effect that the orientation 
which is exclusively his own, along with the corresponding actual appear- 
ances, are in principle different than those of the other subject. 


322 


SUPPLEMENTS 


SUPPLEMENTS 


323 


To the possibility of intersubjective apprehension (or its noematic 
content) belongs the characteristic distribution of the ideal multiplicities of 
appearances of the things of my physical environing world (for the soUtary 
subject) which are required constitutively by it as a spatial world : whereby 
5 to each appearing spatial point there corresponds, by means of a free " I 
move in that direction and make the there into a here, into a center of 
orientation," the ideal possibility of transforming actual appearances into 
potential ones in a regulated and motivated way. Thereby I can imagine, 
for every appearing point in space, how from that standpoint "the" worid 

10 would look, whereas my Body is always hmited in its modes of appearing 
and in the case of a transposition remains at every point in space bound to 
this restricted framework. This is expressed by saying: at each point of 
space I make into a central point, my Body looks similar from a similar 
position. 

15 On the other hand, the Body is a physical thing and it is imaginable how 
it, or a body which is physically similar, would look as a center of 
orientation from any point in space whatever. If to me, being now here, is 
given in the there a body which from here looks like my Body would look 
(at least according to the general type, as regarded from here) then it is 

20 "seen" as a Body, and the potential appearances, which I would have if I 
were transposed to the there, are attributed to it as actual; i.e., an Ego as 
subject is empatheticallly apprehended with the Body, along with those 
appearances and the rest of the things that pertain to the Ego, its hved 
experiences, acts, etc. It is an other Ego since those potential appearances [309J 

25 remain for me potential and can never be actual in the unity of the stream 
of my lived experiences; they are incompatible with the actual appearances 
of things contained in this stream. My Body cannot at one and the same 
time be both here and there : the appearances which belong to the there can 
be mine only by means of a change of position, thus only in a possible 

30 future. 

In the essence of empathetic apprehension is thus included the sense that 
my physical surrounding worid is the same as that of my fellows, that we 
all have the "same ' manifolds of appearance, the only difference being 
that each subject has his own Body which is exclusively his own and 

35 consequently has an orientation which is exclusively his, along with the 
corresponding actual appearances of the physical surrounding worid as a 
selection out of the common system of possible appearances. 

Accordingly each subject has his position in the one same space, and 
each subject, as subject of a freely moving Body, can move in this common 

40 space, can exchange his position with that of his congener, and so can 
exchange his orientations and series of appearances with another's. They 
are exchanged as the similar is with the similar, not as the identical is with 
the identical; they are exchanged out of a similar system organized 
according to a typical content, while each subject yet remains ineluctably 

45 distinct from every other by means of an abyss, and no one can acquire 
identically the same appearances as those of another. Each subject has his 
stream of consciousness displaying a regularity that encompasses precisely 


all streams of consciousness, all animal subjects. The sense-things and the 
subjective-Objective thing-unities which were previously related exclusively 
to a single subject now become intersubjective — i.e., intersubjectively 
identifiable — unities, and the lived experiences of the appearances obtain a 
5 new sense-content. That is, the things as correlates of the solitary subject 
obtain a sense which becomes common for the whole group of communi- 
cating subjects : it is the same thing that I see and that the other sees, it is 
just that we see this same thing "from out of" different points of space. 
The properties of what is seen are the same, though they present themselves 

10 to each one in a correspondingly different way; and so are even the 
secondary qualities, provided we are all normal perceivers, perceiving under 
normal circumstances. Moreover, for all subjects, primary qualities are 
manifest in the secondary, and of course those are Objectively identical 
Indeed it lies in the nature of this constitutive state of affairs that 

15 communicating subjects, as long as the exchange of descriptive information 
is not opposed, apprehend the sense-things themselves as intersubjective 
identities, that they then further apprehend intersubjectively the already 
higher senses of subjective-Objective thing-unities, and finally, that the 
supplementation of the interchangeable experiences of these things with 

20 similar content by other experiences which are not present as the same in 
all subjects, and which hence are intersubjectively contradictory with regard 
to the phenomenal dependence of these differences on a different psycho- 
physical character of the subjects, makes possible a far-reaching constitu- [310] 
tion of a concordant intersubjective Objectivity, which now at the same 

25 time becomes the one valid for any single subject. 

Continuing along this path we come then to the totality of relations 
between Body and soul. Constituted together are the physical thing as 
nature, the Body as aesthesiological unity, and the soul as a founded 
reality, thus a non-selfsufficient one, with the Body as its substrate (the 

30 Body always thought constitutively only as an aesthesiological unity). In 
this series we do not come across the personal Ego, although each founded 
psychic subject is a subject of lived experiences of acts. Concerning the 
constitution of the personal Ego, it must be considered as having the Body 
as field of its free will, and especially in this respect, that the kinesthetic 

35 processes, which already provide essential contributions toward the consti- 
tution of the thing of the lowest level, are characterized as free processes, to 
which are joined, as dependent, processes of other sorts of aesthesiological 
data. And thereby is connected the possibility of apprehending the Body as 
freely moved totality of sense organs, i.e., as a complex of organs moving 

40 freely in mutual coordination. If perception is to be constitutive of a thing, 
then there must also pertain to it the possibility of Bodily movements as 
''free" movements. 

In this way we come round to the constitution of the personal Ego. 
Things are constituted for the Ego, but in unity with them the Ego is also 

45 constituted in a certain empirically familiar manner (thus in a determinate 
sort of apperception) as it relates itself to the appearing things. The Ego 
carries out perceptual activities, and here belong essentially Corporeal 


324 


SUPPLEMENTS 


SUPPLEMENTS 


325 


"activities." Concerned with appearing things, the Ego directs its sense 
organs in various ways ; it moves its eyes, carries out a changing accommo- 
dation, feels with its hand over the surface of the appearing body, etc. 


Supplement II (to Section Two, pp. 118 ff.) 

5 This old reflection on habituahty is still extremely immature; although 
everything essential is glimpsed, the description is not carried through to 
the end with precision. 

In the first place the doctrine of the pure Ego — before all else as 
pole — must be [revised?]. 

10 Just like any object-pole, the Ego-pole is a pole of identity, a center of an 
identity, and is an absolutely identical, though non-autonomous, center for 
affects and actions. 

It might already be said of affects (whose domain is the immanent sphere 
and in particular what is in the foreground there) that their sediment is a 

15 passive habituality in the Ego. That is still problematic. The Ego-pole is in [3l| 
any case an apriori center of original Ego-properties. Just as an object has 
its identity as a pole of relatively or absolutely permanent properties, and 
just as every property is something identical though non-autonomous (in 
the pole), so the same holds for the Ego. It is a pole of acts, though acts are 

20 not properties, nor are they affects. But every act, carried out " for the first 
time," becomes an " instauration " of a permanent possession lasting 
throughout immanent time (in the sense of a lasting identity). The Ego 
remains unchanged as long as it remains " of the same conviction," " of the 
same opinion." To change the conviction is to change "oneself." But 

25 throughout change and unchange the Ego remains identically the same 
precisely as pole. Where should we put the Ego of humors, of states : " I am 
in bad humor," etc.? 


Supplement III (to Section Two, p. 149, 1. 128) 

The localization of the ear noises in the ear 
30 Here we have to attend to a phenomenon of orientation, the analogon of 

the phenomenon of orientation in vision. 
Corresponding to "my" approach or withdrawal (in the free "I move") 

a visual Object changes its orientation, and Ukewise so does an acoustic 

Object, in virtue of an approximative function of different gradient found 
35 in the two senses (in the one case the visual " image," retaining its identity, 

grows in clarity and inner richness of moments when approached, in the 

other case the acoustic " image "), connected with enhancement in the area 

of accommodation. 
I can stop my ears, more or less completely, just as I can shut my eyes. 
40 Appearances that I have without accommodating to them are not Objective 

ones, nor are appearances which remain the same while the accommoda- 


tion is changing by my free movement. There is always an optimum of 
accommodation, and that is the "true" one. For every distance there is a 
different accommodation. — Null point of accommodation? Is that appro- 
priate to the noise in the ears? Yes, the moving over there, if we call that 

5 accommodation in this sphere, the bringing my ear nearer or farther away 
by moving myself— where that does not alter anything, there I have an 
Object in the Here. So it is my Body, it is a " subjective tone " in the ear, or 
it is subjective color appearances which remain unchanged and are 
localized by me in the eye. But prior to all this insertion in the Body 

10 something Uke that is in itself a null character. That is to be considered 
further. 


Supplement IV (to Section Three, pp. 181 ff.) 

Our goal, the working out of the idea of transcendental phenomenology 
in full clarity, requires a penetrating study of the relation between the [312] 

15 natural sciences and the human sciences. 

The outcome of our previous investigations is that phenomenology 
maintains a relation to every science. Each science has its object-domain 
and each has its method, i.e., its proper procedures to appropriate 
theoretically the objectivities of the domain in question. Such objectivities 

20 must first be given; the originarily giving consciousness, which corresponds 
to them, plays in each science the role of source of ultimate foundation. 
Together with this are joined the different ways of mediate foundation 
along with the concomitant noetical principles of reason. All thi& is 
material for phenomenological research: all the species of acts which the 

25 researcher of any kind of science accompUshes, all the species of meanings 
which in such acts mediate the relation to objectivities, all the modes of 
appearances in which these objectivities enter into the researcher's con- 
sciousness, all the modes of thoughtful grasping and noetical qualification 
which emerge therewith— all these become in phenomenology theoretical 

30 Objects. Phenomenology does not investigate the objects investigated by 
the researcher in other sciences; on the contrary, it investigates the total 
system of possible acts of consciousness, of possible appearances and 
meanings related to precisely those objects. All dogmatic investigation of 
objects requires transformation into a transcendental investigation. Here 

35 phenomenology, as became clear in our considerations, does not have to 
deal with each separate object or every individual discipline whatsoever, 
but it has rather to investigate the guiding lines of the principles of being 
(regional universalities) or the system of rational ontologies. Once, for 
example, the phenomenological work is done for the region of being, 

40 "nature in general," then it is equally done, in the mode of generaUty, for 
all special disciphnes of the natural sciences, and only a consideration of 
the particularities is then needed. 

If we now want to pursue further the phenomenological " clarification " ^ 


The expression ** clarification " can be employed here only conditionally. 


326 


SUPPLEMENTS 


SUPPLEMENTS 


327 


of the natural and human sciences, then still other interests are motivating 
us. Already before engaging ourselves in phenomenology, these sciences 
and the mathematical disciplines intimately entwined with them are already 
familiar to us, and they were already formed before phenomenology was 
5 established. No matter how much it is for phenomenology a matter of life 
and death that it draw its method from the data which are its own, we can 
nevertheless not obviate the danger that habitual methods we have adopted 
in those dogmatic sciences, and insights about method we have reflectively 
formed in them, will determine and confuse us at the outset in our attempt 

10 to found a pure phenomenology. If it is our concern to assure ourselves of 
the specifics of the phenomenological method, then we must also become 
clear about what distinguishes it from that which is apparently identical in 
the methods of the dogmatic sciences. Hence we are often aware of being [3 If 
forced into considerations of a comparative nature. For instance, phenom- 

15 enology describes consciousness and correlates of consciousness. But that is 
precisely what is also done by mundane scientific psychology. How then is 
phenomenological description related to mundane scientific description? Is 
phenomenological description distinct from the latter only in that it is 
eidetic whereas the mundane scientific description is empirical? Is it then 

20 the case that every phenomenological description is eo ipso transformed 
into a natural-Objective one when the eidetic attitude is abandoned? 
Conversely, is it possible that even dogmatic empirical research can become 
eidetic— insofar as empirical concretions are largely mere single examples 
of the apriori? Is that actually a transition into phenomenology? From this 

25 approach we encounter the question of the relation between a phenomenon 
logy and an ontology of nature and of the world in general. Natural science 
is either physical or biological (psychological). What is the special status of 
the descriptive psychology, based purely on inner experience, which has 
been demanded repeatedly since the last third of the 19th century, 

30 especially since Brentano (psychognosis) and Dilthey (descriptive, analytic 
psychology)? This psychology certainly accepts the project of a descriptive 
analysis of consciousness and its data. So it seems that within psychology 
itself we encounter phenomenology and that eidetic phenomenology has to 
be inserted into eidetic psychology as a part of it. Doubtlessly, there is an 

35 element of truth expressed here (but certainly not the pure truth), and 
connected with this is the fact that descriptive psychology offers a genuine 
and natural point of departure for the working out of the idea of phenome- 
nology. This was in fact the way which led me to phenomenology. On the 
other hand, it is to be fully estabUshed in a deeper investigation that 

40 phenomenology the way we understand it — as eidetic, but, at the same 
time, as resting on the transcendental reduction — is in no way descriptive 
psychology and has, in strict truth, not even one part in common with it. 
That, however, does not mean to deny the fact that a transcendental- 
phenomenological attitude can be coordinated with each and every imma- 

45 nent-descriptive attitude by means of certain, essentially available, apper- 
ceptive transformations, and so is justified what we said above about the 
*' element of truth " in the rejected view. It is obvious that this not only 


holds for ^w/?/r/ca/-descriptive psychology compared with our phenomeno- 
logy (which is indeed supposed to be an eidetic discipline), but it also 
applies to eidetic or rational psychology. In other words : the idea of our 
pure phenomenology does not coincide at all with the equally necessary, 

5 although up to now not explicitly realized, idea of a rational psychology [314] 
(namely with regard to an eidetic-descriptive infrastructure which belongs 
to such a psychology). The transition from the empirical-psychological to 
the eidetic-psychological does not require any previous transcendental 
reduction of the former and consequently does not lead to the eidetic- 

10 phenomenological. It is of the highest importance, however, not only for 

practical and methodological reasons but also for theoretical-scientific and 

philosophical reasons, to make these relations perfectly clear, and to this 

task we dedicate our forces. 

With regard to the relation of phenomenology to the human sciences, a 

15 relation which is surely problematic with respect to psychology, quite 
analogous questions emerge. There are those who oppose phenomenology 
to psychology; others want to take them together and unify them. These 
views are not yet clarified and are, as is well known, the subject of much 
debate. Only phenomenology can decide here, and specifically by means of 

20 phenomenological analyses of the kind we have accomplished up to now, 
for they are preconditions for the grounding of a systematic science of 
phenomenology. Phenomenology is highly interested in the decisive solu- 
tion of these questions, insofar as it is the very element of the life of 
phenomenology to acquire a fully conscious clarity about itself, and this 

25 urgently requires that the sense of human science and psychology be fully 
clarified. If the characteristic essence of human science is grasped in its 
purity and if then it is grasped as something other than natural-scientific 
psychology and the disciplines dependent on it, there results a new way into 
phenomenology and a much better one, more far-reaching than the way 

30 from psychology. 

However, the constitution of an eidetics of the spirit (rather than of 
psychic nature in the psychological sense) immediately presses toward the 
view that phenomenology is a discipUne included therein. Again the 
question arises concerning the justification of such an inclusion. In a more 

35 penetrating investigation, the present state of affairs emerges as one that is 
different than the one which resulted from a comparison of phenomenology 
and psychology, since here it is clear that in the case of a very broad and at 
the same time thoroughly concrete grasp of the idea of an eidetics of the 
spirit, the latter in fact encompasses all of phenomenology, just as— in a 

40 certain interpretation, with, so to say, a change of sign — on the other hand 
it also encompasses all ontologies and all apriori disciplines whatever. In 
connection with the investigations we have to devote to this problem, we 
will be able to settle the question that is so important for the self- 
understanding of phenomenology, the question of the relation between 

45 phenomenology and ontology as well as the question of the relation between 
the method of phenomenology and the universal scientific- theoretical method 
of intuitive "clarification " of unclear concepts and principles. In this relation [315] 


328 


SUPPLEMENTS 


SUPPLEMENTS 


329 


it will be shown that the universal task of the clarification of all 
concepts — understood in the universality of principles — and the correla- 
tive task, to be accomplished in the most perfect intuition, of the eidetic 
analysis and eidetic description of all objectivities and all kinds of unity 
5 pertaining essentially to them, coincide with phenomenology. Individual 
clarification is not a work of phenomenology as a science, individual 
analysis in the sphere of intuition is not a phenomenological analysis, but it 
becomes such as soon as it enters into the compass of a systematic analysis 
and eidetic description of the totality of possible intuitive data. It would 

10 then be apparent that (eidetically descriptive) phenomenology has the 
status of the fundamental philosophical science, hence that phenomenolog- 
ical philosophy and philosophy in general must be one and the same. And 
in that case it would also become clear that philosophy and intuitive 
philosophy must equally count as the same, provided the word intuition is 

15 given its proper sense. This sense cannot be ascertained before phenome- 
nology, but only through it. More precisely, if one takes into account what 
resides in the most original sense of philosophical intuition and what kind 
of intuition and mode of intuitive research is required by it, then, in 
consistent thinking, one necessarily arrives at the phenomenological atti- 

20 tude and the recognition of a great science, on which all philosophizing 
must be based if it is to occur at all, precisely phenomenology in our sense. 
If, however, one goes beyond the idea of an eidetic-descriptive phenome- 
nology, projected originally in the first part of Ideas, to a systematic 
development of all the deductive consequences which reside in it, then one 

25 arrives at the universal system of an apriori, which encompasses all 
conceivable apriori sciences, but as products of phenomenology, founded 
purely subjectively and eidetically on absolute data. As a further conse- 
quence, though now going back to the empirical, hence to what is factual, 
one comes to a universal system of absolutely grounded sciences which can 

30 even be designated as universal and naturally enlarged phenomenology. 


Supplement V (to pp. 207 f.) 

The pregivennesses of the spirit or of spirits, of individualities of a higher 
level in the life of the spirit. 

We make up a normal human community, within which, however, 
35 abnormal men can be found and, in addition, levels of various depth. 

1.) before all, normal intuitive spatio-temporal nature, especially the 
earth and for each circle of men their determinate earthly environment, 
inorganic as well as organic. [31^ 

2.) men and animals in determinate movable spatio-temporal distribu- 
40 tions, constituted this or that way, at rest, working, etc. 

3.) goods: works of art, implements, etc. Naturally useful things. Works, 
tools, etc. All of which refer back to spiritual works of the past and the 
future. 

4.) morals and customs, laws, religion, language, unions and statutes of 


unions, various society units with their particular norms, freely established 
by the preference of the society (contracts), conventions in these unities, 
classes, professional circles, etc. 

Social personalities, the social forms of community which are not full 
5 personalities and which are not societies of will and action (linguistic 
communities, national communities without a national "will" and their 
correlates). 

Genesis, spiritual origins. Origin of the single individuahty, ongins of 

higher spiritual individuaUties. How the correlative surrounding worlds are 

10 constituted in ever new levels, in which what was already constituted 

becomes a pregiven objectivity. Types of individualities, solitary individuals 

and social individualities, and how they arise. The human type of an epoch, 

of a nation, of a professional circle in an epoch, etc. 

Biography: description of an individuahty in its development. Always 

15 already an individual type. 

History: description of the unity and development of a sociality enclosed 
in itself with unitary correlates. 

Social transformations, types within a development, types of the sociah- 
ties which are developing and types of community-formations. 
20 Art and the development of art; science and its development. Develop- 
ment of irreal objectivities as constituted givennesses. 

Development of humanity, of the way of its inner life. The type of its 
individualities, its people, languages, arts, sciences, religions. The directions 
of development, tendencies of development; ideas as motivations for 
25 development, aims of development, God in history. 

Development of man as man of a "lower" level. Development of 
sensibility. Development of nature as correlate. Origin of man out of the 
animal. 


Supplement VI (to Section Three, pp. 223 ff.) 

30 Inspectio sui 

What do I encounter as Ego and what as counter-Ego, as not-Ego, as 
foreign to mel 

Things are over and against me, not-I, foreign to me. P^/l 

Even my Body is over against me— as body but not as Body; what 
35 Strikes my hand, my Body, strikes "me."— The sting in my hand: I am 
stung, the sting is unpleasant to me. The warmth of the room flows 
through my body, is pleasant to me. 

Ego as subject of pleasure and displeasure, Ego as subject of " acts." I 

pay attention, I grasp, I take together by collecting, I compare, I analyze, 

40 I believe, I doubt, I am inclined to belief, I decide affirmatively, I reject, I 

consider, I evaluate, I waiver in my evaluating and then decide, and 

likewise for willing. 

But acts are subjective in quite a different sense than my Body is. My 
Body is at one time an Object foreign to me, is over and against me just as 


330 


SUPPLEMENTS 


SUPPLEMENTS 


331 


much as other things are, when it is taken precisely as a Corporeal body, as 
that thing there which is in fact a thing hke any other. The Body is, 
however, also the bearer of fields of sensation, etc. If I stick something into 
a piece of wax, then I do not have any " sting "-sensation in my field of 
5 touch, the way I do have if it is my Body that is stung. 

Thus sensations are subjective, but in quite a different way than acts are. 
I have sensations — it is in quite a different way that I carry out acts. The 
Corporeal body as bearer of sense-data " localized " in it, as substrate of 
fields of sensation, is subjective in a metaphorical sense; but in addition it 

10 is a field of free movement, and indeed in such a way that in certain fields 

of sensation free processes are produced, to which then are joined similar 

ones in other fields as consequences, apperceived, all in all, as " I move my 

hand, my foot," etc. 

But this connection points back to the fact that whatever is in itself 

15 completely foreign to the Ego, every thing, is given through "appear- 
ances;" and appearances, sensations in unity with concomitant apprehen- 
sions, "images," are subjective. But what sort of subjectivity is this? It is of 
course quite different than that of the Ego-acts. I see a tree, I "have" 
appearances, images. I look the tree over, I touch it all over : I experience 

20 courses of movement-sensations (in the eye; or, for touch, in the moving 
hand), and these Uved experiences are not only lived experiences of courses 
of events but have the character of an " I do." Everything changeable in the 
immediate " I do " is originally subjective. Thereby the images do not take 
their course in just any way, but in a consistent way, as images of one and 

25 the same thing and in sequences of fulfillment, tendencies of transition, and 
to this is connected the stimulus to pay attention, the stimulus to observe 
from every angle. The Object attracts, stimulates, wants to be considered. I 
as subject of the voluntary or involuntary "I do." 


Supplement VII (to Section Three, p. 224 to p. 245) [3l8| 

30 The Ego and its over-and-against 

Everything originarily proper to the subject is unified in the Ego and 
belongs consequently on the side of the Ego. Everything else is over and 
against it. We have here, with respect to all constituted "things" and 
"matters," an asymmetrical, non-reversible relation. I can indeed say that 

35 the Ego is over and against the thing, but then the "over and against" 
loses its specific sense. Only an Ego can have an over-and-against in the 
sense in question here. It can of course also function itself as such an 
over-and-against. In that case, as Ego it has its over-and-against and is at 
the same time an over-and-against for another Ego or is its own over- 

40 and-against in reflection. But the non-Ego, the Object that is no subject, is 
what it is only as an over-and-against, only as something constituted in 
relation to an Ego or to an open Ego-multiplicity and its originally 
egological characters. 


The Ego is itself over and against itself, is itself for itself, is constituted in 
itself. Each Ego can also be over and against one or more other Egos, a 
constituted Object for them, apprehended by them, experienced by them, 
etc. But it is also constituted precisely for itself and has its constituted 

5 surrounding world as non-Ego, as mere "Objects," which exist only as 
constituted for an Ego and never as constituting themselves, as Ego. One 
must never confuse being-an-Object, in general, (a special case of which is 
the peculiar Objectivity of the not-I, and so is the being of the Ego as in an 
extended sense being-an-Object for itself), with being-attended-to, being the 

10 Object of theses, of position-takings, on the part of what exists as Ego. For 
the latter presupposes the former. I "become" an object for myself — an 
object of my attention, etc. But I am an Object for myself only insofar as I 
have " self-consciousness," even if I do not reflect. If I did not have this 
self-consciousness then I would not be able to reflect. Likewise, prior to 

1 5 every act of attention there is by essence a constitutive consciousness of the 
objectivity in question. 

It is now evident and beyond discussion that what is most proper to the 
Ego is something experienced in or at the Body, that it is something unified 
with the Body in the manner of a constituted stratum within a constituted 

20 Objectivity. Each such Objectivity and stratum indeed belongs on the side 
of the not-Ego, the over-and-against, which has sense only as the over- 
and-against of an Ego. Thus if I regard an animal or a man as " nature," 
then that is, together with the totality of nature and all its bodies. Bodies, 
and animals, precisely nature, thing, non-Ego. 

25 This is no more than a beginning, however. Much is still lacking for a 
full understanding of the distinction we are bringing out here between the 
Ego as person, as subject of its surrounding world, as subject of various 
objectivities, especially as subject of real nature, constituted for it in such 
and such a way, and as subject that experiences nature, is affected by it, 

30 forms it, etc. — and, on the other hand, the human being as Object of 

nature, the human subject, with soul and psychic qualities as occurrences in [319] 
nature. What is lacking is, for instance, an understanding of the relation- 
ship between the " pure Ego," earlier taken as a structural moment of all 
cogitations and afterwards still very much utilized, and the Ego as person, 

35 for the pure Ego must indeed be designated the subject of all Objects. What 
is lacking is an understanding of the insertion into space and time, which 
the person also attributes to himself, whereas he at the same time posits his 
Body and all nature as not-Ego over and against himself. Was it not 
claimed with respect to the psychic Ego that it owes its insertion into the 

40 spatio-temporal world to its being founded in the physical Body? Is the 
psychic Ego not the person in a naturaUstic apperception? — precisely an 
apperception requiring still deeper clarification. In addition, how can the 
personal Ego, whose essence it is to have its not-Ego over and against itself, 
apperceive itself as unified with a not-Ego? How can it, while remaining the 

45 personal Ego, posit itself over and against the non-naturalized Ego as 
something naturalized? Furthermore, does not the Ego as person require 
the Ego as Thou, i.e., an over-and-against that is itself an Ego? Is it just a 


332 


SUPPLEMENTS 


SUPPLEMENTS 


333 


matter of the empirical accident of communicative interchange that such 
words as Ego are coined, words that intimate conmiunicative relationships ; 
or is it a relation belonging to the essence of personal Objectivation (the 
subjectivating Objectivation) which is thereby expressed? Is this the essence 
5 of the person, that it can be constituted only in a personal association; i.e., 
does the word "person" designate a kind of being that is in principle 
relative — similar to "material thing," which is what it is only within a 
possible thingly nexus? — 

The positing of the fellow man. Let us take the following path in order to 

10 progress a step or two. We considered earlier how the Ego fmds itself as 
person. Let us inquire into how we find over and against ourselves our 
fellow men not as natural Objects but as persons, as free Ego-subjects, as 
partners. Thereby we shall also inquire into how the attitude changes in the 
transition from the naturalistic to the personahstic consideration of the 

15 fellow man. (We think here always of a consistent attitude and indeed one 
that is theoretically interested.) Common to both attitudes is the givenness 
of the fellow man through comprehension, but that functions differently in 
the two cases. In the one case, what is comprehended is nature; in the 
other, spirit. In the one case, what is consistently posited is the other's Ego, 

20 lived experience, and consciousness as a real determination of a real himian 
being, built on the fundamental apprehension and positing of material 
nature, as something really-causally dependent on it, consequently as 
something attached to it. In the theoretical attitude, accompUshing consis- 
tent experience and experiential research, we find here as our thematic 

25 domain the one nature or world of reahties with the real physio-psychic 
unities (of animal nature) contained in it. In the other case, the Ego, and 
specifically as person, is "posited purely and simply" and thereby posited 
as subject of its personal environment, as related, by means of understand- [32(| 
ing and empathy, to other persons as partners in a social nexus, to which 

30 corresponds a unitary social surrounding world, whereas at the same time 
each one of them has his own environment bearing the stamp of his own 
subjectivity. 

What is the sense of this "pure and simple" positing of the person and 
of the personal surrounding world as its correlate? For is it not, as one will 

35 immediately ask, through the comprehension in which the other person is 
given that he is posited in relation to his Body and as one with it? Suppose 
we are within a society. Looking about naively, we find in front of our eyes 
things, Bodies, people. But Bodies are also things; unified with them and 
expressed in them we find personal hfe. In empathy we apprehend persons. 

40 We address ourselves to them, just as they address themselves to us. We 
determine them, they determine us. What we have here is not two things, 
intertwined with each other extrinsically. Rather, what we find here is 
intrinsically one. The persons are the men themselves who enter into 
personal relations with us ; and Bodies are included in the human unity. All 

45 that is correct. Similarly, the unity given in this way is not a naturalistic 
unity, any more than. . . (this manuscript continues on p. 245, 1. 37). 


Supplement VIII (to Section Three, p. 248) 

It is just like reading a newspaper: the paper imprinted with sensory- 
intuitive marks is unified with the sense expressed and understood in the 
word-signs. Likewise in the case of any other hterary offering, whether it be 

5 spoken, written, etc. It has as it were a sensuous Body for a spiritual 
meaning that is grasped by way of understanding ; "Spirit" and "Body" 
are unified in a particular way in terms of appearances. The objectivity 
designated just now as "Body" is altogether something given in pure and 
simple intuition, in mere secondary qualities ; in these and in no others it is 

10 "there" precisely for the one who understands, and it belongs to his 
environment. Only as such an environing Objectivity does it become for 
him relevant for the functions of " understanding" or "expression" he has 
to exercise. But the relations are of course not altogether the same, and in 
addition a more profound analysis shows that all such comprehensive 

15 unities refer back to the unity of Body and spirit in the ordinary and most 
proper sense. But the reference to them can at the same time serve to make 
clearer the character of the unity which interests us here. The human 
Body... (continued on p. 256, 1. 17). 


Supplement IX (to Section Three, p. 252) 

20 This applies furthermore also to all human products in visible reality. As [321] 
products of the animated Body, they are animated just as any thingly 
process produced, stimulated, or elicited by human agency : a stroke that is 
aimed, a stick wielded, a book written, etc., take on the spirituaUty of the 
Body. The movement of a machine has its spirituality just as the machine 

25 itself has. Each work, each product, each action expresses an activity and is 
characterized as work, as act: one sees how the cigar is rolled, one 
discovers therein the expression of a manipulation and, on the other hand, 
the "visible" aim. The handwriting, each stroke in it, its "ductus/' bears 
the stamp of the operative spirit. In short, products and works are again 

30 psycho-physical unities ; they have their physical and their spiritual aspects, 
they are physical things that are " animated. " 


Supplement X (to Section Three, pp. 259 ff.) 

Personal Ego and surrounding world 
This will come to be understood still much better if we engage ourselves 

35 in a consideration of the relation of reciprocal determination between the 
personal subject and its surrounding world: for example, the personal 
subject's being determined in function of the values of an Object of the 
surrounding world, namely through its valuable properties, its beautiful 
color or form etc., and, conversely, the determination of the Object of the 

^ surrounding world by the subject, e.g., by the free movement of the subject, 
though what is moved immediately is the Body. 


334 


SUPPLEMENTS 


SUPPLEMENTS 


335 


First of all, however, we again ask the question : what comprises the pure 
and simple positing of the personal subject, the "spirit;" i.e., in what 
consists the straightforward attitude towards the personal subject? The 
answer is : while living in the understanding of the Body which appears in 
5 our environment, we posit the spirit, the person, exactly as it is given in 
comprehension, and it is given in comprehension in a way that is essentially 
analogous to the way in which each of us is given to himself in the 
"inspectio sui," as " spirit" of his Body and of the rest of his transcendent 
surrounding world, similarly as subject of the things he sees, of his ever 

10 changing appearances of his "external" things and again as Ego-subject of 
his acts and states (in the "sum cogitans") as accomplishing them, as 
active, passive, receptive, etc. The difference, however, consists in this, that 
in the inspectio I perceive my subjective surrounding world insofar as it is a 
material world, whereas I do not perceive the subjective material world of 

15 the other: I understand it by empathy and I identify it with my surround- 
ing world according to the things we have reciprocally in common. The 
distinctive characteristic of the material surrounding world consists in its 
being, in original constitution, the surrounding world of the individual 
subject, i.e., one constituted in his perceptions, and consequently in the 

20 appearances of the things as he sees them (and in whatever other 

sense-appearances of things he has), and finally in his appearances of things [3^ 
as full and complete. Each person has therefore, along with his perceptions 
and perceptual nexuses, the things of his material surrounding world (they 
are the same as those which subsequently, from the standpoint of the 

25 naturahstic apprehension, come to count as "appearances" of physicalistic 
things), and these things first come to intersubjective identification in 
comprehension. And then we claim: we "see" the same things, with the 
only difference that each one sees them from his own standpoint, with an 
orientation and, in general, with a mode of appearance which can never be 

30 the same as the other's at one and the same time. 

In more precise terms, with respect to the same things of the intersubjec- 
tive material surrounding world, the perceptions of any one person are for 
essential reasons different in content from the simultaneous ones of any 
other person ; appearing things in their mode of appearance are in principle 

35 peculiar to each experiencer in the same present. The situation can also be 
expressed by saying that in the most proper sense each person sees in his 
perceptions the sensory-intuitive unities constituted in them exclusively, and 
thus they are his own. It is not through mere seeing (through mere "sense" 
perception), but through the comprehension founded therein, that the 

40 intersubjectively "perceived" thing is constituted originally as a unity of a 
higher level. Even if this thing is not perceived in the primary and stricter 
sense — ^ insofar as we understand by perception mere seeing, touching, etc., 
in which is constituted the mere " sense-thing," bound completely to the 
individual subject, as a unity in the changing of his, this subject's, changing 

45 images (apparencies) — yet talk of perception as regards the intersubjective 
thing is justified to this extent, that it is constituted originally in those 
founded acts (and in principle only in such ones), and thus, in other words. 


it comes to givenness originarily in them. But we are used to designating 
quite universally any lived experience in which an individual being comes to 
originary givenness as perception and to employ the word "seeing" 
accordingly. 
5 We have said that everyone perceives sensorially and on the lowest level 
his subjective surrounding world, insofar as he lives only his own sense-data 
and his own apprehensions, and no one can hve those of another and can 
never have ones that are completely like another's. This leads to the further 
consequence that everyone has his stream of lived experience, his acts and 

10 states, to which he can, in the inspectio, direct his reflective gaze, and 
everyone has his pure Ego and hkewise his personal Ego, which we have 
distinguished from the pure Ego. Let us think of comprehension, grasping 
it as actively performed. But in comprehension what each one can grasp is 
other persons, in unity with the sensory perception of the other Bodies as 

1 5 Corporeal bodies of his physical surrounding world, and he perceives them 
in an original understanding of their "meaning," and specifically as 
analogous of his own Ego of the inspectio. Thus the other is thereby given 
again as " Ego," one that encounters its Body as aesthesiological unity, and [323] 
likewise as the free field of the other's " I move," as center of orientation of 

20 his sensuous things, appearing in an eminent manner over and against the 
things in his environment, things that in general are the "same" as the 
ones I have over and against me but now are oriented to my Body, the 
Body given to me as mine. The predominant relations here and the only 
problematic ones are those of the Ego to its acts, in which it lives and 

25 precisely in virtue of which it relates to its surrounding world, the latter 
determining its comportment and in turn being determined by that 
comportment. This surrounding world has its universal sense and relations, 
which first of all arise in comprehension, namely the sense of an " Objec- 
tive" surrounding world, which presupposes genetically the merely subjec- 

30 tive surrounding world as primal constitution. 

In this connection we need to consider not only the Objective physical 
world, but rather we also need to recall the relation in which, again in 
virtue of comprehension, an Ego arises for an other, a person for another 
person. The primary cardinal opposition between Ego and non-Ego (as 

35 Object foreign to me) prior to all comprehension determines also the 
cardinal distinctions in the relation between the Ego and the material 
surrounding world and between the Ego and the personal surrounding 
world : thus in the last analysis between the Ego and an other Ego, over 
and against the former and yet still an Ego, precisely an "other." My Ego 

40 is given to me in a totally different manner than a physical thing is; it is not 
adumbrated through sensations, its states are in consciousness, and are 
lived, as one with their being; they do not merely "present" themselves as 
unities, which indeed as self-presenting would refer back to lived experi- 
ences in which they would appear through presentation. In the nexus of the 

45 conscious lived experiences of the Ego as a nexus of absolute givennesses, 
the Ego manifests itself absolutely; in the flux of its immanent life, in the 
determinate manner of its immanent course of life, it manifests its empirical 


336 


SUPPLEMENTS 


SUPPLEMENTS 


337 


personal unity, its "individuality." Thus the egological states are "abso- 
lute" states; that is, they are not merely constituted in relation to absolutes 
(lived experiences) as intentional unities of them. What the Ego is given to 
itself as, that is precisely how the other Ego is understood in his Body, in 
5 virtue of the analogizing comprehension ; it is therefore given in absolute 
manifestation, in self-manifestation, simply, straightforwardly, without 
appearances. In that way Ego enters into relation with Ego : as something 
absolutely self-manifesting with an other absolutely manifest to itself. And 
just as the individual person is a unity of absolute manifestation, so also is 

10 every kind of social unity manifesting itself as a unity of a higher level in 
the individual persons founding it as subjects of certain nexuses of acts. ' It 
manifests itself in states which consist of reciprocal relations of empathy [32| 
between the individual subjects involved, and Ukewise these are not unities 
of appearance nor are they constituted through adumbrational "presenta- 

15 tion." All personal unities of a lower or higher level belong together 
therefore from the radical viewpoint of the mode of their constitution^ and 
likewise so do, from another side, all that is impersonal in the surrounding 
world, all material objectivities; the latter are constituted as relative, the 
former as absolute. 

20 The levels of the constitution of Objective reality 

In a marvelous fashion, the levels of constitution of reality are built on 
one another: the individual Ego, encountering only itself absolutely, 
constitutes in sequences of levels of appearances its "external" world, a 
world of appearances that is transcendent, though relative, to it. By way of 

25 the comprehension of the Bodies appearing to it therein, it grasps other 
Egos as absolutely self-manifesting unities, it finds itself in an association of 
personal unities and enters into mutual understanding with them. Along 
with this is constituted, on the one hand, " Objective " physical nature as an 
identical unity, and over and against it the subjective worlds (i.e., the 

30 separate worlds constituted for the individual subjects posited in a compre- 
hensive relation) which are constituting manifolds. On the other hand, 
through the interweavings of mutual understanding, social personalities of 
a higher degree are constituted, related to the common Objective surround- 
ing world as the world to which henceforth all persons find themselves 

35 related socially and also as singular individuals. It is the world of their 
socially significant and perhaps also socially performed labor, and in 
general it is the world constituted in a manifold of specifically social acts 
whose sense includes communalities. 

However, a world which is still differently constituted is intertwined with 

40 it. When persons find over against themselves other persons related to the 
world they have in common, then they can also carry out those changes in 


• This is too fast. There are indeed new kinds of unities, in the unities of 
primordial manifestation, that we call Egos, self-giving, though still in a peculiar 
manner. This is not "appearance," but is in fact quite analogous to primordial 
manifestation. This must be examined more closely. 


apprehension we have designated as the naturaUstic attitude. They can take 
as one with the appearing Bodies the persons grasped comprehensively in 
them and can then apprehend these unities in a naturahzing way. What is 
then given are not the pure, absolutely self-manifesting unities we call 
5 persons, related only to the phenomenal Objects constituted as surrounding 
world, but what is given are in a certain way apperceptive transformations 
of these, which now themselves have taken on the character of unities of 
appearance. The personal subject residing in the psychophysical unity — the 
psychic subject with psychic quaUties and states in the sense of natural- 

10 scientific psychology — has assumed, in virtue of the new apperception, 
which requires causal intertwining with the Body, moments that can be 
constituted only in the constitutive connection with the real that is given 
through appearances (by means of an adumbrative presentation), and that [325] 
are hence, even if only in a mediate way, of a natural kind, belonging to the 

15 order of appearances. The realm of nature is the realm of the "phenom- 
enal;" that means here the realm of the real unities constituted in or by 
means of "presentation." The realm of the spirit, however, is the realm of 
the reahties given in absolute manifestation (self-manifestation and mani- 
festation through comprehension), realities having behind themselves only 

20 the pure Ego as the irreal, absolute substrate of all manifestation of 
reaUty. 

The relation of person to person, of human being to human being, in the 
world of the spirit is hence essentially different from the relation between 
human beings in nature; and it is again essentially different from the 

25 relation between persons and human beings as natural Objects (e.g.. 
Objects of zoology or of psychology as a natural science). The human being 
in the personal world (the world of spirit, we also say, as the domain of the 
human sciences) is the unity of Body as expression of spirit and of spirit 
as expressed in the Body, as it is given in the personaHstic attitude. One can 

30 even speak here of a founded unity insofar as the spirit is comprehended on 
the basis of the perception of the Body (in which, being merely sensuous, 
the Body is given as a mere sensuous thing), and of course the unity of 
Body and spirit is also a founded unity. ^ 

Pure Ego and personal Ego^ 

35 It is now time to raise to clarity the distinction between pure Ego and 
personal Ego presupposed all along. The former is, according to our earlier 
presentation, the pure subject of each cogito in the unity of a stream of 
lived experiences, in each of which something absolutely identical steps 
forth and again steps back, but without being generated or passing away. 

40 We grasp this Ego hence in reflection, in which we grasp pure conscious- 
ness (the one purified in the transcendental reduction) and from which we 
take the Ego residing in it but not "manifesting" itself. This Ego is not a 
reaUty and so does not have real properties. The personal Ego, on the 


' The paragraph appended here in the manuscript can be found on p. 259, U. 
5-14. 

2 C/ § 57, bearing the same title (pp. 259 ff.). 


338 


SUPPLEMENTS 


SUPPLEMENTS 


339 


contrary, is indeed a reality, and this in conformity with the concept of 
reality we have fixed and clarified. The original sense of the word "real" 
refers to things of nature, and nature can be understood here as the nature 
appearing sensuously in relation to the individual subject, on a higher level 

5 it can be understood as the imperfectly Objective nature related appercep- 
tively to an open nexus of " normally " experiencing subjects, or, finally, it 
can be understood as nature in the sense of natural science, the ultimate 
and perfectly Objective nature. Spiritual realities stand over against all 
these levels of natural objectivities that are connected together constitu- 

10 lively. Spiritual " substance " is fundamentally different from thingly " sub- 
stance," whereby substance is here only another expression for "real [32^ 
object," bearer of real properties. 

We already know one aspect of the make-up of the distinction : natural 
realities are unities of "appearances," and the appearances belong to 

15 Ego-subjects, which in turn are themselves apprehensible as realities, but as 
realities which are unities of absolute manifestation. The latter, however, 
means that they manifest themselves in absolute consciousness, which, as 
manifesting consciousness, experiences the apprehension as a state of 
spiritual unity. What we now need is the clarification of the determinate 

20 way in which this manifestion is possible, and what the "real circum- 
stances" here consist in, to which the idea of reality as unity of real 
properties is related. After all our analyses, the answer is easily given. 
Already through the relation which belongs to the idea of pure Ego, 
already through the objective correlate which comes to consciousness in the 

25 cogito as its cogitatum, we have a relation to objectivity pertaining to the 
essence of the pure Ego and consequently to every Ego. For the personal 
Ego, which is constituted as a comprehensive unity, this means that Ego 
and surrounding world belong together and are inseparable from each 
other. The Ego has the surrounding world over and against itself, both as 

30 the natural world of things and as the personal world, of which it is a 
personal member. As we have seen earlier in our descriptions, the Ego 
carries out, with regard to what is first given in the surrounding world, the 
things and persons standing over and against it perceptually, certain active 
modes of comportment: it evaluates, it desires, it acts, it forms things 

35 creatively, or it comports itself theoretically in experience and research, etc. 
Likewise it comports itself as passive, it undergoes "effects" from the 
things and the persons, it finds itself determined by them to positive or 
negative evaluation, to a desiring or a rejecting, etc. It finds itself 
"influenced" by persons, it "compUes with them," it accepts commands 

40 from them or it gives them commands, etc. 

From the standpoint of pure consciousness all this is reduced to 
intentional hved experiences together with their concomitant intentional 
correlates, and with regard to all these lived experiences the pure Ego is 
something identical. As subject of all such modes of comportment, 

45 however, the pure Ego assumes a realizing apprehension that can be 
performed by a new act of the pure Ego in relation to itself and to its past 
modes of comportment of which it is conscious in memory, or that can also 


be performed by a pure Ego in acts of comprehension as regards an other 
Ego. That is to say, each pure Ego, as identical subject of its pure 
consciousness, can be apprehended as something which has its determi- 
nately specific modes of relating to its surrounding world, its determinate 
5 way of letting itself be motivated by it in active and passive kinds of 
comportment; and everyone who has developed to maturity apprehends 
himself in that way, is aware of himself as a person. 

The meaning of personal apprehension, the correlate of which is personal 

reality, shows itself, as is the case with every other basic kind of 

10 apprehension, in the corresponding experience exhibiting it. If we interro- [327] 

gate this experience, then we encounter throughout a determinate type of 

comportment toward the common interpersonal surrounding world. On the 

foundation of the entire stream of lived experience, through which is 

constituted for the present subject its surrounding world (world of things 

15 and personal surrounding worid), an identical real Ego-subject manifests 

itself, and as identical it is manifest in relation to real circumstances : what 

functions as the latter are exclusively the things or persons and their 

qualities and relations, etc., of which the subject is conscious as objective 

reality (for instance, what is. actually experienced by the subject or what is 

20 reproductively given as existing (positional consciousness) either in clear or 

obscure presentifications or in mediate positing in thought). It is obvious 

that these things and persons are constituted as intersubjective unities; 

hence they are not considered merely as constitutive correlates of an 

individual Subject, as exhibitable in the mere multiplicities of experience of 

25 this individual subject. The person as such is related to the intersubjectively 

constituted worid, which is one for all subjects and to which the person is 

joined by means of comprehension. In this intentional world of things and 

persons (at first subjects, which all subsequently become apprehensible in a 

real way as persons) reside the real circumstances in which subjects exercise 

30 and undergo "causality" and in which they (according to the regulated 

character of this causality, which is precisely constitutive for the genuine 

sense of causality and consequently also of substantiality) preserve their 

identical substance, the identity of the person. 

The world as the sphere of influence of persons : that is a constitutive 

35 correlation which, as is evident, is connected quite closely with the 

correlation between reality itself (real substance) and causality in the special 

sense at issue here. To each reality belongs (for once to use the word in 

another, somewhat enlarged, sense) a " surrounding world " of realities as 

the domain of the real circumstances of its influence or, as we can also say, 

^ as its field of influence; conversely, each reality then also belongs to the 

field of influence of its "partners" in this "surrounding world." Hence in 

our case, too, the correlate of personal reality or substance is its real 

surrounding world, and the latter is now a dualistic one, composed of 

things and persons. To be sure, it is evident here that the many kinds of 

realities are themselves essentially bound to each other by means of a 

correlation : the reality of persons demands the reality of things, and the 

reality of things equally demands that of persons. 


340 


SUPPLEMENTS 


SUPPLEMENTS 


341 


Supplement XI (to Section Three, pp. 277 ff.) 


Theme : 

The human being apprehended in an inductive-natural way — the empirical 
real, this human being, this person — is not the Ego of faculties, is not the [32^ 
5 person himself, and in particular is not the free person. 

Thinking of myself in my action, running through it, so to say, 
quasi-repeating it, I experience the "I am free," '*I can do it." But how is 
that? Not as mere doxological possibihty (possibihty of phantasy). On the 
basis of this empty ideal possibility is built (again as ideally possible) a 

10 practical consent and the insight that from the fiat the action " would come 
forth " eventually. On the other hand, there exist the ideal possibilities of 
unfree restraint, distraction, etc. And again, ideal possibilities that in spite 
of a strong counter-affection, the "I do" still would proceed or that, 
unimpeded by it, I would act freely and not be deterred. I then grasp the 

15 essence of the " I resist," " I engage my Ego-power (power of action)," and 
of the " I do," " the action has its source in the Ego itself." In precisely this 
way I grasp the essence of the negative /ztzr : " I refuse to give my practical 
consent to the distracting stimulus," But also the tension between both 
these " powers," the upsurge of the activity of the will (the intensity of the 

20 power of action, of Ego-power) over and against the mounting stimulus 
(intensity of affection, of passive power, which is something negative over 
and against the positive affection and Ego-power). 

If both are involved, then something which affects the senses is chosen ; 
where there are no counter tendencies the power of action is minimal. 

25 The question is whether all this is sufficient. Do I have a consciousness of 
factual freedom on the basis of the experience that I acted, or that I often 
gave my practical consent? Hence in the mode of an experiential appercep- 
tion? 

E.g., freedom: I can weave thoughts, I can choose to think of anything I 

30 want, I can frame the hypothesis that it is this way and not that way. I 

make a beginning and if need be I can change the beginrting again into a 

neutrality modification, and I know with certainty that I can do it, based 

on experience. 

But is it always experience, mere experience? I resist such an assump- 

35 tion. 

By immersing myself in the form of neutrality I can reUve the restricting 
power of affection and can, so to say, measure it and accordingly 
quasi-produce the tension of the active power necessary for there to be an 
overcoming. But I can also see that I, as I am factually, cannot summon 

40 this power, it will be beyond me. If I hypothesize, with regard to my 
empirical Ego, that I could do it, then the operative power does not match 
it, and if the occasion arises it will surely be found wanting and will 
certainly be overcome by the passive power. ^^ 

We can formulate here an antinomy : ^ 


Thesis: Every conscious ability is given as a product of experience ; the Ego 
itself the subject of active faculties, is a product of experience. 
Antithesis: There is an insightful, non-empirical ability, such a one, namely, 
that does not spring inductively from similar experiences of the corresponding 
5 action. I have the power to act and I can "see" this power. 

If I project myself imaginatively into a temptation, I, being the one I am, 
can envisage what follows that beginning: I withstand the temptation, I 
deny it my assent, I overcome it, perhaps being reinforced by this or that 
motive. Or more simply : it is something evil, I reject it. This is not mere 

10 experiential knowledge, knowledge of the " I am wont to behave in such a 
way, to make such repudiations, and therefore I will no doubt also do so in 
the future." That would mean : I have the empirical property of deciding in 
such a way under such circumstances. But that is not the sense of the faculty 
we are trying to grasp here, the '' I can." This sense is the one by which the 

15 beginning of the situation and the value judgment would motivate me, 
being the one I am, as a sort of consequent, to decide in this or that way 
and to act accordingly : whereby it is not claimed that it would be the right 
thing to do, for I can also find that I would decide in favor of the 
temptation. 

20 When I judge another, for the most part I follow experience. He has 
repeatedly shown himself to be a blackguard, he will continue to act that 
way. But this experiential knowledge is not an understanding of the other. If I 
understand him, then I see deeply into his motivations and then I do not 
need empirical apperception, apperception of the habitual. 

25 Naturally, that must then agree with experience. Experience can raise 
objections to my apprehension. In that case I would have to consider 
whether the concordance in experience was not a mere semblance. I might 
then find that the motives were precisely factually different than I 
presupposed, the situation not quite the same. If he is the one he is, actually 

30 the same Ego, then it is his type to be able to do this and not to do 
that. 

Ego as subject of my decisions and my position-takings, my self- 
determinations that have arisen from original, instaurating position- 
takings, my definite positions on these or those questions; and with this is 

35 connected : Ego as subject of motivations in the specific sense, that I let 
myself be motivated by whatever type of motives in such and such a way, 
i.e., to take such and such a position. As this subject I have my more or less 
fixed style, although I do not retain these positions in all particulars, a style 
which necessarily expresses itself on the outside, necessarily puts associa- [330] 

40 tions into play, necessarily constitutes associations about myself in my life, 
so that I have always constituted and continue to constitute of myself, 
according to my own type, an inductive *' outer representation." 

How is this related to the Ego of faculties and lack of faculties, the " I 
can " and the "I cannot " ? Here a foundation must be laid carefully first. 

45 Precedence goes to the "I do," specificallly the "instinctive" one; then the 


342 


SUPPLEMENTS 


originally following "I do!'' as "I will," with original success and failure. 
In repeated success, i.e., through exercise, the practical ability increases. It 
increases from the "association" belonging peculiarly to this sphere, an 
analogy with association in the usual sense. In that way is made possible 
5 again ; willing on the basis of the experiential ability that was previously in 
consciousness, especially the will that chooses, the rationally premeditative 
will that considers whether it can accomplish something and what it can 
accomplish. I know from experience that I have various practical abilities, 
but I also know that these are not fixed abilities of mine, that they require 

10 exercise and are subject to deterioration from lack of exercise or other 
causes. I have an empirical-inductive representation of my Ego-faculties 
and can acquire, by imagining myself into other situations, certitude, 
though only an inductive one, about what I would do. In more precise 
terms, I do not only have faculties and lack of faculties as related one by 

15 one to individual cases, but the apperception of faculties may be transferred 
to similar cases just as with any apperception, and thus it is in fact 
apperception according to the usual sense. It is only that it is precisely an 
apperception of faculties, a practical apperception, analogous to the 
apperception of being, just as the association of what is exercised, that is in 

20 question here, is an analogon of the apperception of being. We must not 
fail to note that the transfer of an actually experienced " I can and I effect " 
to a new case is not simply an inductive ontological belief, related to my 
ability as a fact, but that I experience in practical consciousness itself a 
possible ability. 

25 The ability or lack of ability, which is not a matter for a position-taking, 
which precedes it either as valuing or desiring, etc., or leaves it open, 
positing it only hypothetically, must be distinguished from that ability and 
lack of ability that is related to position-taking. I have not done that in my 
text, and so amongst the good things there, there is something essentially 

30 flawed. 

For we need to establish a fundamental essential distinction, distinguish- 
ing all other subjective events (according to the type " I move ") from all 
position-takings. These are not subordinate to the will. I cannot surrender 
my judgment in the motivation in which it emerges; and likewise with other 

35 position-takings. In connection with them I can still do much. I can inhibit, 
posit hypothetically, etc. A position-taking is not a practical possibility like 
just any kinesthesis in the system of my kinesthetic "I can." [331] 

It is necessary to carry on our reflections here with the utmost care. 
Suppose I do not have a judgment yet, do not yet have a will, have not yet 

40 evaluated. I can proceed to acquire such. I look around for motives and 
once I have them the decision follows, not in an arbitrary fashion but as a 
motivated consequence. And it arises prior to the question of the insightful 
foundation, unless I had already made such a foundation my goal. The way 
I am, I as the subject of my previous convictions, and the way within this 

45 sphere motives determine me precisely as this Ego, that is how the decision 
is produced. What is most proper to the person resides in the Ego as 
substrate of decisions and not in the Ego of mere faculties. When I say that 
I cannot carry out a certain decision, e.g., the decision to commit a murder. 


SUPPLEMENTS 


343 


when I say I cannot do something like that, I am saying something about 
the way I am (and perhaps about how I used to be and how I supposedly 
will be); all the motives pertaining to a murder as ones which could 
possibly determine it are not, for me, effective ones. The possibility of a 
5 murder is a practical possibiUty to the extent that I, assuming I desired it, 
had the ability to carry it out. Each act of the will is related to a practical 
realm and thus so is this one. And in that sense I can perform almost any 
wrong act (although, more precisely, many acts which have been carried 
out by others go beyond my practical abilities, e.g., climbing up facades). 
10 But with regard to position-taking, its possibility does not belong at all in 
the area of practical possibiUties. But here we must certainly distinguish 
between cases of evidence and non-evidence. At all events, as I am, I can 
predict how I, the one I am, would behave (taking a position) if the 
occasion arises, provided it is a situation clearly circumscribed and cleariy 
15 represented by me, whereas, to the extent that the situation is undetermined 
I will not be able to say anything with certitude. 

As subject of position-takings and of habitual convictions I have of 

course my style, which is inductively operative and which will lead to a 

corresponding self-apperception, and in this way it is possible to proclaim 

20 inductively, both about myself and about others, how the position-takings 

would transpire. On the other hand, a position-taking is not a mere effect 

of an association, and even if it is correct that in my consideration of how I 

would decide in any given case I am dependent on my previous life and my 

former decisions, yet this dependency does not mean that the answer I 

25 would give to such questions has been acquired in an extrinsic inductive 

way. I depend on motives, in the reactivation of an old decision I depend 

on my former decision; I am now the one I am as determined by my prior 

being (by my decisions). And in that way even as personal subject of actual 

and possible decisions, according to my original peculiar character as well 

30 as according to the decisions which have been carried out in factual 

relations, I am a unity of determinations (a unity of positions and other [332] 
pecuUar characters in them), a unity not based on mere association but 
preceding it. Because I have a unique character, because I behave according 
to that character in a regular way, I must become inductively apprehensible 
35 and I must be able to become a theme for an inductive consideration. But 
these are all extrinsic considerations : the inductions are proven correct or 
incorrect in an external way, but nevertheless they require here a second 
verification by means of a transition from exteriority to interiority, insofar 
as I precisely am the one I am, not as nature, but as a position-taking 
40 Ego. 


344 


SUPPLEMENTS 


SUPPLEMENTS 


345 


Supplement XII (to Section Three, pp. 263 ff.) 

I. THE PERSON — THE SPIRIT AND ITS PSYCHIC BASIS 
(CONCERNING THE EGO AS PERSON) > 

§ 1. The distinction between primal sensibility 
5 and intellectus agens 

The spiritual sphere is the one of " Ego-subjectivities," the sphere of the 
cogitationes which irradiate as activities from the Ego and which within 
subjectivity itself, and then going beyond it, weave from one Ego-subject to 
another proper networks of nexuses which (in opposition to real — natural, 
10 spatial, thingly — unities) constitute personal unities (persons themselves 
and personaUties at the social level as well as all looser societies). The 
spiritual sphere has, notwithstanding this nexus proper to it, its underlying 
basis in the inferior "psychic" and in addition has its immanent teleology 
in the lawful transformations of the higher into the lower, of the spiritually 

15 active into passivities, into a secondary sensibihty providing the future 

Ego-actions with pregivennesses, and at the same time it has predelineated 

ways of what can properiy be called re-production, ways of retransforma- 

tion back into activities. 

All spiritual activity, every Ego-act, shares in what is proper to active 

20 intentionality: it is a perceptual grasping, an explicating of the perceived 
object, an exphcating of the directedness to individual features, and the 
referring of them back step by step to the identical substrate of the features, 
to " the same," a comparing and distinguishing, a predicating of under- 
standing, a thinking of the universal and an apprehension of the particular 

25 under the viewpoint of the universal, a consciousness of what is singular (of 
what is one and unique precisely in the logical meaning of particular 
consciousness), a subordination of a particular thought under the general 
contents thought of as universal. It is an evaluating, and specifically 
self-evaluating or evaluating for the sake of a foundational value; it is the [333] 

30 positing of a goal and the striving for means, etc. All personal " intention- 
aUty " refers to activity and has its origin in activities. For it is either an 
intentionality which has arisen originally and is then active, or it is a 
"sedimentation" of activities, which as such are meaningful and in their 
" sense " refer back to the active or constitutive nexuses, and that by means 

35 of many levels built one on the other. Each new act, as a new intentional- 
ity, constitutes ever new objectivities productively experienced as act- 
correlates. An act is as it were an intending (in a very broad sense), and 
every act-formation, such as a predicating, deducing, demonstrating pro- 
cess of thought, or the thinking of a researcher which goes on from 

40 hypotheses up to probabilities, and likewise each nexus which evaluates 


C/ §61, pp.288 ff. 


unitarily and which is performed by the evaluating subject, or each nexus of 
acts of the will in the unity of one action, along with the acts which lie at 
their basis and are essentially foundational for them— all these are 
act-connections which, even in their often overwhelming implications, make 
5 up the unity of one act and bring to consciousness an objective correlate 
which thereby stands "over and against" the Ego. And all simple or 
involved acts stand under the point of view of validity or invalidity, and in 
that way to all of them belongs the idea of truth (which in its universaUza- 
tion goes beyond the domain of judgment). 
10 All original productivity, original at least in one or more steps, is 
act-spontaneity. But every spontaneity sinks down into passivity, and that 
means here that each objectivity can originally enter into consciousness as 
productive in its originary constitution (or in the quasi-originary constitu- 
tion of reproduction, memory, mere phantasy, etc.), or it can come to 
15 consciousness as "sensuous" in the form of a passive retrospective 
consciousness, which, after productive consciousness runs its course, 
remains behind and admits a retrospective gaze (the most primitive 
single-rayed spontaneity) upon the object that was just now actively 
constituted, or a memory can emerge or even a transformation of former 
20 productions can occur through the efficacy of psychic laws, etc. In this way 
objectivity can also be given passively and render possible, according to its 
character, explications, clarifications, and approximations or can set in 
motion tendencies in those directions. To all secondary intentionalities we 
must ascribe such tendencies, and they are tendencies toward "renewal" or 
25 toward transformation into spontaneous acts and nexuses of acts corre- 
sponding to them. 

The spirit has a psychic basis. This shows itself in that the subject-Ego is 
not relegated to mere retentions and memory reproductions. The sensuous 
reproduction holds sway also in the form that under sensuously similar 
30 circumstances something similar emerges, and in this way sensuous similar- 
ity tends to bring it about that new pregivennesses of a sensuously similar 
kind, which arose productively eariier, arise again, and among them are [334] 
ones which despite this similarity (and indeed because this similarity is 
precisely often a merely " extrinsic "-^ensuous one) cannot be transformed 
35 into the state of originality. In this way can be understood contradictions 
of various kinds and absurdities, which indeed are presumably given or 
which, as false and yet unitarily understood and thought, are held to be 
true. The doxa requires the unitary execution of a production in the 
verification and only then has its " rights." And the same appUes to every 
40 kind of thetic quaUty. 

We distinguish here sensibility and (let us say) reason. In sensibility we 
distinguish primal sensibility, which does not contain any sediment of 
reason, and secondary sensibility, which arises through a production of 
reason. Accordingly we distinguish also within reason between original 
45 reason, intellectus agens, and reason which has been degraded into sensibil- 
ity. 


346 


SUPPLEMENTS 


SUPPLEMENTS 


347 


§ 2. Sensibility as the psychic basis of the spirit 

Let us now discourse on sensibility: by that term we understand the 
"psychic" basis of the spirit, and of the spirit on all conceivable levels, i.e., 
the underlying basis of the acts of the spirit on all their conceivable levels^ 
5 from the lowest, which we can exemphfy as the simple act of directing a ray 
of spiritual regard onto something affecting the subject, which it terminates 
in, grasps, or considers, or as the act of simple turning toward something in 
active pleasure, etc., up to the highest rational acts of theoretical thinking 
or of artistic creation or of social-ethical behavior. 
10 What then is this psychic basis? Primal sensibihty is composed of the 
sensuous data, the color data in their visual field of sensation, a field which, 
before all "apperception," is a unity and can still be found afterwards as a 
moment of an apperception, namely as a moment of the visual aspect. 
Likewise, the sensuous feehngs are founded in these sensuous data, and so 

15 are the sensuous data of the instincts, the instincts not as something 
supposedly transcendent to consciousness but as primal hved experiences, 
always belonging to the content of the psychic basis. That is a primal 
content of sensibility. And to the sphere of sensibility also pertain its own 
laws, not only essential laws but also factual laws as rules for a quasi- 

20 production of ever new sensibihties, in a certain vahd sense secondary ones, 
though not ones originating from reason. (Perhaps a better terminology 
would result from distinguishing between authentic and unauthentic sensi- 
bility and by speaking as regards the latter of intellective or spiritual 
sensibility and as regards the former of spiritless sensibility.) 

25 Association and reproduction (memory, synthesis, phantasy) belong to [331 
sensibility as well. But one will say that that is a general property of all 
lived experiences — and of acts as well. Admittedly, as they occur here, they 
function associatively, are subject to the law of retention, and stand under 
conditions of memory, of transformation, of tendencies to produce similar 

30 phantasies, etc. This is now exactly the process of the generation of that 
secondary intellective sensibility; and then this same process is also decisive 
for original sensibility. But it does not arise through association. Primal 
sensibility, sensation, etc. does not arise out of immanent grounds, out of 
psychic tendencies; it is simply there, it emerges. The primally intellective 

35 also does not arise "psychically," from association, but from a ray 
emanating out of the Ego; it is not something foreign to the Ego but is 
precisely absolute. On the other hand, the Ego presupposes sensibility as 
affection, as stimulus, first of all primal sensibility, and then the secondary. 
The Ego always has possessions. Primal sensibility is its primal possession. 

40 A second possession is the intentional content of reproduction (originary 
reproduction as memory) and of the transformation in phantasy taking 
place in reproduction, passive transformation, self-structuration with an 
overturned doxa. 

In the sphere of this passivity, the sphere of this making oneself by oneself 

45 or this coming forth in a new way (a sphere of receptivity : the Ego can 
look at, encounter, and thence experience stimuli), we have a primal sphere 


of intentionality , an unauthentic one, since there can be no question here of a 
genuine "intention toward," for which the Ego is required; but "represen- 
tation-of," apperception, is already there. To remember something is not 
merely to have a "weaker" moment of sensation, etc., and the same applies 
5 to the constitution of time, which belongs here, and perhaps it also applies 
to the constitution of the very first level of space (oculomotor unity). The 
lowest Ego-spontaneity or Ego-activity is "receptivity," and by that I mean 
that indeed already the constitution of space (and thus also the constitution 
of the schema) presupposes this lowest spontaneity; but the unity, which 
10 arises as a doxic one, is not a spontaneously posited unity but a receptive 
one. Space is a form of sensibility, having originated in receptivity; thus it 
is not a form of completely pure sensibility. Sensible nature is constituted in 
mere receptivity; it is the world of sense-things with its sensible forms of 
time, space, and substantiality-causality. It would then have to be verified: 
15 perhaps reception is a mere spectating, whereas the intentional unity arises 
in pure sensibility, just as I have always assumed it up to now. In that case 
what is intentional on the level of the senses would only be a system of lines 
into which the spontaneous regard of receptivity can penetrate and can be 
operative as a consideration of the intentional object, just as in the 
20 reflective consideration of the aspects, etc. 

Thus we have in the sphere of lived experience the immense field of 

primary sensibihty with its network of tendentious nexuses, with its [336] 

Objective constitutions, and with its rules, which are expressed in the 

theme: there appears an Objective world that is to be maintained concor- 

25 dantly. Arid thereby primitive laws hold sway, for instance those of 

association and reproduction, according to which "representations" arise 

with the lowest, most original intentionaUty ; every reproduction has its 

intentionality. — Beyond the sphere of hved experience (in which we class 

the system of orthoaesthetic and heteroaesthetic lived experiences, includ- 

30 ing, therefore, illusions, etc.) pertaining to the constitution of the world, we 

have a fiuidum of phantasies. It must be noted that the sensuous 

representations related to the world of things occur here and there as 

ordered but run a zigzag course: a series of memories and segments of 

memory beside the course of perception, which latter runs constantly in the 

35 case of waking consciousness, though it is sometimes richer sometimes 

poorer. In sleep even this is disrupted; in dreaming we have courses of 

heteroaesthetic lived experiences which are not inserted into the real 

world. 

All this is a proper field of nexuses, ones which run out by themselves as 

40 Objective events, though they are subjectively produced. Where is empathy 

to be accommodated? The regulation of sensibility is (with respect to the 

sensibility of sensation and also with respect to the sensibility of feeling and 

every primal sensibility) an intersubjective one. Account must be taken of 

that in the appropriate place. 


348 


SUPPLEMENTS 


SUPPLEMENTS 


349 


Excursus: impression and reproduction 

^^ In the universal sphere of lived experience I distinguished earlier between 
"impression" and "reproduction." 
The word "impression" is appropriate only to original sensations; the 
5 word expresses well what is "there" of itself, and indeed originally: 
namely, what is pregiven to the Ego, presenting itself to the Ego in the 
manner of something affecting it as foreign. Acts are then not impressions 
m this sense but rather are their opposites. Acts are not reproductions, 
either, but are origins for possible reproductions. Reproduction signifies 
10 certain sorts of modifications, ones which refer back to what is not 
modified, not derived by laws of reproduction (association). This non- 
derived ("impression" in the other sense) breaks down into primal 
sensibility and into Ego-actions and Ego-affections. (The terminology is 
obviously not very satisfactory.) 
15 The (sensuous) impressions, in their emerging and disappearing, are 
subject to a certain lawfulness, one that is inseparably intertwined with the 
laws of reproductions. Factual laws (laws of existence) of sensuous [33| 
impressions are only to be acquired as psychophysical laws, and that means 
that only after the constitution of nature, thus after the formation of 
20 intentionality, whose correlate is nature, can the rules of existence for the 
data of sensation be produced through "retrospective interpretation." 
Thereby the data of sensation are to be understood as data of primal 
sensibility. These factual laws, according to which possible sensations 
receive their fixed order and thereby are intersubjectively concordant, 
25 presuppose elementary laws, essential laws, and specifically more general 
ones, which extend beyond primal sensibility: the laws of association and 
reproduction, of a kind signifying for example: If a set of sensations once 
existed, and if a similar set again comes up, then there chngs to this latter a 
tendency toward the memory of the earlier similar one, a tendency toward 
30 an emergence of the corresponding reproduction. It is likewise with laws of 
expectation, laws related to protentions, laws of the "advent" of sensa- 
tions, etc. In addition, a reproduction has the tendency to produce further 
reproductions: it recalls similar previous impressions and impressional 
nexuses. If this tendency is fulfilled, then new reproductions arise. 
35 In immanence we find sensations and reproductions endowed with 
tendencies, "intentions toward," which are fulfilled in the arrival of the 
"intended" impressions or reproductions. These instincts or tendencies 
pertain to the sensuous itself and move from the sensuous to the sensuous 
(from impressions to new impressions, or from impressions to reproduc- 
40 tions, from reproductions to other reproductions). The formulation of the 
ultimate laws is still outstanding. (What is the significance of the occupied 
fields of sense, of the prevention of the fulfillment of the tendencies toward 
sense data by means of sense data which precisely occupy the field and 
contend with them?) 
45 Over and against these tendencies there are others, which are directed to 
the Ego-subject as affections, as tendencies toward a grasping. In addition : 


the tendencies toward pleasurable surrender, which proceed from the 
feeling-sensations intertwined with the sensations (lived experiences), and 
again those that proceed from reproductive moments of pleasure and 
displeasure, which pertain to the expected data of sensation, and further- 
5 more the tendencies of desire — an active passivity, as it were (that is, not 
an activity proceeding from the Ego). 

The tendencies lying within sensibiUty itself have, however, an essential 
relation to the affective tendencies; that is, the tendencies and intentions 
adhering to sensibility become paths of affections. The "intentional 

10 Object," that on which the reproductive tendency is directed, functions as 
"motivating" and works like a stimulus. 

Locke saw something vahd: sensation is what is first, insofar as a 
functioning Ego can only exist if it has a possession, and only insofar as the 
possession must first affect it, to which the Ego then reacts : all activity of 

1 5 the Ego presupposes affection, even if — in the developed subject — it is not 
exactly the one of primal sensibihty. For afterwards secondary sensibility 
enters in. But not all Ego activity is mere yielding to an affection, mere 
receptivity and passivity in the sense of yielding, surrender to the enjoyment 
of pleasure, suffering as negative pleasure : rather, this passive reaction is an [338] 

20 underlying level for a new kind of acts, the free acts, which are genuine 
Ego-activities, free position-taking with regard to the affections, versus an 
already passively carried out indulgence within a disapproval of them. 
Afterwards, it is possible for an act of yielding to be a free act. 


§3. Development of the Ego — Ego-action and Ego-afTection 

25 Let us now look into what pertains to the Ego. There we find certain 
nexuses, the motivation-nexuses, which are determined by the sensuous 
lower level but which have their own law. No active Ego-motivations arise 
through "association" or through "psychophysical lawfulness;" thus they 
do not arise the way all formations of sensibility do. To be sure, the 

30 entirety of natural drives is presupposed, the "natural mechanism." Can it 
now be said that what proceeds from the Ego and occurs in the Ego as 
" affecting," in penetrating into the Ego as motivating, drawing it to itself 
ever tighter — still prior to any yielding — is no longer nature? No, the 
affection belongs quite certainly in the sphere of nature and is the means of 

35 the bond between Ego and nature. Moreover, the Ego also has its natural 
side. All Ego-actions, just like the Ego-affections, come under the law of 
association, are arranged in time, work afterwards as affecting, etc. But at 
best it is the Ego thought of as purely passive which is mere nature and 
belongs within the nexus of nature. But not the Ego of freedom. 

40 However, mere nature is the entirety of the " mechanical I-do, " There 
arises some sensuous drive, for example the urge to smoke. I reach for a 
cigar and hght it up, whereas my attention, my Ego-activities, indeed my 
being affected consciously, are entirely somewhere else: thoughts are 
stimulating me, I am following them up, comporting myself to them as 


350 


SUPPLEMENTS 


SUPPLEMENTS 


351 


actively verifying them, approving them, disapproving of them, etc. • Here 
we have "unconscious" Ego-affections and reactions. What is affecting 
goes toward the Ego, though not toward the waking Ego, the Ego of 
"conscious" attention, occupation, etc. The Ego always lives in the 
5 medium of its "history;" all its earlier Hved experiences have sunk down, 
but they have aftereffects in tendencies, sudden ideas, transformations or 
assimilations of earlier lived experiences, and from such assimilations new 
formations are merged together, etc.— just as in the sphere of primal 
sensibility, whose formations also pertain to the medium of the Ego, to the 

10 Ego's actual and potential possessions. All this has its natural course, thus 
even each free act has its comet's tail of nature: but the act itself has not 
come from nature (i.e., arisen through mere natural lawfulness) but has 
come precisely from the Ego. Ego and nature stand in contrast, and every 
act also has its natural side, namely its underlying basis in nature: what is 

15 pregiven as affecting is a formation of nature, though here and there what [339| 
is of the Ego may have played a role in earlier action. And above all every 
act has its natural side in that the accomplishment of earlier similar acts 
brings with it an associative tendency, a natural tendency, to accomplish 
the act again; that means that under the given circumstances of the 

20 affection there is a reproductive tendency directed to the reproduction of 
what was intended in the previous similar act-comportment, and not only 
that: it is a tendency directed to this (present) similar comportment itself. 
Thus a second affection directed to the Ego is bound with the first, and 
now perhaps the Ego yields; but then the Ego no longer accomplishes the 

25 act altogether freely, no longer from original freedom. This should be 
analyzed more precisely; for there are complexities here. I can decide freely, 
and at the same time I am following my habitual inclination. I am entirely 
free if I am not motivated passively, that is, if I do not carry out the 
consequence through affection but through "rational motives." I must 

30 follow the latter and not yield to the affection. Rational motives, values, 

etc., can themselves, however, motivate me as " pregivennesses " on a 

second level, or I can freely give in to them, freely decide in their favor. 

After all this, it is comprehensible how "nature" develops, how the 

natural basis of the soul is organized in its development in such a way that 

35 "nature" is constituted in it, and that, for example, at first the Ego 
behaves in general in its reactions as mere nature, and thus an "animal" 
and purely animal Ego develops, and that for the Ego as active subject of 
the cogitationes, which is identically one throughout all of them, is 
constituted a new pregivenness : the empirical Ego, which has a familiar 

40 nature, i.e., a nature to be learned in experience, and has become in its 
natural evolution, precisely with its nature, graspable purely according to 
"natural laws" — all this is now comprehensible. 

We can also understand that in constituted nature, the Body and the 
Body-soul unity are constituted and that the empirical Ego is the Ego of 

45 Bodily-psychic nature. The Ego is not itself the Bodily-psychic unity but 

' C/ pp. 270 ff. 


lives in it. It is the Ego of the soul, the Ego to which is related back the 
psychic lived experiences of the sensory sphere as its possessions, the Ego, 
on the other hand, which is the constant subject in its " acts," acts which 
here, however, are mere re-acts, natural reactions in face of the posses- 
5 sions. 

But how does the human being develop, i.e., how does the animal Ego 
develop into the human Ego? How is there constituted for the active Ego a 
pregiven Ego, which is the free personal subject, with which is then 
identified my momentarily present ego-cogito? How is it that my cogito, a 

10 momentary state, a passing manifestation of this permanent person, 
becomes an Objectively constituted pregivenness? Do laws, properly speak- 
ing, hold as regards the personal (free) subject, and which ones? 

They are not empirical laws, laws of association. Those rule only in the [340] 
sphere of passivity; where they determine the Ego, there they posit nature. 

15 They are, one will say, laws of reason. But what are laws of reason, and 
how do they determine development? 


II. SUBJECTIVITY AS SOUL AND 
AS SPIRIT IN THE ATTITUDE OF THE 
NATURAL SCIENCES AND IN THE ATTITUDE OF 
20 THE HUMAN SCIENCES 

§ 1. The reality of the soul and of the human being 

In taking up the question of the reality of the soul we need first of all to 
clarify the place of origin of the concept of reality and the place where 
reality exhibits itself in its most simple form. Accordingly we go back: 

25 I. to the thing as nature. As such it is an intuitive substance, in the sense 
of an intuitive unity of real properties. At bottom it is a sensuously intuitive 
thing, presenting itself through schemata. The schema is the one in it, the 
one given through sensuous apperception properly understood. On that is 
built the causal apperception: the sense-thing is grasped as something 

30 identical throughout modes of behavior. It is first on the basis of this 
causal apperception that we designate a thing as real, and here is where talk 
of reality has its origin. This apperception of the thing as real is 
synthetic— On a still higher level the thing is "Objectively" determined 
through mere "primary quahties," over and against which the intuitively 

35 substantial thing is regarded as "mere appearance," related to normal 
perceivers, 

11. But the animal and, in the first place, human beings can also be 
regarded as reality or nature, and we can here distinguish again between 
the animal as intuitive unity and the animal as unity of modes of behavior. 

^0 At the start we remain with the first: 

A) the animal of intuition : here we have : 

1 .) in the sensuous-intuitive sphere of the givenness of the Body, the 
intuitive Body-substance with its sensuously given properties. 


352 


SUPPLEMENTS 


SUPPLEMENTS 


353 


2.) the "psychic life" expressed in the other's Body, another subject with 

his lived experiences, his surrounding world, etc. This is not to be 

understood as meaning that we have two separate things beside one 

another: the Body of sense intuition and in addition the representation of 

5 something subjective; rather, what we have is an intuition of a human 

being.^ That means: [341J 

a.) expression creates everywhere a kind of unity, thus, for example, 
linguistic expression and meaning, symbol and symbolized ; and there exist 
hence double-sided unities, which manifest the ever more intimate inter- 

10 twining of the two sides the more articulated in various ways is the 
expression, or the expressing, and the more sensuous parts there are that 
have a meaning function, and specifically within the unity of one mean- 
ing, 
b.) the expression is appresenting, the expressed is co-existing. What 

1 5 exists in the proper temporal-local sense of a res extensa is the Body there 
as thing of sense intuition. The appresented is co-being along with what 
exists, and it is co-existing, participating therefore in Objective spatial 
existence and in space-time in the way that appresentation here accom- 
plishes, and according to which we have a sort of " intuition " of the human 

20 being as a Bodily-spiritual unity, which remains preserved throughout the 
intuitive alterations and spatial movements of the Body-thing as " organ- 
ism," at least within the empirical hmits in which obviously remains the 
natural intuition of a human being. The corpse bears in itself the 
representation of a human soul but no longer appresents it; and thus we 

25 see precisely a corpse, which was a man, but now no longer is. 

B) Let us pass now to the next level of constitution and compare the 
animal as unity of modes of behavior with the thing constituted as real. Its 
reaUty manifests itself in the dependency on circumstances; the thing is 
relative to other things and in this relation it has its thingly qualities: as 

30 causal states and causal properties. It is what it is in the unity of a 
nature. — 

What is the situation, on the other hand, as regards the human being and 
the animal? Not only is the corporeal Body real, a real physical thing, but 


' I experience a human being, and this has as components: I experience "exter- 
nally" the corporeal Body and I experience "inwardly" the psychic. This is an 
" abstract " distinction. I do not need to consider further the mode of experience, 
although it is different depending on the object. The inner is original or comes from 
empathy, but both of these are "inner." — Both outer and inner experience, however, 
are necessary for the unity of an experience in which an object is experienced : thus 
for a unity of concatenate determinations. Concatenation pertains in itself to the 
corporeal Body — that is natural causality — and likewise to the soul — and that is 
the motivational concatenation, which still has to be discussed. And finally: nature 
and spirit are necessarily in psychophysical concatenation as a kind of "causality." 

1 . Expression of an irreal sense : ideal appresentation, 

2. Expression of the psychic : real appresentation, the real linked to the real in the 
unity of a concrete reality. 


the soul is too, in concomitant change; i.e., psychic events are joined as 
existential consequences to real Bodily-corporeal events (which as such 
stand within the causahty of physical nature). That means: the Corporeal 
body is not a concrete reality for itself; it is only a real human body by 
5 means of the fact that changes in the soul occur concomitantly. And 
likewise the soul is not a reality for itself; rather, it has concomitant 
changes in the Bodily corporeality: that is, psychic occurrences lead in 
themselves to consequences in reahty. 
The question must now be retrieved ; is the soul real in the same sense as 

10 the Corporeal body, and is the human being a reality composed of two 
linked realities and thereby also itself given as a reahty? Immediately, 
striking differences appear between the thing and the soul as realities, 
above all : the latter is not in universal experience constituted tout court in [342] 
the way that what it is psychically is constituted in relation to other souls as 

15 members of a psychic universe, the totality of all souls whatsoever. Or: all 
bodies whatever form a unitary totaUty of nature, though this does not 
imply that all souls are connected as a totality of the psychic purely in 
itself, in the way that the thing of nature is what it is as member of the 
natural universe. 

20 I apprehend by means of expression, as was expounded earlier, the unity 
of a human being, that man there, in "outer" experience.' In this 
apperception there lies a system of experiential indications, by means of 
which an Ego-life, with a partially determinate content and a horizon of 
indeterminateness and of unknownness, is given as one with the Body and 

25 is " there " as bound with it. And in the species of this apperception there 
lies the fact that from the very start reladons of dependency between the 
psychic and the Bodily (itself interwoven in the causal nexus of physical 
nature) come to consciousness by way of apprehension, and by means of 
the corresponding attention there enter into the thematic focus : a) accord- 

30 ing to the universal type and b) as individuals, present factual structures 
that belong in the type according to the general style. 

In the attitude corresponding to the experience of a human being, in 
which this bound unity is given as there in space, as spatial and as bound 
on the spiritual side with the spatial, I have in fact a double reality, I, the 

35 spectator, and all the others in the human community, find or can find this 
human being as a unity which in the causality of nature persists as 
Corporeal body, and to that extent this physical unity, as an organic unity, 
fulfills certain physical conditions as the Body of a subject, which in its life 
of sensation and perception, and in its life of phantasy and memory (and 

40 then further in an unknown way), is dependent on the physical structures 
of the Body, and conversely they are influenced by it, (Co-existence as 
mutual being-with-one-another in a general structure, thus mutual regula- 
tion of co-existence and in possible alterations, thus causality.) 


' Cf. Section Two, p. 146, 1. 4, to the end of the paragraph, where parts of the 
following text are repeated word for word. In order not to disturb the unity of this 
supplement, the sentences in question have not been deleted here. 


354 


SUPPLEMENTS 


SUPPLEMENTS 


355 


The Body has a privilege in this unity, and specifically for the following 
reasons: man is man in spatial nature, and he is in nature only because of 
the fact that in the first place the Corporeal body is a material thing in 
nature. Psychic reality is here constituted as a reality in space only through 
5 the psychophysical dependencies. The absolute universal form of the world 
is space-time. Worldly reality is in all cases spatial and is being-in-space : 
that is, corporeal being. Everything real is corporeal, in all cases corporeal, 
although not necessarily that alone. There does not exist the same necessity 
that whatever is real be psychic or have irreal determinations, whereas the [343j 

10 latter can be real only through con-junction (appresentation) with corpo- 
reality. The soul is given in appresenting expression as a unity. It has its 
unity in itself, but here it comes into consideration as a unity in a nexus: 
specifically, within psychophysical causalities I consider an individual 
sensation, perception, nexus of memory, etc., but these are moments of the 

1 5 subjective stream of lived experience and are states of the " soul," of the 
empathized unity, which is, as a unity, a seat of causality. Likewise this is 
the way I would excise an individual physical state, e.g., of the optic nerve, 
and follow it up to a process in the brain: but it is a process in the brain, 
the nerve is an organ in the nervous system, and the nervous system is the 

20 one of the closed Body, which as Body is a seat of psychophysical causality. 
This pertains to the essence of the ruling, sense-determining appercep- 
tion. 

The unity of the soul is a real unity through the fact that as unity of 
psychic being and life it is connected with the Body as unity of the Bodily 

25 stream of being, which for its part is a member of nature. It was quite 
correct when I from the start took the human being as a double reality; it is 
just that the psychic reality is here what it is (as mundane reality) only 
through the reality of the Body, which is founding for it. Only in that way 
does the soul become a member of the one nexus in which the soul enters 

30 into real relations (relations of nature) not only with the Body but also with 
other souls. 


§ 2. Psychophysical causality and the causal nexus of things 

There is still another question demanding our consideration here. I have 
attempted to differentiate between psychophysical conditionality and physi- 

35 cal causality. A difference is certainly to be found here, namely in this 
regard, that the physical thing is what it is, i.e., has real properties, only in 
relation to the causal nexus of physical nature. It pertains to the reality of 
the thing (to the sense predelineated for the thing, predelineated through 
the original constitution of the thing) that each thingly property is related 

40 to physical causal circumstances and to no others. Things can change as a 
result of psychic effects, but in that case none of their thingly properties 
change, only their states change. In the nexus of physical nature, other 
things and their comportment in the causal nexus as regards some given 
thing determine what this thing is, which permanent causal properties it 


will have. The causal properties can persist or they can change, and that 
depends on the course of nature. To be sure, the exact identity of the thing 
requires a certain supreme regularity, a most universal natural lawfulness. 
The form of causality, which stands under strict rules (on a higher level, 
5 laws), pertains to the very form of the being of a thing. 

For example, to speak more clearly: every thing can, psychophysically [344] 
understood, function as a stimulus-Object ; its physical processes can extend 
its effects to a perceiving subject: but the ** property" of being able to have 
" effects " on an experiencing subject in this manner gives the thing no inner 

10 constituting property,^ supplies it with nothing that pertains to its nature. 
The manifold of possible effects on the subject adds nothing to what the 
thing is, and conversely : the soul does not interfere with ** nature," which 
remains what it "is" whether the soul has effects in it or not. Indeed 
courses of states of nature arise through these effects, states which were not 

15 there before, but still no physical property can change in that way in its 
fixed style, prescribed to it by its causal lawfulness and determinate of its 
identity. It depends on the course of natural experience how we will 
determine the physical thing more exactly, and what we have grasped as its 
property with regard to the pregiven casual nexus can prove to be a 

20 changeable manifestation of a higher property. Even the property assumed 
to be fixed comes to change insofar as the course of experience brings to 
light new causal nexuses on higher levels. But psychophysical causaUty can 
accomplish nothing in this respect ; the thing and the whole of nature are 
sealed off. Psychical consequences are joined to natural processes, just as 

25 psychical causes have consequences in nature, but they are such that in 
truth they have no influence on nature. 

It is clear that the causality of physical nature has in fact a pre-eminent 
sense. This causality is a constitutive idea for the idea of nature, for the 
idea of a physical thing : that is, all inner features of the thing as features of 

30 a lasting (persistent) being, as features of a duration, are themselves 
persistent, and each such feature expresses a persistent behavior (a persis- 
tent lawfulness of comportment) in the causal nexus. ^ For reasons of 
principle, the psychic is outside this nexus. Through psychophysical causal- 
ity there is constituted no constitutive feature whatever of a persistent 

35 spatial thing. 


§ 3. Possibility of the insertion of the soul into nature^ 

What shall we say then about the reality of the soul? The soul, too, is of 
course a persistent being. But this persistent being is no ** nature ; " it is not. 


' Constituting properties of the thing: properties in which it persists in all its 
changes of state as the same, which thus belong to it permanently in this changing of 
states. 

^ Compare this statement with § 32, pp. 134 f. 

^ These analyses are employed in part in Section Two ; cf. § 32, pp. 1 34 ff. 


356 


SUPPLEMENTS 


SUPPLEMENTS 


357 


as what it is, a complex of persistent properties which are unities of causal 
nexuses. Thus the soul is not constituted simply inductively-apperceptively. [345] 
It is the unity of a psychic life, of a stream of consciousness ; this stream is 
the Ufe of an identical Ego, a unity extending through time (through the 
5 same time which is the duration of the Body), and the soul has " effects '' in 
physis and in turn undergoes effects coming from there; it displays, to be 
sure, an identity also in the fact that on the whole, under given Bodily- 
physical circumstances, it "behaves" in its reactions in a regulated way, 
sensing in this way or that way, perceiving such and such, etc. We mean 

10 here also that under given psychic circumstances something in Corporeality 
changes as a consequence, the hand moves, etc. But if for that reason 
psychophysical properties are attributed to it as well as something like a 
nature, then it is not in fact this nature, and in principle it is irreducible to 
nature. 

15 The being of the soul is not "substantial" in the sense of thingly being, 
and if we reheve it of the idea of substance, as Kant did, then we 
undoubtedly will have to say that there is no soul-substance. And that 
means that the soul has no in-itself analogously similar to a "nature;" it 
has neither a mathematical nature in the manner of the thing of physics, 

20 nor a nature like the one of the thing of intuition. The soul is not a 
schematized unity; and as far as "causality" is concerned, it has to be 
maintained that what deserves the name " causality " is that functional or 
lawful comportment of dependency which is the correlate of the constitu- 
tion of persistent properties of a persistent real something of the type, 

25 nature. Thus in the case of the soul and in psychology there can be no talk 
at all of causality. None of the lawfully regulated functionalities in the 
factual sphere is causality in that sense. The flux of the life of the soul has 
its unity in itself, and since the mundane real " soul " belonging to a Body 
is related to this thingly Body in a functional nexus of mutual dependency, 

30 the soul has, to be sure, its persistent psychic properties, which are 
expressions for certain regulated dependencies in the emergence of what is 
psychic in its dependency on what is Bodily. The soul is a being that is 
related conditionally to Bodily circumstances, related in a regulated way to 
circumstances in physical nature; and likewise the soul is characterized by 

35 the fact that psychic occurrences have consequences in nature in a regulated 
fashion. 

On the other hand, the Body too is itself characterized by this psycho- 
physical nexus and its rules : but the Body does not receive any new natural 
property thereby, just as the soul itself is not, due to such a regularity in 

40 psychic existence, a nature and receives no natural properties. The soul is 
not thereby a mere X of causal properties. But through such a connection 
with the bodily (which, in the naturalistic attitude, is posited straightfor- 
wardly as being), the soul has an interrelatedness of existence with nature, 
"existence" as event in the world, existence "in" space, existence "in" 

45 space-time. And thus the soul has, we can say, a quasi-nature and a 
quasi-causality, to the extent that we broaden precisely the concepts of 
nature, substance, and causality and designate as "substance" (real thingly [346] 


existence) everything existing related to conditional circumstances of exist- 
ence and standing under laws of existence and designate as " causal " every 
property constituted here as conditionally determined. The soul has in itself 
a proper essence of its own, prior to all the causalities in which it is 

5 involved. This essence allows the soul to be considered for itself under 
abstraction from everything psychic-causal (in opposition to a body, which 
is causal through and through and has no anterior proper essence of its 
own). The soul is a worldly real being apriori only as intertwined 
psychophysically and as united with other souls in a community or as 

10 potentially united with them. How the soul is to be posited in its own 
proper essence is another matter, certainly not as mundane. 

The subjective, the being of a subject and of its subjective Ufe under the 
viewpoint of these conditional nexuses, is naturahzed subjectivity ; it is the 
"psychic" in the sense of modem naturalistic psychology, which thus 

15 considers man as nature and inserts him into the nexus of nature. 


§ 4. The human being as spiritual subject 

On the other hand, what in life we call a human being and what is dealt 
with in (is the theoretical theme of) the sciences of life, the sciences of the 
spirit, and is treated there as subject, and what in the sciences of the 

20 objective spirit is treated as spiritual surrounding world, as culture, and 
especially as a human being, is not that naturalized human being. For as 
justified as this naturalizing obviously is, and as rightfully as the title nature 
encompasses the themata of scientific research, to that same extent does 
this title fail to embrace the specifically spiritual sphere in its spiritual 

25 relations. 

If I am interested in the human being as a human subject, as a person in 
a personal association, then he is admittedly also something bound to the 
Body; he stands there outside in space, he goes places, he sits, speaks to 
other people who are standing near him in space, etc. But my interest does 

30 not go toward nature but precisely toward the subject; and it is only a 
prejudice to maintain that nature is «the true being of the subject. For I 
cannot study physical things otherwise than as nature, since nature is their 
essence and the truth of a thing is a truth of nature; if I seek "Objective" 
truth, then I must pursue physics. But here it is different. To be sure, to 

35 make the spirit one's theme means, logically speaking, to make it into an 
" Object " (object), into a theoretical Object. But this is far from meaning to 
investigate spirit as nature, and if we nevertheless speak of the " nature of 
the spirit," we do so by equivocation. For in that case nature means 
essence, and in this sense one can even speak of the nature of numbers, 

40 etc.i 


' The following three pages of the manuscript are used in Section Three; cf. § 55, 
'The spiritual Ego...", P- 226 to p. 231. 


358 


SUPPLEMENTS 


§ 5. Empathy as spiritual (not naturalistic) 
relation between subjects 

By means of empathy, all Ego-relations are ascribed to the subject of the 
other Body, and it is to be noted from the outset in this connection that 
5 empathetic apperception first grasps "from the outside" the other's Body 
as a body like any body and then as a bearer of sensations and of possible 
effects and thereby at the same time as organ of a subject, a subject who is 
dependent on this organ for his sensations, perceptions, and for his further 
subject-acts and dispositions. On the other hand, however, it must also be 

10 noted that this realizing apprehension, which here can no longer be 
considered an "experiential consciousness" or an "apperception," still 
does not involve my making the natural reality of the other my thematic 
Object, i.e., taking a human being as a member of nature. Rather, I am, in 
empathy, directed to the other Ego and Ego-Ufe and not to psychophysical 

15 reality, which is a double reality with physical reality as the founding level. 
The other's Body is for me a passageway (in "expression," in intimation, 
etc.) toward the understanding of the Ego there, the "he: " he moves his 
hand, he reaches for this or that, he strikes, he considers, he is motivated by 
this or that. He is the center of a surrounding worid appearing to him, 

20 presentified to him in memory, thought about, etc., and included in it is a 
corporeal surrounding world, which to a great extent he has in common 
with me and with others. The human being appears, but I am focused on 
the human subject and on the subjectivity in its subjective comportments, 
in its nexuses of motivation. 

25 If we have incorporated other subjects into our subjective surrounding 
world and thereby have eo ipso included ourselves in our surrounding 
world, there then arises the field of social relations of subjectivity: we as 
personal subjects of common work, common research, technical activity, 
etc. And in that case there arise the corresponding apperceptions of 

30 accomplishments as accomplishments, of individual accomplishments and 
communal ones, of works, as works of the individual and works of the 
community, but also the apperceptions of thoughts and feelings, etc. of the 
individual as motivated by his milieu, through the "influences" of others, 
whether of others in immediate intercommerce or in the mediate way of 

35 understanding their works or by way of tradition, etc. 


[3471 


§6. Spiritual Ego and psychological Ego. — Constitution of the Ego 

as self in self-apperception. Distinction between the original 

Ego and the self apperceived in self-apperception; the person, 

the Ego of self-experience, of self-consciousness 

40 In the totality of these spiritual relations of subjects, there is opened up 

to us a field for another kind of science, different in principle from natural [348] 
science. There belongs here all observation of people, and all knowledge 
about people, the study of persons, of societies, and of the formation and 


SUPPLEMENTS 


359 


transformation of surrounding worlds for the persons— a complex of 
disciplines that we encompass under the title of the human sciences. 

What is the relation between this study of human and worldly personal- 
ities, the study of "us and our worid," the world in which we find 
5 ourselves, and the study of the soul in the sense of psychology? Let us 
begin with the first, the study of the spiritual world, which is the naturally 
given world. Here belong together: the study of persons and the study of 
individual and communal empirical worids. Persons, as what they are, are 
individuals in relation to their subjective pregivennesses, which are inter- 
10 twined with their external world; this is a common possession, or can be 
for all normal people. 

But there is indeed a distinction to be made: I can study the material 

surrounding world as a descriptive surrounding worid of the normal human 

being or of the normal humans of an epoch. On the other hand I can also 

15 study persons, the types of persons, etc., their character dispositions, etc., 

and also the essence and development of persons, the development of their 

apprehensions of the world, their things and positings of things; in short, I 

can pursue the human sciences. I can, e.g., consider how historical men 

carried on physics, examine how they conceived the idea of nature and how 

20 they came to the knowledge of nature under the guidance of that idea.^ But 

I can also enter into physics, for even that is a field of possible activity of 

the spiritual Ego, in which activity precisely this field arises constitutively : 

the logical determination of the material object as substantial-causal unity 

and thus of the whole of nature; Ukewise CorporeaHty under the viewpoint 

25 of nature, and finally the soul. 

In the attitude directed to nature and focused on the soul of the 
Corporeal body, the theme is the subject as the soul in connection with the 
Body (the psychophysical subject); however, in the spiritual attitude I have 
as my exclusive theme purely and simply the subjects and their surrounding 
30 worlds. Insofar as these worlds, regarding their structure in physical nature, 
are common in a typical and normal way, they are not Objective in an 
absolute and rigorous way; they require mathematization if rigorous 
Objectivity is sought. This Objectivity, however, is an aim of the work of 
thought which constitutes new objectivities, the " true " ones of the exact 
35 sciences. These do not determine (motivate) the spirit, as long as they do 
not come to consciousness. Likewise, a tool is determining, as tool, only for 
the one who has apprehended it as such; or again, for the Chinese a 
symphony of Beethoven does not exist and is therefore not determining for 
them. Each object of the surrounding worid, e.g., the red poppy, exists for [349] 
40 the one who "has" it in view, and this existence is "relative" (a peculiar 
relativity). 


> Thus I am now, as before, directed to the world the way it is pregiven, but my 
theme is especially human beings and humanity, insofar as they are consciously 
related to the world as their surrounding world, and at present are related to their 
subjective surrounding world; how they in this present have the field of their present 
sciences, etc. 


360 


SUPPLEMENTS 


But the personal subject is not the mere pure Ego. The personal Ego can 
be mistaken about its faculties. But in that case it has others. It must have 
some faculties or other, it necessarily is developing and developed, and it 
has its necessary genesis (teleiosis) I can study. It is always determined 
5 through the rhythm of the pregiven possession and of the attention to it 
and of the occupation with it and by the rhythm of the constitution of a 
new objectivity and of a new possession for new objectivities. 

Is this a study of the "soul" in the sense of modem psychology? The 
soul is not the Ego^ which has things and comports itself, is not the 

10 personal subject of the faculties, but is that which exists as something 
psychical inserted in the Body in Objective space and time.^ And here we 
touch the main difficulty : to determine this clearly. The spiritual Ego is the 
reference point for everything, it is the Ego that is related to whatever is 
spatio-temporal, but it is not itself in space and time. Everything temporal 

15 is in its field of view and hkewise everything spatial, everything ideal and 

everything empirical, etc. It is particularly related to a Body it has in a 

special sense as its own, but it is not something real connected with the 

Body. 

On the other hand, an animal (man or beast) can be considered as a 

20 thing in the world, as a real-causal unity. This is the case when the theme is 
the psychophysical, the subject in the sense of psychophysical psychology : 
the identical something in the empirical-real connections between the 
physical Body and what is psychical. Considered in this way the human 
being is a real unity of two strata in Objective nature. If I plunge myself 

25 into what is purely subjective, one of the two strata, and if I remain 
precisely in the natural attitude, then a man is an identical person related to 
his field of subjectivity, and the theme is the personal subject together with 
its subjective field. 

Here the question can be raised : is this personal subject not a "product of 

30 a subjective genetic formation "? It must indeed be thought necessarily as 
something which develops and which at the very outset of this development 
already has its definite dispositions. They are manifest in the way the hved 
experiences proceed in the stream of consciousness. The subject therefore 
can be understood also as the unity manifesting itself in the stream of 

35 consciousness. So here we distinguish : 1 . the unity of the person, 2. the self 

as the unity constituted in me as "Ego," constituted in self-experience, [350] 
self-apperception, as intended with an open horizon, the true being of 
which would be the being of the known person. The personal subject as 
developed is the subject that is conscious of itself; the self as object is a 


^ To be sure, I must distinguish soul and person, but is person not a determination 
of soul, a unity constituted in it? 

2 Does that mean to be in space and in space-time in the sense of natural 
science — under the idea of an "in-itself" as substratum of real "truths in them- 
selves''? This "Objective" being-in-itself in contrast to the being of subjective 
facticity, hence in contrast to the being-relative to me and my "here" and "now," 
hence at one time idealizing Objectivation, at another time subjectivation. 


SUPPLEMENTS 


361 


product of constitution, an " apperceptive " unity. At the beginning of its 
development, the subject is not an Object for itself and does not have the 
apperceptive unity, " Ego." But even in the further course of development, 
this unity is never determined once and for all: I can be more and other 
5 than the Ego as apperceptive unity.' 

To the pure essence of the soul there belongs an Ego-polarizing; further, 
there belongs to it the necessity of a development in which the Ego 
develops into a person and as a person. The essence of this development 
includes the sense that the Ego as person is constituted in the soul by 

10 means of self-experience. A personal being is only possible as conscious of 
itself, and the self of self-experience is, as experienced, an intended self; the 
true self is the person himself as the person in the present stage of his 
development. In life the person is transcendent — an inner transcendence 
which in spite of all self-deception is absolutely irreducible. 

1 5 On the basis of the natural attitude, we distinguish : 

1 . The concrete Ego or the soul, investigated according to its psychophy- 
sical character: psychological subjectivity: the subject Ego (it does not 
matter whether and to what extent it is itself thematically apperceived) 
existing in its " states " (as the states of its subjective real possessions), in its 

20 apperceptions and their meaning-contents, and in its acts. It is all that 
concretely taken together in an empirical-real nexus with the world of 
things as posited absolutely. Or the subject itself which hves in its psychic 
life and which is constantly involved in change as regards the content of 
this hfe, but which is a unity in this change and develops thereby, taken 

25 together with all that is "subjective" about it, though it is bound in a real 
way to the Body, in which is included the "person in nature." 

2. The subject in the nexus of motivation, as person, the spiritual subject 
or the concrete soul, though not understood as nature, and not the human 
personal subject in nature or connected with nature in the stricter (physical) 

30 sense. It is the subject which not only is, but which apperceives itself as 
subject. The subject as spirit, as person, has self-consciousness or an Ego 
(which is the same); a soul does not need to have self-consciousness. The 
subject, however, does not only apperceive itself, but it also apperceives 
other subjects who Hkewise not only are but also apperceive themselves, 

35 and all these subjects are in spiritual contact; apperceptions of the I and the 

thou, of the we, emerge, apperceptions which form the foundation of the [351] 
conunerce between persons. Furthermore, each subject has its surrounding 
world posited by it and given to it, as surrounding world which is 
ultimately identifiable as the one surrounding world common to all, i.e., the 

40 world. In relation to the one common surrounding world, personal 
associations are constituted, which can be considered as personalities of a 
higher order. In their case as well, we can speak of a " self-consciousness," 
and we can differentiate, for example as regards a nation, between the 


• The text which follows in the manuscript is employed in Section Three. Cf 
p. 264, 1. 30 to p. 265, 1. 21. 


362 


SUPPLEMENTS 


national soul and the nation as national subject in the sense of a 
self-conscious personality. 

What in truth is first in psychology is the soul according to its proper 
essence and according to its properly essential psychic connections with 
5 other souls. But still further distinctions are called for. The world as a 
universe of experience is a universal inductive unity, a unity of "empirical" 
interrelatedness, and within it is a special unity: nature. But inductive 
research regarding the psychic is not hmited to the psychophysical. One 
must and one can project in advance the possible theories of inductive 

10 research. But now a basic distinction is still lacking: the distinction between 
pure research of the soul, with stratification in personal research, and the 
research into the lower level of psychic passivity, which is preparatory 
because it is concerned with association as a fact of the spirit (which must 
be distinguished from association as inductive experience). 

15 But here it must be noted that research in the human sciences has as its 
world the surrounding world in its natural validity but at the same time has 
this world, in the sense of a subjective surrounding world, as a theme — and 
only in this way as theme. For the personal researcher, the human scientist, 
things are and are questioned only as existing things^ in the way persons 

20 (who are thematic there) intend them. 


§ 7, Subjects considered as nature and as spirit 

In the anthropological sciences of the spirit we have to do with subjects 
in the sense mentioned in 2) above, we have to do with persons and 
personalities. This subject is conscious of itself and thereby is a developed 

25 subject at the level of " spirit " in Leibniz' sense. The spirit as unity of the 
Ego of motivation, as unity of the Ego of faculties, becomes an Object, 
while I, in empathy, engage in a consideration of what is interior, and the 
Ego with which I then empathize (i.e., the subject prior to self-conscious- 
ness) is brought to clarity by me along with its surrounding world and 

30 along with what motivates it in that world. I myself remain in my intuitive 
world; as Ego I have my environment and I take that which I and my 
companion have intentionally in common precisely as common. That is 
what I do in the case of all people who I find in the compass of my 
environment; I empathize with each one and participate in his doing and 

35 suffering and share in his surrounding world, positing it in relation to mine, [352] 
precisely as long as they are concordant. I posit the Bodies there as things 
of my environment and on the other hand as expressions of the subjects 
(who have these Bodies in inner intuition) ; the subjects stand toward one 
another in the bond of communication, thus immediately, precisely in 

40 accord with their lived experience. In this life of spirits, in their being active 
and their suffering, as well as in their obscure background, in sleep, etc., 
their "reality" manifests itself, their unity of spiritual "causality of 
freedom " and of unfreedom. 

But what happens when we decide to investigate the soul and the person 


SUPPLEMENTS 


363 


as nature? What sort of direction of focus do we then have? As regards this 
mode of consideration, the following must be kept in mind : the things of 
my and our environment I thematize scientifically are not the things there 
as such, that is, not the things correlative to me and to us, as our 
5 over-and-against, but instead I posit them " absolutely. " That is, I raise the 
scientific question of their in-itself, and I investigate this in-itself to the 
exclusion of all else. Thus I take all environing things, both mine and those 
of the other subject, as mere appearances, and I now have no interest in 
these appearances, except insofar as they serve to present to me the in-itself. 

10 My theme is henceforth all "things" and the whole world valid for me and 
for us, yet not as they are factually valid for us, but instead with respect to 
their true being, and even then not as they are related to us under the idea 
of our rationality (that is, as if this was an ideal surrounding world), but 
precisely purely and simply as the one that would be reality " in itself." But 

15 since the others and I myself likewise belong together to my surrounding 

world and to the pregiven surrounding world of everybody and can be 

considered under the idea of its true being as members of the world, so all 

appearances have their turn as moments of the real world. 

What about the subjects, however? Can I also say here that I take them 

20 as mere appearances of' subjects in themselves? The Ego which expresses 
itself here in the intuitive Body, can that be an appearance of a still to be 
determined X? Can it be so in the sense that every intuitive thing is 
supposed to be the thing and not an aspect of the thing, an " appearance," 
which would contain in itself logically a true being, the "mathematical"? 

25 Thus a product of thought? In this sense, no; the other subject is given in 
empathy and manifests itself originally in its irreal absoluteness, and 
everyone capable of empathy grasps it directly as such, provided he grasps 
it correctly at all, provided he understands. Thus the human subject is 
altogether an intersubjective being. 

30 But the question is here not whether subjects are mere unities of 
presentations in the same sense as physical things, but whether subjects are 
not given as belonging to the pregiven world precisely in changing 
subjective modes as apperceived, represented, or meant in such and such a 
way, so that they, just like everything pregiven as worldly, may be 

35 interrogated as to their true sense versus their factical " appearances " and [353] 
opinions about them. And that is obviously the case. A presupposition for 
everything here is that we all, in communication and in individual-personal 
life, as constantly related to the community and to the world, "know" that 
what I experience in the world can be experienced as the same by everyone, 

40 whereas we know at the same time that each person has his own 
viewpoints, modes of appearance, etc. Thus the pregivenness of the world 
signifies the persistency of a universal world-conviction, a world-posses- 
sion, which at the same time is a presumption of being and is always 
givenness of being, indeed as givenness of a being which has its true being 

45 only ahead of itself. To be sure, in actual life one need not be conscious of 
this fact that true being is an idea lying in the infinite. 

What else still remains? Indeed only this, that the positing of the 


364 


SUPPLEMENTS 


SUPPLEMENTS 


365 


Objective world and first of all, e.g., of physical nature "in itself" 
(logical-true nature), a positing which ensues when I posit the relative thing 
of the environment purely and simply, creates, beyond its relativity with 
regard to me, a framework in which I can insert and must insert the spirit, 
5 the subject. Things have a causal essence, absolutely, whether I experience 
it or not. They are, together with their determinations, without need of me. 
Subjects, too, have their mundane in-itself, and to a certain degree they 
have a " causal " essence, whether they know about it or not and whether I 
know about it or not. There exist, accordingly, psychophysical connections, 

10 whether or not they enter into the compass of actual intentionality. Just as 
Objective nature was discovered by making experienced nature thematic 
purely as res extensa, experienced nature thus becoming a point of 
departure for the goal of determining theoretically an Objective in-itself of 
nature unconditionally valid for everybody (in other words, to fulfill a 

15 scientific theory of nature and a theoretical-logical determination of 
experienced being in theoretical operations), so the goal of a truth in itself 
valid for the whole world had to result, and thereby in the theoretical 
treatment of psychic subjectivity mathematical nature had to serve as 
substrate. But, of course, only a transcendental-universal consideration 

20 within the human sciences can clarify the sense of the mathematical 
naturalization and of its precise or more general application to the world 
and can set its rights. 

The human being as an inductive-real psychophysical unity is therefore a 
legitimate theme, but it must not be substituted for the psychic as the goal 

25 of an exclusively psychophysical psychology. The psychic bears in itself the 
person with his personal surrounding world as it appears and as in each 
case it is posited as vaUd by the person. In that case, therefore, all research 
in the human sciences is directed to a truth which is a component of the 
truth of the Objective real world (see below). But understood here is indeed 

30 the fundamental distinction between a human science functioning in this 

way (as a positive science in the system of positive sciences) versus an [354] 
absolute human science. I may completely put out of play my interest in a 
knowledge of the world, of the pregiven world of realities, and instead of 
making the world pure and simple my absolute theme, I make myself and 

35 my communicative subjectivity my absolute theme as the subjectivity whose 
comprehensive surrounding world includes that world and its truth, or as 
that subjectivity which posits the vahdity of everything valid as being and 
which is the subject for everything that is Object — its Object — and finally 
as that subjectivity which itself, if it suited its purpose, would pursue a 

40 truth in itself, etc. I posit myself as subject and not as world-Object already 
when I posit my Body and then everything valid for me as worldly and as 
being in whatever way, as the experienced of my experiences, etc., as what I 
possess in knowledge, as my pratical Object, etc. 

Here it must be noted that one's personal self-apperception, as well as 

45 the apperception experienced by empathy in the other, and the other's 
apperception are precisely apperception, self-appearance and appearance of 
others, and it must be noted further that over and against the true 


Objective being of the person of the personal world, I have in transcenden- 
tal subjectivity the counterpole, in which the apperception of one's self and 
of the Objective pole, ** person," constituted therein, is a transcendental 
product. 
5 And when I, in the act of empathy, experience others, I do not take them 
only as the experienced of my experiences, as my possession, but as subjects 
like myself, hence as subjects for their surrounding worid, valid for them, 
and at the same time as subjects for the one same world which in the 
"appearances" we all have of our surrounding worlds (in the worlds 
10 having subjective validity) is, as a result of an all-encompassing validity, 
vaUd for each of us as an identical worid, showing itself to one in this way, 
to others in that way. But this self-same world can still be relative, for even 
if we may all be in agreement on a certain content (as an identical, actually 
existing worid) over and against what is subjective and changing, yet in the 
15 progress of history this content itself can indeed change, though we do 
remain convinced that it is the one identical world that it was always, which 
only "appeared" to us historically or to people of different cultures at one 
time in one way, at another time differently. If this manner of consideration 
is carried out universally and consistently to the end, we then attain the 
20 universal and absolute human science — transcendental phenomenology. 
But what now is the situation with regard to the de facto human 
sciences? Are they sciences in the transcendental-phenomenological sense, 
in which is revealed the whole of concrete absolute subjectivity together 
with its entire life, including what is hidden in it, the life in which is 
25 constituted what appears and what is true, what is relative and what is 
absolutely true (in conformity with an idea which may possibly be justified 
or only partially justified)? The human sciences are, essentially, personal 
sciences. They deal with persons in personal associations and with the 
personal surrounding world, which arises out of personal acts in personal [355] 
30 motivations. That requires a very precise characterization and the demon- 
stration that here exists an immense field of overt nexuses, a field in which 
one can move and can intuit and consequently understand the rationality 
of motivations, whereas this whole field which can and does exist in the 
light has an obscure basis which is to be conquered, the underlying basis of 
35 passive motivations and constitutions which brings it about that the 
intelligibility of the human sciences always also retains aspects of unintelli- 
gibility. In addition, the human-scientific attitude is lacking in purity to the 
extent that no distinction is made between world-science, especially natural 
science and its attitude, and pure human science and to the extent that a 
40 science of nature is admitted beside it, lying on the same level, instead of 
being transformed into human science. 

The human being understood as a psychophysical unity is, as theme, as 
direction of investigation, obviously quite different from the human being 
taken as subject of intentionahty, related to being as (and insofar as it is) 
45 intentionally posited actual being. Surely experienced nature is "the same" 
as Objective nature, but what does that mean upon closer inspection? It 
means that if I carry out experience while in the theoretical attitude, I am 


366 


SUPPLEMENTS 


SUPPLEMENTS 


367 


maintaining, in the further course of natural-scientific thinking, the X of 
the determinations, originally posited in experience as being, an X to be 
determined precisely in the consciousness of identity. If, however, I am not 
in the theoretical attitude but for the rest am living the life of a subject, 
5 then the thing stands intuitively before my eyes: it stands there and it 
determines me, I evaluate it, etc. The life-attitude of the spirit (at least for 
the most part) is then not an attitude of theoretical determination, and 
what is the object there is what is intuited in the how of its being intuited, 
and it is characterized as being or as what is thought in the way it is thought 

10 and posited. That which is thus characterized determines me and is in fact 
not the same as the theoretical ''Objective" thing pertaining to another 
attitude; it is rather an ideal goal for theoretical work, and in this work I 
do not have the Objective thing itself (that would be the goal as attained), 
but instead what motivates me is the "idea" of something undetermined 

1 5 which is to be determined, on the basis experience, as intentional goal The 
attitude of the subject functioning here is hence different in general from 
the one of the natural scientist. The personal subject, functioning person- 
ally in life, is the subject of active life and has its constituted surrounding 
world as its concordant possessions; that is to say, it is the subject-Object, 

20 the subject in the apperception, person : the personal Ego of self-appercep- 
tion (of human self-experience) and correspondingly of thou-experience and 
we-experience. The attitude of the human scientist, however, is again a 
theoretical attitude ; to be specific, the human scientist makes the subject of 
personal apperception and its surrounding world a theoretical theme and 

25 raises the question of what a subject is and what pertains to a subject, while 
probing deeper, through empathy, into the subject's attitude. ' The personal 
subject, and what it possesses, is thereby the one whose true being the 
human scientist wants to determine, and this true being is a unity in its 
motivations, a unity which exists in these motivations in their special 

30 character and has consciousness (but not theoretical knowledge) of itself as 
such a unity. As self-conscious Ego, it has an apperception of itself, tlie 
original Ego-apperception. 


§ 8. Distinction between a psychological 
and a psychophysical analysis. 
35 Positive psychology — naturahstic psychology — human-scientific 

psychology ^inductive psychology 

The human being as a psychophysical Object has this in common with 
the spiritual, that the latter, with all its spirituality, all its comportment and 


[35^^ 


10 


15 


20 


25 


30 


35 


40 


being motivated, must be given in the psychophysicist's apperception of the 
human being and be given as connected with the Body. But the spirit as 
unity is not the theme of the psychophysicist as such; instead, he 
investigates what in the life of the spirit, in the having of sensations, in the 
course of its apperceptions, in the course of its acts, etc. is psychophysically 
conditioned and, conversely, what in Corporeality depends on the spiritual. 
The absolute theme of the positive psychologist (or positive anthropologist) 
is not the spirit as a being in itself and for itself but the spirit as pertaining 
to the extant world. The spirit taken purely in itself is also his theme, as is 
all psychophysical conditionality and everything empirically inductive 
which belongs to it as mundane; but this researcher's attitude is precisely a 
positive one and not the absolute one. 

Hence a peculiar change of attitude in relation to the spiritual is the 
result. In self-experience > and in experience of the subject (the spirit) in 
general, subjects are experienced as being and are given as unities of their 
modes of comportment in relation to what they possess, their spheres of 
subjectivity, their surrounding worlds: subject is on one side, and sur- 
rounding world is a correlate; the subjective as possession is not the 
subject. The subject as person is even to be distinguished from the 
subjective as life. The Ego-subject itself is dependent on its subjective 
spheres of possessions in the sense of its being affected, etc. : motivation. 
But in this respect the dependence is not a causal one, or rather, the subject 
is not an animal in nature. It is not intended and posited as nature and 
hence is not determinable as nature. It does not make sense to consider it as 
caused or as itself causing in the natural sense. Cause is an inductive and 
associative notion. Subjects, on the other hand, affect one another by way 
of motivation. Psychophysical conditionality exists between the Ego- 
domain of hved experience, together with all that occurs in it, and nature, 
first of all Corporeality, and specifically also between, e.g., the Ego-acts, 
the cogitationes, and Corporeality. The subject can be posited in relation to 
nature itself only in the way that the concrete soul (with its Ego, stream of 
hved experiences, and acts) pertains precisely in an empirical way to the 
Body. The Ego-acts come into consideration thereby precisely as events in 
natural time, in world time: as the "he is investigating," "he is evaluat- 
ing," etc., i.e., as the respective lived experiences, taken as facts in the 
world, in world time. 

The attitude of the positive psychologist is hence this: he grasps the 
human being as a whole, but he directs his thematic regard toward the 
entire realm of the content of lived experiences and toward any other 
subjective content of the human being, including also the Objects in the 


[357] 


' Thereby I have a personal apperception of others, and I distinguish it from the 
self-apperception which he has and which I attribute to him by empathy, or from the 
apperceptive appearances and intentions therein, from the subject-Object itself, the 
truth of which is sought by human science along with the concomitant true 
(Objective-subjective) motivations. 


With the science of the spirit (as such and as absolute spirit) the expression 
"self-experience" assumes a double meaning; self-experience precisely as transcen- 
dental or naively as human scientific self-experience, and self-experience as mundane 
self-experience. 


368 


SUPPLEMENTS 


latter's surrounding world, taking all these merely as correlates of human 
lived experience. What in this domain is ruled by psychophysical condition- 
ahty is a psychophysical theme. It is obvious that if the human being. 
Objectified in this way, is posited in nature and if psychology wants to 
5 investigate the whole being of man, it must indeed co-investigate the subject 
and all motivational nexuses; it must co-investigate the genesis of the 
subject. A complete Objective psychology must obviously encompass 
everything, including all motivational nexuses. This Objective psychology, 
just for that reason, does not coincide with purely inductive psychophysics, 

10 and the latter again does not coincide with the domain of those investiga- 
tions which study the human being empirically as a thing — purely accord- 
ing to inductive principles. Psychophysics is by no means a mathematically 
closed discipUne; it is no authentic psychology. It considers the human 
being extrinsically, purely within the frame of inductive-empirical regulari- 

15 ties and indeed psychophysical ones. But this characteristic of the psycho- 
physical, can that be what distinguishes psychophysics from a complete 
Objective psychology? ' The soul, as theme of psychology, has properties 
residing outside of the subjective personal sphere of motivation, e.g., 
memory-properties, associations, etc., which one can also observe Objec- 

20 tively and estabhsh experimentally, and which on the other hand can in no 
way be articulated as psychophysical nexuses. Hence the inductive does not 
coincide with Corporeal-psychic conditionahty but is to be understood here 
as the totahty of inductive regularities (and of the regularities of act- [358| 
comportment as well), which can be established by considering the subject 

25 as an Object in the empirical-inductive nexus, in the nexus of "habitual 
expectation." 

But here the question can be raised as to whether one can, in the case of 
such inductive and yet not psychophysical modes of consideration, also be 
in a human-scientific attitude. Hence one would have to allow for the 

30 possibility of a psychology adopting a human-scientific attitude, proceeding 
in an empirical-inductive way, and, if need be, experimentally. And in that 
case, experimental psychology would not necessarily be ** natural-scien- 
tific" (world-scientific) positive psychology. Under natural-scientific psy- 
chology one can understand a psychology which "naturalizes" the soul, 

35 i.e., considers it purely inductively like any material reality. There are limits 
within which this is justified : the soul, the psyche of the human being, 
comports itself as a thing in empirical regularity according to circumstances 
and can then be known according to external rules and indices. 


' Here a clear distinction must be made between: 1) the total range of inductive- 
empirical nexuses ; 2) what is specific to the psychophysical nexuses. Hence inductive 
psychology is not psychophysics. Even in the human sciences there can be induction, 
as an extrinsic method, one that is extrinsic to its essence, a method which produces 
precisely nothing in the way of essential nexuses or understanding. 


SUPPLEMENTS 


369 


§ 9. Stream of consciousness, lived experience, and 
intentional correlates as nexuses of psychic life 

Once the " soul " is specified as the theme of psychology and the initial 

question is raised concerning the relation of the psychological attitude to 

5 the attitude of the human sciences, then we have to procure before all, in 

order to get beyond these difficulties, an overview of everything that can be 

included under the title "the psychic life of man." 

Here we have: 

1) in unity with the Body, nexuses of sensations in the fields of 
10 sensation, associative complexes, apperceptions, etc. — a unity of the 

stream of lived experiences as a stream of living through. Every hved 
experience obtains a position in Objective time, and indeed by means of an 
Objective connection with the Body as nature, and there exist here, 
however undetermined, manifold Objective relations of dependence 
1 5 between the physical and the psychical, which pertain to Objective time, to 
the form of Objective existence. 

2) The lived experiences are thereby in and for themselves unities of the 
immanent stream of time; hence the nexus of the original flux which 
constitutes the temporal in immanence is different from the immanent 

20 intersubjective nexus of sociality. 

3) In the intentional lived experiences, the subject of the stream of hved 
experiences is conscious of this or that " Jxanscendent " being, visible 
things, intuitive things, things thought of, etc. We speak here hence of 
three : lived experience, subject of the lived experience, and the Object of 

25 the hved experience in consciousness. The title "soul" includes, then, 
together with the one stream of lived experience, the Ego-subject which 
pertains to it (now sleeping, now awake, now active in its acts, now affected 
by some "stimuU" or other, now freely active, now passive). And what is [359] 
"pregiven" to the Ego-subject are those multiple and intentionally consti- 

30 tuted "intuitive" or unintuitive objects, objects toward which it is directed 
or is not directed, etc. The " objects " are thereby given either in the form of 
doxic "theses" or with the characters of existing, possibly existing or 
probably existing, and also as value ^objects, as objects practically required 
or practically willed, etc. In a certain way, all that is a part of the stream of 

35 consciousness, but it is therein a part as intended, thought, surmised, 
valued etc. in this noematic form, together with the axiothetic characteris- 
tics and their modifications, related to the Ego. 

The Ego, however, can also relate itself to its own lived experiences and 
to itself in the form of "self-consciousness." 


40 


§ 10. The spiritual considered psychologically and the question 
of its "explanation." Two concepts of nature 

What about the noematic contents now, the " objects," and the Ego from 
the standpoint of empirical psychology and psychophysics? The Ego 


370 


SUPPLEMENTS 


comports itself to its objects, possibly to itself and its lived experiences— 
that is in each case to be considered an Objective temporal factum. With 
the Objective temporalization of the soul the Ego is also temporalized, 
although it is not itself a real [reell] part of the stream of consciousness : 
5 everything immanent, so far as it is a part of immanent time, is brought 
into coincidence with Objective time and along vi^ith it likewise is the Ego, 
insofar as it is the inseparable Ego of that stream. It pertains " always " and 
"permanently" to it, that each cogito, each affection, has its position in 
time. The question can be raised as to how the hved experiences as 

10 Objective facta are dependent on Corporeahty. Here belongs every cogito 
as lived experience and also the fact that the Ego thereby takes this or that 
position with regard to the cogitatum, that it comports itself in this or that 
way to its "objects" (noematically) ; all this is a fact united with the very 
lived experiences : the lived experiences in question occur in the stream as 

15 this or that cogito. This occurrence is an Objective real fact which can 
appear as dependent on physical circumstances, just as conversely physical 
processes can arise in Objective nature as a consequence of the psychic. The 
spiritual fact (my comporting myself in this way under my noematic 
circumstances), we can say, is a factum in the stream of consciousness, a 

20 factum of psychic being, which is Unked to the Body. It can be studied as 
this factum of nature, hence studied also according to psychophysical 
conditionalities and according to whatever other empirical-inductive regu- 
larities there may be. 
The person as such is the central unity of the Ego, a unity which endures 

25 through time in the multiplicity of affections and actions. In the course of 
these temporal Ego-events, the person is constituted originally as person, 
i.e., as substrate of personal characters, as, in its temporal being, substrate- [360| 
unity. The way a person is actually constituted, that is how he functions as 
a motivational subject for new affections and actions. Conversely, the 

30 person " manifests " himself to the one who understands him (I myself to 
myself in the case of self-understanding) by the way he allows himself at 
any moment to be motivated or by the way he is active. Hence a distinction 
must be made between original constitution and the understanding- 
experience within constitution and ^ithin what is already constituted, the 

35 understanding of which is all the more complete the more the constitution 
is revealed. 

If one studies the person in his unity, which manifests itself in his acts 
and affections, then one studies how he "affects" other persons and 
likewise how he spiritually undergoes effects from them, and furthermore 

40 one studies how personalities of a higher order are constituted, how 
individual persons and collective personalities of a higher level perform, 
how as correlates of their spiritual performances cultural objectivities and 
cultural arrangements are constituted, how individual persons, communal 
personalities, and cultural formations develop, in which forms they do so, 

45 in what typicality, etc. Obviously in all that there is also a system of events 
in "nature" as an empirical-causal spatio-temporal world-order, namely 
insofar as, to all of that, precisely systems of hved experiences of human 


SUPPLEMENTS 


371 


beings correspond as unities in spatio-temporal nature. If, or as long as, 
these lived experiences are psychophysically dependent and in general are 
subject to empirical-external inductive experimental rules, then these spiri- 
tual facts will also have to be considered under psychophysical and, more 
5 generally, natural points of view. 

One has to say therefore that a scientific consideration of reality (a 
complete scientific anthropology as positive science of man) includes a 
scientific study of the spirit and consequently of spiritual accomplishments, 
since all that is spiritual is enclosed in a certain way in the nexuses of lived 

10 experiences of the individual human being and since these possess to an 
indeterminate extent, which is precisely to be investigated further, a 
psychophysical conditionality toward physical nature. More generally: 
inductively there are empirical facts and in any case, even abstraction made 
from these, there are facts of the spatio-temporal world, and these remain 

15 even where such dependencies do not come into question. In the lived 

experiences is also included the significance human beings attribute to 

things of all sorts by means of value predicates, etc., in predicates relating 

to works, machines, pictures, etc. 

Culture is then a title on the one hand for actual things, which the 

20 positive scientific psychologist himself encounters as Objective and which 
he identifies as the intended things of the human being who is functioning 
here as Object of world-science, and on the other hand, it relates to the 
meaning-conferring acts of this human being in relation to his intended 
things. From the standpoint of a consideration of reality it is hence correct [361] 

25 to say that value-predicates, practological predicates, and hkewise the 
predicates of sensuous quality, color, tone, etc. are "merely subjective." 
They are not predicates of " merely subjective " modes of appearance in the 
sense of the real which is constituted thereby according to real qualities. 
This merely subjective is, in a very broad sense, ideal or irreal. It is, 

30 however, in its way, true being as intended and perhaps is exhibited truth 
over and against the mere appearances: e.g., the correct color related to 
our normal experience as human beings. And in another way it is the 
truth-value of the authentic work of art, which for its part, e.g. in its 
intuited colors and forms, is founded in the normal truth of being as merely 

35 subjective. 

One could say that the psychological is on the one hand consciousness, 
i.e., the real [reeil] psychic being in a psychical nexus ( = nexus of hved 
experience), and on the other hand the intentional-psychic being, the 
intentional correlate in the form of an intended thing with appearance- 

40 properties, value characteristics, etc. Thereby however the psychologist as a 
positive psychologist or as an investigator of nature executes the positing of 
physical nature' as a foundational positing and he participates in the 
positing, as nature, of the human being who serves him as an Object. But 


' Nature always refers to the totality of nature in the sense of the universal world 
of realities. 


372 


SUPPLEMENTS 


he justifies his procedure with demonstrative reasons, whereby the thing 
which was intentionally posited by the person is at the same time valid as 
an actual thing of nature, at least according to certain circumstances, and 
for the rest as an actual thing intended or intuited with these or those 
5 subjective characters. 

It is obvious that every spiritual relation between human beings, and 
everything which in the spirituality of a higher personality is constituted 
with regard to what gives to this spirituality spatio-temporal existence in 
universal nature, is reducible to the singular human beings psychophysi- 

10 cally considered and to the nexuses of nature existing between them. 
Intersubjective spirituality, taken in its purity, is, in world-experience, not 
for itself but, rather, mundane, hence naturally temporal in virtue of the 
determinate foundation of the singular subjects, with their individual 
empathies, in the individual real Bodies. Here "nature" (the world of 

1 5 positivity), which each natural science (positive science) investigates accord- 
ing to one area, is always thought of as the unity of the temporal order of 
existence, the unity of the order of coexistence and succession, in the one 
spatio-thingly determined time, the unity of an order of physical and 
(partially at least) psychical nature, which can be construed* and antici- 

20 pated, as well as, in retrospect, reconstrued. Nature must be a system of 
univocal determinability of all beings; that is what the natural scientist 
holds, guided as he is by physical nature as the fundamental domain. This 
world conceived as nature, the universal Objective world, is the universe of 
substrates for truths in themselves — this universe thought in a universal [362J 

25 science as deductible out of "axioms" or hypotheses is a geometrical and 
physical paradigm, the latter interpreted in a definite way. 

Beyond physical nature, with its closed lawfulness guaranteeing a 
constant and univocal temporal sequence in the form of a nature " left to 
its own devices," though on the other hand nevertheless allowing room for 

30 spirituality and spiritual effects in what is physical, there must hence still be 
a psychophysical lawfulness and a spiritual one. As regards the first, it is 
lawfulness which for certain physical constellations of being (if not, indeed, 
for everything physical) requires a spiritual " parallel " of a definite essence. 
As regards the latter, there are structural laws of unity and perhaps laws of 

35 the properly essential development of the psyche as immanent psychical 
laws. All the person's spiritual activity, evaluating, accomplishing, and 
creating, can be included here, as belonging to the realm of Objective facts 
in the one temporal-spatial order. 
We are therefore dealing here with nature in a double sense : 

40 1) as physical nature, along with the psychic (in the broadest sense) 
legitimately empathized in it. It is the realm of Objectively real facts versus 
"merely subjective facts;" it is the totality of all that is given in mere 
"factual" experience, whose intended Objects of experience have been freed 
of all merely subjective determinations, freed of all determinations which 


That means : can be construed in the sense of the physicalistic model. 


SUPPLEMENTS 


373 


do not concord and which do not have to comply with the concordance of 
demonstration, first within the individual subject and its concordance in its 
original demonstrations, and then in intersubjectivity. But there must be a 
necessary and not an accidental concordance, founded apriori in the idea of 
5 an "in itself." To the realm of an accidental concordance there also belong 
the " secondary quahties " as the ones by means of which Objective physical 
nature "presents" itself to subjects. In physical nature taken in that sense 
we have hence a universe of factual. Objectively determinable being, free of 
all determinations which in their proper predicative meaning refer back to 

10 subjects and groups of subjects experiencing them, being presented with 
them, feeling them, taking positions toward them, acting on them, etc. 

In the context of this Objective nature, there also belongs the soul as 
experientially connected with the Body, as an Objective real fact. 
2) One can, however, understand nature also as the realm of inductive 

15 experiential properties, and there must be such properties if talk of an 
ordering of the spiritual, of the correlates of lived experience, into nature is 
to make any sense. 

In this way, all that is psychical or all that is personal can be considered 
under the aspect of a being, an event, a homogeneous process-formation in 

20 Objective spatio-temporal nature, and it is thereby always a constituent of 

what is "psychic" in physical things, in Bodies. Hence the person is [363] 
thereby also something that occurs in nature (in the Objective nature of 
natural science), Hnked with a Body, belonging to what is psychic of the 
Body, a higher stratum of the Corporeal body as a being in itself. 

25 In this conception there arises a question which is an obvious one in the 
attitude of natural science, the question of the " natural-scientific explana- 
tion" of the psychic, and the sense and legitimacy of this question must be 
considered. First of all, the meaning of the term " existing " as applied to 
the psychic (the psychic as existing) must be investigated. The psychic is 

30 subjectivity within the experience of empathy ; it is there experienced as 
temporally coexisting with the Corporeal-physical. Every physical Object 
which has irreal predicates (predicates added on to physical things, such as 
values) is posited merely as physical. In the natural attitude, it is precisely 
only the individual that is posited, that which is intersubjectively identical 

35 for everyone: on the lowest level as physical nature and, as a further 
stratum, the "psychical" as co-experienced with it in Objective time. The 
problem then is how the Objective temporal order of the psychic object of 
empathy is to be determined according to its manifold content. The 
physical is, in conformity with its proper ontological sense, through and 

40 through inductive-empirical. How far does the inductive-empirical go 
beyond that? What about the psychic in its own proper character? Is it also 
something inductive-empirical, or does it not have an apriori essence 
presupposed by all inductive psychic empirics? And if we hence subtract it 
by essential necessity from this structure, does there not then remain 

45 something still to be investigated that is not inductive-empirical? What 
kind of distribution of Objective time belongs to the sphere of the interior 
life which reaches beyond the circle of immediate psychophysical indica- 


374 


SUPPLEMENTS 


tion? What kind of distinctions do we need here with regard to the 
inductive connections? To have broached these questions may for the 
moment suffice. 


§11. The human sciences posit subjectivity as 
5 absolute. — ''Inner" and ''outer" experience 

We now turn to a consideration of the human-scientific attitude. Instead 
of assigning the spirit, persons, personal communities, and personal 
accomphshments to one nature, instead of attaching them to the nature 
which is at their basis and which is posited (absolutely) as something in 

10 itself, it is the character of the human sciences to posit subjectivity as 
absolute, to acknowledge nature only as the intuitively existing surrounding 
world, or as a represented, thought, and intended surrounding world of 
persons, and to take mathematical Objective nature, which previously was 
the " true reaUty," only as (what in fact it merely is) a theoretical though 

15 rational construction on the part of man as the subject of scientific 
activities, partially accomphshed by individual persons, partially by social 
personalities. 

In the spiritual attitude we have, as given unities, the persons and their [364] 
surrounding worlds and their activities in relation to these surrounding 

20 worlds ; we investigate them intuitively and analytically, and we bring them 
to scientific understanding (based on intuition). Scientifically we go back 
to the nexuses of the stream of consciousness of the respective Ego along 
with its sensuous substrata, and we investigate here in intentional research 
all these connections and the manner in which therein personal unities are 

25 constituted by means of a (constituted) determinateness in the surrounding 
world. The givennesses of the surrounding world, the things of nature and 
so on, are reduced to constituted unities and intersubjective regulations. In 
short, all the human sciences acquire an ultimate linkage in phenomenology 
as empirical phenomenology (modification of transcendental phenomeno- 

30 logy). Human science is a science on the basis of sheer intuition, and its 
theoretical determination does not consist in the construction of an 
Objective temporal order but in the construction of a subjective order of 
phenomena according to noetic and noematic motivations in a subjective 
(though super-individual) temporal order. That is, it consists in an order 

35 which posits all immanent streams of hved experience and the intentional 
correlates in them with their immanent temporal orders in one unitary 
ordered relation, the index of which is the transcendently constituted 
Objective temporal order. 

Natural science proceeds from outer experience; that is its root and 

40 ground, from it all its pregivennesses originate. It works on what is 
experienced by the subject (or by different subjects in different modes of 
givenness) — experienced in changing qualities (though this indeed, in spite 
of the differences in the qualities and the subjective aspects, proves to be 
the one same actual being)— as the "in itself," the content of the 


SUPPLEMENTS 


375 


supra-subjective, the logical invariant for each subject with the same 
experience, the invariant in relation to all predicates which derive from the 
manifold subjective circumstances. The "Objective" is what, in the chang- 
ing subjective elements, in the subjectively changing manifolds, is the 
5 invariant "true being," and this is, above all. Objective nature in the first 
sense, namely physical nature. The broadened second nature arises through 
externalization, through the regulated linkage of the psychical to the 
physical. 

Descriptive natural science, the science of the intuitive forms and orders 

10 of classes (which have an intersubjective content provided they are based 
on a society of normal people), is a natural science only if conceived as a 
sublevel therein, assigned the task of determining in a theoretical-Objective 
way, in the sense of an Objective (exact) science of nature, the universal- 
subjective which belongs to a society of normal human beings. Even all 

15 morphology in the human sciences, including the morphology of individual 
psychology, can be regarded as such a sublevel: hence one aiming at an 
"Objective" determination, a determination with Objective existence as [365] 
spatio-temporal existence, which is grasped in the apperception, "outer 
experience." But the human sciences are based purely and simply on "inner 

20 experience," or, formulated in a better way, on phenomenological experi- 
ence ; for inner experience in the sense of psychological self-experience and 
experience of the other, as these are founded in physical experience, is a 
form of outer experience, of " nature "-experience. The immanent, that 
which is found in myself, is then considered thematically as something to be 

25 found in the soul pertaining to my Body, as a lived experience, etc. In a 
certain sense the human sciences thematically use outer experience as well, 
but just as the science of nature externalizes immanent experience (by 
means of a naturalized thematic attitude), so the human sciences internalize 
outer experience. They do not make outer experience thematic as outer, but 

30 they make it thematic as an inner accomplishment. The human scientist is 
not, like the natural scientist, a subject that thematically-theoretically 
engages in outer experience; i.e., his theoretical attitude does not aim at 
positing the externally experienced Object as his theme pure and simple, 
specifically in the sense of what must be determined Objectively and as 

35 purely factual, but he aims at positing it as noema of the experience and as 
belonging to the surrounding world of the experiencing subject or exper- 
iencing community, and his goal is to determine this in its subjective nexus. 
The thesis put into effect here is the phenomenological thesis of experience : 
"an Ego-subject experiences this or that;" for this thesis, then, there is no 

40 difference between the experience of nature, the experience of sensibly 
intuitive things, sense-things, and the experience of comparable axiological 
and practical Objectivities, The theme is therefore subjectivity and the 
Object as such, which, in the subjective, appears, is posited, and perhaps is 
even theoretically determined. And so in general, the theme is subjectivity 

45 both as individual and social, together with all its intentional correlates. 
Whatever is Objective in natural science is then characterized as a system of 
distinctive formations of subjectivity, especially of the subjectivity which 


376 


SUPPLEMENTS 


investigates nature in a rational way. The human scientist thus goes back 
precisely one level, back to the subject which investigates nature and so to 
any subject operative either rationally or irrationally. 
The definition of the science of " nature " as a science of Objectivity and 
5 the science of the spirit as a science of subjectivity is obviously old- 
fashioned and trivial. But Dilthey was the first to intuit (ahhough he in no 
way raised it to theoretical clarity and was not even able to exhibit the 
distinction in its purity) that there must be two sciences of subjectivity : the 
one follows the path of psychophysics, or, more clearly, it is a science 

10 which determines the spiritual Objectively as nature and in nature, hence 
determines it Objectively as mundane; the other, which is not a natural 
science, not science of the spirit based on outer experience, is a science that 
encompasses all sciences of nature, even the natural-scientific theories of 
the spirit (natural-scientific psychology, anthropology), as "spiritual for- [366] 

15 mations," but which also acknowledges them as special spiritual forma- 
tions, next to which there are so many others. The extant empirical human 
sciences are descriptive-intuitive, because everything spiritual must be given 
on the basis of intuitive sources themselves and only on the basis of such 
sources, and not given, like the physical in-itself (of the exact natural 

20 sciences), by means of evident thought, as ideal formation. Belonging here 
are also in a certain way the descriptive " natural " sciences, which present 
types of spiritual formations and as such pertain to the sphere of 
subjectivity. What is intuitively given and what is apprehended by means of 
intuitive concepts is, however, not a sublevel of Objectifying explanation 

25 (nature-explanation) but of subjectifying explanation; that is to say, it is a 
sublevel of the rendering understandable of aspects of the constitutions 
which structure the formations and of aspects of all motivations which 
traverse different correlative strata — "motivations" which connect 
together lived experiences in an intelligible way and motivations which 

30 extend between the Ego and its intentional correlates, etc. In a very broad 
sense, these are purely subjective nexuses of causality, of the because (if) 
and the then, that are to be revealed in a purely intuitive way. 

Hence the attitude of the historian, or the Unguist, etc, is a human- 
scientific attitude, although at any given time only a very limited group of 

35 formations and motivational strata come within his thematic focus. It is not 
the sciences of nature but the human sciences that lead into the " philoso- 
phical" depths; for the philosophical depths are the depths of ultimate 
being. 
Insofar as we have actually original intuition, we have precisely what is 

40 original. And the actually originally intuited, although the natural-scientific 
attitude will call it " merely subjective " and will treat it as unimportant and 
try to eliminate it, as is demanded by the theoretical interest of natural 
science, is the true in the best sense. It is the absolute, the source of 
everything. It has absolute self-validity and not merely validity as a 

45 constitutive product of scientific experience, which in ultimate truth is still 
only an index for a regulated subjectivity. 

The enormous practical significance of Objectivation, its significance for 


SUPPLEMENTS 


377 


the necessary task of the "calculation" of the Objective course of events, 
made the modems blind to the primal legitimacy of the givennesses of 
intuition and blind to the fact that here lies the source of all legitimation, 
and that this source does not extend into the sciences of nature, but that it 
5 alone in its primal form contains truth, and that the development of truth 
must preserve the form of intuition, whereas the science of nature has a 
place in the realm of philosophical truth only if it is interpreted as coming 
forth from that intuitive source and as lying within its subjective signifi- 
cance (and not in the absolute significance which is the result of a dogmatic 
10 conception of the world). 


§ 12. Nature in the human-scientific attitude. — The 
human-scientific and the phenomenological attitude 


[367] 


These remarks, though on the whole very useful, are in need of both 
delimitation and supplementation. 

15 The human scientist, e.g., the linguist or the historian, constantly 
"partakes of" outer experience; "nature" is there for him, the one nature 
common to all persons who share a social nexus, experienced by all of them 
as common, exhibited to all as existent. However, he himself has no 
theoretical interest in determining this common nature and therefore none 

20 in determining psychic nature as it is "bound" to the nature determined 
theoretically by natural science. His theoretical theme is personal subjectiv- 
ity in relation to its surrounding world: and intuitively given nature is 
intuited by the persons as intuitive immediate surrounding world, that is, 
given to them immediately and precisely intuitively. Perhaps even the 

25 nature conceived in natural science is surrounding world, namely surround- 
ing world for the practicing natural scientists, but no further than they 
know of it in their theories. The human scientist does not need any 
transcendental-phenomenological reduction to the phenomena of phenom- 
enology, a reduction to the transcendental-pure cogito, to the transcenden- 

30 tal plurality of cogitating subjects and to their being as thinking subjects. 
The experienced world is for him precisely experienced, and experienced in 
the natural sense, in the sense of practical life ; it is lived in the experienc- 
ing, in straightforward omni-lateral "experiencing" of the constituted 
world of things, of human beings and of animals, of things as natural 

35 things, of things perhaps as national economic values, universal aids, 
utilities, etc., and in the "experiencing" of works of art, literary products, 
etc. The straightforwardly " experienced " world is the one in which persons 
live related to it in a passive or active way, regarding which they take 
positions, judge, evaluate, practically transform, etc. The human scientist 

40 may not, by an artificial methodology, exclude anything from this sphere. 
To be sure, the method for a human-scientific psychology of the inner life 
requires "psychological reduction." But the historical, concretely descrip- 
tive, human sciences hold fast to experience and its experiential unities and 
are in no need of a phenomenological-psychological reduction as a rigorous 


378 


SUPPLEMENTS 


method; they do not aim at ultimate, constitutive, elementary analyses, 
elementary essential laws of intentionality, and the ultimate human- 
scientific "explanation." For the human scientist everything remains open; 
and he also investigates it in multiple ways: as a human scientist he 
5 investigates human beings, their reciprocal personal associations and their 
activities, their accomplishments and the results of their accomphshments, 
etc. 

But because his research interest focuses exclusively on personal subjects, 
individual subjects as well as communal subjects (the latter, for their part, 

10 having arisen through the personal influence of individual subjects on each [368] 
other), and on personal subjective accomphshments, both as performance 
and as the performed, for him all objectivity (always straightforwardly 
valid), all nature, and even all other objectivities (including works, goods, 
etc.) come into consideration only insofar as the objects are the experienced 

15 (or in consciousness in some other way) objects of persons or are newly 
constituted by them in active conscious activities. 

Included under the title of human-scientific studies (that is, in our 
historically elaborated, so-called "human sciences") are those sciences 
which aim at a clarifying understanding of specifically personal accomphsh- 

20 ments as active subject-accomplishments and which investigate their " prod- 
ucts" or active formations. But then, for our human scientist, there 
remains here a sphere of incomprehensibility, which is obviously not purely 
separate ; there remains in human-scientific explanation much that is simply 
inexplicable and is consequendy even characterized as lying outside the 

25 realm of the human sciences, as not having originated in effective acts of 
pregiven persons, mundane beings in their motivational nexus. 

It would be the task of the psychology of the active motivations of 
concrete persons to investigate here what is the apriori and, in general, the 
empirical of this sphere; on the other hand, psychology would obviously 

30 also have to investigate the sphere of passive affections and the passive 
modes of comportment of subjects, their phantasies, their associations, etc. 
Human-scientific psychology, however, as altogether directed to ultimate 
explications, cannot merely be a psychology of active motivations. It 
cannot be satisfied with having anything left over that is incomprehensible. 

35 Concrete-descriptive human science can be self-satisfied, however, because 
it seeks a concretely intuitive understanding, which is possible without an 
elemental understanding of ultimate constitution according to essential 
laws, something that is a universally explicating cognition of phenomeno- 
logy. 

40 Analogous to this is descriptive natural science and its comprehensibility 
within description (not over against theoretical natural science as " explain- 
ing out of elementary laws" — for intuitive description is here not a 
description of what is naturally in itselQ- The intuitive world remains 
thereby constantly presupposed and posited. But the intuitive world is 

45 precisely the world purely as a unity of its interpersonal modes of 
appearance. 

Space " is " indeed " Objective " space, but the scientific interest of the 


SUPPLEMENTS 


379 


human scientist is not simply to determine this Objectivity as such, under 
the idea of an unconditioned Objectivity, or to determine spatial things 
according to their "true being in itself" as unconditioned and valid for 
everyone and for all times. The things " themselves " are the ones identified 
5 in the here and in the there ; they come into consideration, however, only as 
things of personal subjects, only as appearing in the here and in the there, 
although they are always identified and likewise quahfied as the things now 
appearing intuitively in such a way. Space is an index for the system of [369] 
orientations. All things are under consideration according to how they are 

10 given in orientation; the subject comports himself to the spatial thing in the 
process of moving "from here to there," etc. To each subject these oriented 
things, qualified sensuously in this or that way and often individually 
quahfied in many variations, are pregiven as his surrounding world, and it 
is a datum that each subject has his aspects of "the" things, his 

15 perceptions, etc. 

Now a distinction must be made between 1) concrete human science as 
science of persons, of their personal comportment in relation to their 
surrounding world, and of this surrounding world itself — universal des- 
criptive science of the subjective, "personal," world. 2) The scientific 

20 investigation of personal interiority, of prepersonal mundane constitutive 
subjectivity hidden in the personal mundane attitude— transcendental 
subjectivity in the proper sense. Furthermore : the distinction between the 
concrete (historical) descriptive attitude and science and, on the other hand, 
a science directed to lawful universality, hence not a mere morphology in 

25 facticity, which always remains historical. We arrive then at 1) an eidetics 
of personal possible worlds and 2) eidetic phenomenology. 

If, instead of describing identical things, the way they are given in their 
intuitive qualities, one undertakes the description of the thing-appearances 
in their relative noetical sense — i.e., first of all, the manifold appearances 

30 of the intuitive things as they present themselves (and are always posited 
intuitively as identical) for the subject — and if one investigates their 
nexuses and the way they exhibit themselves phenomenally in the con- 
sciousness of the subjects and in the nexus of empathy between subjects and 
how they emerge in consciousness according to their different levels, how in 

35 subjects unities as thing-unities develop apperceptively and become pregiv- 
ennesses, toward which the subjects can take a position, then one is 
carrying out the deeper " comprehending " clarification of the being of the 
surrounding world, which is, moreover, for the human sciences, a pregiven 
being, and one is performing a phenomenological clarification of the 

40 ultimate foundations of the human sciences. Furthermore, this clarification 
is of a being which is already given, as a factum, naturally utilizing here an 
eidetic spiritual-psychological "phenomenology" but not a transcendental 
phenomenology. ' The attitude toward the already given world is here not [370] 


' Transcendental clarification : the foundation of human science as in its way a 
positive science is the eidetic science of personal mundaneity (also in the sense of the 


380 


SUPPLEMENTS 


SUPPLEMENTS 


381 


changed. That which appears in nature is still posited in a natural way, the 
only difference is that the theme of the scientific research and of the 
theoretical determination is subjectivity, and indeed, both here and ulti- 
mately, subjectivity insofar as it in a certain sense produces nature, existent 
5 nature, as knowledge, as its representation, and as existing in such and such 
a way, by means of manifold ways of appearance and in modes of 
consciousness in which it precisely brings this nature intentionally into 
appearance and to cognitive positing as existing. To this then is joined 
natural-scientific knowledge, which in this nexus turns into the human- 

10 scientific clarification of natural science. 

All this is the case without there being an explicit enactment of a 
'' phenomenological reduction," without there being any break in the 
positing of natural reality. All historical personalities, states, churches, etc. 
are likewise posited in advance, and subsequently they are '* explained" in a 

15 subjective human-scientific way and thus made intelligible. And in a similar 
way the pregiven world is made intelhgible out of subjectivity, without 
having put it into brackets. 

According to this conception, we would have in human science several 
levels of clarification and, corresponding to them, several discipUnes. In the 

20 concrete human sciences, persons, personal communities, accomplishments 
as processes of performing, and formations produced in the accomphsh- 
ments— all this belongs, if it concerns precisely the personal in the specific 
sense, to the realm of free subjectivity, active or passive in its proper acts. 
In order to bring the objectivities in question to givenness, experience is 

25 needed— in this case the experience of personal unities and of their 
formations and the experience of the activities (and their motives) which 
produce them — in short, what is needed is the sphere of *' spirituality," 
self-integrated and to be characterized especially as a proper mundane 
sphere of being. In this characteristic lies also the special task of the 


ideally mundane); included in it are the foundational cognitions of the method of all 
sciences as personal accomplishments, — To personal or human science, however, 
does not pertain the constituting life which unfolds " in " the persons. But there is still 
more : human sciences, the historically descriptive and the eidetic, always have their 
factual (or possible) world of the spirit as pregiven, just as in the " nature "-attitude 
nature is presupposed. The natural attitude in general is : to have the natural world of 
the spirit pregiven, and to it the nature-attitude and nature itself as theme of 
knowledge are subordinated. — Now, however, I can exercise epoche ; if I do so with 
regard to the world of the spirit, then consequently also with regard to physical 
nature, and then to nature in an enlarged sense, what remains? I am the Ego that has 
my personal Ego as a phenomenon and with it the whole personal world. — And then 
I arrive at what is new, at absolute transcendental subjectivity and the universe of its 
phenomena. But if I do not execute the epoche, then I attain only a human science 
and a human-scientific psychology on the natural soil of the world of spirit, parallel 
to natural psychology. 


physical biology of the organic living being. One must, however, pay 
attention to the fact that the identical spatio-temporal world of reality 
co-appertains to the content of the personal surrounding world — ^but in the 
way in which it is intuitively determined for the personal community. In 
5 order to bring this world to givenness, an originarily giving intuition is 
needed ("inner" intuition, if need be a reproductive one and then a 
quasi-originarily giving intuition). This precedes science no matter how [371] 
much it is incorporated into the ambit of scientific method. One can 
intuitively bring alive a personality in its work and in its creations without 

10 thereby making any kind of scientific claim. To that belongs, above all, 

description by means of scientifically descriptive concepts. Obviously the 

morphology of spirituality is included here, developmental morphology as 

well. 

In the production of the constituting intuition there is already at work an 

15 understanding; in the corresponding description there is already a scientific 
understanding ^particularly insofar as eidetic necessities of motivation are 
acknowledged or even are properly elaborated and applied to a given case, 
and then we have an explanatory understanding. We understand hence 
concretely and we understand in a scientific way in general by means of a 

20 recourse to laws of motivation. We understand individual lines, individual 
pages, actions, character-properties of personal subjectivity or of objectivi- 
ties correlative to persons, while other pages remain unknown and not 
understood. We posit the aim of exposing the unity of the life of the spirit, 
the large structural nexuses which encompass it, in an intuitive way and 

25 according to concepts and motivational laws. But as long as the underlying 
ground of passivity is outside of this investigation, something irrational yet 
remains. 

Scientific tasks: 

1) The elaboration of personal and thereby universal experience. Persons 

30 as beings in identity, but unknown as to their "history," unknown as to 
their previous personal life. With simple empathy there arises in experience 
that which is directly indicated together with a more or less vague 
evocation of the particular "apprehensions" inserted into the universal 
apperception, person. The disclosure of personal elapsed temporality, 

35 together with its concomitant mundane appearances, intentions, motiva- 
tions, activities, external and internal actions in their personal nexus — all 
of which must likewise be disclosed to a certain degree. 

To the apperception, person, belongs a personal nexus and the Umitless 
horizon of the history in which each individual personaUty " develops " in 

40 the unity of personal nexuses. Historiography is the elaboration of true 
history as a concordant historical experience under the idea of a concor- 
dance maintaining itself in the progress of the disclosing elaboration of this 
experience and resulting always in the same truth (experiential truth), but 
only in a continuously more precise determination. The disclosure results 

45 from the actual historical present to which the historian himself necessarily 
belongs. 


382 


SUPPLEMENTS 


Linguistic expression here does not have at first the function of an 
absolutely fixed conceptuahty but is '* pictorial" expression which is [3721 
descriptive in the primary sense, that is, gifted in evoking intuition. Every 
means to this is legitimate. 
5 2) Science in the pregnant sense, as science which strives for "exact- 
ness," requires a methodology which determines and fixes what is intuited 
by means of proper and essential concepts in the absolute identity of the 
conceptual essences. 

This leads to a universal morphology which is in search of stable 

10 typological concepts and which at the same time creates for the historical a 
*' natural history" already moving within universalities. 

3) Eidetic idealization: free variation and the search for essential neces- 
sities and essential laws. 
To the eidetic theme of personality and personal world there also belongs 

15 the identical natural (real) worid, but in a double way, just as the idea of a 
personal world in general is a double one: 1) as morphological idea: idea 
of an existing personal world, existing within a flux and hence as 
morphological; to it belongs an open horizon though yet not an infinitude. 
It is at least questionable first whether, if we or if a personality discloses its 

20 horizon and encounters it as infinite, an infinitude can then be claimed as 
an actual being. — 2) We form the idea of a personality which sustains 
itself into the infinite, together with the corresponding infinitude of the 
identical real world sustaining itself for the personality. The infinite idea is 
the idea of a world which exists in itself as a substrate of truths in 

25 themselves and absolutely valid. From this idea as norm of knowledge for 
the living personality taken in its personal (relative) surrounding world, 
there results the practical goal of an infinite "exact science" striving for 
this idea by way of approximation. 


Supplement XIII (to Section Three, especially to § 64) 

30 "Personal subjectivity " as a theoretical theme — over against that subject 
and subject life which is considered ^ reality unified with physical nature 
and especially with physical Corporeality, as the point of convergence of 
psychophysical conditionalities; that is, the subject that now senses red 
because certain electro-magnetic waves are striking his retina, functioning 

35 physiologically in a normal way, are changed into nervous stimulation, and 
are propagated up to the central nervous system, etc. On the other hand, 
the " living subject " is the subject of his surrounding world, including his 
surrounding world of spatial things, but also his world of values and of 
goods, his personal and social surrounding world. This subject is a person 

40 among persons, a citizen of a state, a legal subject, a member of a union, an 
officer, etc., and, as such, is affected by the Objects now given in his 
surroundings, feels their force and, in turn, acts upon them. This living 
subject is the subject of actual life, standing towards his congeners in a [373] 
nexus of empathy, in accordance with which he acknowledges the other and 


SUPPLEMENTS 


383 


himself as first experiencing one and the same common surrounding world, 
though each has his own subjective ways of givenness of this common 
world. 
Thus man in nature as nature, nature as the correlate of the natural- 
5 scientific attitude— vs. man as the center of his surrounding world. Let us 
restrict ourselves to the material surrounding world and consider: 

1) the subject in reference to a corporeal thing in the surrounding world, 
and 

2) the subject as nature in a real relation to the same thing: our 
10 cathedral, say. 

Concerning 1): In the attitude of actual life there is a conscious having 
by the Ego of Objects as an immediate having-over-against, a conscious- 
ness of the presence of the cathedral "in the flesh." If someone else is 
standing beside me, looking at the cathedral, then I understand this without 

15 any further ado. His seeing, which I acknowledge in him by empathy, is 
equally an immediate having-over-against; the Object is immediately given. 
With each step that I take, the "view" of the cathedral, its orientation, 
changes, but I see it itself immediately. The seen regulates everything I do, 
from it I am affected in all my interests and activities, etc. If I make the 

20 man of this life into a thehie, then I have to treat him as the subject of his 
surrounding world, as the center of intentionality in reference to the 
"existing" Objects he is conscious of. 

Concerning 2) : In the attitude of natural science, man is corporeally a 
body among bodies, one of which is the cathedral in a determinate real 

25 place in space. I experience myself and the other as unities of body and soul. 
That is, I am now experiencing human beings as psychophysical; and the 
perceptual appearances in the soul then receive the real sense of last 
members of a physical-causal and psychophysical^ conditional process of, 
for example, this content: electro-magnetic waves, transmitted from the 

30 physical body we call " cathedral," are propagated in world-space and act 
as physical stimuli on my corporeal nerve endings and on those of the other 
person, etc. 

Is this the real truth, and over against it is the living subject's immediate 
seeing a mere illusion ? Without entering into an epistemological debate, still 

35 it is clear that such an interpretation would be reversed to the extent that all 
psychophysical knowledge, all knowledge of reahty, rests on immediate 
experience. In other words, the nature-attitude is a special attitude within 
life; it is only that I do not take the Ego as the intentional subject of life 
and this naturally interested life as themes. All that remains in self- 

40 forgetfulness. Further, immediate seeing could be an illusion only if it 

enclosed in its own sense a claim which was refuted by psychophysical [374] 
truth. That is out of the question. On the contrary : 

Simple perception contains in its sense as perception nothing of an 
apprehension of a causal relation between my soul, my sensations, my 

45 appearances, and the thing. 

I, the seer, also have my Body as something immediately seen, and only 
in the course of my experience do I become aware that certain of my 


384 


SUPPLEMENTS 


(immediately perceived or perceptible) organs are organs of perception, 
that they really have something to do with the seeing of things, and, last of 
all, that psychophysical causality obtains here. 

The psychophysical conception arises in a special attitude, which subse- 
5 quently can become a theoretical attitude and a psychophysical^ scientific 
one. Likewise, the thematic apprehension of the thing as nature (in the sense 
of natural science— but also already prior to science, though not with 
thematic consistency) already arises through a special thematic attitude 
directed to the true being-in-itself of the seen, to what it is in itself: namely, 
10 a substrate of causal properties. 

Likewise also arises, in an analogous attitude, the conception of the soul 
as a reality in the real world. To this attitude belongs then precisely 
everything which makes subjectivity a real component of human, psycho- 
physical, reality : thus all of psycho-physical causality. 
15 Is the theoretical attitude toward nature — toward the worid as the total 
unity of reaUties— r//e only possible theoretical attitudel No, it is in fact a 
special kind of Ego-iife and habituality of Ego-life, whereby precisely this 
itself remains anonymous; another possible attitude is the one directed to 
"living subjectivity " or to the human spirit — in the human sciences. 
20 Every science proceeds from a natural ground; or, better, every science 
stands on one. Natural science deals with reahty and real-causal nexuses; 
human science investigates natural personal being and life and the nexuses 
of personal life (Ego-life, active and passive). The "" worids " of the natural 
and the human sciences are correlative and are not at all incompatible. The 
25 life-world of persons escapes natural science, even though the latter 
investigates the totahty of realities, for even the most subtle theory in 
natural science does not touch the life-worid, and that simply because the 
thematic direction of thought the natural scientist follows is a theoretical 
path away from the actuality of life, leaving it behind right at the 
30 beginning, and only reverting back to it in the form of technology and in 
the form of an application of natural science to life. 

The subject of Ufe has things over against himself; that is, to his own life [375] 
there necessarily belongs an intuitive life-horizon, and to this life as a 
human life there belongs a horizon of things which are not mere bodies but 
35 are instead Objects of value, goods, etc. — that is, everything experienced 
by the person in apperception, or objects consciously posited in some other 
way which are his property as lying within the compass of his subjectivity 
and as affecting — his thinking, valuing, desiring, acting. 
The basic relationship in this hfe-world, which predelineates the point of 
40 view of the method, is not causality but motivation. The subject can be 
motivated only through becoming what he " lives," what he is conscious of 
in his life, what is given to him subjectively as actual, certain, supposed, 
valuable, beautiful, good. These characters arise as motivated, just as, on 
the other hand, they are motivating. The subject of motivation posits 
45 himself as such in original self-experience and posits others in empathy- 
experience. Empathy is not a mediate experience in the sense that the other 


SUPPLEMENTS 


385 


would be experienced as a psychophysical annex to his Corporeal body but 
is instead an immediate experience of others. 

The same holds for the experience of communication with others, 
interchange with them. If we see one another with our own eyes, then 
5 subject is confronting subject in an immediate contact. I speak to him, he 
speaks to me; I command him, he obeys. These are immediately experi- 
enced personal relationships, although in this experience of others and of 
communication there are in play special presentifications, and I actually 
have an original perceptual experience only of my own subjectivity. The 
10 indirectness of expression is not the indirectness of an inference from 
experience. We " see " the other and not merely the Body of the other; he is 
there for us not merely as a Body, but, instead, his spirit is self-presentified 
too. He is there "in person." 
The life-worid is the natural worid — in the attitude of natural life we are 
15 living functioning subjects together in an open circle of other functioning 
subjects. Everything Objective about the life-worid is subjective givenness, 
our possession, mine, the other's, and everyone's together. Subject and 
possessions are not equal; the subjects are without qualification, what is 
not personal is surrounding worid, what is Uved is lived experience of the 
20 surrounding worid, and that holds also for what is seen and thought, etc. 
How then will hfe, subjects, and their possessions become scientific 
themes? They will to the extent that we take them precisely as they are and 
ask what belongs to them as subjects, as affected by their environment, as 
passive and as active, and ask, further, what they accomplish and create in 
25 their surrounding worid and how their surrounding worid arises, grows, 
and develops through their individual accomphshments and in reciprocal 
motivation as a common accomplishment. Science is a function of a 
theoretical interest, which itself belongs in the subjective sphere. The 
theoretical interest can be directed to subjectivity itself as the subject of its [376] 
30 surrounding worid, as working and accomplishing in the surrounding 
world, and to the accomphshments as such. The task would be to describe 
this subjectivity, its life, its working, its creating, its productions as 
productions, and to explain them in the sense which results from the 
descriptions. 
35 Individual description, morphological: finally, a universal morphology of 
the natural worid as the common world of a people, of any society 
whatever. In this surrounding worid, which has the vahdity of a world 
common to all, causahties also arise, but as intuitive causalities. Everything 
therein can have an effect, can perhaps also awaken a theoretical interest 
40 and lead to the problem of the true being of this worid. This is how 
"Objective science" arises. That itself belongs, together with its cognitions, 
to the surrounding world of the person who has some part in it. But that is 
only a special case. The general theme still is and remains subjectivity in 
general and its surrounding world. 
45 Apriori description : what in general belongs to it. The essential form of a 
surrounding worid and of the alteration of the surrounding worid corre- 
lated to the essential form of personality. Also, the essential form of the 


386 


SUPPLEMENTS 


personal substructures. To the question of essence belongs the necessary 
structure of the surrounding world with respect to the circumstance that 
factical subjectivity has a uniformly enduring world, in a universal experi- 
ence which tends towards concordance, and can have a continuously valid 
5 world only in the constant establishment of concordance. That leads to the 
essential structure of a world that remains intuitive, is enduring, and is 
valid for everyone. The "transcendental-aesthetic world." The natural 
concept of the world as such a necessary vaUdity and as a field of all 
possible sciences. And here reappears human subjectivity as the subject of a 

10 surrounding world, as a Bodily-corporeal subjectivity to be investigated in 

the natural sciences, as psychophysical^ a Body and a soul, as purely 

subjective and yet also as the one which is the " hving " functioning subject 

of the life-world, and consequently also its description. 

Humans and animals are perceived as Objects of the world. Thereby they 

15 become themes of Objective and, in the first place, descriptive sciences. 
Then what is psychic is co-perceived, co-Objective. 

The physical thing is "in itself," and this in-itself is for natural science 
only a formal-methodical rule of unity, according to which each person 
standing in the unity of mutual understanding, conventionally related to 

20 certain primordially orienting facts (such as the birth of Christ), can 
construct the intuitive things of his surrounding world (the "appear- 
ances "). The physical thing of the natural sciences has only a formal essence ; 
it has only its formula, and for the rest this is its essence, that, according to 
this formula, it is a regulated intentional unity of an infinite variety of [377] 

25 appearances "of all men." 

But each subject has an actual essence and is not merely something 
relative (in the harmony of an infinite manifold of systems of appearances 
which have their ultimate absolute terms of relation in subjects) but instead 
is something for itself and in itself and is only subsequently, by virtue of 

30 communication, for others — others who can understand its essence intui- 
tively, hence " adequately " (namely, in an analogy with degrees of perfec- 
tion and determination to be carried out on the basis of the intuition of 
one's own psychic being) as there and as graspable. 


Supplement XIV (to Section Three) 

35 The human-scientific attitude — the transposition of the natural sciences into 
the human-scientific attitude. 


As will become clear in the following, we conceive of our investigation as 
a transcendental-phenomenological one; hence the human-scientific attitude 
and its givennesses are described as phenomena within transcendental 
40 subjectivity, and it is therefore that use is made of the doctrine of 
constitution and of elementary structural analyses. Yet what is essential 
would still have been disclosed, even if the investigation had been carried 
out in the natural attitude. 


SUPPLEMENTS 


387 


As persons we are in relation to a common surrounding world — we are 
in a personal association : these belong together. We could not be persons 
for others if there were not over and against us a common surrounding 
world. The one is constituted together with the other. Each Ego can 
5 become a person in a personal association only when, by means of 
comprehension, a relation to a surrounding world is produced.' 

Now we want to turn our interest to the world of experience as 
communal experience, and indeed first of all : 

Our theoretical interest can be directed to a given personal association, a 
10 closed one (naturally in relation to its surrounding world), but in such a 
way that this association comes into consideration only insofar as it is 
factually related to the surrounding world in its motivations or insofar as 
the motivational relation of the factual persons to their factual environment 
can attain intuitive understanding. 
1 5 Intuitive understanding means here : I as historian, or we as historians 
working in community, construct out of data of actual experience legiti- 
mate presentifications of personal being in personal accomplishments and 
formations of accomplishment in progressive unification. We exhibit con- 
structively in such systematically unified presentification a common experi- [378] 
20 ence which is always expanding, a constructive mediate experience, which, 
as it progresses, stands firm and does not unravel through discordance. 

This kind of experience is one which opens up; it is not a conceptual 

judgmental inference but an intuitive disclosing, the results of which are not 

propositions but systematically unified intuitions, whereby what is intui- 

25 tive-objective there is personal being and life, as it would be, or could be, 

directly intuitive to the thematic personality or to others in its nexus. 

This is hence the level of history. It wants to produce intuitive under- 
standing for spirits in relation to their common spiritual surrounding 
world. (To this a morphology is joined as a universal doctrine of the 
30 intuitive structural forms of personalities and personal associations.) 

Deeper expositions : 

I consider subjects in relation to their surrounding world : how they let 
themselves be motivated. In this way I come to know them as personalities, 
as spiritual individuals ; I come to know them in their personal activities 

35 and in their development, and the same holds for communities in their 
individuality and in their communal accomplishments. I investigate how 
they develop, how they form themselves and transform themselves, and I 
attain from all that, from their being and becoming, from their " history," 
an intuitive understanding. 

40 With regard to the surrounding world, it is to be noted that on the one 
hand it is a factual surrounding world, a surrounding world of things. 


This paragraph is utilized in Section Three; cf. p. 201, 11. 25-33. 


388 


SUPPLEMENTS 


experienced in factual experiences, in an individual's experiences and then 
supplemented in comprehension by exchanges, reports, etc' 

But now we have to take into consideration what we said earlier : things, 
which at first are only things of the surrounding world, communal objects 

5 standing over and against us, become spiritual objects of a higher level by 
means of value apperceptions, practical apperceptions, etc. They are for 
example communally valuated as comestibles, or as combustibles, as goods 
for "self-preservation," and they are now precisely "goods;" that is, they 
enter the surrounding world as objects of a higher order, and they 

10 determine, as constituted in these apperceptions, new modes of comport- 
ment by means of which new objects can be constituted. We have then in 
the surrounding world first of all things as mere nature and then all 
concrete cultural formations as things of a higher level. 

a) Interest in the personality itself: now we can consider persons and 

15 associations of persons with respect to how they "comport themselves" 
over and against pregiven persons ^ or things of any level whatsoever in 
their surrounding world, how they let themselves be "motivated" by them, 
therein manifesting their individuality, and how they develop thereby 
according to the style predelineated by their individuality. 

20 b) Interest in individuals' cultural accomplishments and in socio-culture 
(works of the community): we can, however, also consider them with 
respect to how they create thereby a surrounding world, how they produce 
for themselves a cultural world, and how they allow themselves to be 
constantly determined, by what they have produced, to produce new things, 

25 etc. 

This gives rise to inquiries of various kinds : ones which study primarily 
the persons and associations of persons and ones which investigate 
primarily their correlates, although both belong together. One can, e.g., 
proceed purely historically and single out the history of the German people 

30 or state, whereby people and state as personal unities are the focus of the 
research. But one can also write a history of German culture, German 
literature, art, etc. Of course, as we said, both belong together. Likewise 
morphologies : a morphology of household utensils, of weapons, religions, 
symbols, etc. Everywhere in this field, research may consider objects only 

35 as they are for subjects, as ones which they experience, of which they and 


[379] 


1 More precisely : first distinction : the surrounding world is on the one hand a 
surrounding world of things and on the other hand a surrounding world made up of 
persons and associations of persons. (Opposition : persons and non-persons.) 

Second distinction: the objects of the surrounding world in general are either 
deprived of personally-based significations, or they have these significations, they are 
culture. Specifically: something is either mere nature or a thing of culture, i.e., 
something with a spiritual significance, with characters issuing from personal 
accomplishments . 

2 Even persons are "cultural Objects" of the surrounding world. 


SUPPLEMENTS 


389 


their companions have cognition, as ones they let themselves be motivated 

by. 

Research can and may involve here only what allows of being intuitively 
understood; that is, the objects here are what they are only in personal 
understanding and are to be brought to givenness as such. All physics and 
chemistry are thus excluded. 


Mere nature, but as surrounding world, considered purely intuitively: 

The lowest limit of non-personal objects are mere things. They have the 
maximum distance from the Ego, they are as foreign to the Ego as could 

10 be, and they have the minimum which is in general required for the 
possibility of things and persons to be constituted in relation to each other. 
These are the "sensuous" objects, the "mere nature" which stands over 
and against the spirit as ahen to it. If there is posed the scientific task of 
investigating systematically the spiritual world, then this task includes that 

15 of the description of "mere nature." The generally famihar surrounding 
world of persons has for everyone an open horizon of unfamiliarity. With 
regard to the intuitive nature which is alien to me, there results the 
possibility of an intuitive natural-historical investigation which is unhisto- 
rical insofar as it was not actually familiar.' 

20 But we also know that the world has an open endless horizon : the world 
in the present sense of our surrounding world of things. The world of 
things, which stands over and against me, my companions, and my human 
community as " Objective " surrounding world, is endless, corresponding to 
the sense of the apprehension of a thing-world. But the world of persons is 

25 also infinite — that is, the totality of persons who stand to me, or might 
stand to me, in a personal relation. The personal environment is an open 
one, new persons can always enter our experience, others can disappear, 
and finally there is even nothing preventing Martians from presenting 
themselves; hence according to ideal possibility we have here "infinities." 

30 In this sense one's goal can be to fathom that horizon. The interest can 
expand to the universe of the persons who communicate with us and to the 
corresponding universal surrounding world of things. At first according to 
its aspects as "mere nature," but then also according to spiritual factors. 
The explorer penetrates unknown territories and makes them known to us 

35 by his descriptions. A special group of sciences (descriptive natural 
sciences) elaborates at first the purely descriptive expansion of the known 
horizon (universal descriptive research, an investigation of the universal 
human surrounding world), and this description is worked out prior to the 


[380] 


' Here must be added the following: let us start from the personal attitude of 
common practical life. In it we will be directed onto a limited (although open) circle 
of persons, our family, our social circles, etc. and a limited surrounding world. 


390 


SUPPLEMENTS 


intervention of exact physicalistic natural science. Those sciences describe 
our human surrounding world, the world of pure things, animals' sur- 
rounding worlds, and in anthropology the anthropological surrounding 
world. Hence they arise out of a personalistic attitude; we can at least 
5 consider them that way. (They can also serve as preliminary stages for 
natural sciences, for "Objective sciences.") In the surrounding world as our 
over-and-against, there are human races and in every race these and those 
peoples, and then, however, also the cultures, sciences, and arts of these 
peoples, etc. The human sciences are thereby in the end self-related, and 

10 that comes from their own specific character. I can as a German or, more 
generally, as a European (as a person in the society of European life and 
culture) traverse the horizon of our unitary environing world and describe 
it. In that case I encounter all European and then all cultures in general, the 
whole world, all animality, and all humanity, and finally also our science, 

15 as a cultural formation of European culture, German culture. 


The various types of intuitive causality within the personal world 

We study the spiritual life and the spiritual communities with their 
surrounding worlds not only 

1) in concreto, we study them not only in their individuality and 

20 individual developments, but ngll 

2) we also study them morphologically, we investigate the empirical 
generalities with regard to all personal and non-personal directions. 

In both cases it holds that we find: 1) causahties of motivation. Spirits 
allow themselves to be " determined " to act in ways which document their 

25 personalities. And we find : 2) causalities of things among each other as 
mere physical things, things of nature. The boulder falls and crushes 
whatever comes in its way. These are causalities which are perceived and 
are comprehensible and which demonstrate themselves, as is the case with 
everything that is experienced, by further experience, or by intersubjective 

30 agreement. Each in its own way. Material things are given as " appearing " 
through perspectival presentation, persons are given through their connec- 
tion with appearing Bodies, but persons, as regards what is individual of 
them, do not ** appear" in that sense. 

3) We also have a spirit/thing (person/thing) causality: the personal 

35 spirit moves the Body, the hand moves in space among the things there 
because I move it. This is an immediately understandable state of affairs. 
Does something physical here enter into a motivational relation? Extreme 
caution is now called for. Consider : I grasp an eraser, I pick it up in order 
to erase something with it. The action of grasping, etc., in which the 

40 movement in space is included empirically, is motivated by the will to erase. 
But in this way the physical movement of the hand is not motivated nor is 
it motivated by the correlate of the will, which makes it an action. Things 
as such only move mechanically, by being pushed, etc. But things called 
"Body members" move by voluntary direction, in the "I do," "I work " 


SUPPLEMENTS 


391 


" I open and close my hand," etc. • The personal subject performs physical 
" accomplishments." They have, just as do all personal acts, their motives, 
but here is a special kind of "because." The physical process unfolds 
because the Ego of the Body performs it in the way of an action. 
5 It is an important phenomenological task to distinguish the various 

" becauses." We can correctly speak, at any rate, of a causality of the spirit [382] 
in relation to the Body, of a personal or free causality. 

Conversely, the Body as an Object in the surrounding world determines 
the spirit: e.g., its presumed beauty determines the Ego to vanity. Bodily 
10 pain determines it to ... etc. 


What kind of abstract-scientific, nomological, human-scientific (personalis- 
tic) investigations are there? 

I consider: 

a) spirits as subjects, just the way they are, as persons, accomplishing 

15 acts relating to their surrounding world. I consider the acts and am led 
back to the nexuses of lived experiences of the persons. And now 
phenomenology makes known to me the essence of "consciousness," the 
essence of all types of acts, the essence of the passive modes of lived 
experience which found them, and in these nexuses phenomenology again 

20 discovers quite specific relations of because and then. I am led to the 
relations between the "I experience" and the sensations, adumbrations, 
sense-things, etc., and I am led to the implicated "motivations," relations 
between kinesthetic series and the concomitant visual data, etc. 


' Constitutively the Body as a corporeal thing is a unity of corporeal appercep- 
tions and has its horizon of causal properties co-constituted in the current actual 
apperception or experience. 

In the apperception of the Body as a system of Bodily members or " organs," each 
such Bodily member is constituted as subjectively moveable and also as voluntarily 
moveable. We have here hence several levels of motivation : the associative system of 
the bodily thing is motivated by the associative system of subjective kinesthetic 
movements, which are at the same time apperceived as movements of perceptual 
organs (the Bodily member as a thing refers to other Bodily members as perceptual 
organs, because the kinesthetic processes which are at issue here are apperceived as 
movements of the Body). The systems are empirically associative and the processes 
appear as immediately subjective (kinesthetic) or as consequentially subjective. Then 
the *' interference " of the will is no longer associative but is founded on the empirical 
constitutions. Therefore the performing of a subjective movement in the world of 
things as voluntary movement, the " interfering," is not comprehensible as a merely 
intuitive physical process, but it has a super-physical stratum. (For the rest, confer 
what follows.) 


392 


SUPPLEMENTS 


Pure phenomenology, or human-scientific psychology,' investigates here 
the constitutive essential necessities and essential possibilities. Empirical 
science would have to investigate the empirically general rules of factical 
being. To this the whole empirical psychology of memory and association 
5 would pertain, insofar as it leaves aside only all reference to so-called 
physicalistic and physiological explanations, and thereby all psychological 
research is conducted as "purely psychological," and what is being pursued 
is a mere general empirics of the life of the spirit. It is clear that something 
of enormous significance will be gained by the separation of phenomeno- 
10 logical essential nexuses from empirical nexuses in personal hfe. The acts, 
the specific cogitationes, are performed in a deeper psychic milieu and must 
be investigated in it empirically. 

b) Natural science within human science 

We remain in the personalistic (human-scientific) attitude. We may be [383] 

15 members of a community of researchers in natural science, who on the 
basis of their theoretical experience of things intend to investigate the " true 
being" of things according to the sense of thing-apperception. Intuitive 
being, presumed to be true being, is the being which is constituted in the 
regulated lived experiences of the experiencers, persons who are in personal 

20 association. All Objective nature is indeed reduced to regulations of pure 
consciousness of the persons who find themselves in the personal associa- 
tion — but as Objectivity of the exact natural sciences and not as Objectiv- 
ity of the merely factual persons, even in an open community and with an 
open horizon of intersubjective temporality: that is, as true being, such as it 

15 would presumably be exhibited in possible concordant experience hence- 
forth and, in practice, always. On the other hand, modern natural science, 
particularly in its classical form, constantly idealizes this; it absolutizes the 
open infinity as infinite (not only externally but also internally infinite) 
space-time and as infinite divisibility. It produces and uses for that a 

30 mathematics of absolute infinities, and it mathematizes nature and its whole 
structure of being. In doing so it also makes the whole worid of the spirit 
infinite, externally and internally infinite. The truths in themselves of 
mathematics and the presumed truths of the exact science of nature bear 
the stamp of the ideahty of this infinity. Aeterna veritasl (One could ask 

35 whether this is not included already in all eidos and in every essential 
consideration.) 


' If the investigation, as a reflection on the character of the attitude and research 
found in the human sciences, is carried out on the natural level, then one cannot 
introduce any result of phenomenology. But it would then have to be shown that 
personal research has its levels, and that first of all appears the personal practical 
world with its patent nexuses of specific personal motivations, and that, however, 
there belongs to each person an intentionally latent life, the uncovering of which is 
grasped by the personal being in its concreteness. This is the way to a human- 
scientific phenomenological psychology, the parallel of naturalistic phenomenological 
psychology, distinguished from it only by the thematic attitude. 


SUPPLEMENTS 


393 


This association of persons is, in spite of its openness, a fixed one on 
account of its relation to researchers. But in the research of natural science, 
subjects are not investigated and neither is their consciousness, nor are the 
actual and possible constitutive Uved experiences. Natural science research 
5 is directed instead to physicaUstic being as documented in experience and 
also to what is worked out by means of intersubjective exchange of 
descriptions, i.e., by the methods of the natural sciences in their "Objectiv- 
ity" ("absolute" Objectivity). In this research we do not posit ourselves, 
the researchers, and likewise we do not posit other spirits; what are posited 

10 are the things of the surrounding world, the things of our spiritual world, 
and we determine them "Objectively" in their exactly or absolutely true 
being-in-themselves. We know what this means. We know that physical 
things are at first "appearances" of individual subjects, that appearances, 
up to a certain degree, are interchangeable, that distinctions can be made 

15 between normality and abnormality, that the individual subject, even with 
regard to its spiritual states, shows itself to be dependent on its Corporeal- 
ity, that it can and does make distinctions between normahty and abnor- 
mality, that, furthermore, the science of the absolute Objectivity of things 
overcomes these distinctions by taking all possible dependencies into 

20 consideration (but also by absolutizing the infinities), and that it pursues [384] 
the idea of reaUty in all its aspects. ' To presuppose " normal " relations is 
to leave out of consideration certain changeable circumstances and con- 
comitant dependent properties which used to be constant. It is shown that 
what counts as a thing accessible to many persons, a thing endowed with 

25 secondary characteristics, might only be considered an " appearance " of a 
thing existing in itself and requiring thought to be elaborated, a thing 
which for its part is an index for the regulations of phenomena. This makes 
the intersubjective thing of a normal community dependent on motivating 
" abnormahties," that is, those of the Corporeal and physical organization 

30 of the person. Thus is physics essentially related to physiology and psycho- 
logy. In more details: 

Among the intuitively given physical things, Bodies have this distinction 
that psychic data are bound up with them, including those that are the 
conditions of the possibility of knowledge of things. Bodies can, in a 

35 personal community of biological investigators, be investigated as Objects 
just like any other physical Objects (Objective types, which preserve the 
type in the process of metabolism, which are formed in development, and 
which propagate themselves, etc.). Thereby we have a distinction between 
the Bodies which function on the side of the investigators, functioning in 


' No account is taken of the problems of biology as physical science (natural 
science), which of course is not physics in the usual sense, for physical Corporeality, 
considered exactly, is not reducible to a " construct " out of physical elements but is 
a "metabolism" and a structure of development, an individual type intuitively given 
in empirically intuitive types of individuals ; in exact reductions to the physicalistic, 
however, there remains indeed a lawful type. 


394 


SUPPLEMENTS 


such a way that they make possible their knowledge, and the Bodies which 
are their Objects. But the Bodies functioning in research can likewise also 
be investigated by other investigators, etc. The investigators are spiritually 
in a "normal" state (they have normal intelligence though perhaps 
5 defective senses), and series of hved experiences unfold factually in them, 
which are series of Objective cognitions and which correspond in their 
essence to the norms of valid empirical knowledge. In the exchange of their 
cognitions the investigators experience motivations by which new know- 
ledge becomes possible, etc. The methods themselves are demonstrated as 
10 valid in intersubjectively motivated thinking and knowing and as corre- 
sponding to the essential laws of valid knowledge for interpersonally 
constituted series of appearances. 

The elaboration of the Objective world means that the sense-qualities of 
appearing things are eliminated, for they are dependent on the functioning 
15 of the Body (and therefore the corresponding perceptual judgments are 
relative). These dependencies are investigated by sense-physiology, at first 
as aesthesiology, and then as psychophysics in general. > They form a [385] 
stratum of their own. An abundance of relations remains left over, through 
which the appearing thing is determined with so much identity that it is 
20 identifiable even in deviant sensuous appearances. The things of sensuous 
qualities are now merely subjective, they pertain to the subjects, and many 
subjects can have the same sense-things. But in that case they have them 
accidentally, insofar as they possess Bodies modifiable in such a way that in 
turn the things appearing to the senses change as such, and indeed they 
25 change for different subjects in different ways. Should the thing remain 
identical, just as it presents itself as identical, then there must also be a 
distinction made between the thing itself, which is determined not sen- 
suously but rather non-sensuously, i.e., merely through mathematical- 
physicalistic predicates, and the sense-thing of subjective " appearances," 
30 related to the " accidental " subjectivities. 

In the purely spiritual attitude (the phenomenological attitude) there is a 
distinction between precisely : 

1) the actually unfolding spiritual life of each subject (with the person 
constituted therein for itself as pregivenness), 
35 2) the transcendent-natural unities of experience constituted in the 
subject and constituted in each in its own way (Body— outer thing); and 
that means; each subject has its " external" experiences and always has its 
horizon of true being, its constant idea of true nature in itself, and indeed 
as posited in a rational and up to now ever verified positing, as motivated 
40 concordance for the future. Each subject can posit this nature theoretically, 
but can also, however, posit itself and all others (theoretically), and can 
even posit the intersubjective unity of spirits and "bracket" nature. 


' Indeed not as aesthesiology alone, which knows nothing of sense qualities but 
only of sense fields. Therefore we have to have recourse to psychology, grounded on 
the phenomenological method. 


SUPPLEMENTS 


395 


Theoretical investigation of the relations which exist here: theoretical 
positing of nature, theoretical positing and research of spirits (according to 
1) in relation to nature, etc. 
In the natural attitude, nature is there pre-theoretically, and the others 
5 are there and are related to this same nature, and the community of the 
spirit is there, things which become clear in all purity only in phenomeno- 
logy. I can pursue theoretical research of nature (natural science) as well as 
of the spirit in relation to or in nature (naturally directed research into the 
spirit), and finally I can investigate spirits in relation to their noematic, 

10 appearing, presumed (but counting as true) nature, the nature existing in 
spirituality as verified. 

But to this are added other dependencies, those of the higher physiolog- 
ical stratum. Dependent on Bodies are also the reproductions and thereby 
also the apperceptions.^ The reproducdons stand in the associative nexus of [386] 

15 subjectivity. Thereby apperceptions are determined, and that is again 
significant for the things which stand over and against the subjects and 
perhaps stand over against several subjects as the same things. What 
subjects have over against themselves as world depends on their Bodies and 
on the peculiarities of their psyches. The investigation of these dependen- 

20 cies, however, can be consigned to their own sciences. 

a) On the one hand we have the scientific establishment of the Objective 
actuality of what is experienced by persons, physically experienced or 
experienced by empathy. The apperceptions and experiences which persons 
have possess their rights and their legitimation in themselves. This is 

25 prescribed by their proper essence. We convince ourselves in the famiUar 
way whether the experienced thing in the course of experience affirms itself 
as actuality and whether it is confirmed by others or not. It is actual if it 
affirms itself for all of us and if we may presuppose that it would be 
affirmed by each new subject of the association. If I would see something 

30 and would find it confirmed as consistent in my experience, while no one 
else who is correspondingly oriented would see it that way, then the others 
would say I am " sick," or I would say that of them. What we have here is 
a matter for a special investigation. Likewise I have familiar ways of 
confirming for myself whether a comprehensive experience is correct or not, 

35 of acknowledging whether it is concordantly confirmed or is annulled, and 
this for each kind of experience. How, e.g., to the noetic essence of the 
various kinds of experience noetic rules of validity and invaUdity belong; 
how experiential thought is to be verified as valid or invalid; which 
essential connections exist here— all that is investigated by a phenomeno- 

40 logically-based noetics. What it establishes in general is particularized in the 
evidence, the insights, we then carry out and live through in clear 


' There must be a clear distinction made between: 1) The aesthesiological 
dependencies, the ones of the Bodily localized data of sensation, the ones which, 
concerning sensuous qualities, come into consideration as the data which present 
them and motivate them. 2) The functions of presentation itself, which refer back to 
association and apperception. 


396 


SUPPLEMENTS 


expenential thought. The "Objective," mathematical sciences of nature 
have their own methods to convince themselves of the Objectivity of 
matenal bemg and to determine it as Objective, hence to eliminate what 
depends on "accidental" subjects. The pronouncements of the sciences do 
5 not claim to be predicated by each subject, to be actually judged with 
insight by each subject, but only, according to a possibility of principle to 
be able to be verified and to be confirmed by every subject belonging to the 
same personal association of mathematical scientists. This possibility 
however, does precisely not exist regarding the declarations grounded in 
10 secondary quahties and in merely subjective determinations, thus having 
recourse to merely subjective concepts. 

b) But totahzing Objective research also requires the investigation of 
these excluded subjectivities. This is the domain of the Objective (natural- 
mundane) study of the Body and the soul, related to Objective physics. We 
15 have hence, on the one hand, the material thing of Objective mathematical [387] 
physics, for which all intuitively given things are mere appearances. On the 
other hand, there are the manifolds correlative to these Objective unities 
ones which are validly constituting and others invalidly constituting, and 
there are also the subjects and the subjective lived experiences, in which 
20 again the appearances are constituted (and which are indeed themselves 
unities) through other unities of deeper levels, up to the ultimate unities 
and to the very stream of lived experience, with its content of obscure 
backgrounds and clear foregrounds, and with its specific acts. This whole 
mechanism of subjects with their lived experiences and their lived correlates 
25 calls for an Objective investigation, forming a supplement to the Objective 
investigation of material nature. The difficulty here lies in attempting to 
investigate the subjective intersubjectively and to determine it intersubjec- 
tively. Such determination requires intersubjectively exchangeable concepts 
How is that possible? Now, first of all. Objective nature itself is an index 
30 for intersubjectively exchangeable concepts, cognitions, and even phenom- 
ena. If there were no exchangeable subjectivity, then there would also not 
be any possible personal association, for there would be no possibility of 
intersubjective understanding. 
Furthermore: a stock of intersubjectively exchangeable phenomena of a 
35 particular kind, which are excluded as secondary qualities, is de facto 
available, as descriptive natural history teaches. There are in general 
far-reaching descriptive groups of propositions which are thereby intersub- 
jectively comprehensible. In connection with what is exchangeable even the 
merely subjective can to a certain degree be described indirectly and 
40 determined. We determine indirectly the vision of the abnormal by means 
of color analogies, sound analogies, etc. We employ physicalistic means to 
produce a sensation, e.g., a visual sensation, because an abnormality in 
general does not extend so far that no optic lived experiences at all would 
be ehcited by adequate stimuli, which hence makes possible an optical 
45 empathy within a very general framework, i.e., an intersubjective constitu- 
tion of visual data. All this has to be examined in detail and its scientific 
significance brought out. It is obvious that the science of the Objective 


SUPPLEMENTS 


397 


being of the Body and of all subjectivities and, in the end, of the spirit itself 
as subject, proceeds experimentally, whenever it finds possibilities of doing 
so. It investigates all dependencies in a mundane nexus, in the one 
Objective worid, and, of course, it arbitrarily varies the circumstances, 
5 whenever possible, in order to be able to observe the dependent conse- 
quences. 

Spirits as individual subjects of act-motivation. Carrying out acts and 
being motivated to do so : 
Spirits as subjects that have a soul;> that is, subjects that carry out [3881 
10 cogitationes built on the ground of lived experience, containing in them- 
selves apprehensions and interwoven into more encompassing nexuses, in 
which motivations in the other sense hold sway. In the lived experiences a 
natural "soul" is manifest, namely insofar as in them representational 
dispositions and habitual properties are intimated, ones which do not 
15 concern the Ego that takes positions (with regard to the position-taking). 
Here belongs the realm of association psychology. The natural soul is one 
with the subject of the position-taking; both form a unique empirical unity 
from which only the subject-unity stands out (the unity of the position- 
taking Ego). This soul is mine, it "belongs" to my subjectivity and is one 
20 with it. We should even say: it belongs to the person as an underlying 
oasis. 

The "soul" is here taken not as Objective reality but as the spiritual 
soul. That is: "soul" in this sense is not defined as a real unity with 
reference to circumstances of Objective nature; thus it is not d^fm^d 

25 psychophysical^, or it does not have to be defined that way. There is an 
immanent lawfulness in the formation of dispositions as substrates for the 
position-taking subject. On the other hand, this regulation is also connected 
with the psychophysical regulation, to the effect that both are considered as 
one in psychology. 

30 Spirit is certainly not an abstract Ego of position-taking acts, but it is I 
the full person, the Ego as a human being, the I of the I take a position, the 
1 think, I evaluate, I act, I accomphsh works, etc. To me pertains then a 
basis of hved experiences and a basis of passive nature ("my nature") 
mamfesting itself in the tumult of hved experiences. This passive nature is 
the psychic in the sense of physiological natural psychology, but it even 
reaches into the sphere of position-takings themselves, and even these have 
a natural side and enter into dispositions. 

The word "basis," however, means here in addition that the position- 
taking subject is also dependent on this substrate, insofar as I, in order to 
be motivated in my position-taking, precisely must have motivating hved 
expenences, and these stand in an associative nexus and under rules of 
associative dispositions. But even the position-takings themselves are 


■This and both the following paragraphs are employed in Section Three, p. 292, 
• 21 to p. 293, 1. 13; they are included again here because they are not entirely the 
same. 


398 


SUPPLEMENTS 


subject to such rules: there arise ''tendencies," in every position-taking, 
towards similar position-taking under similar circumstances, etc. Neverthe- 
less I am " free." Here we encounter the problems of freedom and of the 
autonomy of the subject of the position-taking as a free subject versus the 
5 psychological associative one. Hence are opposed : the free subject and the 
subject of drives, of permanent tendencies, of the persistent natural soul. 
What sort of an Objective science is it which presents itself within the 
compass of an attitude directed to the person, within the "spiritual" 
attitude? And conversely, what sort of Objective science is human science 

10 itself? Or, what is the status of the Objectivity of physical, psychic, and [389] 
psychophysical nature, which, according to what we have expounded of the 
spiritual attitude, is subordinated without qualification (and thereby loses 
its absoluteness) to the Objectivity of the specific "objects" (thematic 
Objects) of the human sciences? 

15 We have on the one hand physicalistic Objectivity, on the other hand the 
Objectivity of the souls hnked to physical Bodies, with their obscure 
longings, with their apprehensions, their appearances as the correlates of 
apprehensions, among which also are those which are constitutive of 
Objective nature, namely the ones which appear and are experienced as the 

20 vahd substrate for possible Objective knowledge of things. 

We are considering here Objectivities which belong together, and which 
are linked with each other in relations of dependency, and which are 
consigned to one another. What does "Objectivity" mean here? In the 
broadest sense, it refers to (we are speaking of empirical Objectivity, not of 

25 the Objectivity of the idea) a being which in an open personal association is 
thought as determinable in such a way or as determined in such a way that 
it is in principle and at any time determinable in an absolute way by every 
possible Ego-subject of the association of researching subjects. 

But in this respect the being which is experienced through appearances, or, 

30 similarly, any being which, by its real connection with what is experienced 
that way, assumes the character of an appearing being, even if only 
secondarily, essentially distinguishes itself from all being for which this is 
not the case. In this latter respect, obviously what is meant is the being of 
the persons themselves. They are experienced either a) in inspection or b) in 

35 the manner of comprehension, the comprehensive grasping of what is 
inspective, which is a particular modification of inspection. 

a) In inspection: the person has "appearances" as his over-and-against; 
he himself, however, does not appear and is not something dependent on 
what appears. His relation to appearing being is this, namely, that he 

40 " has " it — by the fact that he accompUshes apprehensions in which objects 
appear to him, to which he directs his focus, to which he comports himself 
in such and such acts, takes a position, etc. In the manner of this 
comportment, the person manifests his individuahty. The person arrives at 
an inspective grasping, a self-grasping, when the focus of the Ego is 

45 directed to the series of the Ego-affections and Ego-acts, in which it 
comports itself, as identical, in this or that way to the act-correlates in 


SUPPLEMENTS 


399 


question, including the objects it itself posits and experiences as existing 
objects. 

b) The person can also be grasped comprehensively by other persons, 
however — i.e., grasped as "expression" of a subjective life in a Body. That 
5 person's Ego with its stream of lived experiences, and with the stream of 
acts which flow forth from it, is grasped in empathy; and within the type of 
the motivations which are thereby co-grasped, in their habitual type, the [390] 
individuality is also grasped. The other person is grasped in his Ego-life, his 
Ego-willing, and his Ego-working, etc. Each Ego has its Ego-life, but each 
10 is also a person, is an individuality and a distinct individuality. 

In principle this Objectivity of the person and of personal objectivities is 
comprehensible for each person of the association and is accessible to a 
possible understanding. This Objectivity is the field of the human sciences, 
and in general research it is the Object of general human science. 
15 Such a science is possible in the form of an eidetic discipline, an ontology 
of the spirit, or in the form of an empirical morphology: history or 
biography. It operates respectively with sheer eidetic intuitions or with 
empirical intuitions. 

Something quite different is the case with physical being and with 
20 aesthesiological or psychological being founded on it. 

Physical things appear; the experience which presents these things 
presents them only as they appear, not as they are in themselves. That is : in 
the method of natural science, experience is the support for a thought 
process each subject of the association can, in principle, accomplish, and if 
25 correctly accomphshed it leads in each subject to the same result, to a 
determination of the intersubjectively identifiable being, a determination 
which is itself intersubjectively identifiable, over and against the merely 
phenomenal determinations, which in principle do not have to be acknow- 
ledged by each subject of the association, 
30 As to the natural-psychic, to which is subordinated everything merely 
subjective of the appearing objectivities (of the appearances in the ontolog- 
ical sense, any kind of appearance) as correlate of psychic apprehensions, 
this is an Objectivity supplementing physicalistic reality and interwoven 
with it. 
35 This is not valid from the point of view of physics but only because we, if 
we posit and investigate nature as true Objectivity, then also encounter 
Bodies as things of physical nature as well as, "in" them, the "psychic," 
first of all as the Objectively spatio-temporal subjective. Then we find, 
however, guided by the sense-content of empathy, the psychic as dependent 
40 on the Body. (Physical nature was the first; the psychic that which 
supplements it to make an Objective world. The supplementing depends on 
the founding.) And now the further articulation is to the point, namely 
that in the system of the experiential dependencies of the psychical on the 
physical there is constituted a kind of " reality." But this " reahty " is not, 
45 without quahfication, the entire soul, but instead the soul (the Objective 
surplus beyond the Corporeal body) has a stratum of reality beyond Bodily 
corporeality. The soul as a full reality is the whole Objective-mundane 


400 


SUPPLEMENTS 


subjectivity, which, as supplement of purely theoretically posited nature, 
completes the Objective world. These existing subjects, distributed in space 
and time, are reahty insofar as, under changing Objective conditions 
(circumstances), they comport themselves in a regulated way and accord- 
5 ingly have "real" properties in relation to these rules. Comportment here [391] 
means the same as it does in the case of things. What exists temporally is 
changeable; as something real, it is, in the changes, dependent on real 
circumstances. 
Physics requires, therefore, aesthesiological physiology and psychology: 

10 since, for example, color as secondary thing-quality depends on the 
organization of the eye and of the system B, color is then eliminated as 
non-physicahstic and is taken as mere manifestation of an Objective 
quality, as manifestation of the physicalistic correlate of color. Precisely 
thereby, however, the psychic is dependent on the Bodily, since sensation 

1 5 enters into perception ; and that then goes further, as has been worked out : 
in these dependencies a " reality " manifests itself. It is the essence of reality 
in general to be a unity of dependencies. Already in the intuitive sphere we 
encounter dependencies of this kind, and they determine an apperception, 
the apperception of the Body and of the soul, as a founded apperception; 

20 and as real unity the animated Body is there intuitively for us, whereby the 
psychic is given as localized in the Body and as temporalized in the unity of 
natural time. If we investigate this real unity thematically, specifically 
aiming at a knowledge '' valid for everyone," then we have to determine the 
Body as a physical-chemical, biological thing and determine the soul in 

25 relation to this physicalistic Corporeality (whereby we come back to our 
earlier presentation). 

Psychic reality itself is now to be given intuitively and with respect to its 
"states." In psychic states, psychic reality is itself given intuitively insofar 
as we, e.g., experience that "wine brings joUity," etc. But this intuitive 

30 psychophysical causality is no more a givenness of " true " causality than 
an intuitively experienced physical causality (e.g., the breaking of a glass 
because of its falling) is givenness of the corresponding "Objective" 
causality. Therefore it is quite different in the case of the causality of 
motivation. 

35 c) Spirits and persons stand in a causal relation to their Bodies and 

thereby to the rest of their surrounding world. ^ On the one hand we have 

the relations of spirit to Body, on the other hand the converse relations. 

In the first respect, the Body is in question as the field of the will and 

furthermore as involuntary "expression" of psychic life. Psychic life is 

40 mirrored in sensory-Bodily events; parallel to the latter, which are to be 
studied experientially, there run psychic events, which are apprehended, in 
experience, also as causal ones. These are psychophysical causalities in an 
intuitive sphere. E.g., a man feels ashamed — he blushes because he is 


' The spirit obviously includes here the natural psychic basis, and in general the 
spirit has indeed its nature and along with this nature is dependent on the Body. 


SUPPLEMENTS 


401 


ashamed, but he is not ashamed because he blushes. His pulse increases — 
because he is excited, etc. 

In the reverse direction, there are the dependencies which found what is [392] 
specifically psychic, namely the ones constitutive of the Body as aesthesio- 
5 logical unity. Further; the experiences of health and illness, whereby, in 
their contrast, the differences between normal and abnormal Bodily 
constitution appear, and so do the dependencies of spiritual anomalies on 
the Bodily ones. Experience here leads us to regard the dependency as a 
physio-psychic one, as in the case of anesthesia, analgesia, or the various 

10 disturbances of speech, etc. Thereby it is shown that not only sensations 

but also the corresponding reproductions (phantasms) are dependent on the 

Body, and through it then are mediated all other phenomena founded on 

it. 

All such investigations belong, so far as they take place in the framework 

15 of concrete givennesses, in morphology, in the descriptive disciplines of 
zoology, anthropology, etc. 

The matter would be quite different if we first submitted Bodies and the 
whole of physical nature for itself to an " Objective " exact investigation, A 
physiology pursuing merely descriptive anatomy, and investigating the 

20 concretely intuitive dependencies, belongs completely within morphological 
anthropology. It is different with a physiology that aims at ultimate 
Objectivity and substitutes something physicalistic-chemical for everything 
appearing physically in Corporeality. We are then led to "physics." (No 
account is taken here of the physical-organic science usually called " bio- 

25 logy.") 

The Objective world or the universe of nature, along with Objective 
space and Objective time, in which all Bodies and human beings are 
included precisely as natural, is therefore the correlate of the natural 
sciences, and specifically as sciences of transcendent nature; it is hence the 

30 correlate of the science of physics in a very broad sense, and furthermore, 
of the sciences of aesthesiology and psychology. 

On the other side, however, stand the quite different sciences of 
subjectivity: the sciences of the person, of personal associations, of the 
correlates of persons. The most basic level is the purely "aesthetic" theory 

35 of nature, which is not a science of Objective nature in the sense of physics 
but is a science of phenomenal nature as the common surrounding world of 
normal people. On higher levels obviously belong here all so-called cultural 
sciences. 

Thus we have a sharp distinction between the natural sciences and the 
40 human sciences: natural science investigates reality (substantiality and 
causality) in the appearing worid. Human science investigates personal 
individuality and personal causality, the causality of freedom and motiva- 
tion. Thereby, however, the natural sciences, as sciences, are enclosed 
within the human sphere, the sphere of the spirit. It is not nature itself that 
45 IS encompassed by the Objectivities of the human sciences, but rather that 
holds for the science of nature, the science of psychology, etc.; and nature 


402 


SUPPLEMENTS 


as correlate, as what is known at each respective level, as "world-image" [393] FPTLOGUE 

of science of this or that age, also belongs obviously in human science, in 

history. 
Here we have discovered a remarkable parallelism. Everything human- 
5 scientific allows of being transformed into the natural-scientific insofar as 

intuitive nature is apprehensible as the appearance of an Objective nature 

and to the extent that each spiritual factum, each person in his acts and 

states, is apprehensible as "manifestation" of a soul, related to a Body 

(which expresses it, in another attitude) as a physicalistic thing. 
10 Obviously one must not, as Dilthey did, confuse the opposition of 

description and explanation with the opposition between the human 

sciences and the natural sciences. That is, if we oppose description and 

explanation (and accordingly descriptive and explanatory sciences), then we 

are taking description as a lower level of explanation. If this opposition 
15 makes sense, then we are in the case of both description and explanation 

directed to the same thing : to something " Objective." Actually, we find in 

each sphere, in the sphere of nature but also in the human sphere, this 

distinction between description and explanation as normative. De facto, 

however, if we consider the matter more closely, the so-called descriptive 
20 sciences are not substrata of the corresponding "explanatory" sciences, 

and it is of the utmost necessity, at first with respect to the natural sciences, 

to bring to clarity these obscure relations. 


EPILOGUE ^ 


Preliminary Remarks [138] 

The following pages present, on the whole, the text of the 
explanatory comments I have added as a prologue to the 
5 forthcoming English edition of my Ideas. ^ They may also be of 
use to the German reader of the book (pubHshed so far only as 
a fragment of a greater whole), for in them I speak my mind on 
the general misunderstandings which have obscured the true 
sense of my transcendental phenomenology. Under the spell of 

10 the thinking habitual in the philosophical tradition, people 
overlook what is radically new in this phenomenology as to 
method and field of research. Neither do they understand its 
claim, by no means extravagant, to have first opened the way, 
and even to have taken the first steps along the way, on which, 

15 in sober research to be conducted in the most radically scientific 
spirit, all conceivable problems of philosophy must gradually 
achieve their genuinely original formulation and solution. 

To be sure, no account is taken here of the situation of 
German philosophy (very different from the British situation), 

20 with the "Philosophy of Life" striving to be predominant in it, 
with its new anthropology, its philosophy of "Existence." Thus 
no account is taken of the charges of " intellectuahsm " or 


[See the Translators' Introduction above, p. XIV. The pagination followed here is 
that of the Husserliana edition: Edmund Husserl, Ideen zu einer reinen Phanomeno- 
logie md phdnomenologischen Philosophie, Drittes Buck: Die Phdnomenologie und die 
Fundamente der Wissenschaften. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1952 {Husserliana V), 
"Nachwort," pp. 138-162. — Trans.] 

2 [Husserl is referring to the translation of Book I by W.R. Boyce Gibson; Ideas: 
General introduction to pure phenomenology. New York: Macmillan, 1931.— 
Trans.] 


406 


EPILOGUE 


" rationalism " which have been brought from these sides 
against my phenomenology and which are very closely con- 
nected with my specific concept of philosophy. In this concept, I [139] 
reinstate the most original idea of philosophy, which, since the 
5 time of its first solid formulation by Plato, has laid at the basis 
of our European philosophy and science and which signifies for 
them a task which will ever be theirs. For me, philosophy, as an 
idea, means universal, and in a radical sense, "rigorous" 
science. As such, it is science built on an ultimate foundation, 

10 or, what comes down to the same thing, a science based on 
ultimate self-responsibility, in which, hence, nothing held to be 
obvious, either predicatively or pre-predicatively, can pass, 
unquestioned, as a basis for knowledge. It is, I emphasize, an 
idea, which, as the further meditative interpretation will show, is 

15 to be realized only by way of relative and temporary validities 
and in an infinite historical process — but in this way it is, in 
fact, realizable. In our positive sciences, in conformity with their 
historical origin, this idea lives on, no matter how httle they 
themselves actually do justice to it on account of the way they 

20 are founded. As a result of this shortcoming, difficulties, as is 
well known, arose for these sciences in their most recent 
development, and at the same time a skepticism is spreading 
which generally threatens to discredit the great project of a 
rigorous science and, taken more universally, the project of a 

25 philosophy as rigorous science. But instead of prematurely 
yielding to this skepticism, it appears to me to be more proper, 
and to be the great task of our time, to carry out a radical 
meditation, in order to intentionally explicate the genuine sense 
of this idea of philosophy and* to demonstrate the possibiHty of 

30 its realization. But this will come to pass in a decisive and 
productive way only by means of the systematic elaboration of 
the method of questioning back into the ultimate conceivable 
presuppositions of knowledge. This questioning back leads at 
first to universal subjective being and life, which, as pre- 

35 scientific, are already presupposed in all theorizing, and from 
there it leads on — and this is the most decisive step — to 
so-called "transcendental subjectivity" (an old term given a 
new sense) as the primordial locus of all meaning-giving and 
validation of being. "Philosophy as rigorous science," and 


EPILOGUE 


407 


specifically as universal and absolutely foundational science, 
may not be given up, unless first is made anew, and with the 
most radical seriousness, an attempt to actually found it, or 
again, unless the science of phenomenology, the science of a 
5 new beginning, which arose out of such an intention, is thought [140] 
through with equal seriousness. I cannot engage here in a closer 
confrontation with the counter-trends of the present, which, in 
the most extreme contrast to my phenomenological philosophy, 
want to draw a line between philosophy and rigorous science. I 

10 would only like to say expressly that I cannot acknowledge any 
kind of justification to the objections that have been advanced 
from those quarters: e.g., my intellectuahsm, the miring of my 
methodic procedure in abstract one-sidedness, my failure, in 
general and in principle, to touch upon original-concrete, prac- 

15 tical-active subjectivity, and my skirting of the so-called prob- 
lems of "Existence" as well as the metaphysical problems. 
These objections are all based on misunderstandings and, 
ultimately, on the fact that my phenomenology is interpreted 
back to a level, the overcoming of which is precisely its whole 

20 sense. In other words, they are based on the fact that what is in 
principle the novelty of the " phenomenological reduction " has 
not been understood, and consequently neither has the ascent 
from mundane subjectivity (from man) to "transcendental 
subjectivity." So it is my critics who have remained mired — in 

25 an anthropology, whether empirical or apriori, which, according 
to my theory, does not at all secure the specifically philosophi- 
cal ground. And to take this anthropology for philosophy is 
equivalent to a relapse into a "transcendental anthropologism " 
or "psychologism." To exhibit this in detail would require an 

30 extended treatise of its own. 

For the rest, I hold fast to my old conviction that in matters 
of science what counts is work done rather than criticism, work 
which in the end remains intact, no matter how much it is 
misunderstood and how often arguments against it miss the 

35 point. What the Ideas reports of — as I am still firmly con- 
vinced — is indeed work done, in its beginning parts, and to 
carry on this work steadily has been my endeavor ever since. A 
book I am now preparing [Cartesian Meditations], which is 
presumably to appear early next year, will, I hope, prove to all 


408 


EPILOGUE 


who in this restless age have time for theories, built up 
objectively in such a laborious and sober way, that transcenden- [141] 
tal phenomenology in the sense I conceive it does in fact 
encompass the universal horizon of the problems of philosophy 
5 and holds in readiness the method they require. It will be 
shown, therefore, that my phenomenology actually has within 
its field of view all questions that can be put to man in the 
concrete, including as well all so-called metaphysical questions, 
insofar as they have possible sense in the first place, for it is 
10 their original formulation and critical delimitation which is 
precisely the vocation of this phenomenology. 


1. 


My Ideas toward a pure phenomenology and a phenomenologi- 
cal philosophy, of which only a first volume has appeared, 

15 attempts to found, under the heading of pure, or transcendental, 
phenomenology, a new science, although one prepared by the 
entire course of philosophical development since Descartes, a 
science related to a new field of experience, exclusively its own, 
the field of "transcendental subjectivity." This term does not 

20 refer here, therefore, to a product of speculative fabricafions; 
transcendental subjectivity, together with its transcendental 
lived experiences, faculties, and accomphshments, is an abso- 
lutely autonomous domain of direct experience, even if up to 
now, for essential reasons, it has remained inaccessible. Trans- 

25 cendental experience, within a theoretical and, at first, descrip- 
tive scope, becomes possible only by way of a radical transfor- 
mation of that attitude in which natural, mundane experience 
runs its course. This transformation of attitude, as method of 
access to the transcendental-phenomenological sphere, is called 

30 " phenomenological reduction." 

Transcendental phenomenology is not meant to be founded 
in that book as an empirical science of the empirical facts 
related to this field of experience. The facts which at any time 
present themselves there serve as examples only — for what is 

35 most universal — similar to the way empirical examples serve 
the mathematician. For instance, intuitive factual groups of 


EPILOGUE 


409 


beads on an abacus serve merely as examples for an insightful 
grasping, in pure universality, of, e.g., 2, 3, 4... in general, pure 
numbers in general, and, related to them, pure mathematical 
propositions, universal mathematical essences. Thus Book I of [142] 
5 the Ideas deals with an "apriori" science (an eidetic science 
directed to the universal that is original-intuitive) which lays 
claim to the factual field of experience of transcendental subjec- 
tivity and its factual lived experiences, but which takes them 
into account merely as pure possibiUties, placing them beside 

10 pure intuitive possibilities that have been varied completely ad 
libitum, and then extrapolating, as their " apriori," the indisso- 
luble essential structure of transcendental subjectivity pervading 
all the free variations. Since the reduction to the transcendental, 
and at the same time this further reduction to the eidos, is the 

15 method of access to the field of work of the new science, it 
follows (and this is to be emphasized sharply from the start) 
that the genuine beginning of the systematic disclosure of this 
science lies in the chapters dealing with these reductions. Only 
by starting at that point and by following the demonstrations as 

20 they proceed step by step, can the reader, participating 
inwardly, judge whether or not something peculiarly new is 
actually worked out there — worked out and not just fabricated, 
drawn from actually universal intuition of the essence and 
described faithfully. 

25 In that book, eidetic phenomenology is Umited to the realm 
of sheer eidetic " description," i.e., to the realm of the imme- 
diately intuitable essential structures of transcendental subjectiv- 
ity. For this already comprises in itself a systematically self- 
enclosed infinity of essential properties. And therefore the work 

30 does not pretend to be a systematically exhaustive elaboration 
of the transcendental cognitions that could perhaps be gained 
by means of logical deduction. Indeed, even the descriptive 
domain is limited to its more easily accessible level; thus the 
whole problem of the temporalization of the sphere of imma- 

35 nent time remains excluded. (On that, see my lectures on inner 
time consciousness delivered in 1905 and published in my 
Jahrbuch fur Philosophic und phdnomenologische Forschung, 
Vol. IX.) For the second volume of the Ideas were reserved the 
problems of the Ego, the problems of the person as person, and 


410 


EPILOGUE 


the transcendental problem of 'empathy." Eidetic description is 
one (but not the only) distinctive feature of the total style of this 
new apriori science over and against the mathematical sciences. [143] 
The latter are "deductive" sciences, which means that in their 
5 scientific-theoretical style mediate, deductive cognition prevails 
to an incomparable extent over the immediate axiomatic know- 
ledge that lays the foundation for all the deductions. In the 
mathematical sciences an infinity of deductions rests on a few 
axioms. In the transcendental sphere, however, we find an 
10 infinity of cognitions that precede all deduction, and what is 
mediate there (a mediation by way of intentional implication) 
has nothing to do with deduction and, being thoroughly 
intuitive, resists any sort of methodic or constructive symbohza- 
tion. 


15 


2. 


We must still issue a warning against a misunderstanding that 
has been so prevalent. If at the very outset of the Ideas, by way 
of anticipation, it is given as the author's opinion (to be 
grounded in the further parts of the work as announced) that all 

20 radically scientific philosophy rests on the foundation of phe- 
nomenology and is, in an extended sense, " phenomenological 
philosophy" through and through, this is not to be taken as 
meaning that philosophy is in his view solely and entirely an 
apriori science. The setting of the tasks of Volume I, tasks of a 

25 science of the eidetic essence of transcendental subjectivity, does 
not at all imply (quite the contrary) that a factual science of 
transcendental subjectivity has already been accomplished. A 
glance at the sciences of mathematics, those great logical 
instruments for the factual sciences corresponding to them, 

30 would already have forced us to expect just the opposite. For 
factual science in the strictest sense, truly rational science of 
nature, only became possible in the first place on the basis of 
the independent construction of a pure mathematics of nature. 
It is the same everywhere ; the science of the pure possibilities 

35 must precede the science of the actual facts and must provide 
the latter with direction, its concrete logic. The case of transcen- 


EPILOGUE 


411 


dental philosophy is no different, even if the achievement of the 
system of the transcendental apriori has a much higher dig- 
nity. 


3. 


[144] 


5 Great difficulties, grounded in the nature of the matters 
themselves, in general impede the understanding, or even the 
secure mastery, of the distinction between transcendental phe- 
nomenology and "descriptive," or, as is often said nowadays, 
" phenomenological," psychology. This has led to misunder- 

10 standings, and even researchers who consider themselves as 
subscribing to a phenomenological orientation have been sub- 
ject to them. Thus some explanations and clarifications should 
prove useful here. The change of attitude which in the book in 
question is called the phenomenological reduction (we can now 

1 5 name it more clearly : the transcendental-phenomenological 
reduction) is carried out by me, the one philosophizing at the 
moment, from out of the natural attitude, the one in which I 
experience myself at first as an Ego in the usual sense, as this 
human person living among others in the world. As psycholog- 

20 ist, I in general make my theme this being and life in the mode 
of an " Ego," and I thematize the person solely with regard to 
his "psychic" aspect. In the pure turn to the interior, exclu- 
sively following so-called "inner experience" (more precisely, 
self-experience as well as "empathy") and deferring all psycho- 

25 physical questions which include a relation to human corporeal- 
ity, I acquire an original and purely descriptive knowledge of 
psychic hfe as it is in itself; and the most original is of me 
myself, for here alone is it purely perceptual. If, as often 
happens, descriptions which keep purely and faithfully to the 

30 data of intuition are called phenomenological, then a "phenom- 
enological psychology" can be said to arise purely on the basis 
of inner intuition as intuition of what is essentially proper to the 
psyche. In fact, if the right method is followed here (of which 
we shall still have to speak later), what results is not simply 

35 unselfsufficient typologizing and classificatory descriptions but 
indeed a vast autonomous science. Yet this will properly come 


412 


EPILOGUE 


to pass only if — as is possible even here — the goal is not a 
factual science of the facts of this sphere of inner intuition but is 
a science of the essence, i.e., one which investigates the invar- 
iant, properly essential structures of a soul or of a community 
5 of psychic life: in short, a science that investigates their 
apriori. 

Now if that transcendental-phenomenological reduction is [145] 
actually carried out, the reduction by means of which the 
natural attitude, the attitude of inner psychology, is trans- 

10 formed and becomes a transcendental attitude, then psycholog- 
ical subjectivity loses precisely that which gives it the status of 
something real in the pregiven world of naive experience. It 
loses the ontological sense of being the soul of a Body existing 
in pregiven spatio-temporal nature. For nature, including Body 

15 and soul, and the world in general as the totality of what I 
accept naively and straightforwardly as existing, lose, through 
the phenomenological epoche, this ontological status. 

It is here of decisive importance that one have already made 
it perfectly clear to oneself just what this epoche means, what 

20 the significance is of this suspension of belief in the existence of 
the world of experience, and what kind of theoretical outlook 
on "pure subjectivity" is thereby first made possible. On the 
one hand, certain judgments are now excluded, all those that, 
resting on natural experience, are about this world constantly 

25 and altogether unquestionably pregiven as existing. Conse- 
quently all positive sciences are also excluded, for they in fact 
have the source of their verification in natural-mundane experi- 
ence. It is obvious that psychology is one of their number. On 
the other hand, by means of this epoche the regard is freed for 

30 the universal phenomenon, " the world of consciousness purely 
as such," the world purely as given in the manifold flux of 
conscious hfe: that is, as appearing ''originaliter '' in a manifold 
of ''concordant" experiences. In these concordances it is char- 
acterized, for consciousness, as "actually existing." In its 

35 details, however, but only in details, it can happen that this 
character of "actual being" is overturned and becomes "hollow 
semblance." This universal phenomenon, "world existing for 
me" (and then also "existing for us") is made the phenomeno- 
logist's new field of theoretical interest, the field of a new sort of 


EPILOGUE 


413 


theoretical experience and experiential research. He lets himself 
be governed by the "pure phenomena" as they present them- 
selves in the consistently practiced phenomenological attitude, 
and he sees opening up an infinite, self-enclosed, absolutely 
5 autonomous realm of beings : the domain of pure, or transcen- 
dental, subjectivity. In this domain, the corresponding pure or 
transcendental phenomena replace all the mundane events that [146] 
were accessible previously in the natural attitude, that is, 
precisely those occurrences in which what is mundane " is " for 

10 him purely and simply or, in other words, has the status of 
being and perhaps has been verified. 

Once this reduction is grasped clearly then one also sees the 
utter radicality of its effect upon the psychological subject of 
inner experience and upon this experience itself and thus upon 

15 my own Ego, the Ego of the currently practicing phenomeno- 
logist. Within my field of transcendental phenomena, I no 
longer have theoretical validity as a human Ego ; I am no longer 
a real Object within the world which I accept as existing, but 
instead I am posited exclusively as subject for this world. And 

20 this world is itself posited precisely as I am conscious of it in 
some fashion or other, as appearing to me in a certain way or as 
believed, predicatively judged, valued, etc. Thus it is posited in 
such a manner that the certainty of its being belongs itself to the 
"phenomenon," in no different a way than other modes of 

25 what I have in consciousness and its "contents." 

Though the phenomenologist, in all his transcendental 
descriptions, does not pass the slightest judgment about the 
world and about his human Ego as a mundane being, neverthe- 
less he does constantly make a judgment about his Ego, indeed 

30 a judgment affirming its existence ; but now this is the transcen- 
dental Ego, i.e., the Ego as a being absolutely in itself and for 
itself, ''prior '' to all mundane being, which only in this Ego first 
acquires ontological validity. It is evident at once that, despite 
the transformation of sense affecting the total phenomenologi- 

35 cal-psychological content of the soul, it is precisely this content 
that becomes transcendental-phenomenological, just as, con- 
versely, with the return of the natural-psychological attitude, it 
becomes psychological once again. This correspondence must 
remain in effect even if, already prior to all interest in the 


414 


EPILOGUE 


formation of a psychological science and, in particular, of a 
"descriptive" or " phenomenological " psychology, a transcen- 
dental phenomenology is established from philosophical 
motives, thus if the transcendental Ego comes into view imme- 
5 diately through the phenomenological reduction and is made 
the theme of a transcendental description. In this way, there is a 
remarkable thoroughgoing paralleHsm between a correctly exe- 
cuted phenomenological psychology and a transcendental phe- 
nomenology. To every eidetic, as well as to every empirical, [147] 

10 constatation on the one side, a parallel must correspond on the 
other side. And yet this whole theoretical content, if taken, in 
the natural attitude, as psychology, as a positive science relating 
to the pregiven world, is utterly non-philosophical; whereas the 
"same" content in the transcendental attitude, and conse- 

15 quently understood as transcendental phenomenology, is a 
philosophical science. Indeed, it even achieves the rank of the 
philosophically fundamental science, as a science that cultivates, 
in description, the transcendental ground, which henceforth 
remains the exclusive ground of all philosophical knowledge. 

20 In fact here reside the greatest stumbling blocks on the path 
to understanding, for one will no doubt feel it is asking much 
too much that a mere "nuance," arising out of a simple change 
in attitude, should have such a great significance and indeed be 
decisive for all genuine philosophy. The totally unique signifi- 

25 cance of this " nuance " can become evident only by means of a 
radical self-understanding on the part of the philosopher with 
regard to what he properly wants to attain under the title of 
philosophy and with regard to the extent to which he must want 
something different in principle from "positive" science, thus 

30 something else than domination, in theory, of the pregiven 
world of experience. In this self-understanding, provided it is 
actually carried through radically and consistently, there arises a 
compelling motivation which forces the philosophizing Ego to 
reflect back on that subjectivity of his own which is ultimately 

35 the Ego that does the experiencing in all his natural mundane 
experience, both the actual and the possible, and further is the 
Ego that is active in all the person's activity, including the Ego 
that is the agent of scientific cognition. This is the Ego, 
therefore, that is already presupposed by every natural self- 


415 


cognition in the form, "I, this man in the world, who experi- 
ence, think, act, etc." In other words, out of this the shift to the 
phenomenological attitude arises as an absolute requirement in 
order for philosophy to be able to set its distinctive project on 
5 the soil of that experience which is in itself the first and 
consequently in order for philosophy to begin at all. Thus it is 
only in the transcendental-phenomenological attitude that phi- 
losophy can get underway and can develop as a science in ail its 
further philosophical activity. Precisely for that reason, descrip- 

10 tive apriori phenomenology (visible in my Ideas in its actual [148] 
working) as directly cultivating the transcendental soil, is in 
itself " first philosophy," the philosophy of the beginning. Only 
if this motivation, which calls for a very precise and deeply 
penetrating interpretation, has become a living and compelling 

15 insight will it be clear that what at first seems so odd, i.e., 
attending to the nuance, the nuance that conducts one from a 
pure inner psychology to transcendental phenomenology, 
actually is what decides between the being or non-being of a 
philosophy — of a philosophy which in a radically scientific 

20 spirit knows what is required by its distinctive sense, to be 
grounded in ultimate self-responsibility, knows the required 
foundation and the required method. It is only on the basis of 
such self-understanding that we can understand the deepest and 
genuinely radical sense of psychologism — i.e., its sense as 

25 transcendental psychologism, as the aberration that has cor- 
rupted the pure sense of philosophy by seeking to ground 
philosophy on anthropology or psychology, i.e., on the positive 
science of man or, respectively, on that of human psychic life. 
This aberration is not mitigated even if, following our proce- 

30 dure, a pure inner psychology is worked out as an apriori 
science. Even then, it remains positive science and can be a 
foundation only for "positive," "dogmatic" science — but for 
philosophy, never. 


4. 


35 In the reflections to which I have devoted myself these many 
years, I have pursued various ways, all equally possible, aimed 


416 


EPILOGUE 


EPILOGUE 


417 


at exploring, in an absolutely transparent and compelling 
fashion, such a motivation as presses beyond the natural 
positivity of life and science and forces upon us, by displaying 
the necessity of the phenomenological reduction, a conversion 
5 to the transcendental attitude. These ways are therefore ones 
that lead to the beginning of a serious philosophy. They need to 
be thought through in reflective consciousness, and thereby they 
themselves belong properly to the beginning, inasmuch as a 
begmning can in fact arise only in the beginner's self-reflection. 
10 It goes without saying that the necessary point of departure for 
each of these ways is the natural-naive attitude, for which the 
world of experience is the "self-evident" pregiven ground of 
being (that is, its being is never questioned). In Ideas I (Part 2, [149] 
Chapter 2), I chose the way which at that time seemed to me the 
15 most impressive. It proceeds egologically at first, as a self- 
reflection entirely within the realm of purely inner-psychological 
intuition, or, as we can also say, as a "phenomenological" 
reflection in the usual psychological sense. Eventually it leads so 
far that I, the one reflecting on himself, come to realize that, in 
20 the consistently exclusive direction of experience toward what is 
experienceable purely as inner, toward what is "accessible" to 
me phenomenologically, I have a proper essence that is self- 
enclosed and self-coherent. To this essence pertains all actual 
and possible experience by means of which the Objective world 
25 IS there for me with all the experiential verifications in which it 
has for me ontological validity, one that is verified even if never 
scientifically examined. This essence also includes the special 
apperceptions through which I have for myself the status of a 
human being with Body and soul, a human being who lives amid 
30 others in the world of which he is conscious as surround- 
ing world, who is engaged with them in this world, who is 
attracted or repulsed by it, and who deals with it in work or in 
theory, etc. Reflecting further on myself, I realize as well that 
my phenomenologically self-enclosed proper essence can be 
35 posited absolutely, as the Ego (and I am this Ego) that bestows 
ontological validity on the being of the world of which I speak 
at any time. It is for me and is what it is for me only insofar as 
it acquires sense and self-confirming validity from my own pure 
life and from that of the others who are disclosed to me in my 


own life. I, as this absolutely posited proper essence, as the open 
and infinite field of pure phenomenological givens and as their 
inseparable unity, am the "transcendental Ego." Absolute 
positing means that I no longer have the world as "given" to 
5 me in advance or with the status of straightforward existence. 
Instead, from now on what is exclusively given (as a result of 
my new attitude) is my Ego, purely as the Ego that exists in 
itself and that in itself experiences the world, verifies it. etc. 


5. 

10 If these considerations are pursued with undaunted self- 
consistency (something that will not suit everybody), transcen- 
dental-phenomenological idealism arises, standing in the shar- [150] 
pest possible opposition to all psychologistic idealism. The 
presentation of it m the chapter indicated above suffers. I 

15 concede, from imperfections. Although it is unassailable in all 
actual essentials, it lacks, regarding the foundation of this 
idealism, an explicit taking of a position on the problem of 
transcendental solipsism, the problem of transcendental inter- 
subjectivity : that is, on the essential relatedness of the world 

20 that is valid for me as the Objective world to the other subjects 
who have validity for me. These supplements were supposed to 
be supplied by the second volume, meant from the start to 
accompany the first and which I hoped at that time would 

^_ appear very shortly after it.' The scandal caused by this 

2^ ideahsm and its alleged solipsi.sm considerably impeded the 
reception of the book, as if this outhne of philosophy were 
supposed to contain in some way all that is essential to it. In 
fact, the book dealt only with one way in which the motivation 
arises to acquire, from out of the problem of the possibilitv of 

3( Objective cognition, the necessary insight that the very sense of 


■ My lectures at Gottingen in 1910-11 already presented a first sketch of mv 
transcendental theory of empathy, i.e.. the reduction of human existence as mundane 
Demg-w.th-one-another to transcendental mtersubjectivit> . See the extensive descrip- 
tions in the fifth part of my forthcoming Cartesian Meditations. A short precis of the 
path followed is given in my Formal and transcendental logic. § 96. 


418 


EPILOGUE 


this problem leads back to the Ego existing purely in itself and 
for itself, that this Ego as presupposition of all knowledge of 
the world cannot itself be nor remain presupposed as a worldly 
being, and that it consequently must be brought to transcenden- 
5 tal purity through phenomenological reduction, through £7toxfi 
with respect to the world's being-for-me. Perhaps I would have 
done better, without changing the essential coherence of the 
presentation, to have left open the final decision in favor of 
transcendental idealism and only tried to make evident the fact 
10 that trains of thought of decisive philosophical significance (i.e., 
ones pressing on toward an ^'idealism") necessarily arise here 
and must be thought through unconditionally and that to do so 
it is by all means necessary to secure for oneself the terrain of 
transcendental subjectivity. I may not here neglect, however, to 
15 declare expressly that I retract nothing whatsoever as regards [151] 
transcendental-phenomenological idealism and that I still con- 
sider, as I did before, every form of the usual philosophical 
realism nonsensical in principle, no less so than that idealism 
which it sets itself up against in its argumentations and which it 

20 "'refutes." The objection of solipsism would never have been 
raised, given a deeper understanding of my presentation, as an 
objection against phenomenological ideahsm itself; the objec- 
tion would only be against my incomplete presentation of it. 
For all that, however, it is inexcusable for anyone to overlook 

25 the fundamental essentials of the philosophizing whose gateway 
has been opened in that book : versus the thinking that is rich in 
presuppositions, having as premises the world and science and 
various methodic habits of thought descended from the entire 
scientific tradifion, there a radical cognitive autonomy is 

30 enacted. For there the validity of everything pregiven as 
"obvious,'' and taken for granted, is suspended, and a return 
takes place to that which is already presupposed implicitly in all 
presupposing, all questioning, and all answering, and which 
thereby is necessarily, constantly, and immediately what is, in 

35 advance, first in itself. This latter becomes posited freely and 
expressly as what is first, and indeed with an evidence that 
precedes all conceivable evidences and that bears them impli- 
citly. Although it is only with the phenomenological reduction, 
which would consciously convert this radicalism into actual 


EPILOGUE 


419 


work, that authentic philosophizing can begin — i.e., precisely a 
philosophizing which accomplishes work — yet the whole prepa- 
ratory reflection has already been carried out in exactly that 
spirit. It is in fact — though still unconsciously — a phenomeno- 
5 logical reflection. Accordingly, then, it is a piece of pure 
self-reflection, exhibiting the most original evident facts; more- 
over, if it brings into view in them the outHnes of idealism 
(although in an indistinct way), it is still anything but a party to 
the usual debates between idealism and realism, and so none of 

10 the objections found in their wrangling can affect it. Whatever 
connections have been exhibited there as phenomenologically 
essential, including the motivations in the direction of "ideal- 
ism," remain intact notwithstanding all the refinements and 
supplementations that may prove necessary, just as the reahty 

15 of mountain ranges and of rivers, described by the first explorer 

to actually see them, remains intact despite the corrections and [152] 
supplements later explorers will add to his descriptions. The 
first preliminary beginning of a new conception of the transcen- 
dental problem (serving merely as a motivation toward that 

20 goal) must be taken up therefore according to its phenomeno- 
logical content, one always of fundamental importance, and 
according to what is predelineated therein with concrete neces- 
sity even for the true sense of an Objective being that is 
knowable only subjectively. 

25 Moreover, transcendental phenomenology is no theory 
merely there to provide answers to the historical problem of 
idealism; it is a science that contains its own foundation and is 
absolutely self-sufficient; indeed, it is the only absolutely self- 
sufficient science. But it is such only in that, when carried out 

30 consistently (as is clear already in the concluding part of the 
book, so important for a proper understanding), it leads to 
"constitutive problems" and theories which encompass all 
conceivable objects that can ever be encountered by us — thus 
the entire pregiven real world with all its categories of objects, 

35 and likewise all "ideal" worlds — and which render them 
comprehensible as transcendental correlates. This implies, how- 
ever, that transcendental-phenomenological idealism is not 
simply a particular philosophical thesis, one theory among 
others, but that transcendental phenomenology, as a concrete 


420 


EPILOGUE 


science, is in itself universal idealism carried out as science, even 
if in it not one word is spoken about idealism. It demonstrates 
this idealism by means of its own sense as transcendental science 
in each of its separate constitutive domains. 
5 Now, however, we must not fail to clarify expressly the 
fundamental and essential distinction between transcendental- 
phenomenological ideahsm versus that idealism against which 
realism battles as against its forsworn opponent. Above all: 
phenomenological ideahsm does not deny the actual existence of 

10 the real world (in the first place, that means nature), as if it 
maintained that the world were mere semblance, to which 
natural thinking and the positive sciences would be subject, 
though unwittingly. Its sole task and accomphshment is to 
clarify the sense of this world, precisely the sense in which 

15 everyone accepts it— and rightly so — as actually existing. That 

the world exists, that it is given as existing universe in uninter- [153] 
rupted experience which is constantly fusing into universal 
concordance, is entirely beyond doubt. But it is quite another 
matter to understand this indubitabihty which sustains life and 

20 positive science and to clarify the ground of its legitimacy. In 
this regard, it is a fundamental of philosophy, according to the 
expositions in the text of the Ideas, that the continual prog- 
ression of experience in this form of universal concordance is a 
mere presumption, even if a legitimately valid one, and that 

25 consequently the non-existence of the world ever remains think- 
able, notwithstanding the fact that it was previously, and now 
still is, actually given in concordant experience. The result of the 
phenomenological sense-clarification of the mode of being of 
the real world, and of any conceivable real world at all, is that 

30 only the being of transcendental subjectivity has the sense of 
absolute being, that only it is "irrelative" (i.e., relative only to 
itself), whereas the real world indeed is but has an essential 
relativity to transcendental subjectivity, due, namely, to the fact 
that it can have its sense as being only as an intentional 

35 sense-formation of transcendental subjectivity. Natural hfe, and 
its natural world, finds, precisely herein, its limits (but is not for 
that reason subject to some kind of illusion) in that, living on in 
its " naturality," it has no motive to pass over into the 
transcendental attitude, to execute, therefore, by means of the 


EPILOGUE 


421 


phenomenological reduction, transcendental self-reflection. But 
all this acquires its full sense only if the phenomenological 
disclosure of the transcendental Ego has been carried out so far 
that the experience of co-subjects, which is included in it, has 
5 obtained its reduction to transcendental experience, thus if it 
has been shown that "transcendental subjectivity," as what is 
given in transcendental experience for the one engaged at the 
moment in self-reflection, means not only " I as transcendental 
Ego-self," taken concretely in the life of my own transcendental 

10 consciousness, but, in addition, also refers to the co-subjects 
that present themselves as transcendental in my transcendental 
hfe, in the transcendental we-community which is co-presented. 
Transcendental intersubjectivity is thus the one in which the real 
world is constituted as Objective, as being for "everybody." 

15 This is where the real world gets its sense, whether or not we 

have explicit knowledge of the fact. And how could we have this [154] 
knowledge prior to the phenomenological reduction, which is 
what first brings transcendental subjectivity, as universal abso- 
lute being, within the compass of experience? As long as one 

20 knows only of psychological subjectivity, posits it as absolute, 
and yet would explain the world as the mere correlate of this 
subjectivity, then idealism will be countersensical, will be psy- 
chological ideahsm — the one opposed by an equally counter- 
sensical reahsm. Now, of course, for him who has already 

25 secured access to genuine transcendental subjectivity, it is easy 
to see that the first great ideahsts of the 18th century, Berkeley 
and Hume on the one side, Leibniz on the other, had actually 
already surpassed the psychological sphere in the natural-real 
sense. But because the contrast between psychological and 

30 transcendental subjectivity remained unclarified, and the pre- 
dominating British sensuahsm or naturahsm could not make the 
constitution of the real understandable as an intentional accom- 
plishment producing sense and true being for transcendental 
subjectivity, there thus remained unabated, in the times that 

35 followed, the sterile and unphilosophical (occurring on the 
terrain of nature) battle between realism and idealism. And 
there remained dominant the insufficient interpretation of the 
sense which the great idealists actually intended, though, to be 
sure, as we said, without their being able to mark out clearly, 


422 


EPILOGUE 


for themselves and for others, the radical distinction between 
this sense as a transcendental one and, in opposition to it, the 
psychological. 
The new works I have started to bring out in the past year 
5 (my first publications since the Ideas) will adduce far-reaching 
extensions, clarifications, and supplements to what was begun in 
the Ideas and, incidently, prior to that already in the Logical 
Investigations, so that the claim to have actually set into work 
the necessary beginning of a philosophy "which is to come 

10 forth as a science" will not be regarded as mere self-delusion. In 
any event, he who for decades did not speculate about a new 
Atlantis but instead actually journeyed in the trackless wilder- 
ness of a new continent and undertook the virgin cultivation of 
some of its areas will not allow himself to be deterred in any 

15 way by the rejection of geographers who judge his reports 

according to their habitual ways of experiencing and thinking [155] 
and thereby excuse themselves from the pain of undertaking 
travels in the new land. 


20 There is still one more point that we must address here. In 
those circles where the phenomenological reduction is dispensed 
with as a philosophically irrelevant oddity— whereby, of 
course, the whole sense of my work and of my phenomenology 
is obhterated, and what is left is only an apriori psychology— it 

25 often happens that precisely this psychology that remains over 
is identified, as to its sense, with Franz Brentano's psychology 
of intentionality. However great is the veneration and gratitude 
with which I remember my teacher and his genius, and as much 
as I consider his transformation of the scholastic concept of 

30 intentionahty into a descriptive foundational concept of psycho- 
logy to be a great discovery, without which phenomenology 
would never have been possible, nevertheless an essential dis- 
tinction has to be drawn between pure psychology in my sense, 
a psychology contained impHcitly in transcendental phenomeno- 

35 logy, and Brentano's psychology. This applies no less to his 
"psychognosis," which is restricted to pure description within 


EPILOGUE 


423 


the realm of inner experience. That is indeed a "phenomenolog- 
ical" psychology, if, as often occurs today, any psychological 
investigation remaining purely within the confines of "inner 
e:|perience" is called "phenomenological" and if the term 
5 ^' phenomenological psychology" simply refers to the totahty of 
such investigations. Disregarding its name, this psychology then 
obviously leads back to John Locke and his school, up to John 
Stuart Mill. In which case it can be said that David Hume's 
Treatise contains the first systematic sketch of a pure, though 

10 not eidetic, phenomenology, and, in particular. Volume I of it is 
the first sketch of a comprehensive phenomenology of cogni- 
tion. To be sure, Hume's designation of his work as psychology 
concealed the fact, which went unnoticed, that Hume was by no 
means a psychologist in the usual sense and that his treatise is 

15 instead an actual "transcendental" phenomenology, though a 

sensualistically perverted one. Like his great predecessor, Ber- [156] 
keley, it is only as a psychologist that he has been regarded and 
been influential. Thus, excluding all transcendental questions, it 
is only this "phenomenological" school as a whole that con- 

20 cerns us here. Characteristic of this school and its psychology is 
the conception heralded in Locke's metaphor of the pure psyche 
as a " white paper," i.e., a complex or cluster of data, tempo- 
rally simultaneous or temporally successive, which take the 
course they do partially on account of their own rules and 

25 partially as governed by psycho-physical rules. The task of 
descriptive psychology would thus be to distinguish and classify 
the basic kinds of these "sense data," data of "inner experi- 
ence," as well as the elementary fundamental forms of their 
combination. And it would then be up to explanatory psycho- 

30 logy to seek the causal laws regulating the formation and 
transformation of the data, and in this it would be hke natural 
science and indeed would use a similar method. For those who 
live in the habits of thought prevailing in the science of nature it 
seems to be quite obvious that purely psychic being, or psychic 

35 life, is to be considered a course of events similar to natural 
ones, occurring in the quasi-space of consciousness. Evidently 
and in principle, it makes no difference in this regard whether 
one lets the psychic data be blown into aggregates "atomisti- 
cally," like shifting heaps of sand, even though in conformity 


424 


EPILOGUE 


with empirical laws, or whether they are considered parts of 
wholes which, by necessity, either empirical or apriori, can 
behave individually only as such parts within a whole — at the 
highest level perhaps in the whole that is consciousness in its 
5 totahty, which is bound to a fixed form of wholeness. In other 
words, atomistic psychology, as well as Gestalt psychology, 
both retain the sense and the principle of psychological "natu- 
rahsm" (as we have defined it above) or "sensualism/' as it can 
also be named if we recall the use of the term ''inner sense/' 

10 Clearly, even Brentano's psychology of intentionality remains 
tied to this traditional naturahsm, although it has brought 
about a reformation by introducing into psychology the descrip- 
tive concept of intentionality as a universal and fundamental 
one. 

15 What is essentially new, broken open in transcendentally 
oriented phenomenology and at the same time a breakthrough 
for descriptive psychology, transforming completely the face of 
this psychology, its entire method and its concrete aims, is the 
insight that a concrete description of the sphere of conscious- [157] 

20 ness as a self-enclosed sphere of intentionality (only in this way 
is it given concretely) has a totally different sense than descrip- 
tions of nature, thus than the exemplary descriptions in the 
descriptive natural sciences. A concrete description of conscious 
lived experiences, those of perception, memory, predicative 

25 judgment, love, action, etc. also requires by necessity the 
description of the objects "as such," the "intentional" objects, 
that one is conscious of in the respective lived experiences, i.e., a 
description of the objects as they belong inseparably to the lived 
experience in question as its " objectively meant " (its objective 

30 sense). As a further consequence, the description must also take 
into account the intentional synthesis, whereby one and the 
same intentional object as such is, in a purely inner-psycholog- 
ical respect, an ideal index for a manifold of modes of 
consciousness coordinated to it in a strict fashion and whose 

35 typicality is correlated, for essential reasons, with the typicality 
of the intentional object. It is not enough to say that all 
consciousness is consciousness-of and go on to distinguish by 
type the various modes of consciousness, in the manner, for 
example, of Brentano's classification (with which I cannot 


EPILOGUE 


425 


agree) with its classes of " representations," "judgments," 
"phenomena of love and hate," etc. On the contrary, what must 
be undertaken is an inquiry into the various categories of 
"objects" — but purely as objects of possible consciousness — 
5 and a questioning back to the essential forms of possible 
"manifolds," ones that are to be joined together synthetically 
and through whose synthesis, itself something to be described, 
there arises the consciousness of the identity of the present 
object of the respective category. One and the same "object in 

10 general," as meant object, traverses these manifolds. In the 
synthesis we are conscious of it as the same one that can and 
does come to consciousness in descriptively very different 
manners of appearance, manners of givenness, modes of tempo- 
ralization, modes of position-taking on the part of the Ego, etc. : 

15 i.e., in lived experiences that are extremely varied from a 
descrijptive point of view, though they are all of the same 
descriptive typology, one pertaining to them by essence 
(apriori). It is only a first indication, and one that does not say 
very much, to proclaim that every object is always either 

20 represented, or judged, or loved, etc. At this point arises the 
universal task — discussed at the end of the book in the 
transcendental attitude — of the disclosure of the phenomeno- [158] 
logical "constitution" of objects, although it is thought there as 
projected back on the natural-psychological attitude. 

25 I had to emphasize the distinction between transcendental 
subjectivity and psychological subjectivity, and so I declared 
repeatedly that transcendental phenomenology is by no means 
psychology, not even phenomenological psychology. Unfortu- 
nately, the effect upon most professional psychologists was their 

30 complete failure to notice the radical psychological reform that 
is implied in transcendental phenomenology. They interpreted 
my remarks to mean that the entire transcendental phenomeno- 
logy of the Ideas would be of no concern to them as psycholog- 
ists. And even the few who realized that something of great 

35 psychological relevance was being said there, and who then tried 
to make it accessible to others, did not grasp the whole sense 
and the entire import of an intentional and constitutive phe- 
nomenology. They did not see that there for the first time, in 
opposition to naturahstic external psychology, a psychology 


426 


EPILOGUE 


was expressed and worked out in which the Hfe of the soul 
becomes understood in its most proper, originally intuitive 
essence and that this intuitive essence resides in the constitution, 
ever new and ever being organized in new ways, of sense- 
5 formations in modes of ontological vahdity; that is, jt resides in 
the system of intentional accomplishments by means of which 
presently existing objects of the most varied levels, up even to 
the one Objective world, "are there" for the Ego. Pure inner 
psychology, the genuine psychology of intentionality (which, of 
10 course, is ultimately a psychology of pure intersubjectivity), 
reveals itself through and through as the constitutive phenome- 
nology of the natural attitude. The way from the Logical 
Investigations to the Ideas is, provided we deflect our aim from 
the transcendental-philosophical toward the psychological, the 
15 way that leads from a first and still imperfectly elucidated and 
delimited disclosure of the task, to the systematic development 
of the art, of interrogating the subjectivity of consciousness 
Itself and of interpreting it out of itself, out of its own essence, 
by maintaining a standpoint within it and avoiding the Wind- 
20 ness due to naturahstic prejudices. The beginning has neces- 
sarily to be a self-interrogation of one's own consciousness, 
mine, the psychologist's, and then the inquiry leads imperatively [159] 
from the objective sense, taken as a " guideline," to its modes of 
givenness of various levels, e.g., those of spatio-temporal orien- 
25 tations, perspectives, etc. And on the other hand it also ascends 
to the correlative noeses in the realm that is specifically the 
Ego's. Nevertheless, the interrogation of what specifically char- 
acterizes the Ego was not yet broached in the first volume of the 
Ideas. 

30 Moreover, it is not without reason that the reform of 
psychology first presented itself as a hidden implication of a 
transcendental reform. For it is the philosophical problem, the 
transcendental problem, that gives rise to the urgency to attain 
the most extreme radicahsm in the clarification of the ways in 

35 which knowledge and its object are related in the Ufe of 
consciousness itself, and only this urgency leads necessarily to a 
universal and concrete phenomenology of consciousness, one 
that takes its primary orientation from the intentional object. In 
the transition to the natural-psychological attitude it is obvious 


EPILOGUE 


427 


then, that the sense of an intentional psychology is totally 
different than anything to be found in the Lockean tradition, or 
for that matter, in the school of Brentano. Even A. Meinong is 
no exception here, quite the reverse, although some particular 
5 doctrines of his, in writings which appeared after my Logical 
Investigations, make contact with my own. Indeed Meinong 
remains immured in the basic conceptions of Brentano, i.e., in 
the psychological naturalism of the tradition of Locke— as does 
the entire psychology of modern times, contemporary psycho- 
10 logy included. 


7. 

For all that, however, the work in question is a philosophical 
one and does not make the reform of psychology one of its 
themes, although it cannot be totally lacking in indications for a 

15 genuine intentional psychology as a positive science. Further- 
more, even as philosophical is its task restricted. It does not 
pretend to be more than an attempt— the fruit of decades of 
meditation oriented exclusively to this single goal — to set into [160] 
motion the radical beginning of a philosophy which, to repeat 

20 the words of Kant, "might come forth as a science." The ideal 
of the philosopher to work out once and for all a systematically 
complete logic, ethics, metaphysics, etc., which he could at any 
time justify to himself and to others on the basis of absolutely 
compelHng insight, this ideal I had to forsake long ago and still 

25 deny myself today, and for no other reason than that the insight 
was always, and continues to be, indubitable for me that a 
philosophy simply cannot begin naively at random. That is, it 
cannot begin the way the positive sciences do, settling on the 
pregiven soil of world-experience, a soil presupposed as 

30 obviously existing. That they do this explains why they all have 
problems with their foundations and find themselves in parad- 
oxes, which are then supposed to be resolved by a subsequent 
epistemology, one that actually comes too late, however. It is 
precisely for this reason that the positive sciences are unphilos- 

35 ophical, are not ultimate and absolute sciences justifying them- 
selves out of ultimate grounds of knowledge. A philosophy with 


428 


EPILOGUE 


problematic foundations, with paradoxes due to the unclarity of 
its fundamental concepts, is no philosophy and contradicts the 
very sense of philosophy. Philosophy can take root only in 
radical reflections on the sense and possibiHty of its own 
5 enterprise. Through these reflections it must first of all appro- 
priate, by its own activity, its own proper soil, the absolute soil 
of pure experience, and must then create, again as self-active, 
the original concepts that adequately fit the measurements of 
this soil, and must in this fashion proceed altogether by way of 
10 an absolutely transparent method. In such a case there cannot 
be any unclear, problematic concepts or any paradoxes. The 
total lack of these reflections— that is, actually radical ones — 
and the overiooking of the tremendous difficulties of a correct 
beginning, or the quick and easy concealment of these difficul- 
15 ties, resulted in the circumstance that we have had, and continue 
to have, many, ever new, philosophical " systems " or '' trends " 
but not the one philosophy which, nevertheless, as idea, under- 
lies and sustains all the would-be philosophies. Philosophy on 
the path of its genuine reahzation is not like a relatively 
20 imperfect science which improves itself by taking its natural 
course. In the very sense of philosophy there is contained a 
radicalism of foundation, a reduction to absolute presupposi- 
tionlessness, and a fundamental method, by means of which the 
beginning philosopher secures for himself an absolute ground as 
25 the presupposition, which can be made with absolute insight, of 

all presuppositions considered to be ''obvious" in the usual [161] 
sense. Yet that too must first be clarified through corresponding 
reflections and disclosed in its absolute binding force. That 
these reflections get more and more involved as they progress, 
30 until finally they lead to a whole science, a science of the 
beginnings, a ''first" philosophy, and that all philosophical 
discipUnes, indeed the foundations of all science, arise out of 
this ground and root — these things had to remain hidden as 
long as there was lacking the radicalism without which philoso- 
35 phy cannot be at all and cannot even begin. In beginning 
naively with the presuppositions of positivity it could not help 
but happen that the true philosophical beginning got lost 
irretrievably. Since a sensitivity for the seriousness of the 
beginning was lacking to the philosophical projects of the 


EPILOGUE 


429 


tradition, there thus was lacking what is first and most impor- 
tant: namely, the specifically philosophical ground, to be 
acquired originally through autonomous activity, and conse- 
quently that autochthony or rootedness which alone makes 
5 genuine philosophy possible. These convictions of mine became 
stronger and stronger in the course of my work, in the evidence 
of the results founded one upon the other, step by step. Even if 
I had to tone down the ideal of my philosophical aspirations 
practically to that of a rank beginner, at least in my old age I 
10 have acquired the perfect certitude that I deserve to be called a 
genuine beginner. If the years of Methuselah were allotted to 
me, then I could almost hope that I might yet be able to become 
a philosopher. Now, I was able to pursue further and further 
the problems arising from the beginning of descriptive phenom- 

15 enology (the beginning of the beginning) and to elaborate them 
concretely in parts which were (for me) very instructive. The 
universal horizon of the work of a phenomenological philoso- 
phy has been revealed in its main geographical structures, as it 
were, and the essential layers of the problems and the essential 

20 methods of access to them have been clarified. I can see spread 
out before me the endlessly open plains of true philosophy, the 
"promised land," though its thorough cultivation will come 
after me. This optimism might be met with a smile, but the 
reader will be able to see for himself, in the fragments presented 

25 in the book as the beginning of phenomenology, whether there 

is not some jusfification for it. I would love to hope that those [162] 
who come afterwards will take up these beginnings and will 
carry them on persistently but will also repair their admittedly 
great imperfections, imperfections which can hardly be avoided 

30 in the beginnings of a science. 

Yet, in the last analysis, my book will be unable to help 
anyone who is already certain of his philosophy and his 
philosophical method and hence has never come to know the 
despair of one to whom the misfortune befell of being in love 

35 with philosophy and who, as a beginning student, amidst the 
jumble of philosophies, had to make a choice and became aware 
that there really was no choice at all, since none of those 
philosophies were concerned with genuine presupposifionless- 
ness and none had arisen out of the radicalism of an autono- 


430 


EPILOGUE 


mous self-responsibility, the radicalism philosophy itself INDEX 

demands. In the present time is the situation much different? 

Anyone who beheves he can appeal to the fruitful bathos ^ of 

experience in the usual sense, or to the "sure results" of the 
5 exact sciences, or to experimental or physiological psychology, 

or to a constantly improving logic and mathematics, etc., and 

who believes he can find there philosophical premises, such a 

one will not be very receptive to my book, especially if he, in the 

grip of the scientific skepticism of our times, has altogether 
10 ceased to accept as valid the goal of a philosophy as rigorous 

science. Thus he will be unable to muster the intensive interest 

required, and he will not consider worthwhile the great pains 

and expenditure of time that are demanded for an understand- 
ing, in my footsteps, of this beginning way as I have sketched it 
15 out. Only someone who is himself struggUng with the beginning 

of philosophy will react differently, for he will be forced to say 

to himself: tua res agitur. ^ 


• [Reading Bathos for Pathos^ following the text of the Nachwort as originally 
published in Husserl's Jahrbuch, vol. 11. — Trans.] 

2 ["You have a stake in this." Husserl is quoting Horace: Nam tua res agitur, 
paries cum proximus ardet. Epist. I, 18, 84. — Trans.] 


INDEX 


abnormalities, 63, 67, 71 fT., 94, 393 

absolute spirit, 90 

absolute subject, 180 

absolute time, 188 

acoustic image, 324 

advertence [Zuwendung], 25, 231 

adumbrations, 62; not the way the 
pure Ego is given. 111; schema as 
unity of, 135; 138 f.; 157 

aestheta, 60 f. 

aesthetic pleasure, 10, 16 

aesthetic synthesis, 19 ff. 

affective (acts, attitude, interest), 9 f., 
14 ff., 224, 349 

affects, 98, 112, 232; in Spinoza and 
Hobbes, 233; 324 

ages of Ufe, 266 f., 279, 284 

Albrecht, xix 

alert consciousness, 114ff. 

analogizing apperception, 176, 336 

animal nature: vs. material nature, 
30-32; as object of natural science, 
96 ff. 

animaha, 169 fT. 

animals : as founded reahties, 35 f. ; 
96; 101; lack stratum of theoretical 
thought, 142; playing cat 185 f.; as 
zoological objects, 192 f.; animal 
Ego, 350 f. 

animating sense, 248-259, 333 

anthropologism, 407 

anthropology: as positive science, 
150, 184, 371, 376, 390; as philoso- 
phy of man, 405 ff., 407, 415 


apperception : of things, 39 ff., 50 ff. ; 
of the human, 102 ff., 129 ff., 146; 
of the personal, 195 ff., 381 ; of the 
interpersonal, 203 ff. ; and motiva- 
tion, 235 ff. ; and empathy, 239 ff., 
358; self-apperception, 259-265, 
277, 360 ff.; naturalistic, 351; et 
passim. 

appresence, 170 ff., 208 

Aristotle, 176 n, 

art, 4, 10, 191, 255, 328 f. 

association: as intra-subjective con- 
nection, 143, 233 ff., 263 f., 283 ff., 
341-351; as inter-subjective con- 
nection, 200-220, 302 ff., 357 ff., 
393 ff. 

authenticity and unauthenticity, 198, 
276, 346 f. 

axiological attitude, 9ff., 204 ff, 

beauty, 4, 12-18, 196 ff., 391 

Beethoven, 359 

Berkeley, 421, 423 

Biemel, M., xiii 

biology, 381, 401 

Body [Leib]: significance of abnor- 
malities, 63 ff. ; organ of free will, 
1 59 ff., 323 ; vs. other material 
things, 165 ff.; bearer of localized 
sensations, 161 f.; zero point of 
orientation, 165 f., 224; for the sol- 
ipsistic subject, 168 f,; unity with 
soul, 168, 176, 252, 294; as "subjec- 
tive," 224; as expression of spiri- 


434 


INDEX 


tual life, 259, 296; two-sided reality, 
297; impenetrability of two Bodies, 
216; point of conversion between 
causality and conditionality, 168, 
299; means of all perception, yet 
itself imperfectly constituted, 61, 
167; et passim. 
book : as comprehensive unity, 248 f. 
bracketing, 27, 183, 301, 380 
brain, 146, 172 f., 229, 305, 354 
Brentano, 326, 422, 424, 427 

categorial objects, 7 ff., 23, 26 

categorial synthesis, 19 ff. 

causality: and reality, 48 ff., psycho- 
physical, 68 ff., 258 ff., 306, 354 ff., 
384, 390 ff.; as constitutive idea of 
material nature, 132 ff.; inapplica- 
ble to the soul, 140 ff., 356; the 
quasi -causality of the psychic, 145, 
356; motivational, 227 ff., 241 ff.; 
vs. the personal attitude, 247; as 
mystery, 272; causahty of reason, 
235; causality and spirit, 295 ff., 
390 ff. ; et passim. 

centaur, 62, 274 

central nervous system, 164, 198, 382 

chemistry, 55, 389 

child, 101 n., 282, 288 

church, 27, 148, 192, 255 

closet drama, 251 

cogitationes, 103, 263 f., 278, 292, 344, 
367, 392 

cogito, 5f., 103-127, 223 ff., 260 f., 
337 f. 

communal spirit, 209, 255 

community, 92, 141, 181, 207 ff,, 329, 
353, 363, 375, 387 ff. 

comprehension [Komprehension] : as 
personal apperception, 201, 217, 
240, 245, 254 ff., 295, 306, 311, 321, 
335 ff., 387 f. 

convictions, 120-126 

corpse, 352 

culture, 201, 250, 357, 365, 371, 388, 
390 

death, 186, 326 


Descartes, 31, 109, 218, 408 
description: vs. explanation, 402 
descriptive psychology, 326 f., 423 f. 
desire, 104, 121, 160, 197 ff., 269 f. 
differential equations, 89 
Dilthey, 181 f., 326, 376, 402 
doxa, 17, 43, 289, 345 f. 
drama, 244, 249, 251, 255 
dreaming, 272, 347 
drives [Triebel 1(^1, 233, 267, 282, 

289, 349, 398 
dull consciousness, 114ff. 
duration: of material things, 30 ff., 

49-54, 1 34 ; in immanent time, 

109 f., 120-127 

Ebbinghaus, 182 

Egology, 181 

Ego-pole, 103, 107, 111, 324 

eidetic intuition, 97 

eidetic phenomenology, 183, 326, 379, 

409 
eidetic reduction, 183, 187 
eidetics, 327, 379 
eidos, 392, 409 
elasticity, 39, 45, 50 ff. 
empathy [Einfuhlung], 1 70- 1 80, 

208 ff., 239 ff., 362 ff., 381 ff., et 

passim. 
empirical Ego, 99, 116, 183, 190, 

261 ff., 340, 350 
epoche, 29, 380 n., 412, 418 
essence, passim. 
ethics, 233, 427 

evidence, 230 ff., 275 f., 286, 343, 418 
existence [Dasein] : natural, thingly, 

30, 35, 69; psychic, 101, 141, 145; 

personal, 201, 208; spiritual, 292; et 

passim. 
explanation: vs. description, 402 
expression (of sense) and the 

expressed, 248-259, 333, 352 ff. 
extension, 31-36, 40 ff., 135 f.; vs. 

spread, 157 ff. 

faculty-psychology, 131 
family of man, 254 


INDEX 


435 


feelings: as original value-conscious- 
ness, 6-20; Body as source of stir- 
rings of feelings, 165; sensuous feel- 
ings, 194 ff., 207, 243 ff. 
fiat, 104, 269 f., 297, 300, 340 
flux (Fluss) of lived experiences, 109, 
126 ff., 139, 263, 294, 335 f. (See 
also Stream of consciousness.) 
fragmentation, 33 ff., 55, 138, 144 
freedom: in the kinesthetic, 73, 158 f., 
167 f.; vs. powers of the objective 
spirit, 149; vs. passivity, tendencies 
and drives, 225, 267, 289, 350; vs. 
influence of others, 281 f. 
friendship, 170, 210 

genesis, 209, 226, 263, 267, 329, 360, 

368 
Gestalt psychology, 424 
ghosts, 100 f., 227, 244, 301 
God, 90, 329 
goods: vs. mere natural things, 4, 19, 

102, 225, 328, 384 
GuUiver, 127 

habit, 143, 193, 235 f , 267 f , 280, 289 

habituality, 313, 324, 384 

habitus, 118, 279, 281, 290, 308 

hidden reason, 289 

historians, 10, 241, 376 ff. 

historiography [Geschichtsschreibung], 
381 

history : natural things as history-less, 
vs. psychic reality, 144 f.; individual 
history, 313, 329, 350, 387; as 
human science, 388, 399, 402 

Hobbes, 233 

horizon, 42, 114, 205 ff., 314, 360 ff. 

human sciences [Geisteswissenschaf- 
ten] : not mere descriptive natural 
sciences, 181; grasp motives not 
causes, 241 ; as cultural accomplish- 
ments, 320 ; relation to natural 
sciences, 325 ff., 384, 401 f.; vs. 
transcendental sciences, 354; and 
outer experience, 375 


Hume, 421, 423 

Husserl, E. : Cartesian Meditations, 
407, 417 n.; Formal and transcen- 
dental logic, 264, 417 n.; Inner time- 
consciousness, 409; Logical Investi- 
gations, 276, 422, 426 f. 

hyle, 265 

hyletic substrate, 160, 305, 308 

I as man, 99 f., 115 f., 175 

''I can," 13 f., 159, 228, 266 ff., 341 

ideahsm, 417-421 

"if-then,'' phenomenal, 163 

imagination, 97 f., 218 

immanent time, 109, 119ff., 138, 188, 
215, 324, 370, 409 

impact, 42, 48 ff. 

impenetrability of Bodies, 216 

impressions, 125 f., 307, 348 f. 

individuum, 37, 150 

inertia, 56 n. 

infinity: endlessness vs. openness, 313 

inner time-consciousness, 239 

inspectio sui, 223, 329, 334 

instauration [Urstiftung], 120, 124, 
281, 324 

instincts, 143, 267, 308, 346 ff. 

intellectus agens, 289, 344 f. 

intentional relation: vs. real relation, 
227 

intentionaUty : pure Ego as center, 
116, 226 ff.; empirical intentional- 
ity, 261 ; 291 ; 344 ff. ; concept trans- 
formed by Brentano, 424 f.; psy- 
chology of intentionality, 426 

interaction (psychophysical), 302, 
308 f. 

interest (See theoretical attitude, prac- 
tical attitude, etc.) 

intersubjective motivations, 243 ff. 

intersubjectivity, 86, 93, 311, 315, 373, 
417, 421, 426 

introjection, 175, 177, 184, 186, 216 

intuition [Anschauung] : sense intuition 
vs. axiological, 10 ff.; thing of intui- 
tion as such, 30 ff. ; form of intui- 


436 


INDEX 


tion, 86 ff . ; always has open hori- 
zons, 163; neutralized, 274 ff.; self- 
intuition, 262 ff. ; source of all legi- 
timation, 377 ; originarily giving, 
381; psychology based on inner 
intuition, 411 ff.; et passim. 
intuitive "flair" [Intuition], 286 f. 

joy, 14 ff., 243, 279, 288 

Kant, 115, 139, 218, 356,427 
kinesthetic sensations, 23 f., 61 ff., 70 

136, 154 ff, 323, 342 
kinetic sensations, 136, 156, 158 

Landgrebe, L., xiii, xvi 

language, 175, 235, 328 

Leibniz, 115, 362, 421 

life-world [Lebenswelt], 302 n., 384 ff 

lighting, 45, 67, 74, 177 

Lipps, 270 n. 

lived experience {Erlebnis], passim. 

localization, 36, 61, 153-165, 172 ff., 

185 ff., 213, 216, 324 
Locke, 349, 423, 427 
locus, 35, 406 

machine, 333 

magnitude, 32 f , 88 

materiality, 24, 28, 31 ff., 58, 100, 141, 144 

mathematics, 203, 290, 392, 410, 430 

mathematization, 145, 359 

mechanical motion, 42 f., 167, 229 
271 ff. 

medium, 57, 65 f 

Meinong, 427 

memory, 122 ff., 262, 275, 283 f., 314, 
345 ff , 353 ff 

mere things, 11, 18 f., 27, 191, 200, 
225, 319, 389 

method: of physics, 89, 242; phenom- 
enological, 96, 189 ff., 405 ff.; phe- 
nomenological vs. natural-scientific, 
325 ff.; human-scientific, 377 ff., 
424; natural-scientific, 396 ff. 


Mill, J. S., 423 

miracle, 53 

mobihty, 39, 166 

molecules, 54 

monad, 115, 118, 302, 306, 309, 314 

morphology, 375, 379, 381 f., 385, 

387 f, 399, 401 
motion, 39, 42, 57, 67, 153, 273 f. 
motivation : as law of personal hfe (vs. 

causality), 223-293, et passim, 
Miinsterberg, 182 
mutual understanding, 86 ff., 194, 

202 ff., 217, 240, 336, 386 

natural attitude, 22, 69, 184 ff., 251, 

360 f., 373, 386, 395, 411 ff., 426 
natural history, 214 f., 382, 396 
natural science: as excluding mean- 
ing-predicates, 3 ff., 27 ff. ; objective 
nature as correlate, 217 ff., 302, 
401; vs. human science, 190, 214, 
325, 352, 356, 384, 393; psychology 
as natural science, 181, 184, 423; 
conception of the person, 373, 383; 
descriptive natural science, 375 ff., 
389; oblivious to the life-worid, 
384 

natural-scientific attitude, 4, 29, 215, 
376, 383 

naturahstic attitude, 30, 169, 183 ff., 
190 ff., 220 f„ 294, 337, 356 

naturalization, 176, 254, 311, 316, 
331, 337, 357, 364, 375 

nature-attitude, 189, 215, 380 n,, 383 

neutralization (neutrality modifica- 
tion), 5, 270, 274-278, 340 

noemata, 19, 38, 121, 179, 221, 228, 
231, 244, 375 

noeses, 116, 121, 426 

non-Ego, 265, 330, 331, 335 

non-sensuous quality, 320 f. 

normal sensibihty, 61, 91 

objectivating acts, 1 7 f. 

objective spirit, 148, 251, 256, 357 

ontology, 97, 326 f., 399 


INDEX 


437 


opinions, persistence of, 118 ff. 
organism, 36, 185 f., 267, 352 

parallelism: psychophysical, 302 ff., 
307 f. 

passive Ego, 225 

passive states, 8 

passivity, 13 ff., 22, 104, 225, 234 f., 
345 ff., 362, 381 

perception: as general objectivation, 
16ff.; as originary experience, 40, 
123 f., 170, 275; function of abnor- 
malities in, 63 ff. ; one-sided, 54, 
185; perceiver's Body as medium, 
61 ff., 167, 224, 259, 296; self- 
perception, 99 ff., 259 ff., 277; 
visual vs. tactual, 155 ff.; as moti- 
vation for judgments, 231 ff. ; per- 
ceptual harmony and discord, 48, 
289; not a causal operation, 383 f.; 
et passim. 

personal apperception, 262, 366 

personal Ego, 149 f., 193 ff., 213 f., 
231, 259 ff, 323, 331 ff., 338, 360, 366 

personal properties, 129, 149 

personalistic attitude, 147 ff., 183 ff., 
259, 294 ff., 332, 390 ff, 

personality. 111, 117, 148 f., 362, 372, 
381 ff. 

phantasms, 143, 304, 401 

phantasy, 62, 127, 130, 244 f., 276 ff., 
345 f. 

phantoms (purely visual spatial 
forms), 23 f., 39 ff., 100 f. 

phenomena: immediately experienced 
contents, 211, 218, 357, 393; pure, 
transcendental phenomena, 377, 
386, 413 ff. 

phenomenological method, 96, 189 ff., 
326, 405 ff. 

phenomenological psychology, 411, 
414, 423, 425 

phenomenological reduction, 183, 
187, 189, 377, 380, 407 ff. 

phenomenology, 85, 97, 181 ff., 295, 
325 ff., 374 ff., 391 ff., 405 ff. (See 


also Pure phenomenology. Trans- 
cendental phenomenology, Eidetic 
phenomenology.) 

philosophy, 328, 405 ff. 

physicalistic thing, 80 ff., 89 ff., 179, 
217 ff., 242, 297 ff., 334 

physics, 49, 89 ff., 193 ff., 215 ff., 
356 ff., 389 ff. 

physiology, 272, 393 ff. 

physis, 134, 298, 356 

Plato, 406 

practical attitude, 4 f., 15; as personal 
attitude, 199 

practical possibihties, 270 ff., 342 f. 

pregivennesses, 226, 283 ff., 344 f., 
374, 379 

presuppositionlessness, 428 f. 

primal presence, 170 ff., 208 

primary qualities, 34, 90, 93, 323, 
351 

primordial manifestation [Beurkun- 
dungl 50, 59, 131, 135, 139, 188 

protention, 268 

psyche [Psyche], 80, 128, 142, 368, 
372, 395,411,423 

psychic Ego, 98, 102, 128, 141 ff., 184, 
255, 331 

psychic properties, 129 f., 140, 222, 
356 

psychoanalysis, 234 

psychological Ego, 128, 139, 358 

psychological reduction, 377 f. 

psychologism, 407, 415 

psychology : theory of faculties, 131; 
as natural science, 181, 327, 337, 
357, 368; experimental, 308, 368, 
430; as way into phenomenology, 
327, 415; as human science, 366 ff., 
377 f., 392; phenomenological psy- 
chology, 411 ff., 423 ff. 

psychophysical parallelism, 302 ff., 
307 f. 

psychophysics, 368 f., 376, 394 

pure consciousness, 118, 124, 188 f., 
221, 263, 337 ff., 392 

pure Ego, 103-128, et passim. 


438 


INDEX 


pure phenomenology, 183, 326 f., 392, 
408 

rational motives, 267, 350 

real circumstances, 45 ff., 131 ff., 

162 ff., 296 ff. 
real properties, 34, 45 ff., 129 ff., 258, 

312, 337 
real relation: vs. intentional relation, 

227 
realism, 418-421 
reflection : vs. adoption of theoretical 

attitude, 15ff. 
regional ontology, 97 
reproduction, 125 f., 281, 345 ff. 
res extensa. 36, 141, 157, 352, 364 
residuum (of the reductions), 189 
retention, 16, 307, 314, 346 
Rickert,- 182 
rigorous science, 406 f., 430 

santonin, 67 f., 78, 80 

schemata, 40 ff., 61 ff., 100, 135, 212, 
351 

secondary passivity, 14, 21 f. 

secondary quahties, 34, 81, 93 f., 184, 
221, 246, 323, 333, 373, 396 

secondary receptivities, 19 

secondary sensibility, 345 ff. 

sedimentation, 118, 233, 324, 344 f. 

self-apperception, 259 ff. 

sensations : vs. things and phantoms, 
23 ff. ; constitutive-representational 
vs. motivating-kinesthetic, 62 ff., 
152; most primitive adumbrations, 
1 38 ; localized, 1 52 ff, ; doubled, 
1 53 f ; ultimate pregivennesses, 
224 f. ; et passim. 

sense: as animating, 248-259, 333 

sense data, 26, 77, 172 ff., 243, 303 ff., 
348, 423 

sense-things [Sinnendinge], 69 ff., 
76 ff., 319 ff. 

sensibility, 72 ff.; vs. reason, 289; vs. 
intellectus agens, 344 ff. 

Simmel, 182 

skepticism, 406, 430 


social experience, 210 f. 

social personalities, 329, 336, 374 

society, 92, 181, 204, 208, 241, 246, 

329, 332, 375, 385, 390 
solid body, 56 ff. 

solipsism, 75 ff. ; and constitution of 
physicalistic nature, 82 f., 94 f., 151, 
169ff.; vs. intersubjective experi- 
ence, 83 ff. ; and constitution of the 
Body, 168 f.; alleged solipsism of 
Ideas I 417 f. 
solus ipse, 86, 92 

soul [Seek]: as natural object, 96, 
141 ff., 355; vs. pure Ego, 128; real- 
ity of, 134, 351 ff., 384; strata of, 
142, 292; as united with the Body, 
168, 176, 252, 294; vs. spirit, 
181 ff.; in the reduction, 412 ff.; et 
passim. 
space-time, 145, 188, 215, 222, 352 ff., 

392 
spatiahty, 32, 36, 63, 209, 214 
Spinoza, 233 
spirit [Geist], passim. 
spiritual attitude, 254, 300, 359, 374, 

394, 398 
spiritual Ego, 103, 151, 226, 266, 279, 

288 f., 295, 358 ff. 
spontaneity, 9 ff., 26, 61 ff., 167, 

345 ff. 
spread [Ausbreitung] : vs. extension, 

36, 157 ff. 
stereoscope, 39 
stimuli, 198 ff., 228 ff., 267, 279, 289, 

295 f., 346 ff. 
stimulatabihty, 184f. 
Stein, E., xii, xiii 
Strasser, S., xiii 

stream of consciousness [Bewusstseins- 
Strom], 110 ff., 146, 165, 188, 
234 ff.; as unity of motivation, 239; 
369 ff. (See also Flux of lived expe- 
riences.) 
stuff [StofA 225 
style of life, 283 

subjective attitude: vs. natural atti- 
tude, 69 


INDEX 


439 


substantiality, 37, 48, 58, 132, 339, 
347, 401 

substruction, 178, 242 f. 

supernatural realities, 145 

surrounding world [Umwelt]: not 
composed of mere things, 191, 195; 
person as center, 194ff.; common 
surrounding world and personal 
associations, 201, 387; and spiritual 
Ego, 225 ff., 298, 311, 357; egoistic 
surrounding world vs. communica- 
tive, 203 ff. ; theoretical surrounding 
world, 230; and personal Ego, 
333 ff. ; et passim. 

tactile image, 73 

technology, 384 

telos, 228 

temporalization, 188, 213, 216, 370, 

409, 425 
temptation, 279, 341 
theater, 244, 250 
theoretical attitude, 4 ff., 332, 365 f., 

375, 384 
thing in itself, 39, 139 
thingly properties, 34, 135, 161, 354 
tones, tonal data, 24 ff., 156, 161, 196, 325 
touch, 57 f. ; priority of, 74 f. ; one 


hand touching the other, 152 ff. ; vs. 

vision, 155 ff. 
transcendent time, 126, 215 
transcendental Ego, 128, 413 ff. 
transcendental intersubjectivity, 417, 

421 
transcendental phenomenology, 325, 

365, 374, 379, 405 ff. 
transcendental reduction, 326 f., 337 
transcendental subjectivity, 365, 379, 

386, 406 ff, 

universe, 3, 30, 116, 353, 362, 372 f., 

389, 401, 420 
use-objects, 29, 191, 197, 225 

values : as excluded from nature, 4 ff. ; 
valuing on the part of the natural 
scientist, 28 f. ; theory of values, 
230; pre-eminent values, 280 

violin-tone, 24, 156, 196 f. 

visual image, 67, 74 f., 324 

vocalization, 101 n. 

weight, 34f„49, 153 
Windelband, 182 
world-image, 84, 94, 402 
written marks, 256 


