The Dance of Siva: Fourteen Indian Essays — Ananda K. Coomaraswamy (Sunwise Turn, New York, 1918)

# Acquisition header
  Source: https://archive.org/details/danceofsivafourt00coomiala (file: danceofsivafourt00coomiala_djvu.txt)
  Retrieved: 2026-06-15 for vedanta-timeline primary-source corpus.
  Format: Internet Archive OCR plain text (_djvu.txt). Public domain (first publ. 1918).
  Note: leading library-plate OCR boilerplate retained as-is.

THE  LIBRARY 

OF 

THE  UNIVERSITY 

OF  CALIFORNIA 

LOS  ANGELES 


c  ., 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 

in  2007  with  funding  from 

IVIicrosoft  Corporation 


http://www.archive.org/details/danceofsivafourtbOcoomiala 


THE  DANCE  OF  §IVA. 


Cosmic  I3anco  of  Natarajfi.     Rrahnianical  bronze.     Soutli  Ttulian.    12th  Century, 

Madras  Museum. 


THE  DANCE  OF  SIVA 

FOURTEEN  INDIAN   ESSAYS 

BY 

ANANDA  COOMARASWAMY 


V 


THE  SUNWISE  TURN,  INC. 

2  EAST  3 1ST  STREET 
NEW  YORK 
1918 


COPYRIGHT,   1918 
THE  SUNWISE  TURN,  lac 


Art 
Library 

C78ci 
CONTENTS 

PAGE 

What  Has  India  Contributed  to  Human  Welfare? 1 

Hindu  View  of  Art:  Historical 18 

Hindu  View  of  Art:  Theory  of  Beauty        ........  30 

That  Beauty  is  a  State         38 

Buddhist  Primitives         46 

The  Dance  of  Siva 56 

Indian  Images  With  Many  Arms 67 

Indian  Music 72 

Status   of   Indian   Women 82 

Sahaja          103 

Intellectual  Fraternity         112 

Cosmopolitan  View  of  Nietzsche 115 

Young  India ,     .  122 

Individuality,  Autonomy  and  Function 137 


h 


1235083 


LIST  OF  PLATES 

BETWEEN   PAGES 

Frontispiece — Cosmic  Dance  of  Nataraja,  12th  Century. 

I.    Figure  a. — Avalokitesvara  Bodhisattva,  8th  Century. 
Figure  b. — Siva  and  Parvati  on  Mt.  Kailasa,  8th  Cen- 
tury         24-25 

II.    Figure  a. — Deer.    Mamallapuram.  8th  Century. 

Figure  b. — Elephants,  Mamallapuram,  8th  Century     .  26-27 

III.  Krishna  Disguised  as  a  Milkmaid,  17th  Century     .     .  28-29 

IV.  Ajanta  Fresco,  6th  or  7th  Century 40-41 

V.    Figure  a. — Temple  at  BadamI,  8th  Century. 

Figure  b. — Monkey  family.     Mamallapuram,  8th  Cen- 
tury      42-43 

VI.   Figure  a — Seated  Buddha,  Gandhara,  1st  century,  A.D. 
Figure  b. — Dryad,  SanchI,  2nd  century,  B.C. 
Figure  c. — Lay  Worshippers  at  a  Buddha  Shrine,  2nd 

Century 46-47 

VII.    Buddha  in  Samadhi 48-49 

VIII.    Standing  Bodhisattva,  2nd  Century,   A.   D.     .     .     .  50-51 

IX.    Standing  Buddha,  Ceylon,  2nd  Century,  A.  D.     .     .  52-53 

X.    Standing  Buddha,  2nd  century,  A.D 52-53 

XI.    Standing  Images  of  Buddha,  2nd  Century,  A.  D.     .     .  54-55 

XII.    Brahma,  Elephanta,  8th  Century 66-67 

XIII.  Durga  as  Chandi  slaying  Mahista,  11th  Century     .     .  68-69 

XIV.  Death  of  Hiranyakasipu.    Elura,  8th  Century     .     .     .  70-71 

XV.    'Chamber-music  of  an  aristocratic  society,'  18th  Cen- 
tury      72-73 

XVI.    Ratan  Devi 74-75 

XVII.   TodI  Ragini  (a  musical  mode),  16th  Century     .     .     .  76-77 

XVIII.    Madhu-madhavl  Ragini  (a  musical  mode),  16th  Cen- 
tury  '. 78-79 

XIX.   Todi  Ragini  (a  musical  mode),  18th  Century     .     .     .  80-81 

XX.    A  Hindu  lady  at  her  toilet,  18th  Centur>-     ....  84-85 

XXI.    Chand  Bibi,  called  Chand  Sultan,  18th  Century     .     .  86-87 

XXII.    Hindu  Marriage,  about  1600  A.  D.     . ' 88-89 

XXIII.  Radha  in  her  kitchen,  Krishna  at  the  window,  1st  Cen- 

tur>' 90-91 

XXIV.  "Where  each  is  both,"  8th  Century 104-105 

XXV.   A  School  of  Philosophy,  18th  Century 130-131 

XXVI.   Figure  a. — One  of  the  gates  of  Jaipur. 

Figure  b. — Laying  a  warp  in  Madura 132-133 

XXVII.   The  Bathing  Ghat  at  Benares 134-135 


WHAT  HAS  INDIA  CONTRIBUTED 
TO  HUMAN  WELFARE?^ 

Each  race  contributes  something  essential  to  the  world's 
civilization  in  the  course  of  its  own  self-expression  and  self- 
realization.  The  character  built  up  in  solving  its  own  problems, 
in  the  experience  of  its  own  misfortunes,  is  itself  a  gift  which 
each  offers  to  the  world.  The  essential  contribution  of  India, 
then,  is  simply  her  Indianness ;  her  g^eat  humiliation  would  be  to 
substitute  or  to  have  substituted  for  this  own  character  (sva- 
hhava)  a  cosmopolitan  veneer,  for  then  indeed  she  must  come 
before  the  world  empty-handed. 

If  now  we  ask  what  is  most  distinctive  in  this  essential  contri- 
bution, we  must  first  make  it  clear  that  there  cannot  be  anything 
absolutely  unique  in  the  experience  of  any  race.  Its  peculiarities 
will  be  chiefly  a  matter  of  selection  and  emphasis,  certainly  not 
a  difference  in  specific  humanity.  If  we  regard  the  world  as  a 
family  of  nations,  then  we  shall  best  understand  the  position  of 
India  by  recognizing  in  her  the  elder,  who  no  longer,  it  is  true, 
possesses  the  virility  and  enterprise  of  youth,  but  has  passed 
through  many  experiences  and  solved  many  problems  which 
younger  races  have  hardly  yet  recognized.  The  heart  and  essence 
of  the  Indian  experience  is  to  be  fotmd  in  a  constant  intuition  of 
the  unity  of  all  life,  and  the  instinctive  and  ineradicable  conviction 
that  the  recognition  of  this  unity  is  the  highest  good  and  the 
uttermost  freedom.  All  that  India  can  offer  to  the  world  pro- 
ceeds from  her  philosophy.  This  philosophy  is  not,  indeed, 
unknown  to  others — it  is  equally  the  gospel  of  Jesus  and  of  Blake, 
Lao  Tze,  and  Rumi — but  nowhere  else  has  it  been  made  the  essen- 
tial basis  of  sociology  and  education. 

Every  race  must  solve  its  own  problems,  and  those  of  its  own 
day.  I  do  not  suggest  that  the  ancient  Indian  solution  of  the 
special  Indian  problems,  though  its  lessons  may  be  many  and 
valuable,  can  be  directly  applied  to  modern  conditions.  What  I 
do  suggest  is  that  the  Hindus  grasped  more  firmly  than  others 
the  fundamental  meaning  and  purpose  of  life,  and  more  deliber- 

1  First  published  in  the  'Athenaeum,'  London,  1915. 


2  WHAT  HAS  INDIA  CONTRIBUTED? 

ately  than  others  organized  society  with  a  view  to  the  attainment 
of  the  fruit  of  Ufe;  and  this  organization  was  designed,  not  for 
the  advantage  of  a  single  class,  but,  to  use  a  modern  formula,  to 
take  from  each  according  to  his  capacity,  and  to  give  to  each 
according  to  his  needs.  How  far  the  rishis  succeeded  in  this 
aim  may  be  a  matter  of  opinion.  We  must  not  judge  of  Indian 
society,  especially  Indian  society  in  its  present  moment  of  decay, 
as  if  it  actually  realized  the  Brahmanical  social  ideas;  yet  even 
with  all  its  imperfections  Hindu  society  as  it  survives  will  appear 
to  many  to  be  superior  to  any  form  of  social  organization  attained 
on  a  large  scale  anywhere  else,  and  infinitely  superior  to  the  social 
order  which  we  know  as  "modern  civilization,"  But  even  if  it 
were  impossible  to  maintain  this  view — and  a  majority  of  Euro- 
peans and  of  English-educated  Indians  certainly  believe  to  the 
contrary — what  nevertheless  remains  as  the  most  conspicuous 
special  character  of  the  Indian  culture,  and  its  greatest  signifiance 
for  the  modern  world,  is  the  evidence  of  a  constant  effort  to 
understand  the  meaning  and  the  ultimate  purpose  of  life,  and  a 
purposive  organization  of  society  in  harmony  with  that  order, 
and  with  a  view  to  the  attainment  of  the  purpose.^  The  Brah- 
manical idea  is  an  Indian  "City  of  the  gods" — as  devanagari,  the 
name  of  the  Sanskrit  script,  suggests.  The  building  of  that 
city  anew  is  the  constant  task  of  civilization;  and  though  the 
details  of  our  plans  may  change,  and  the  contours  of  our  building, 
we  may  learn  from  India  to  build  on  the  foundations  of  the 
religion  of  Eternity. 

Where  the  Indian  mind  differs  most  from  the  average  mind  of 
modern  Europe  is  in  its  view  of  the  value  of  philosophy.  In 
Europe  and  America  the  study  of  philosophy  is  regarded  as  an 

1  Lest  I  should  seem  to  exaggerate  the  importance  which  Hindus  attach 
to  Adhydtmd-vidya,  the  Science  of  the  Self,  I  quote  from  the  *  Bhagavad 
Gita,'  ix.  2 :  "It  is  the  kingly  science,  the  royal  secret,  sacred  surpassingly. 
It  supplies  the  only  sanction  and  support  to  righteousness,  and  its  benefits 
may  be  seen  even  with  the  eyes  of  the  flesh  as  bringing  peace  and  perma- 
nence of  happiness  to  men  " ;  and  from  Manu,  xii.  100 :  "Only  he  who 
knows  the  Vedasastra.  only  he  deserves  to  be  the  Leader  of  Armies,  the 
Wielder  of  the  Rod  of  Law,  the  King  of  Men,  the  Suzerain  and  Overlord 
of  Kings." 

The  reader  who  desires  to  follow  up  the  subject  of  this  essay  is  strongly 
recommended  to  the  work  of  Bhagavan  Das.  '  The  Science  of  Social 
Organization,'  London  and  Benares,  1910. 


WHAT  HAS  INDIA  CONTRIBUTED?  3 

end  in  itself,  and  as  such  it  seems  of  but  little  importance  to  the 
ordinary  man.  In  India,  on  the  contrary,  philosophy  is  not 
regarded  primarily  as  a  mental  gj'mnastic,  but  rather,  and  with 
deep  religious  conviction,  as  our  salvation  (moksha)  from  the 
ignorance  (avidyd)  which  for  ever  hides  from  our  eyes  the  vision 
of  reality.  Philosophy  is  the  key  to  the  map  of  life,  by  which  are 
set  forth  the  meaning  of  life  and  the  means  of  attaining  its  goal. 
It  is  no  wonder,  then,  that  the  Indians  have  pursued  the  study 
of  philosophy  with  enthusiasm,  for  these  are  matters  that  con- 
cern all. 

There  is  a  fundamental  difference  between  the  Brahman  and 
the  modern  view  of  politics.  The  modern  politician  considers 
that  idealism  in  politics  is  unpractical;  time  enough,  he  thinks, 
to  deal  with  social  misfortunes  when  they  arise.  The  same  out- 
look may  be  recognized  in  the  fact  that  modem  medicine  lays 
greater  stress  on  cure  than  on  prevention,  i.  e.,  endeavours  to 
protect  against  unnatural  conditions  rather  than  to  change  the 
social  environment.  The  Western  sociologist  is  apt  to  say :  "The 
teachings  of  religion  and  philosophy  may  or  may  not  be  true,  but 
in  any  case  they  have  no  significance  for  the  practical  reformer." 
The  Brahmans,  on  the  contrary,  considered  all  activity  not 
directed  in  accordance  with  a  consistent  theory  of  the  meaning 
and  purpose  of  life  as  supremely  unpractical. 

Only  one  condition  permits  us  to  excuse  the  indifference  of  the 
European  individual  to  philosophy;  it  is  that  the  struggle  to 
exist  leaves  him  no  time  for  reflection.  Philosophy  can  only  be 
known  to  those  who  are  alike  disinterested  and  free  from  care; 
and  Europeans  are  not  thus  free,  whatever  their  political  status. 
Where  modern  Industrialism  prevails,  the  Brahman,  Kshattriya, 
and  §udra  alike  are  exploited  by  the  Vaishya,^  and  where  in  this 
way  commerce  settles  on  every  tree  there  must  be  felt  continual 
anxiety  about  a  bare  subsistence;  the  victim  of  Industry  must 
confine  his  thoughts  to  the  subject  of  to-morrow's  food  for  him- 
self and  his  family;  the  mere  Will  to  Life  takes  precedence  of 
the  Will  to  Power.  If  at  the  same  time  it  is  decided  that  every 
man's  voice  is  to  count  equally  in  the  councils  of  the  nation,  it 
follows  naturally  that  the  voice  of  those  who  think  must  be 

^  Brahman,  Kshattriya,  Vaishya,  Sudra — the  four  primary  types  of 
Brahmanical  sociology,  vie,  philosopher  and  educator,  administrator  and 
soldier,  tradesman  and  herdsman,  craftsman  and  labourer. 


4  WHAT  HAS  INDIA  CONTRIBUTED? 

drowned  by  that  of  those  who  do  not  think  and  have  no  leisure. 
This  position  leaves  all  classes  alike  at  the  mercy  of  unscrupulous 
individual  exploitation,  for  all  political  effort  lacking  a  philo- 
sophical basis  becomes  merely  opportunist.  The  problem  of 
modem  Europe  is  to  discover  her  own  aristocracy  and  to  learn 
to  obey  its  will. 

It  is  just  this  problem  which  India  long  since  solved  for  her- 
self in  her  own  way.  Indian  philosophy  is  essentially  the  cre- 
ation of  the  two  upper  classes  of  society,  the  Brahmans  and  the 
Kshattriyas.  To  the  latter  are  due  most  of  its  forward  move- 
ments; to  the  former  its  elaboration,  systematization,  mythical 
representation,  and  application.  The  Brahmans  possessed  not 
merely  the  genius  for  organization,  but  also  the  power  to  enforce 
their  will;  for,  whatever  may  be  the  failings  of  individuals,  the 
Brahmans  as  a  class  are  men  whom  other  Hindus  have  always 
agreed  to  reverence,  and  still  regard  with  the  highest  respect 
and  affection.  The  secret  of  their  power  is  manifold;  but  it  is 
above  all  in  the  nature  of  their  appointed  dhartna,  of  study,  teach- 
ing, and  renunciation. 

Of  Buddhism  I  shall  not  speak  at  great  length,  but  rather  in 
parenthesis ;  for  the  Buddhists  never  directly  attempted  to  organ- 
ize human  society,  thinking  that,  rather  than  concern  himself 
with  polity,  the  wise  man  should  leave  the  dark  state  of  life  in 
the  world  to  follow  the  bright  state  of  the  mendicant.*  Buddhist 
doctrine  is  a  medicine  solely  directed  to  save  the  individual  from 
burning,  not  in  a  future  hell,  but  in  the  present  fire  of  his  own 
thirst.  It  assumes  that  to  escape  from  the  eternal  recurrence  is 
not  merely  the  summum  bonum,  but  the  whole  purpose  of  life; 
he  is  the  wisest  who  devotes  himself  immediately  to  this  end; 
he  the  most  loving  who  devotes  himself  to  the  enlightenment  of 
others. 

Buddhism  has  nevertheless  deep  and  lasting  effects  on  Indian 
state-craft.  For  just  as  the  Brahman  philosopher  advised  and 
guided  his  royal  patrons,  so  did  the  Buddhist  ascetics.  The  senti- 
ment of  friendliness  (metteya),  through  its  effect  upon  individual 
character,  reacted  upon  social  theory. 

It  is  difficult  to  separate  what  is  Buddhist  from  what  is  Indian 
generally;  but  we  may  fairly  take  the  statemanship  of  the  great 

^  Dhammapada,  87;  also  the  J&takamala  of  Aiya  Sura,  xix,  27. 


WHAT  HAS  INDIA  CONTRIBUTED?  5 

Buddhist  Emperor  Asoka  as  an  example  of  the  effect  of  Buddhist 
teaching  upon  character  and  pohcy.  His  famous  edicts  very  well 
illustrate  the  little  accepted  truth  that  "in  the  Orient,  from 
ancient  times,  national  government  has  been  based  on  benevolence, 
and  directed  to  securing  the  welfare  and  happiness  of  the  peo- 
ple."^ One  of  the  most  significant  of  the  edicts  deals  with  "True 
Conquest."  Previous  to  his  acceptance  of  the  Buddhist  dharma 
Asoka  had  conquered  the  neighbouring  kingdom  of  the  Kalingas, 
and  added  their  territory  to  his  own;  but  now,  says  the  edict. 
His  Majesty  feels  "remorse  for  having  conquered  the  Kalingas, 
because  the  conquest  of  a  country  previously  unconquered  in- 
volves the  slaughter,  death,  and  carrying  away  captive  of  the 
people.  That  is  a  matter  of  profound  sorrow  and  regret  to  His 
Sacred  Majesty  .  .  .  His  Sacred  Majesty  desires  that  all  animate 
beings  should  have  security,  self-control,  peace  of  mind,  and 
joyousness. . .  .My  sons  and  grandsons,  who  may  be,  should  not 
regard  it  as  their  duty  to  conquer  a  new  conquest.  If  perchance 
they  become  engaged  in  a  conquest  by  arms,  they  should  take 
pleasure  in  patience  and  gentleness,  and  regard  as  (the  only  true) 
conquest,  the  conquest  won  by  piety.  That  avails  both  for  this 
world  and  the  next." 

In  another  edict  "His  Sacred  and  Gracious  Majesty  the  King 
does  reverence  to  men  of  all  sects,  whether  ascetics  or  house- 
holders." Elsewhere  he  announces  the  establishment  of  hos- 
pitals, and  the  appointment  of  officials  "to  consider  the  case 
where  a  man  has  a  large  family,  has  been  smitten  by  calamity, 
or  Is  advanced  in  years";  he  orders  that  animals  should  not  be 
killed  for  his  table;  he  commands  that  shade  and  fruit  trees 
should  be  planted  by  the  high  roads;  and  he  exhorts  all  men  to 
"strive  hard."  He  quotes  the  Buddhist  saying,  "All  men  are  my 
children."  The  annals  of  India,  and  especially  of  Ceylon,  can 
show  us  other  Buddhist  kings  of  the  same  temper.  But  it  will 
be  seen  that  such  effects  of  Buddhist  teaching  have  their  further 
consequences  mainly  through  benevolent  despotism,  and  the  moral 
order  established  by  one  wise  king  may  be  destroyed  by  his  suc- 
cessors.    Buddhism,   so   far  as   I   know,   never   attempted  to 

1  Viscount  Torio  in  The  Japan  Daily  Mail,  November  19th-20th,  1890. 
The  whole  essay,  of  which  a  good  part  is  quoted  in  Lafcadio  Hearn's 
'  Glimpses  of  Unfamiliar  Japan/  is  a  searching  criticism  of  Western  polity, 
regarded  from  the  standpoint  of  a  modern  Buddhist. 


6  WHAT  HAS  INDIA  CONTRIBUTED? 

formulate  a  constitution  or  to  determine  the  social  order.  Just 
this,  however,  the  Brahmans  attempted  in  many  ways,  and  to  a 
great  extent  achieved,  and  it  is  mainly  their  application  of  religi- 
ous philosophy  to  the  problems  of  sociology  which  forms  the 
subject  of  the  present  discussion. 

The  Kshattriya-Brahman  solution  of  the  ultimate  problems  of 
life  is  given  in  the  early  Upanishads,^  It  is  a  form  of  absolute 
(according  to  ^ankaracharya)  or  modified  (according  to 
Ramanuja)  Monism.  Filled  with  enthusiasm  for  this  doctrine  of 
the  Unity  or  Interdependence  of  all  life,  the  Brahman-Utopists  set 
themselves  to  found  a  social  order  upon  the  basis  provided.  In 
the  great  epics^  they  represented  the  desired  social  order  as 
having  actually  existed  in  a  golden  past,  and  they  put  into  the 
mouths  of  the  epic  heroes  not  only  their  actual  philosophy,  but 
the  theory  of  its  practical  application — this,  above  all,  in  the  long 
discourses  of  the  dying  Bhishma.  The  heroes  themselves  they 
made  ideal  types  of  character  for  the  guidance  of  all  subsequent 
generations;  for  the  education  of  India  has  been  accomplished 
deliberately  through  hero-worship.  In  the  'Dharmasastra'  of 
Manu'  and  the  *  Arthasastra'*  of  Chanakya — perhaps  the  most 
remarkable  sociological  documents  the  world  possesses — they  set 
forth  the  picture  of  the  ideal  society,  defined  from  the  standpoint 
of  law.  By  these  and  other  means  they  accomplished  what  has 
not  yet  been  eflfected  in  any  other  country  in  making  religious 
philosophy  the  essential  and  intelligible  basis  of  popular  culture 
and  national  polity. 

^  Deussen,  The  Philosophy  of  the  Upanishads,  translated  by  A.  S.  Geden, 
London,  1906. 

2  The  '  Mahabharata '  and  '  The  Ramayana.'  These  can  be  studied  in  the 
prose  translations  by  P.  C.  Ray  and  M.  N.  Dutt,  published  in  Calcutta. 

3  This  most  important  document  is  best  expounded  by  Bhagavan  Das, 
The  Science  of  Social  Organisation,  London  and  Benares,  1910;  also 
translated  in  full  in  the  "Sacred  Books  of  the  East,"  vol.  xxv.  "Herein," 
says  Manu  (i.  107,  118),  "are  declared  the  good  and  evil  results  of 
various  deeds,  and  herein  are  expounded  the  eternal  principles  of  all  the 
four  t>T)es  of  human  beings,  of  many  lands,  nations,  tribes,  and  families, 
and  also  the  ways  of  evil  men." 

*N.  N.  Law,  Studies  in  Ancient  Hindu  Polity,  London,  1914.  The 
following  precept  may  serve  as  an  example  of  the  text:  that  the  king 
who  has  acquired  new  territory  "  should  follow  the  people  in  their  faith, 
with  which  they  celebrate  their  national,  religious,  and  congregational 
festivals  and  amusements." 


WHAT  HAS  INDIA  CONTRIBUTED?  7 

What,  then,  is  the  Brahman  view  of  hfe?  To  answer  this  at 
length,  to  expound  the  Science  of  the  Self  (Adhydtmd-vidyd) , 
which  is  the  religion  and  philosophy  of  India,  would  require  con- 
siderable space.  We  have  already  indicated  that  this  science 
recognizes  the  unity  of  all  life — one  source,  one  essence,  and  one 
goal — and  regards  the  realization  of  this  unity  as  the  highest  good, 
bliss,  salvation,  freedom,  the  final  purpose  of  life.  This  is  for 
Hindu  thinkers  eternal  life;  not  an  eternity  in  time,  but  the 
recognition  here  and  now  of  All  Things  in  the  Self  and  the  Self 
in  All.  "More  than  all  else,"  says  Kabir,  who  may  be  said  to 
speak  for  India,  "do  I  cherish  at  heart  that  love  which  makes  me 
to  live  a  limitless  life  in  this  world."  This  inseparable  unity  of 
the  material  and  spiritual  world  is  made  the  foundation  of  the 
Indian  culture,  and  determines  the  whole  character  of  her  social 
ideals. 

How,  then,  could  the  Brahmans  tolerate  the  practical  diversity 
of  life,  how  provide  for  the  fact  that  a  majority  of  individuals 
are  guided  by  selfish  aims,  how  could  they  deal  with  the  problem 
of  evil?  They  had  found  the  Religion  of  Eternity  (Nirguna 
Vidyd)  ;  what  of  the  Religion  of  Time  {Saguna  Vidyd)  ? 

This  is  the  critical  point  of  religious  sociology,  when  it  remains 
to  be  seen  whether  the  older  idealist  (it  is  old  souls  that  are 
idealistic,  the  young  are  short-sighted)  can  remember  his  youth, 
and  can  make  provision  for  the  interest  and  activities  of  spiritual 
immaturity.  To  fail  here  is  to  divide  the  church  from  the  every- 
day life,  and  to  create  the  misleading  distinction  of  sacred  and 
profane;  to  succeed  is  to  illuminate  daily  life  with  the  light  of 
heaven. 

The  life  or  lives  of  man  may  be  regarded  as  constituting  a  curve 
— an  arc  of  time-experience  subtended  by  the  duration  of  the 
individual  Will  to  Life.  The  outward  movement  on  this  curve — 
Evolution,  the  Path  of  Pursuit — the  Pravritti  Mdrga — is  char- 
acterized by  self-assertion.  The  inward  movement — Involution, 
the  Path  of  Return — the  Nivritti  Mdrga— is  characterized  by 
increasing  Self-realization.^    The  religion  of  men  on  the  outward 


^  It  is  a  common  convention  o£  Indianists  to  print  the  wodd  "self"  in 
lower  case  when  the  ego  (jivdtman)  is  intended,  and  with  a  capital  when 
the  higher  self,  the  divine  nature  {paramatman) ,  is  referred  to.  Spiritual 
freedom — the  true  goal — is  the  release  of  the  self  from  the  ego  concept. 


8  WHAT  HAS  INDIA  CONTRIBUTED? 

path  is  the  Religion  of  Time;  the  rehgion  of  those  who  return 
is  the  Religion  of  Eternity.  If  we  consider  life  as  one  whole, 
certainly  Self-realization  must  be  regarded  as  its  essential  pur- 
pose from  the  beginning;  all  our  forgetting  is  but  that  we  may 
remember  the  more  vividly.  But  though  it  is  true  that  in  most 
men  the  two  phases  of  experience  interpenetrate,  we  shall  best 
understand  the  soul  of  man — drawn  as  it  is  in  the  two  opposite, 
or  seeming  opposite,  directions  of  Affirmation  and  Denial,  Will 
and  Will-surrender — by  separate  consideration  of  the  outward 
and  the  inward  tendencies.  Brahmans  avoid  the  theological  use 
of  the  terms  "good"  and  "evil,"  and  prefer  to  speak  of  "knowl- 
edge" and  "ignorance"  {vidyd  and  avidya),  and  of  the  three 
qualities  of  sattva,  rajas,  and  tamas.  As  knowledge  increases,  so 
much  the  more  will  a  man  of  his  own  motion,  and  not  from  any 
sense  of  duty,  tend  to  return,  and  his  character  and  actions  will 
be  more  purely  sdttvic.  But  we  need  not  on  that  account  condemn 
the  self-assertion  of  the  ignorant  as  sin;  for  could  Self-realiza- 
tion be  where  self-assertion  had  never  been?  It  is  not  sin,  but 
youth,  and  to  forbid  the  satisfaction  of  the  thirst  of  youth  is  not 
a  cure;  rather,  as  we  realize  more  clearly  every  day  desires  sup- 
pressed breed  pestilence.  The  Brahmans  therefore,  notwithstand- 
ing the  austere  rule  appointed  for  themselves,  held  that  an  ideal 
human  society  must  provide  for  the  enjoyment  of  all  pleasures 
by  those  who  wish  for  them;  they  would  say,  perhaps,  that 
those  who  have  risen  above  the  mere  gratification  of  the  senses, 
and  beyond  a  life  of  mere  pleasure,  however  refined,  are  just 
those  who  have  already  tasted  pleasure  to  the  full. 

For  reasons  of  this  kind  it  was  held  that  the  acquisition  of 
wealth  (artha)  and  the  enjoyment  of  sense-pleasure  (katna), 
subject  to  such  law  (dharnta^)  as  may  protect  the  weak  against 
the  strong,  are  the  legitimate  preoccupations  of  those  on  the 
outward  path.  This  is  the  stage  attained  by  modem  Western 
society,  of  which  the  norm  is  competition  regulated  by  ethical 
restraint.  Beyond  this  stage  no  society  can  progress  unless  it  is 
subjected  to  the  creative  will  of  those  who  have  passed  beyond 
the  stage  of  most  extreme  egoism,  whether  we  call  them  heroes, 

^Dharma  is  that  morality  by  which  a  given  social  order  is  protected. 
"  It  is  by  Dharma  that  civilization  is  maintained  "  (Matsya  Purana,  cxlv. 
27).  Dharma  may  also  be  translated  as  social  norm,  moral  law,  order, 
duty,  righteousness,  or  as  religion,  mainly  in  its  exoteric  aspects. 


A 


WHAT  HAS  INDIA  CONTRIBUTED? 


guardians,  Brahmans,  Samurai,  or  simply  men  of  genius. 

Puritanism  consists  in  a  desire  to  impose  the  natural  asceticism 
of  age  upon  the  young,  and  this  position  is  largely  founded  on  the 
untenable  theories  of  an  absolute  ethic  and  an  only  true  theology. 
The  opposite  extreme  is  illustrated  in  industrial  society,  which 
accepts  the  principles  of  competition  and  self-assertion  as  a  mat- 
ter of  course,  while  it  denies  the  value  of  philosophy  and  dis- 
cipline. Brahman  sociology,  just  because  of  its  philosophical 
basis,  avoided  both  errors  in  adopting  the  theory  of  sva-dharma, 
the  "own-morality"  appropriate  to  the  individual  according  to  his 
social  and  spiritual  status,  and  the  doctrine  of  the  many  forms 
of  isvara,  which  is  so  clumsily  interpreted  by  the  missionaries  as 
polytheistic.  However  much  the  Brahmans  held  Self-realization 
to  be  the  end  of  life,  the  summum  bonum,  they  saw  very  clearly 
that  it  would  be  illogical  to  impose  this  aim  immediately  upon 
those  members  of  the  community  who  are  not  yet  weary  of  self- 
assertion.  It  is  most  conspicuously  in  this  understanding  toler- 
ance that  Brahman  sociology  surpasses  other  systems. 

At  this  point  we  must  digress  to  speak  briefly  of  the  doctrine 
of  reincarnation,  which  is  involved  in  the  theory  of  eternal  recur- 
rence. This  doctrine  is  assumed  and  built  upon  by  Brahman 
sociologists,  and  on  this  account  we  must  clearly  understand  its 
practical  applications.  We  must  not  assume  that  reincarnation  is 
a  superstition  which,  if  it  could  be  definitely  refuted  (and  that 
is  a  considerable  "if"),  would  have  as  a  theory  no  practical  value. 
Even  atoms  and  electrons  are  but  symbols,  and  do  not  repre- 
sent tangible  objects  like  marbles,  which  we  could  see  if  we 
had  large  enough  microscopes;  the  practical  value  of  a  theory 
does  not  depend  on  its  representative  character,  but  on  its  efficacy 
in  resuming  past  observation  and  forecasting  future  events.  The 
doctrine  of  reincarnation  corresponds  to  a  fact  which  everyone 
must  have  remarked;  the  varying  age  of  the  souls  of  men,  irre- 
spective of  the  age  of  the  body  counted  in  years.  "A  man  is 
not  an  elder  because  his  head  is  grey"  (Dhammapada,  260). 
Sometimes  we  see  an  old  head  on  young  shoulders.  Some  men 
remain  irresponsible,  self-assertive,  uncontrolled,  unapt  to  their 
last  day;  others  from  their  youth  are  serious,  self -controlled, 
talented,  and  friendly.  We  must  understand  the  doctrine  of 
reincarnation  at  any  rate  as  an  artistic  or  mythical  representation 
of  these  facts.     To  these  facts  the  Brahmans  rightly  attached 


lO  WHAT  HAS  INDIA  CONTRIBUTED? 

great  importance,  for  it  is  this  variation  of  temperament  or  inheri- 
tance which  constitutes  the  natural  inequality  of  men,  an  inequality 
that  is  too  often  ignored  in  the  theories  of  Western  democracy. 

We  can  now  examine  the  Brahmanical  theory  a  little  more 
closely.  An  essential  factor  is  to  be  recognized  in  the  dogma 
of  the  rhythmic  character  of  the  world-process.  This  rhythm  is 
determined  by  the  great  antithesis  of  Subject  and  Object,  Self 
and  not-Self,  Will  and  Matter,  Unity  and  Diversity,  Love  and 
Hate,  and  all  other  "Pairs."  The  interplay  of  these  opposites 
constitues  the  whole  of  sensational  and  registrateable  existence, 
the  Eternal  Becoming  (samsdra),  which  is  characterized  by  birth 
and  death,  evolution  and  involution,  descent  and  ascent,  srishti 
and  samhara.  Every  individual  life — mineral,  vegetable,  animal, 
human,  or  personal  god — has  a  beginning  and  an  end,  and  this 
creation  and  destruction,  appearance  and  disappearance,  are  of 
the  essence  of  the  world-process  and  equally  originate  in  the 
past,  the  present,  and  the  future.  According  to  this  view,  then, 
every  individual  ego  (jlvatman),  or  separate  expression  of  the 
general  Will  to  Life  {ichchha,  trishna),  must  be  regarded  as  hav- 
ing reached  a  certain  stage  of  its  own  cycle  {gati).  The  same 
is  true  of  the  collective  life  of  a  nation,  a  planet,  or  a  cosmic 
system.  It  is  further  considered  that  the  turning  point  of  this 
curve  is  reached  in  man,  and  hence  the  immeasurable  value  which 
Hindus  (and  Buddhists)  attach  to  birth  in  human  form.  Before 
the  turning  point  is  reached — to  use  the  language  of  Christian 
theology — the  natural  man  prevails ;  after  it  is  passed,  regenerate 
man.  The  turning  point  is  not  to  be  regarded  as  sudden,  for  the 
two  conditions  interpenetrate,  and  the  change  of  psychological 
centre  of  gravity  may  occupy  a  succession  of  lives ;  or  if  the  turn- 
ing seems  to  be  a  sudden  event,  it  is  only  in  the  sense  that  the 
fall  of  a  ripe  fruit  appears  sudden. 

According  to  their  position  on  the  great  curve,  that  is  to  say, 
according  to  their  spiritual  age,  we  can  recognize  three  prominent 
types  of  men.  There  is  first  the  mob,  of  those  who  are  pre- 
occupied with  the  thought  of  I  and  Mine,  whose  objective  is  self- 
assertion,  but  are  restrained  on  the  one  hand  by  fear  of  retaliation 
and  of  legal  or  after-death  punishment,  and  on  the  other  by  the 
beginnings  of  love  of  family  and  love  of  country.  These,  in  the 
main,  are  the  "Devourers"  of  Blake,  the  "Slaves"  of  Nietzsche. 
Next  there  is  a  smaller,  but  still  large  number  of  thoughtful  and 


WHAT  HAS  INDIA  CONTRIBUTED?  H 

good  men  whose  behaviour  is  largely  determined  by  a  sense  of 
duty,  but  whose  inner  life  is  still  the  field  of  conflict  between  the 
old  Adam  and  the  new  man.  Men  of  this  type  are  actuated  on 
the  one  hand  by  the  love  of  power  and  fame,  and  ambition  more 
or  less  noble,  and  on  the  other  by  the  disinterested  love  of  man- 
kind. But  this  type  is  rarely  pan-human,  and  its  outlook  is  often 
simultaneously  unselfish  and  narrow.  In  times  of  great  stress, 
the  men  of  this  type  reveal  their  true  nature,  showing  to  what 
extent  they  have  advanced  more  or  less  than  has  appeared.  But 
all  these,  who  have  but  begun  to  taste  of  freedom,  must  still  be 
guided  by  rules.  Finally,  there  is  the  much  smaller  number  of 
great  men — heroes,  saviours,  saints,  and  avatars — who  have  defi- 
nitely passed  the  period  of  greatest  stress  and  have  attained  peace, 
or  at  least  have  attained  to  occasional  and  unmistakeable  vision 
of  life  as  a  whole.  These  are  the  "Prolific"  of  Blake,  the 
"Masters"  of  Nietzsche,  the  true  Brahmans  in  their  own  right, 
and  partake  of  the  nature  of  the  Superman  and  the  Bodhisattva. 
Their  activity  is  determined  by  their  love  and  wisdom,  and  not 
by  rules.  In  the  world,  but  not  of  it,  they  are  the  flower  of 
humanity,  our  leaders  and  teachers. 

These  classes  constitute  the  natural  hierarchy  of  human  society. 
The  Brahman  sociologists  were  firmly  convinced  that  in  an  ideal 
society,  i.  e.,  a  society  designed  deliberately  by  man  for  the  fulfil- 
ment of  his  own  purpose  (purushdrtha) ,^  not  only  must  oppor- 
tunity be  allowed  to  every  one  for  such  experience  as  his  spiritual 
status  requires,  but  also  that  the  best  and  wisest  must  rule.  It 
seemed  to  them  impossible  that  an  ideal  society  should  have  any 
other  than  an  aristocratic  basis,  the  aristocracy  being  at  once 
intellectual  and  spiritual.  Being  firm  believers  in  heredity,  both 
of  blood  and  culture,  they  conceived  that  it  might  be  possible  to 
constitute  an  ideal  society  upon  the  already  existing  basis  of 
occupational  caste.    "If,"  thought  they,  "we  can  determine  natural 

'^  Purushdrtha.  This  is  the  Brahmanical  formula  of  utility,  forming 
the  standard  of  social  ethics.  A  given  activity  is  useful,  and  therefore 
right,  if  it  conduces  to  the  attainment  of  dharma,  artha,  kdma  and  moksha 
(function,  prosperity,  pleasure,  and  spiritual  freedom),  or  any 
one  or  more  of  these  without  detriment  to  any  other.  Brahmanical  utility 
takes  into  account  the  whole  man.  Industrial  sociologists  entertain  a 
much  narrower  view  of  utility:  "It  is  with  utilities  that  have  a  price  that 
political  economy  is  mainly  concerned  "  (Nicholson,  Principles  of  Politi- 
cal Economy^  ed.  2.  p.  28). 


12  WHAT  HAS  INDIA  CONTRIBUTED? 

classes,  then  let  us  assign  to  each  its  appropriate  duties  {sva- 
dharma,  own  norm)  and  appropriate  honour;  this  will  at  once 
facilitate  a  convenient  division  of  necessary  labour,  ensure  the 
handing  down  of  hereditary  skill  in  pupillary  succession,  avoid 
all  possibility  of  social  ambition,  and  will  allow  to  every  individual 
the  experience  and  activity  which  he  needs  and  owes."  They 
assumed  that  by  a  natural  law,  the  individual  ego  is  always,  or 
nearly  always,  bom  into  its  own  befitting  environment.  If  they 
were  wrong  on  this  point,  then  its  remains  for  others  to  discover 
some  better  way  of  achieving  the  same  ends.  I  do  not  say  that 
this  is  impossible;  but  it  can  hardly  be  denied  that  the  Brah- 
manical  caste  system  is  the  nearest  approach  that  has  yet  been 
made  towards  a  society  where  there  shall  be  no  attempt  to  realise 
a  competitive  equality,  but  where  all  interests  are  regarded  as 
identical.  To  those  who  admit  the  variety  of  age  in  human  souls, 
this  must  appear  to  be  the  only  true  communism. 

To  describe  the  caste  system  as  an  idea  or  in  actual  practice 
would  require  a  whole  volume.  But  we  may  notice  a  few  of  its 
characteristics.  The  nature  of  the  difference  between  a  Brahman 
and  a  ^iidra  is  indicated  in  the  view  that  a  Sudra  can  do  no 
wrong,^  a  view  that  must  make  an  immense  demand  upon  the 
patience  of  the  higher  castes,  and  is  the  absolute  converse  of  the 
Western  doctrine  that  the  King  can  do  no  wrong.  These  facts  are 
well  illustrated  in  the  doctrine  of  legal  punishment,  that  that  of 
the  Vaishya  should  be  twice  as  heavy  as  that  of  the  §udra,  that 
that  of  the  Kshattriya  twice  as  heavy  again,  that  of  the  Brahman 
twice  or  even  four  times  as  heavy  again  in  respect  of  the  same 
offence ;  for  responsibility  rises  with  intelligence  and  status.  The 
5udra  is  also  free  of  innumerable  forms  of  self-denial  imposed 
upon  the  Brahman ;  he  may,  for  example,  indulge  in  coarse  food, 
the  widow  may  re-marry.  It  may  be  observed  that  it  was 
strongly  held  that  the  Sudra  should  not  by  any  means  outnumber 
the  other  castes;  if  the  §udras  are  too  many,  as  befell  in  ancient 
Greece,  where  the  slaves  outnumbered  freemen,  the  voice  of  the 
least  wise  may  prevail  by  mere  weight  of  numbers. 

Modem  craftsmen  interested  in  the  regulation  of  machinery  will 
be  struck  by  the  fact  that  the  establishment  and  working  of  large 
machines  and  factories  by  individuals  was  reckoned  a  grievous 

^Manu,  X.  126. 


WHAT  HAS  INDIA  CONTRIBUTED?  13 

sin;  large  organizations  are  only  to  be  carried  oil  in  the  public 

interest.^ 

Given  the  natural  classes,  one  of  the  good  elements  of  what  is 
now  regarded  as  democracy  was  provided  by  making  the  castes 
self-governing;  thus  is  was  secured  that  a  man  should  be  tried 
by  his  peers  (whereas,  under  Industrial  Democracy,  an  artist  may 
be  tried  by  a  jury  of  tradesmen,  or  a  poacher  by  a  bench  of 
squires).  Within  the  caste  there  existed  equality  of  opportunity 
for  all,  and  the  caste  as  a  body  had  collective  privileges  and 
responsibilities.  Society  thus  organized  has  much  the  appearance 
of  what  would  now  be  called  Guild  Socialism. 

In  a  just  and  healthy  society,  function  should  depend  upon 
capacity;  and  in  the  normal  individual,  capacity  and  inclination 
are  inseparable  (this  is  the  'instinct  of  workmanship').  We  are 
able  accordingly  to  recognize,  in  the  theory  of  the  Syndicalists,  as 
well  as  in  the  caste  organization  of  India,  a  very  nearly  ideal  com- 
bination of  duty  and  pleasure,  compulsion  and  freedom;  and  the 
words  vocation  or  dharma  imply  this  very  identity.  Individual- 
ism and  socialism  are  united  in  the  concept  of  function. 

The  Brahmanical  theory  has  also  a  far-reaching  bearing  on  the 
problems  of  education.  "Reading,"  says  the  Garuda  Purana,  "to 
a  man  devoid  of  wisdom,  is  like  a  mirror  to  the  blind."  The 
Brahmans  attached  no  value  to  uncoordinated  knowledge  or  to 
unearned  opinions,  but  rather  regarded  these  as  dangerous  tools 
in  the  hands  of  unskilled  craftsmen.  The  greatest  stress  is  laid 
on  the  development  of  character.  Proficiency  in  hereditary  apti- 
tudes is  assured  by  pupillary  succession  within  the  caste.    But 


^  Manu,  xi.  63,  64,  66. 

A  truly  progressive  society  is  only  possible  where  there  is  unity  of  pur- 
pose. How  rapidly  the  social  habit  can  then  be  changed  is  well  illustrated 
by  the  action  of  many  of  the  Allied  Governments  in  taking  con- 
trol of  several  departments  of  industrial  production.  It  is  only  sad  to 
reflect  that  it  needed  a  great  disaster  to  compel  so  simple  an  act  as  the 
limitation  of  profits.  In  the  same  way  vast  sums  are  now  spent  on 
caring  for  the  welfare  of  an  army  of  soldiers  who  would  be,  and  will 
again  be,  left  to  the  tender  mercies  of  the  labour  market  in  times  of 
peace.  If  the  nation  were  as  united  in  peace  by  a  determination  to  make 
the  best  of  life  how  much  could  not  be  accomplished  at  a  fraction  of  the 
cost  of  war?  If  a  nation  can  co-operate  for  self-defence,  why  not  also 
for  self-development? 


14 


WHAT  HAS  INDIA  CONTRIBUTED? 


it  is  in  respect  of  what  we  generally  understand  by  higher  educa- 
tion that  the  Brahman  method  differs  most  from  modern  ideals ; 
for  it  is  not  even  contemplated  as  desirable  that  all  knowledge 
should  be  made  accessible  to  all.  The  key  to  education  is  to  be 
found  in  personality.  There  should  be  no  teacher  for  whom 
teaching  is  less  than  a  vocation  (none  may  "sell  the  Vedas"),  and 
no  teacher  should  impart  his  knowledge  to  a  pupil  until  he  finds 
the  pupil  ready  to  receive  it,  and  the  proof  of  this  is  to  be 
found  in  the  asking  of  the  right  questions.  "As  the  man  who 
digs  with  a  spade  obtains  water,  even  so  an  obedient  pupil  obtains 
the  knowledge  which  is  in  his  teacher."^ 

The  relative  position  of  man  and  woman  is  also  ver}'  note- 
worthy. Perhaps  the  woman  is  in  general  a  younger  soul,  as 
Paracelsus  puts  it,  "nearer  to  the  world  than  man."  But  there  is 
no  war  of  words  as  to  which  is  the  superior,  which  inferior ;  for 
the  question  of  competitive  equality  is  not  considered.  The  Hindu 
marriage  contemplates  identity,  and  not  equality.^  The  pri- 
mary motif  of  marriage  is  not  merely  individual  satisfaction,  but 
the  achievement  of  Purushartha,  the  purposes  of  life,  and  the 
wife  is  spoken  of  as  sahadharmachdrinl,  "she  who  cooperates  in 
the  fulfillment  of  social  and  religious  duties."  In  the  same  way 
for  the  community  at  large,  the  system  of  caste  is  designed  rather 
to  unite  than  to  divide.  Men  of  different  castes  have  more  in 
common  than  men  of  different  classes.  It  is  in  an  Industrial 
Democracy,  and  where  a  system  of  secular  education  prevails, 
that  groups  of  men  are  effectually  separated ;  a  Western  professor 
and  a  navvy  do  not  understand  each  other  half  so  well  as  a 
Brahman  and  a  Sudra.  It  has  been  justly  remarked  that  "the 
lowest  pariah  hanging  to  the  skirts  of  Hindu  society  is  in  a 
sense  as  much  the  disciple  of  the  Brahman  ideal  as  any  priest 
himself."  ^ 

It  remains  to  apply  what  has  been  said  to  immediate  problems. 
I  have  suggested  that  India  has  nothing  of  more  value  to  offer  to 
the  world  than  her  religious  philosophy,  and  her  faith  in  the 
application  of  philosophy  to  social  problems.    A  few  words  may 


1  Manu.  ii.  218. 

2  Manu,  ix.  45.  "  The  man  is  not  the  man  alone ;  he  is  the  man,  the 
woman,  and  the  progeny.  The  Sages  have  declared  that  the  husband  is 
the  same  as  the  wife." 


WHAT  HAS  INDIA  CONTRIBUTED? 


IS 


be  added  on  the  present  crisis^  and  the  relationship  of  East  and 
West.  Let  us  understand  first  that  what  we  see  in  India  is  a  co- 
operative society  in  a  state  of  decay.  Western  society  has  never 
been  so  highly  organized,  but  in  so  far  as  it  was  organized,  its 
disintegration  has  proceeded  much  further  than  is  yet  the  case  in 
India.  And  we  may  expect  that  Europe,  having  sunk  into  in- 
dustrial competition  first,  will  be  the  first  to  emerge.  The  seeds 
of  a  future  co-operation  have  long  been  sown,  and  we  can  clearly 
recognize  a  conscious,  and  perhaps  also  an  unconscious,  effort 
towards  reconstruction. 

In  the  meantime  the  decay  of  Asia  jroceeds,  partly  of  internal 
necessity,  because  at  the  present  moment  the  social  change  from 
co-operation  to  competition  is  spoken  of  as  progress,  and  because 
it  seems  to  promise  the  ultimate  recovery  of  political  power,  and 
partly  as  the  result  of  destructive  exploitation  by  the  Industrial- 
ists. Even  those  European  thinkers  who  may  be  called  the 
prophets  of  the  new  age  are  content  to  think  of  a  development 
taking  place  in  Europe  alone.  But  let  it  be  clearly  realized  that 
the  modem  world  is  not  the  ancient  world  of  slow  communi- 
cations; what  is  done  in  India  or  Japan  to-day  has  immediate 
spiritual  and  economic  results  in  Europe  and  America.  To  say 
that  East  is  East  and  West  is  West  is  simply  to  hide  one's 
head  in  the  sand.^     It  will  be  quite  impossible  to  establish  any 

1 1  do  not  mean  the  present  war.  as  such,  but  civilization  at  the  parting 
of  the  ways. 

2  I  should  like  to  point  out  here  that  Mr.  Lowes  Dickinson's  return  to 
this  position  ('An  Essay  on  India,  China,  and  Japan,'  and  'Appearances,' 
both  1914),  is  very  unfortunate.  He  says  the  religion  of  India  is  the 
Religion  of  Eternity,  the  religion  of  Europe  the  Religion  of  Time,  and 
chooses  the  latter.  These  phrases,  by  the  way,  are  excellent  renderings 
of  Pravritti  dharma  and  Nivritti  dharma.  So  far  as  Mr.  Dickinson's  dis- 
tinction is  true,  in  so  far  that  is  as  India  suffers  from  premature  vairdgya, 
and  Europe  from  excessive  activity,  so  far  each  exhibits  an  excess  which 
each  should  best  be  able  to  correct.  But  an  antithesis  of  this  sort  is  only 
conceptually  possible,  and  no  race  or  nation  has  ever  followed  either  of 
the  religions  exclusively.  All  true  civilization  is  the  due  adjustment  of 
the  two  points  of  view.  And  just  because  this  balance  has  been  so  con- 
spicuously attained  in  India,  one  who  knows  far  more  of  India  than 
Mr.  Dickinson  remarks  that  she  "  may  yet  be  destined  to  prepare  the  way 
for  the  reconciliation  of  Christianity  with  the  world,  and  through  the 
practical  identification  of  the  spiritual  with  the  temporal  life,  to  hasten 
the  period  of  that  third  step  forvvard  in  the  moral  development  of  human- 


l6  WHAT  HAS  INDIA  CONTRIBUTED? 

higher  social  order  in  the  West  so  long  as  the  East  remains  in- 
fatuated with  the,  to  her,  entirely  novel  and  fascinating  theory  of 
laissez-faire. 

The  rapid  degradation  of  Asia  is  thus  an  evil  portent  for  the 
future  of  humanity  and  for  the  future  of  that  Western  social 
idealism  of  which  the  beginnings  are  already  recognizable.  If, 
either  in  ignorance  or  in  contempt  of  Asia,  constructive  European 
thought  omits  to  seek  the  co-operation  of  Eastern  philosophers, 
there  will  come  a  time  when  Europe  will  not  be  able  to  fight 
Industrialism,  because  this  enemy  will  be  entrenched  in  Asia.  It 
is  not  sufficient  for  the  English  colonies  and  America  to  protect 
themselves  by  immigration  laws  against  cheap  Asiatic  labour; 
that  is  a  merely  temporary  device,  and  likely  to  do  more  harm 
than  good,  even  apart  from  its  injustice.  Nor  will  it  be  possible 
for  the  European  nationalist  ideal  that  every  nation  should  choose 
its  own  form  of  government,  and  lead  its  own  life,^  to  be  realized, 
so  long  as  the  European  nations  have,  or  desire  to  have, 
possessions  in  Asia.  What  has  to  be  secured  is  the  conscious 
co-operation  of  East  and  West  for  common  ends,  not  the  sub- 
jection of  either  to  the  other,  nor  their  lasting  estrangement.  For 
if  Asia  be  not  with  Europe,  she  will  be  against  her,  and  there 
may  arise  a  terrible  conflict,  economic,  or  even  armed,  between 
an  idealistic  Europe  and  a  materialized  Asia. 

To  put  the  matter  in  another  way,  we  do  not  fully  realize  the 
debt  that  Europe  already  owes  to  Asiatic  thought,  for  the  dis- 
covery of  Asia  has  hardly  begun.  And,  on  the  other  hand,  Europe 
has  inflicted  terrible  injuries  upon  Asia  in  modem  times.*  I  do 
not  mean  to  say  that  the  virus  of  "civilization"  would  not  have 
spread  through  Asia  quite  apart  from  any  direct  European  at- 
tempts to  effect  such  a  result — quite  on  the  contrary ;  but  it  can- 
ity, when  there  will  be  no  (iivisions  of  race,  creed,  or  class,  or  nationality 
between  men,  by  whatsoever  name  they  may  be  called,  for  they  will  all 
be  one  in  the  acknowledgment  of  their  common  Brotherhood  "  (Sir  George 
Birdwood,    Sva^   p.  355). 

^  The  ideal  of  self-determination  (sva-rdj)  for  which  the  Allies  claim 
to  be  fighting. 

2  For  example — and  without  the  least  ill-will — the  English  in  India 
who  unconsciously  created  social  confusion  simply  because  they  could  not 
understand  what  they  saw,  and  endeavoured  to  fit  a  co-operative  structure 
into  the  categories  of  modern  political  theory. 


WHAT  HAS  INDIA  CONTRIBUTED? 


17 


not  be  denied  that  those  who  have  been  the  unconscious  instru- 
ments of  the  degradation  of  Asiatic  society  from  the  basis  of 
dharma  to  the  basis  of  contract  have  incurred  a  debt. 

The  "clear  air"  of  Asia  is  not  merely  a  dream  of  the  past. 
There  is  idealism,  and  there  are  idealists  in  modern  India,  even 
amongst  those  who  have  been  corrupted  by  half  a  century  of 
squalid  education.  We  are  not  all  deceived  by  the  illusion  of 
progress,  but,  like  some  of  our  European  colleagues,  desire  "the 
coming  of  better  conditions  of  life,  when  the  whole  world  will 
again  learn  that  the  object  of  human  life  is  not  to  waste  it  in  a 
feverish  anxiety  and  race  after  physical  objects  and  comforts, 
but  to  use  it  in  developing  the  mental,  moral,  and  spiritual 
powers,  latent  in  man."  ^  The  debt,  then,  of  Europe,  can  best 
be  paid — and  with  infinite  advantage  to  herself — by  seeking  the 
co-operation  of  modern  Asia  in  every  adventure  of  the  spirit 
which  Europe  would  essay.  It  is  true  that  this  involves  the  hard 
surrender  of  the  old  idea  that  it  is  the  mission  of  the  West  to 
civilize  the  East;  but  that  somewhat  Teutonic  and  Imperial  view 
of  kultur  is  already  discredited.  What  is  needed  for  the  com- 
mon civilization  of  the  world  is  the  recognition  of  common  prob- 
lems, and  to  co-operate  in  their  solution.  If  it  be  asked  what 
inner  riches  India  brings  to  aid  in  the  realization  of  a  civilization 
of  the  world,  then,  from  the  Indian  standpoint,  the  answer  must 
be  found  in  her  religions  and  her  philosophy,  and  her  constant 
application  of  abstract  theory  to  practical  life. 


1  S.  C.  Basu.  The  Daily  Practice  of  the  Hindus,  2nd  ed.,  p.  4. 


HINDU  VIEW  OF  ART: 

1.      HISTORY   OF   ESTHETIC 

The  earliest  Indian  art  of  which  we  have  any  information  or 
concerning  which  we  are  able  to  draw  reasonably  certain  infer- 
ences, we  may  designate  as  Vedic,  since  we  can  hardly  undertake 
here  the  discussion  of  the  perhaps  contemporary  culture  of  the 
early  Dravidians.  Vedic  art  was  essentially  practical.  About 
painting  and  sculpture  we  have  no  knowledge,  but  the  carpenter, 
metal-worker  and  potter  and  weaver  efficiently  provided  for  man's 
material  requirements.  If  their  work  was  decorated,  we  may  be 
sure  that  its  'ornament'  had  often,  and  perhaps  always,  a  magical 
and  protective  significance.  The  ends  of  poetry  were  also  prac- 
tical. The  Vedic  hymns  were  designed  to  persuade  the  gods  to 
deal  generously  with  men: 

"As  birds  extend  their  sheltering  wings. 
Spread  your  protection  over  us." 

(Rigveda.) 

Much  of  this  poetry  is  descriptive;  it  is  nature-poetry  in  the 
sense  that  it  deals  with  natural  phenomena.  Its  most  poetical 
quality  is  its  sense  of  wonder  and  admiration,  but  it  is  not  lyrical 
in  any  other  sense.  It  has  no  tragic  or  reflective  elements,  except 
in  some  of  the  later  hymns,  and  there  is  no  question  of  'aesthetic 
contemplation,'  for  the  conception  of  the  sympathetic  con- 
stantly prevails.  The  poet  sometimes  comments  on  his  own 
work,  which  he  compares  to  a  car  well-built  by  a  deft  craftsman, 
or  to  fair  and  well-woven  garments,  or  to  a  bride  adorned  for  her 
lover;  and  this  art  it  was  that  made  the  hymns  acceptable  to 
the  gods  to  whom  they  were  addressed.  Vedic  Esthetic  consisted 
essentially  in  the  appreciation  of  skill. 

The  keynote  of  the  age  of  the  Upanishads  (800  b.  c.)  and 
Pali  Buddhism  (500  b.  c.)  is  the  search  for  truth.  The  ancient 
hymns  had  become  a  long-established  institution,  taken  for 
granted;  ritual  was  followed  solely  for  the  sake  of  advantage 
in  this  world  or  the  next.     Meanwhile  the  deeper  foundations 


HINDU  VIEW  OF  ART:    HISTORICAL 


19 


of  Indian  culture  were  in  process  of  determination  in  the  mental 
struggle  of  the  'dwellers  in  the  forest/  The  language  of  the 
Upanishads  combines  austerity  with  passion,  but  this  passion  is 
the  exaltation  of  mental  effort,  remote  from  the  common  life  of 
men  in  the  world.  Only  here  and  there  we  find  glimpses  of  the 
later  fusion  of  lyric  and  religious  experience,  when,  for  example, 
in  the  Brihadaranyaka  Upanishad,  the  bliss  of  atman-intuition, 
or  the  intuition  of  the  Self,  is  compared  with  the  happiness  of 
earthly  lovers  in  self -forgetting  dalliance.  In  general,  the  Upani- 
shads are  too  much  preoccupied  with  deeper  speculations  to  ex- 
hibit a  conscious  art,  or  to  discuss  the  art  of  their  times;  in  this 
age  there  is  no  explicit  Esthetic. 

When,  however,  we  consider  the  Indian  way  of  regarding  the 
Vedas  as  a  whole,  we  shall  find  implicit  in  the  word  'sruti'  a  very 
important  doctrine ;  that  the  Veda  is  eternal,  the  sacred  books  are 
its  temporal  expression,  they  have  been  'heard.'  This  is  not  a 
theory  of  'revelation'  in  the  ordinary  sense,  since  the  audition 
depends  on  the  qualification  of  the  hearer,  not  on  the  will 
and  active  manifestation  of  a  god.  But  it  is  on  all  fours  with 
the  later  Hindu  view  which  treats  the  practice  of  art  as  a  form 
of  yoga,  and  identifies  aesthetic  emotion  with  that  felt  when  the 
self  perceives  the  Self. 

In  Pali  Buddhism  generally,  an  enthusiasm  for  the  truth, 
unsurpassed  even  in  the  Upanishads,  is  combined  with  monastic 
institutionalism  and  a  rather  violent  polemic  against  the  joys 
of  the  world.  Beauty  and  personal  love  are  not  merely  evanes- 
cent, but  are  snares  to  be  avoided  at  all  costs;  and  it  is  clearly 
indicated  that  the  Early  Buddhist  Esthetic  is  strictly  hedonistic. 
The  indications  of  this  point  of  view  are  summed  up  in  the  fol- 
lowing pages  of  the  Visuddhi  Magga :  "Living  beings  on  account 
of  their  love  and  devotion  to  the  sensations  excited  by  forms  and 
the  other  objects  of  sense,  give  high  honour  to  painters,  musicians, 
perfumers,  cooks,  elixir-prescribing  physicians,  and  other  like 
persons  who  furnish  us  with  objects  of  sense." 

In  the  Upanishads  on  the  one  hand,  and  in  the  teachings  of 
Buddha  on  the  other,  the  deepest  problems  of  life  were  pene- 
trated; the  mists  of  the  Vedic  dawn  had  melted  in  the  fire  of 
austerity  (tapes),  and  life  lay  open  to  man's  inspection  as  a 
thing  of  v/hich  the  secret  mechanism  was  no  more  mysterious. 
We  can  scarcely  exaggerate  the  sense  of  triumph  with  which  the 


20  HINDU  VIEW  OF  ART:   HISTORICAL 

doctrines  of  the  Atman  or  Self  and  the  gospel  of  Buddha  per- 
meated Indian  society.  The  immediate  result  of  the  acceptance 
of  these  views  appeared  in  an  organized  and  deliberate  endeavour 
to  create  a  form  of  society  adapted  for  the  fulfilment  of  the 
purposes  of  life  as  seen  in  the  light  of  the  new  philosophies.  To 
the  ideal  of  the  saint  in  retirement  was  very  soon  added  that  of 
the  man  who  remains  in  the  world  and  yet  acquires  or  possesses 
the  highest  wisdom — "It  w^as  with  works  that  Janaka  and  others 
came  imto  adeptship"  (  Glta,  iii.  20) .  There  was  now  also  evolved 
the  doctrine  of  union  by  action  (^karma-yoga)  set  forth  in  the 
Bhagavad  Gitd,  as  leading  even  the  citizen  on  the  path  of  sal- 
vation. The  emergence  of  a  definitely  Brahmanical  rather  than  a 
Buddhist  scheme  of  life  is  to  be  attributed  to  the  fact  that  the 
practical  energies  of  Buddhists  were  largely  absorbed  within  the 
limits  of  its  monasticism;  the  Buddhists  in  the  main  regard  Nir- 
vana not  merely  as  the  ultimate,  but  as  the  sole  object  of  life. 
But  the  Brahmans  never  forgot  that  this  life  is  the  field  alike  of 
Pursuit  and  Return.  Their  scheme  of  life  is  set  forth  at  great 
length  in  the  Sutra  literature,  the  Dhartna  Sastras  and  the  Epics 
(in  general,  4th — 1st  centuries  b.  c). 

This  literature  yields  sufficient  material  for  an  elucidation  of 
the  orthodox  view  of  art.  But  notwithstanding  the  breadth  of 
the  fourfold  plan,  we  find  in  this  literature  the  same  hedonistic 
--Esthetic  and  puritanical  applications  as  are  characteristic  of  Pali 
Buddhism.  Thus,  Manu  forbids  the  householder  to  dance  or  sing 
or  play  on  musical  instruments,  and  reckons  architects,  actors  and 
singers  amongst  the  unworthy  men  who  should  not  be  invited  to 
the  ceremony  of  offerings  to  the  dead.  Even  Chanakya,  though 
he  tolerates  musicians  and  actors,  classes  them  with  courtesans. 
The  hedonistic  theory  still  prevailed.  In  later  times  the  'defence' 
of  any  art,  such  as  poetry  or  drama,  was  characteristically  based 
on  the  fact  that  it  could  contribute  to  the  achievement  of  all  or 
any  of  the  Four  Aims  of  Life.    ' 

Meanwhile  the  stimulus  of  discovered  truth  led  not  only  to 
this  austere  formulation  of  a  scheme  of  life  (typically  in  Manu), 
but  also  to  the  development  of  yoga  as  a  practice  for  the  attain- 
ment of  the  desired  end ;  and  in  this  development  an  almost  equal 
part  was  taken  by  Brahmans  and  Buddhists  (typically  in  Patafi- 
jali  and  Nagarjuna). 

We  shall  digress  here,  and  partially  anticipate,  to  discuss  briefly 


HINDU  VIEW  OF  ART :   HISTORICAL  21 

the  important  part  once  played  in  Indian  thought  by  the 
concept  of  Art  as  Yoga,  a  subject  sufficient  in  itself  for  a 
whole  volume.  It  will  be  remembered  that  the  purpose  of 
Yoga  is  mental  concentration,  carried  so  far  as  the  overlooking  of 
all  distinction  between  the  subject  and  the  object  of  contempla- 
tion ;  a  means  of  achieving  harmony  or  unity  of  consciousness. 

It  was  soon  recognized  that  the  concentration  of  the  artist  was 
of  this  very  nature ;  and  we  find  such  texts  as  Sukracharya's : 

"Let  the  imager  establish  images  in  temples  by  meditation  on 
the  deities  who  are  the  objects  of  his  devotion.  For  the  successful 
achievement  of  this  yoga  the  lineaments  of  the  image  are 
described  in  books  to  be  dwelt  upon  in  detail.  In  no  other  way, 
not  even  by  direct  and  immediate  vision  of  an  actual  object,  is  it 
possible  to  be  so  absorbed  in  contemplation,  as  thus  in  the  making 
of  images." 

The  manner  in  which  even  the  lesser  crafts  constitute  a  practice 
(achdrya)  analogous  to  that  of  (samprajndtd)  yoga  is  indicated 
incidentally  by  Sankaracharya  in  the  commentary  on  the  Brahma 
Sutra,  3,  2,  10.  The  subject  of  discussion  is  the  distinction  of 
swoon  from  waking ;  in  swoon  the  senses  no  longer  perceive  their 
objects.  Sankaracharya  remarks,  "True,  the  arrow-maker  per- 
ceives nothing  beyond  his  work  when  he  is  buried  in  it;  but  he 
has  nevertheless  consciousness  and  control  over  his  body,  both 
of  which  are  absent  in  the  fainting  person."  The  arrow-maker 
seems  to  have  afforded,  indeed,  a  proverbial  instance  of  single- 
minded  attention,  as  we  read  in  the  Bhdgavata  Purdna. 

"I  have  learned  concentration  from  the  maker  of  arrows." 

A  connection  between  dream  and  art  is  recognized  in  a  passage 
of  the  Agni  Purdna,'^  where  the  imager  is  instructed,  on  the  night 
before  beginning  his  work,  and  after  ceremonial  purification,  to 
pray,  "O  thou  Lord  of  all  the  gods,  teach  me  in  dreams  how  to 
carry  out  all  the  work  I  have  in  my  mind."  Here  again  we  see 
an  anticipation  of  modern  views,  which  associate  myth  and  dream 
and  art  as  essentially  similar  and  representing  the  dramatisation 
of  man's  innermost  hopes  and  fears. 

The  practise  of  visualisation,  referred  to  by  Sukracharya,  is 
identical  in  worship  and  in  art.     The  worshipper  recites   the 

1  Agni  Purdiia,  ch.  xllii.  Cf.  Patanjali,  Yoga  Sutra,  1,  38.  For  the  theory 
of  dreams  see  also  Katlia  Upanishad,  v.  8,  and  Brihadaranyaka  Upanishad, 
iv.  3,  9-14  and  16-18. 


22  HINDU  VIEW  OF  ART:   HISTORICAL 

dhydna  mantram  describing  the  deity,  and  forms  a  corresponding 
mental  picture,  and  it  is  then  to  this  imagined  form  that  his 
prayers  are  addressed  and  the  offerings  are  made.  The  artist 
follows  identical  prescriptions,  but  proceeds  to  represent  the 
mental  picture  in  a  visible  and  objective  form,  by  drawing  or 
modelling.    Thus,  to  take  an  example  from  Buddhist  sources:^ 

The  artist  (^sddhaka,  mantrin,  or  yogin,  as  he  is  variously — and 
significantly — called),  after  ceremonial  purification,  is  to  proceed 
to  a  solitary  place.  There  he  is  to  perform  the  "Sevenfold 
Office,"  beginning  with  the  invocation  of  the  hosts  of  Buddhas 
and  Bodhisattvas,  and  the  offering  to  them  of  real  or  imaginary 
flowers.  Then  he  must  realize  in  thought  the  four  infinite  moods 
of  friendliness,  compassion,  sympathy,  and  impartiality.  Then 
he  must  meditate  upon  the  emptiness  (sunyatd)  or  non-existence 
of  all  things,  for  "by  the  fire  of  the  idea  of  the  abyss,  it  is  said, 
there  are  destroyed  beyond  recovery  the  five  factors"  of  ego- 
consciousness.^  Then  only  should  he  invoke  the  desired  divinity 
by  the  utterance  of  the  appropriate  seed- word  (blja)  and  should 
identify  himself  completely  with  the  divinity  to  be  represented. 
Then  finally  on  pronouncing  the  dhydna  mantram,  in  which  the 
attributes  are  defined,  the  divinity  appears  visibly,  "like  a  reflec- 
tion," or  "as  in  a  dream"  and  this  brilliant  image  is  the  artist's 
model. 

This  ritual  is  perhaps  unduly  elaborated,  but  in  essentials  it 
shows  a  clear  understanding  of  the  psychology  of  the  imagina- 
tion. These  essentials  are  the  setting  aside  the  transformations 
of  the  thinking  principle^;  self-identification  with  the  object  of 

^Condensed  from  Foucher.  Iconographie  Bouddhiqtie,  11,  8-11. 

2  Similar  views  are  met  with  again  and  again  in  modern  aesthetic. 
Goethe  perceived  that  he  who  attains  to  the  vision  of  beauty  is  from 
himself  set  free:  Riciotto  Canudo  remarks  that  the  secret  of  all  art  is  self- 
f orgetfulness :  and  Laurence  Binyon  that  "we  too  should  make  ourselves 
empty,  that  the  great  soul  of  the  universe  may  fill  us  with  its  breath 
(Ideas  of  Design  in  East  and  West,  Atlantic  Monthly,  1913). 

^  Wagner  speaks  of  "  an  internal  sense  which  becomes  clear  and  active 
•when  all  the  others,  directed  outward,  sleep  or  dream"  (Combarieu,  Music, 
its  Laws  and  Evolution,  p.  63).  That  God  is  the  actual  theme  of  all  art 
is  suggested  by  Sankaracharya  in  the  commentary  on  the  Brahma  Sutra, 
i,  i,  20-21.  where  he  indicates  the  Brahman  as  the  real  theme  of  secular 
as  well  as  spiritual  songs :  and  according  to  Behmen,  "It  is  nought  indeed 
but  thine  own  hearing  and  willing  that  do  hinder  thee,  so  that  thou  dost  not 
see  and  hear  God  {Dialogues  on  the  Supersensual  Life.) 


HINDU  VIEW  OF  ART:   HISTORICAL  23 

the  work;^  and  vividness  of  the  final  image.^ 

There  are  abundant  literary  parallels  for  this  conception  of  art 
as  yoga.  Thus  Valmiki,  although  he  was  already  familiar  with 
the  story  of  Rama,  before  composing  his  own  Rdmdyana  sought 
to  realize  it  more  profoundly,  and  "seating  himself  with  his  face 
tov/ards  the  East^  and  sipping  water  according  to  rule  (i.  e.  cere- 
monial purification),  he  set  himself  to  yoga-contemplation  of  his 
theme.  By  virtue  of  his  yoga-power  he  clearly  saw  before  him 
Rama,  Lakshmana  and  Sita,  and  Dasaratha,  together  with  his 
wives,  in  his  kingdom  laughing,  talking,  acting  and  moving  as  if 
in  real  life  ...  by  yoga-power  that  righteous  one  beheld  all  that 
had  come  to  pass,  and  all  that  was  to  come  to  pass  in  the  future, 
like  a  nelli  f  ruit^  on  the  palm  of  his  hand.  And  having  truly  seen 
all  by  virtue  of  his  concentration,  the  generous  sage  began  the 
setting  forth  of  the  history  of  Rama."  * 

Notice  here  particularly  that  the  work  of  art  is  completed 
before  the  work  of  transcription  or  representation  is  begun.' 
"The  mind  of  the  sage,"  says  Chuang  Tzu,  "being  in  repose,  be- 
comes the  mirror  of  the  universe,  the  speculum  of  all  creation." 
Croce  is  entirely  correct  when  he  speaks  of  "the  artist,  who 
never  makes  a  stroke  with  his  brush  without  having  previously 
seen  it  with  his  imagination"  and  remarks  that  the  externalisation 
of  a  work  of  art  "implies  a  vigilant  will,  which  persists  in  not 
allowing  certain  visions,  intuitions,  or  representations  to  be  lost."* 

1  Cf .  the  phrase  "Devam  hhutva,  devatn  yajet" :  to  worship  the  god 
become  the  god.    That  which  remains  for  us  object,  remains  unknown. 

2  He  who  does  not  imagine  in  stronger  and  better  lineaments,"  said 
Blake,  "and  in  stronger  and  better  light  than  his  perishing  mortal  eye  can 
see,  does  not  imagine  at  all." 

3  Phyllanthus  emhlica,  the  round  fruit  of  which  is  about  the  size  of 
an  ordinary  marble.  The  simile  is  a  common  Indian  formula  for  clear 
insight. 

*  Rdmayana,  Balakandam. 

^  Cf.  Coomaraswamy  and  Duggirala,  The  Mirror  of  Gesture,  Introduc- 
tion, p.  3.  So  Vasubandhu  speaks  of  the  poet  as  seeing  the  world,  like 
a  jujube  fruit,  lying  within  the  hollow  of  his  hands  (Vdsavadatta,  invo- 
cation.) "It  seems  to  me."  William  Morris  wrote,  "that  no  hour  of  the 
day  passes  that  the  whole  world  does  not  show  itself  to  me":  and  Mag- 
nusson  records  of  him,  referring  to  Sigurd  the  Volsung  and  other  poems, 
that  "in  each  case  the  subject  matter  had  taken  such  a  clearly  definite 
shape  in  his  mind,  as  he  told  me,  that  it  only  remained  to  write  it  down." 

^  Croce,  Aesthetic,  pp.  162.  168. 


24  HINDU  VIEW  OF  ART:   HISTORICAL 

It  should  be  understood  that  yoga  ('union')  is  not  merely  a 
mental  exercise  or  a  religious  discipline,  but  the  most  practical 
preparation  for  any  undertaking  whatever.  Hanuman,  for  ex- 
ample, before  searching  the  Asoka  grove  for  Sita,  "prayed  to  the 
gods  and  ranged  the  forest  in  imagination  till  be  found  her"; 
then  only  did  he  spring  from  the  walls  of  Lanka,  like  an  arrow 
from  a  bow,  and  enter  the  grove  in  the  flesh.  Throughout  the 
East,  wherever  Hindu  or  Buddhist  thought  have  deeply  pene- 
trated, it  is  firmly  believed  that  all  knowledge  is  directly  accessible 
to  the  concentred  and  'one-pointed'  mind,  without  the  direct 
intervention  of  the  senses.  Probably  all  inventors,  artists  and 
mathematicians  are  more  or  less  aware  of  this  as  a  matter  of 
personal  experience.  In  the  language  of  psycho-analysis,  this 
concentration  preparatory  to  undertaking  a  specific  task  is  "the 
willed  introversion  of  a  creative  mind,  which,  retreating  before 
its  own  problem  and  inwardly  collecting  its  forces,  dips  at  least 
for  a  moment  into  the  source  of  life,  in  order  there  to  wrest 
a  little  more  strength  from  the  mother  for  the  completion  of  its 
work,"  and  the  result  of  this  reunion  is  "a  fountain  of  youth  and 
new  fertility."^ 

We  have  spoken  so  far  of  yoga,  but  for  the  artist  this  was 
rather  a  means  than  an  end.  Just  as  in  Mediaeval  Europe,  so  too, 
and  perhaps  even  more  conspicuously  in  India,  the  impulse  to 
iconolatry  derived  from  the  spirit  of  adoration — the  loving  and 
passionate  devotion  to  a  personal  divinity,  which  we  know  as 
bhakti.  Patanjali,  in  the  Yoga  Sutra,  mentions  the  Lord  only  as 
one  amongst  other  suitable  objects  of  contemplation,  and  without 
the  use  of  any  image  being  implied;  but  the  purpose  of  the  lover 
is  precisely  to  establish  a  personal  relation  with  the  Beloved, 
and  the  plastic  symbol  is  created  for  this  end.  A  purely  ab- 
stract philosophy  or  a  psychology  like  that  of  Early  Bud- 
dhism does  not  demand  aesthetic  expression;  it  was  the  spirit 
of  worship  which  built  upon  the  foundations  of  Buddhist  and 
Vedantic  thought  the  mansions  of  Indian  religion,  which  shelter 
all  those  whom  purely  intellectual  formulae  could  not  satisfy — 
the  children  of  this  world  who  will  not  hurry  along  the  path  of 
Release,  and  the  mystics  who  find  a  foretaste  of  freedom  in  the 
love  of  every  cloud  in  the  sky  and  flower  at  their  feet. 

1  Jung,  Psychology  of  the  Unconscious,  pp.  330,  336. 


INDIAN   SCULPTURE. 


PLATE  I 


Figure   a.     Avalokitesvara   Bodhisattva.     Buddhist  bronze.     Ceylon,  8th  Century. 
Museum  of  Fine  Arts,  Boston. 


Figure  b.   Siva  and  Parvati  on  Mt.  Kailasa.    Brahmanical  stone  sculpture,  Elura, 

8th   Century. 


HINDU  VIEW  OF  ART:   HISTORICAL  25 

This  was  indeed  a  return  to  superstition,  or  at  any  rate  to 
duality ;  but  what  in  this  world  is  not  a  dream  and  a  superstition  ? 
— certainly  not  the  atoms  of  science.  And  for  all  those  who  are 
not  yet  idealists  there  are,  as  there  must  be,  idols  provided.  The 
superstitions  of  Hinduism,  like  those  of  Christianity,  accom- 
lished  more  for  the  hearts  of  men  than  those  of  modern  material- 
ism. It  may  well  be  doubted  if  art  and  idolatry,  idolatry  and  art, 
are  not  inseparable.^ 

Let  us  observe  here  that  the  purpose  of  the  imager  was  neither 
self-expression  nor  the  realisation  of  beauty.  He  did  not  choose 
his  own  problems,  but  like  the  Gothic  sculptor,  obeyed  a  hieratic 
canon.^  He  did  not  regard  his  own  or  his  fellows'  work  from  the 
standpoint  of  connoisseurship  or  aestheticism — not,  that  is  to  say, 
from  the  standpoint  of  the  philosopher,  or  aesthete,  but  from  that 
of  a  pious  artisan.  To  him  the  theme  was  all  in  all,  and  if  there  is 
beauty  in  his  work,  this  did  not  arise  from  aesthetic  intention,^ 
but  from  a  state  of  mind  which  found  unconscious  expression.  In 
every  epoch  of  great  and  creative  art  we  observe  an  identical  phe- 
nomenon— the  artist  is  preoccupied  with  his  theme.  It  is  only  in 
looking  backward,  and  as  philosophers  rather  than  artists — or  if 
we  are  also  artists,  a  rare  combination,  then  with  the  philosophic 
and  not  the  aesthetic  side  of  our  minds — that  we  perceive  that 
the  quality  of  beauty  in  a  work  of  art  is  really  quite  independent 
of  its  theme.  Then  we  are  apt  to  forget  that  beauty  has  never 
been  reached  except  through  the  necessity  that  was  felt  to  deal 
with  the  particular  subject.  We  sit  down  to  paint  a  beautiful 
picture,  or  stand  up  to  dance,  and  having  nothing  in  us  that  we 
feel  must  be  said  and  said  clearly  at  all  costs,  we  are  surprised 
that  the  result  is  insipid  and  lacks  conviction;  the  subject  may  be 

1  "  The  lineaments  of  images,"  says  Sukracharya,  "are  determined  by 
the  relation  which  subsists  between  the  adorer  and  the  Adored."  Cf.  the 
Saiva  invocation  "Thou  that  dost  take  the  forms  imagined  by  thy  wor- 
shippers." 

2  We  cannot  assert  this  too  strongly  of  orthodox  or  classic  (sdstriya) 
Hindu  art.  Rajput  painting  is  more  romantic,  but  even  there  the  theme 
is  pre-determined  in  literature,  and  the  pictures,  though  they  are  not 
illustrations  in  the  representative  sense  of  the  word,  are  pictures  for 
verses  just  as  much  as  the  Ajanta  paintings  or  the  reliefs  of  Borobodur. 

3  "  Even  the  misshapen  image  of  a  god,"  says  Sukracharya,  "  is  to  be 
preferred  to  the  image  of  a  man,  however  charming " :  in  full  accord 
with  our  modern  view,  that  prefers  conviction  to  prettiness. 


26  HINDU  VIEW  OF  ART:   HISTORICAL 

lovely,  the  dancer  may  be  ravishing,  but  the  picture  and  the  dance 
are  not  rasavant.  The  theory  of  beauty  is  a  matter  for  philosoph- 
ers, and  artists  strive  to  demonstrate  it  at  their  own  risk. 

The  Indian  imager  was  concerned  with  his  own  problem.  It  is  in- 
teresting to  see  the  kind  of  man  he  was  expected  to  be.  According 
to  one  of  the  Silpa  Sastras  "The  Silpan  (artificer)  should  under- 
stand the  Atharva  Veda,  the  thirty-two  Silpa  Sastras,  and  the 
Vedic  mantras  by  which  the  deities  are  invoked.  He  should  be 
one  who  wears  a  sacred  thread,  a  necklace  of  holy  beads,  and  a 
ring  of  kusa  grass  on  his  finger ;  delighting  in  the  worship  of  God, 
faithful  to  his  wife,  avoiding  strange  women,  piously  acquiring  a 
knowledge  of  various  sciences,  such  a  one  is  indeed  a  crafts- 
man."^ Elsewhere  it  is  said  "the  painter  must  be  a  good  man,  no 
sluggard,  not  given  to  anger;  holy,  learned,  self-controlled,  devout 
and  charitable,  such  should  be  his  character."*  It  is  added  that 
he  should  work  in  solitude,  or  when  another  artist  is  present, 
never  before  a  layman. 

In  this  connection  it  is  very  important  to  realize  that  the  artisan 
or  artist  possessed  an  assured  status  in  the  form  of  a  life  contract, 
or  rather  an  hereditary  office.  He  was  trained  from  childhood  as 
his  father's  disciple,  and  followed  his  father's  calling  as  a  matter 
of  course.  He  was  member  of  a  guild,  and  the  guilds  Vv^ere 
recognized,  and  protected  by  the  king.  The  artificer  was  also 
protected  from  competition  and  undercutting;  it  is  said:  "That 
any  other  than  a  Silpan  should  build  temples,  towns,  seaports, 
tanks  or  wells,  is  comparable  to  the  sin  of  murder."^  This  was 
guild  socialism  in  a  non-competitive  society.* 

The  earliest  impulses  of  Indian  art  appears  to  have  been  more 
or  less  practical  and  secular,  and  it  is  perhaps  to  this  fact  that  we 
may  partly  trace  the  distrust  of  art  exhibited  by  the  early  hedo- 

*  From  a  Tamil  version  of  a  ^ilpa  Sastra,  quoted  by  Keams,  Indian 
Antiquary,  vol.  v.,  1876. 

*  Griinwedel,  Mythologie  des  Buddhismus,  p.  192.  Cf.  Cezanne,  "  I 
have  never  permitted  anyone  to  watch  me  while  I  work.  I  refuse  to 
do  anything  before  anyone"  (quoted  W.  H.  Wright.  Modern  Painting, 
p.  152). 

3  Keams,  loc.  cit. 

*  The  Sociology  is  discussed  more  fully  in  Sir  George  Birdwood's 
Industrial  Arts  of  India,  and  Sva,  and  my  Mediaeval  Sinhalese  Art  and 
The  Indian  Craftsman. 


INDIAN  SCULPTURE. 


PLATE  II 


Figure  a.     Deer,  Mamallapuram,  8lh  Century'. 


Figure  b.     Elephants,  Mamallapuram,  Nth  LiiUiir}-. 


HINDU  VIEW  OF  ART:    HISTORICAL  27 

nists.  On  the  other  hand,  the  dominant  motifs  governing  its 
evolution  from  the  third  century  B.C.  onwards,  and  up  to  the 
close  of  the  eighteenth  century,  are  devotion  (bhakti)  and 
reunion  (yoga).  Neither  of  these  is  peculiar  to  India,  but  they 
exhibit  there  a  peculiar  character  which  leaves  its  mark  on  every- 
thing Hindu  or  Buddhist.  Let  us  now  follow  these  traces  in  a 
very  summary  reference  to  actual  documents. 

I  have  discussed  in  another  chapter  the  beginnings  of  Buddhist 
art.^  It  is  in  the  southern  primitives  at  AmaravatI  and  Anura- 
dhapura  rather  than  in  the  semi-Roman  figures  of  the  North-west 
that  we  can  best  observe  the  development  of  an  art  that  is 
distinctively  Indian.  This  is  the  main  stream;  and  it  is  these 
types  from  which  the  suave  and  gracious  forms  of  Gupta  sculp- 
ture derive,  and  these  in  turn  became  the  models  of  all  Buddhist 
art  in  China.  In  India  proper,  they  grow  more  and  more 
mouvemente,  more  dramatic  and  vigorous,  in  the  classic  art  of 
Elura  and  Elephanta,  Mamallapuram  and  Ceylon,  and  form  the 
basis  of  the  immense  developments  of  colonial  Buddhist  and 
Hindu  art  in  Java  and  Cambodia.  Gupta  and  classic  painting 
£re  preserved  at  Ajanta. 

The  tender  humanism  and  the  profound  nature  sympathies 
which  are  so  conspicuous  in  the  painting  of  Ajanta  and  the 
sculpture  of  Mamallapuram  are  recognizable  equally  in  the  work 
of  poets  like  Asvaghosha  and  Arya  §ura  and  dramatists  like 
Kalidasa.  Asvaghosha  says  of  Prince  Siddhartha  that  one  day  as 
he  was  riding  in  the  country  "he  saw  a  piece  of  land  being 
ploughed,  with  the  path  of  the  plough  broken  like  waves  of  the 
water.  . .  .And  regarding  the  men  as  they  ploughed,  their  faces 
soiled  by  the  dust,  scorched  by  the  sun,  and  chafed  by  the  wind, 
and  their  cattle  bewildered  by  the  burden  of  drawing,  the  All-noble 
One  felt  the  uttermost  compassion;  and  alighting  from  the  back 
of  his  horse,  he  passed  slowly  over  the  earth,  overcome  with 
sorrow — pondering  the  birth  and  destructioh  proceeding  in  the 
world,  he  grieved."  Nor  can  anything  be  more  poignant  than 
Santi  Deva's  expression  of  his  sense  of  the  eternal  movement 
and  unsubstantiality  of  life — "Who  is  a  kinsman,  and  who  a 

^  The  beginnings  of  Hindu  art  also  go  back  to  the  second  or  third 
century  B.  C,  but  apart  from  a  few  coins.  little  or  nothing  has  been  pre- 
served of  earlier  date  than  the  third  or  fourth  century  A.  D. 


a8  HINDU  VIEW  OF  ART :    HISTORICAL 

friend,  and  unto  whom?"  The  Hterature  of  love  is  no  less 
remarkable.  We  recognize  here,  just  as  in  the  painting  and 
sculpture,  what  is  eternal  in  all  art,  and  universal — impassioned 
vision  based  on  understanding,  correlated  with  cloudless  thought 
and  devoid  of  sentimentality.  There  is  every  reason  to  believe  too 
that  this  was  the  time  of  highest  attainment  in  music.  Lastly, 
this  was  a  time  of  progress  in  the  field  of  pure  science,  especially 
mathematics  and  astronomy.  From  the  fourth  to  the  end  of 
the  eighth  century  we  must  regard  as  the  golden  age  of  Indian 
civilization.  This  was  the  period  of  Wei  and  T'ang  in  China; 
Eastern  Asia  represented  then  to  all  intents  and  purposes  the 
civilization  of  the  world. 

After  the  ninth  or  tenth  century  there  is  a  general,  though  cer- 
tainly not  universal,  decline  in  orthodox  art,  of  which  the 
formulae  were  rapidly  stereotyped  in  their  main  outlines,  and 
rendered  florid  in  their  detail.  Classical  Sanskrit  literature  also 
came  to  an  end  in  a  forest  of  elaborate  embroidery.  But  great 
forces  (sometimes  grouped  under  the  designation  of  the  Pau- 
ranic  Renaissance)  had  long  been  at  work  preparing  the  way 
for  the  emergence  of  the  old  cults  of  Siva  and  Vishnu  in  forms 
which  gave  renewed  inspiration  to  art — sculpture  and  poetry  in 
the  South,  and  poetry  and  painting  in  the  North.  In  these 
devotional  faiths  was  completed  the  cycle  of  Indian  spiritual 
evolution  from  pure  philosophy  to  pure  mysticism,  from  knowl- 
edge to  love.  The  inner  and  outer  life  were  finally  unified — a 
development  entirely  analogous  to  that  of  Zen  Buddhism  in  the 
Far  East.  The  transparency  of  life  so  clearly  expressed  in  the 
paintings  of  Ajanta  is  indicated  with  a  renewed  emphasis — above 
all  in  the  Radha-Krishna  cults — and  in  all  the  Northern  Vaish- 
nava  poetry  and  painting — the  tradition  in  which  Rabindranath 
Tagore  is  the  latest  singer,  and  of  which  the  theory  is  plainly  set 
forth  in  his  song: 

Not  my  way  of  salvation,  to  surrender  the  world ! 

Rather  for  me  the  taste  of  Infinite  Freedom 

While  yet  I  am  bound  by  a  thousand  bonds  to  the  wheel  .  .  . 

In  each  glory  of  sound  and  sight  and  scent 

I  shall  find  Thy  infinite  joy  abiding: 

My  passion  shall  bum  as  the  flame  of  salvation, 

The  flower  of  my  love  shall  become  the  ripe  fruit  of  devotion. 


INDIAN  PAINTING. 


PLATE  III 


Krishna   disguised   as   a   milkmaid.     Rajput   Painting,    17th   Centurj-.      Museum   of 

Fine  Arts,   Boston. 


HINDU  VIEW  OF  ART:   HISTORICAL  29 

But  such  a  theory  is  now  rather  a  survival  of  all  that  was  uni- 
versal in  Indian  religion,  rather  than  a  new  point  of  departure. 
The  current  Esthetic  of  'educated'  India — a  product  of  a  wide 
miscomprehension  of  Western  culture  and  a  general  surrender 
to  Noncomformist  ethics — is  again  realistic  and  hedonistic,  and 
perhaps  for  the  first  time  illustrative,  personal,  and  sentimental. 


HINDU  VIEW  OF  ART: 

II.      THEORY  OF  BEAUTY 

We  have  so  far  discussed  the  Hindu  view  of  art  mainly  from 
the  internal  evidence  of  the  art  itself.  There  remains,  what  is 
more  exactly  pertinent  to  the  title  of  these  chapters,  to  discuss 
the  Hindu  Esthetic  as  it  is  expressly  formulated  and  elaborated 
in  the  abundant  Sanskrit  and  Hindi  literature  on  Poetics  and  the 
Drama.  We  shall  find  that  general  conclusions  are  reached  which 
are  applicable,  not  only  to  literature,  but  to  all  arts  alike. 

The  discussion  begins  with  the  Defence  of  Poesy.  This  is 
summed  up  in  the  statement  that  it  may  contribute  to  the  achieve- 
ment of  all  or  any  of  the  Four  Ends  of  Life.  A  single  word 
rightly  employed  and  understood  is  compared  to  the  'cow  of 
plenty,'  yielding  every  treasure;  and  the  same  poem  that  is  of 
material  advantage  to  one,  may  be  of  spiritual  advantage  to  an- 
other or  upon  another  occasion. 

The  question  follows :  What  is  the  essential  element  in  poetry  ? 
According  to  some  authors  this  consists  in  style  or  figures,  or  in 
suggestion  {vyanjand,  to  which  we  shall  recur  in  discussing  the 
varieties  of  poetry).  But  the  greater  writers  refute  these  views 
and  are  agreed  that  the  one  essential  element  in  poetry^  is  what 
they  term  Rasa,  or  Flavour.  With  this  term,  which  is  the  equiva- 
lent of  Beauty  or  Esthetic  Emotion'  in  the  strict  sense  of  the 
philosopher,  must  be  considered  the  derivative  adjective  rasavant 

1  Especially  Visvanatha  in  the  Sahitya  Darpana,  ca.  1450  A.  D.  (trans. 
Bibliotheca  Indica,  Ballantyne).  Also  in  the  Agtii  Purdna,  and  the 
Vyakti  Viveka. 

2  As  remarked  by  W.  Rothenstein,  "  What  is  written  upon  a  single 
work  should  enable  people  to  apply  clear  principles  to  all  works  they  may 
meet  with"  (Two  Drawings  by  Hok'sai,  1910).  Also  Benedetto  Croce, 
"  laws  relating  to  special  branches  are  not  conceivable "  {Aesthetic, 
p.  350). 

3  Such  words  as  saundarya  and  rupa  should  be  translated  as  loveliness 
or  charm. 

No  one  suggests  that  metre  makes  poetry.  This  error  was  hardly  to 
be  expected  in  a  country  where  even  the  dryest  treatises  on  law  and 
logic  are  composed  in  metre.  Metrical  poetry  is  padya  kavya,  prose 
poetry  is  gadya  kdvya,  but  it  is  rasa  that  makes  them  poetry. 


HINDU  VIEW  OF  ART:     THEORY  OF  BEAUTY  31 

'having  rasa/  applied  to  a  work  of  art,  and  the  derivative  sub- 
stantive rasika,  one  who  enjoys  rasa,  a  connoisseur  or  lover,  and 
finally  rasdsvadana,  the  tasting  of  rasa,  i.  e.,  aesthetic  contempla- 
tion. 

A  whole  literature  is  devoted  to  the  discussion  of  rasa  and  the 
conditions  of  its  experience.  The  theory,  as  we  have  remarked, 
is  worked  out  in  relation  to  poetry  and  drama,  especially  the 
classic  drama  of  Kalidasa  and  others.  When  we  consider  that 
these  plays  are  essentially  secular  in  subject  and  sensuous  in  ex- 
pression, the  position  arrived  at  regarding  its  significance  will 
seem  all  the  more  remarkable. 

Aesthetic  emotion — rasa — is  said  to  result  in  the  spectator — 

rasika — though  it  is  not  effectively  caused,  through  the  operation 

of    determinants    (vibhava),    consequents    {anubhava),    moods 

(bhdva)  and  involtmtary  emotions  {sattvabhava) .^    Thus: 

Determinants:  the  aesthetic  problem,  plot,  theme,  etc.,  viz:  the 

hero  and  other  characters  and  the  circumstances  of  time  and 

place.     In  the  terminology  of  Croce  these  are  the  "physical 

stimulants  to  aesthetic  reproduction." 

Consequents  :    deliberate  manifestations  of  feeling,  as  gestures, 

etc. 
Moods:     transient  moods   (thirty-three  in  number)   induced  in 
the  characters  by  pleasure  and  pain,  e.  g.,  joy,  agitation,  im- 
patience, etc.     Also  the  permanent  (nine),  viz:  the  Erotic, 
Heroic,  Odious,  Furious,  Terrible,  Pathetic,  Wondrous  and 
Peaceful. 
Involuntary  Emotions:   emotional   states   originating  in  the 
inner  nature;  involuntary  expressions  of  emotion  such  as 
horripilation,  trembling,  etc.  (eight  in  all). 
In  order  that  a  work  may  be  able  to  evoke  rasa  one^  of  the 
permanent  moods  must  form  a  master-motif  to  which  all  other 
expressions  of  emotion  are  subordinate.^     That  is  to  say,  the 
first  essential  of  a  rasavant  work  is  unity — 

As  a  king  to  his  subjects,  as  a  guru  to  his  disciples. 
Even  so  the  master-motif  is  lord  of  all  other  motifs.* 

1  Dhanamjaya,  Dasarupa,  iv.  1. 
-  Or  any  two  rasas  combined. 

3  Dasarupa,  iv,  46. 

4  Bharata,  Ndtya  Sastra,  7,  8. 


32 


HINDU  VIEW  OF  ART:   THEORY  OF  BEAUTY 


If,  on  the  contrary,  a  transient  emotion  is  made  the  motif  of 
the  whole  work,  this  "extended  development  of  a  transient  emo- 
tion tends  to  the  absence  of  rasa,"^  or  as  we  should  now  say,  the 
work  becomes  sentimental.  Pretty  art  which  emphasizes  passing 
feelings  and  personal  emotion  is  neither  beautiful  nor  true:  it 
tells  us  of  meeting  again  in  heaven,  it  confuses  time  and  eternity, 
loveliness  and  beauty,  partiality  and  love. 

Let  us  remark  in  passing  that  while  the  nine  permanent  moods 
correspond  to  an  identical  classification  of  rasas  or  flavours  as 
nine  in  number,  the  rasa  of  which  we  speak  here  is  an  absolute, 
and  distinct  from  any  one  of  these.  The  'nine  rasas  'are  no  more 
than  the  various  colourings  of  one  experience,  and  are  arbitrary 
terms  of  rhetoric  used  only  for  convenience  in  classification :  just 
as  we  speak  of  poetry  categorically  as  lyric,  epic,  dramatic,  etc., 
without  implying  that  poetry  is  anything  but  poetry.  Rasa  is 
tasted — beauty  is  felt — only  by  empathy,  'einfiihlung'  (sddhar- 
ana)  ;  that  is  to  say  by  entering  into,  feeling,  the  permanent  motif ; 
but  it  is  not  the  same  as  the  permanent  motif  itself,  for,  from  this 
point  of  view,  it  matters  not  with  which  of  the  permanent  motifs 
we  have  to  do. 

It  is  just  here  that  we  see  how  far  Hindu  Aesthetic  had  now 
departed  from  its  once  practical  and  hedonistic  character:  the 
Dasarupa  declares  plainly  that  Beauty  is  absolutely  independent 
of  the  sympathetic — "Delightful  or  disgusting,  exalted  or  lowly, 
cruel  or  kindly,  obscure  or  refined,  (actual)  or  imaginary,  there 
is  no  subject  that  cannot  evoke  rasa  in  man." 

Of  course,  a  work  of  art  may  and  often  does  afford  us  at  the 
same  time  pleasure  in  a  sensuous  or  moral  way,  but  this  sort  of 
pleasure  is  derived  directly  from  its  material  qualities,  such  as 
tone  or  texture,  assonance,  etc.,  or  the  ethical  peculiarity  of  its 
theme,  and  not  from  its  aesthetic  qualities :  the  aesthetic  experience 
is  independent  of  this,  and  may  even,  as  Dhanamjaya  says,  be 
derived  in  spite  of  sensuous  or  moral  displeasure. 

Incidentally  we  may  observe  that  the  fear  of  art  which  prevails 

1  Dasarupa,  iv.  45. 

Blake,  too,  says  that  "Knowledge  of  Ideal  Beauty  is  not  to  be  acquired. 
It  is  bom  with  us."  And  as  P'u  Sung-ling  remarks:  "Each  interprets  in 
his  own  way  the  music  of  heaven;  and  whether  it  be  discord  or  not, 
depends  upon  antecedent  causes"  (Giles,  Strange  Stories  from  a  Chinese 
Studio,  p.  xvii). 


HINDU  VIEW  OF  ART:   THEORY  OF  BEAUTY  33 

amongst  Puritans  arises  partly  from  the  failure  to  recognize  that 
aesthetic  experience  does  not  depend  on  pleasure  or  pain  at  all: 
and  when  this  is  not  the  immediate  difficulty,  then  from  the  dis- 
trust of  any  experience  which  is  "beyond  good  and  evil"  and  so 
devoid  of  a  definitely  moral  purpose. 

The  tasting  of  rasa — the  vision  of  beauty — is  enjoyed,  says 
Visvanatha,  "only  by  those  who  are  competent  thereto" :  and  he 
quotes  Dharmadatta  to  the  effect  that  "those  devoid  of  imagina- 
tion, in  the  theatre,  are  but  as  the  wood-work,  the  walls,  and  the 
stones."  It  is  a  matter  of  common  experience  that  it  is  possible 
for  a  man  to  devote  a  whole  life  time  to  the  study  of  art,  without 
having  once  experienced  aesthetic  emotion:  "historical  research" 
as  Croce  expresses  it,  "directed  to  illumine  a  work  of  art  by  plac- 
ing us  in  a  position  to  judge  it,  does  not  alone  suffice  to  bring  it 
to  birth  in  our  spirit,"  for  "pictures,  poetry,  and  every  work  of  art 
produce  no  effect  save  on  souls  prepared  to  receive  them."  Vis- 
vanatha comments  very  pertinently  on  this  fact  when  he  says  that 
"even  some  of  the  most  eager  students  of  poetry  are  seen  not  to 
have  a  right  perception  of  rasa."  The  capacity  and  genius  nec- 
essary for  appreciation  are  partly  native  ('ancient')  and  partly 
cultivated  ('contemporary')  :  but  cultivation  alone  is  useless,  and 
if  the  poet  is  born,  so  too  is  the  rasika,  and  criticism  is  akin  to 
genius. 

Indian  theory  is  very  clear  that  instruction  is  not  the  purpose 
of  art.    On  this  point  Dhanamjaya  is  sufficiently  sarcastic : 

"As  for  any  simple  man  of  little  intelligence,"  he  writes,  "who 
says  that  from  dramas,  which  distil  joy,  the  gain  is  knowledge 
only,  as  in  the  case  of  history  and  the  like  (mere  statement,  nar- 
rative, or  illustration) — homage  to  him,  for  he  has  averted  his 
face  from  what  is  delightful."^ 

The  spectator's  appreciation  of  beauty  depends  on  the  effort 
of  his  own  imagination,  "just  as  in  the  case  of  children  playing 
with  clay  elephants."^  Thus,  technical  elaboration  (realism)  in 
art  is  not  by  itself  the  cause  of  rasa :  as  remarked  by  Rabindra- 

^  Dasarupa,  1,  6. 

^Dasarupa,  IV.  50,  Cf.  Goethe,  "He  who  would  work  for  the 
stage  .  .  .  should  leave  Nature  in  her  proper  place  and  take  careful 
heed  not  to  have  recourse  to  anything  but  what  may  be  performed  by 
children  with  puppets  upon  boards  and  laths,  together  with  sheets  of 
cardboard  and  linen" — quoted  in  'The  Mask,'  Vol.  v.  p.  3. 


34 


HINDU  VIEW  OF  ART;   THEORY  OF  BEAUTY 


nath  Tagore  "in  our  country,  those  of  the  audience  who  are 
appreciative,  are  content  to  perfect  the  song  in  their  own  mind 
by  the  force  of  their  own  feehng."^  This  is  not  very  different 
from  what  is  said  by  Sukracharya  with  reference  to  images :  "the 
defects  of  images  are  constantly  destroyed  by  the  power  of  the 
virtue  of  the  worshipper  who  has  his  heart  always  set  on  God." 
If  this  attitude  seems  to  us  dangerously  uncritical,  that  is  to  say 
dangerous  to  art,  or  rather  to  accomplishment,  let  us  remember 
that  it  prevailed  everywhere  in  all  periods  of  great  creative  activ- 
ity :  and  that  the  decline  of  art  has  always  followed  the  decline  of 
love  and  faith. 

Tolerance  of  an  imperfect  work  of  art  may  arise  in  two  ways : 
the  one  uncritical,  powerfully  swayed  by  the  sympathetic,  and  too 
easily  satisfied  with  a  very  inadequate  correspondence  between 
content  and  form,  the  other  creative,  very  little  swayed  by  con- 
siderations of  charm,  and  able  by  force  of  true  imagination  to 
complete  the  correspondence  of  content  and  form  which  is  not 
achieved  or  not  preserved  in  the  original.  Uncritical  tolerance  is 
content  with  prettiness  or  edification,  and  recoils  from  beauty 
that  is  'difficult':  creative  tolerance  is  indifferent  to  prettiness 
or  edification,  and  is  able  from  a  mere  suggestion,  such  as  an 
awkward  'primitive'  or  a  broken  fragment,  to  create  or  recreate 
a  perfect  experience. 

"Also,  "the  permanent  motif  becomes  rasa  through  the  rasika's 
own  capacity  for  being  delighted — not  from  the  character  of  the 
hero  to  be  imitated,  nor  because  the  work  aims  at  the  production 
of  aesthetic  emotion."^  How  many  works  which  have  "aimed  at 
the  production  of  aesthetic  emotion,"  that  is  to  say,  which  were 
intended  to  be  beautiful,  have  failed  of  their  purpose ! 

The  degrees  of  excellence  in  poetry  are  discusesd  in  the  Kavya 
Prakdsa  and  the  Sdhitya  Darpana.  The  best  is  where  there  is 
a  deeper  significance  than  that  of  the  literal  sense.  In  minor 
poetry  the  sense  overpowers  the  suggestion.  In  inferior  poetn,'-, 
significantly  described  as  'variegated'  or  'romantic'  (chitra),  the 
only  artistic  quality  consists  in  the  ornamentation  of  the  literal 
sense,  which  conveys  no  suggestion  beyond  its  face  meaning. 
Thus  narrative  and  descriptive  verse  take  a  low  place,  just  as 
portraiture  does  in  plastic  art :  and,  indeed,  the  Sdhitya  Darpana 

^  Jthan-smriti,  pp.  134-S. 
2  Dasarupa,  iv.,  47. 


HINDU  VIEW  OF  ART :   THEORY  OF  BEAUTY  35 

excludes  the  last  kind  of  poetry  altogether.  It  Is  to  be  observed 
that  the  kind  of  suggestion  meant  is  something  more  than  implica- 
tion or  double  entendre:  in  the  first  case  we  have  to  do  with  mere 
abbreviation,  comparable  with  the  use  of  the  words  et  cetera,  in 
the  second  we  have  a  mere  play  on  words.  What  is  understood 
to  be  suggested  is  one  of  the  nine  rasas. 

It  is  worth  noting  that  we  have  here  a  departure  from,  and  I 
think,  an  improvement  on  Croce's  definition  'expression  is  art.' 
A  mere  statement,  however,  completely  expressive,  such  as: 
"The  man  walks/'  or  (a+b)^  =  a^+2ab+b^  is  not  art.  Poetry 
is  indeed  a  kind  of  sentence^:  but  what  kind  of  sentence?"  A 
sentence  ensouled  by  rasa,^  i.  e.,  in  which  one  of  the  nine  rasas 
is  implied  or  suggested:  and  the  savouring  of  this  flavour,  ras- 
asvadana,  through  empathy,  by  those  possessing  the  necessary  sen- 
sibility is  the  condition  of  beauty. 

What  then  are  rasa  and  rasdsvddana,  beauty  and  aesthetic  emo- 
tion ?  The  nature  of  this  experience  is  discussed  by  Visvanatha  in 
the  Sdhitya  Darpana^:  "It  is  pure,  indivisible,  self-manifested, 
compounded  equally  of  joy  and  consciousness,  free  of  admixture 
with  any  other  perception,  the  very  twin  brother  of  mystic  experi- 
ence {Brahmdsvddana  sahodarah),  and  the  very  life  of  it  is 
supersensuous  (lokottara)  wonder."*  Further,  "It  is  enjoyed 
by  those  who  are  competent  thereto,  in  identity,'  just  as  the  form 
of  God  is  itself  the  joy  with  which  it  is  recognized." 

For  that  very  reason  it  cannot  be  an  object  of  knowledge,  its 
perception  being  indivisible  from  its  very  existence.  Apart  from 
perception  it  does  not  exist.  It  is  not  on  that  account  to  be 
regarded  as  eternal  in  time  or  as  interrupted:  it  is  timeless.  It 
is  again,  supersensuous,  hyperphysical  (alaukika),  and  the  only 
proof  of  its  reality  is  to  be  found  in  experience" 

Religion  and  art  are  thus  names  for  one  and  the  same  experi- 

*  The  likeness  of  aesthetic  to  linguistic  is  indicated  in  Dasarupa,  iv.  46. 

2  Vdkyam    rasdtmakam  vacakam — Sahitya  Darpana,  3. 

3vv.  33.  51,  53.  54.  "   ' 

■*  Wonder  is  defined  as  a  kind  of  expanding  of  the  mind  in  'admiration.' 

'  The  expression  rasasvddana  is  fictitious,  because  rasasvadana  Is  rasa, 
and  vice  versa.  In  aesthetic  contemplation,  as  In  perfect  worship,  there 
is  Identity  of  subject  and  object,  cause  and  eflfect. 

'The  rasika  Is  therefore  unable  to  convince  the  Philistine  by  argu- 
ment :  he  can  but  say,  Taste  and  see  that  It  Is  good — for  /  know  in  what 
I  have  believed. 


36  HINDU  VIEW  OF  ART:   THEORY  OF  BEAUTY 

ence — an  intuition  of  reality  and  of  identity.  This  is  not,  of 
course,  exclusively  a  Hindu  view:  it  has  been  expounded  by 
many  others,  such  as  the  Neo-platonists,  Hsieh  Ho,  Goethe,  Blake, 
Schopenhauer  and  Schiller.  Nor  is  it  refuted  by  Croce.  It  has 
been  recently  restated  as  follows : 

"In  those  moments  of  exaltation  that  art  can  give,  it  is  easy  to 
believe  that  we  have  been  possessed  by  an  emotion  that  comes 
from  the  world  of  reality.  Those  who  take  this  view  will  have 
to  say  that  there  is  in  all  things  the  stuff  out  of  which  art  is  made 
— reality.  The  peculiarity  of  the  artist  would  seem  to  be  that  he 
possesses  the  power  of  surely  and  frequently  seizing  reality 
(generally  behind  pure  form),  and  the  power  of  expressing  his 
sense  of  it,  in  pure  form  always  !"^ 

Here  pure  form  means  form  not  clogged  with  unaesthetic  mat- 
ter such  as  associations. 

It  will  be  seen  that  this  view  is  monistic:  the  doctrine  of  the 
universal  presence  of  reality  is  that  of  the  immanence  of  the  Abso- 
lute. It  is  inconsistent  with  a  view  of  the  world  as  absolute  mdya, 
or  utterly  unreal,  but  it  implies  that  through  the  false  world  of 
everyday  experience  may  be  seen  by  those  of  penetrating  vision 
(artists,  lovers  and  philosophers)  glimpses  of  the  real  substrate. 
This  world  is  the  formless  as  we  perceive  it,  the  unknowable  as 
we  know  it. 

Precisely  as  love  is  reality  experienced  by  the  lover,  and  truth 
is  reality  as  experienced  by  the  philosopher,  so  beauty  is  reality 
as  experienced  by  the  artist:  and  these  are  three  phases  of  the 
Absolute.  But  it  is  only  through  the  objective  work  of  art  that 
the  artist  is  able  to  communicate  his  experience,  and  for  this 
purpose  any  theme  proper  to  himself  will  serve,  since  the  Abso- 
lute is  manifested  equally  in  the  little  and  the  great,  animate  and 
inanimate,  good  and  evil. 

We  have  seen  that  the  world  of  Beauty,  like  the  Absolute, 
cannot  be  known  objectively.  Can  we  then  reach  this  world  by 
rejecting  objects,  by  a  deliberate  purification  of  art  from  all  asso- 
ciations ?  We  have  already  seen,  however,  that  the  mere  intention 
to  create  beauty  is  not  sufficient:  there  must  exist  an  object  of 
devotion.  Without  a  point  of  departure  there  can  be  no  flight 
and  no  attainment:  here  also  "one  does  not  attain  to  perfection 

1  CUve  Bell.  Art.  p.  54. 


w 

^m   by  mer 


HINDU  VIEW  OF  ART:   THEORY  OF  BEAUTY  37 


by  mere  renunciation.  "^  We  can  no  more  achieve  Beauty  than 
we  can  find  Release  by  turning  our  backs  on  the  world:  we 
cannot  find  our  way  by  a  mere  denial  of  things,  but  only  in 
learning  to  see  those  things  as  they  really  are,  infinite  or  beau- 
tiful. The  artist  reveals  this  beauty  wherever  the  mind  attaches 
itself:  and  the  mind  attaches  itself,  not  directly  to  the  Absolute, 
but  to  objects  of  choice. 

Thus  we  return  to  the  earth.  If  we  supposed  we  should  find 
the  object  of  search  elsewhere,  we  were  mistaken.  The  two 
worlds,  of  spirit  and  matter,  Purusha  and  Prakriti,  are  one:  and 
this  is  as  clear  to  the  artist  as  it  is  to  the  lover  or  the  philosopher. 
Those  Philistines  to  whom  it  is  not  so  apparent,  we  should  speak 
of  as  materialists  or  as  nihilists — exclusive  monists,  to  whom  the 
report  of  the  senses  is  either  all  in  all,  or  nothing  at  all.  The 
theory  of  rasa  set  forth  according  to  Visvanatha  and  other  sesthe- 
ticians,  belongs  to  totalistic  monism ;  it  marches  with  the  Vedanta. 
In  a  country  like  India,  where  thought  is  typically  consistent  with 
itself,  this  is  no  more  than  we  had  a  right  to  expect. 


^Bhagavad  GUd.  111.  14. 


THAT  BEAUTY  IS  A  STATE 

It  is  very  generally  held  that  natural  objects  such  as  human 
beings,  animals  or  landscapes,  and  artificial  objects  such  as  fac- 
tories, textiles  or  works  of  intentional  art,  can  be  classified  as 
beautiful  or  ugly.  And  yet  no  general  principle  of  classification 
has  ever  been  found:  and  that  which  seems  to  be  beautiful  to 
one  is  described  as  ugly  by  another.  In  the  words  of  Plato 
"Everyone  chooses  his  love  out  of  the  objects  of  beauty  accord- 
ing to  his  own  taste." 

To  take,  for  example,  the  human  type:  every  race,  and  to 
some  extent  every  individual,  has  an  unique  ideal.  Nor  can  we 
hope  for  a  final  agreement :  we  cannot  expect  the  European  to  pre- 
fer the  Mongolian  features,  nor  the  Mongolian  the  European.  Of 
course,  it  is  very  easy  for  each  to  maintain  the  absolute  value  of 
his  own  taste  and  to  speak  of  other  types  as  ugly;  just  as  the 
hero  of  chivalry  maintains  by  force  of  arms  that  his  own  beloved 
is  far  more  beautiful  than  any  other.  In  like  manner  the  various 
sects  maintain  the  absolute  value  of  their  own  ethics.  But  it  is 
clear  that  such  claims  are  nothing  more  than  statements  of  preju- 
dice, for  who  is  to  decide  which  racial  ideal  or  which  morality  is 
"best"  ?  It  is  a  little  too  easy  to  decide  that  our  own  is  best ;  we 
are  at  the  most  entitled  to  believe  it  the  best  for  us.  This  rela- 
tivity is  nowhere  better  suggested  than  in  the  classic  saying  attrib- 
uted to  Majnun,  when  it  was  pointed  out  to  him  that  the  world 
at  large  regarded  his  Laila  as  far  from  beautiful.  "To  see  the 
beauty  of  Laila,"  he  said,  "requires  the  eyes  of  Majnun." 

It  is  the  same  with  works  of  art.  Different  artists  are  inspired 
by  different  objects ;  what  is  attractive  and  stimulating  to  one  is 
depressing  and  unattractive  to  another,  and  the  choice  also  varies 
from  race  to  race  and  epoch  to  epoch.  As  to  the  appreciation  of 
such  works,  it  is  the  same;  for  men  in  general  admire  only  such 
works  as  by  education  or  temperament  they  are  predisposed  to 
admire.  To  enter  into  the  spirit  of  an  unfamiliar  art  demands  a 
greater  effort  than  most  are  willing  to  make.  The  classic  scholar 
starts  convinced  that  the  art  of  Greece  has  never  been  equalled 
or  surpassed,  and  never  will  be ;  there  are  many  who  think,  like 
Michelangelo,  that  because  Italian  painting  is  good,  therefore 


THAT  BEAUTY  IS  A  STATE  39 

good  painting  is  Italian.  There  are  many  who  never  yet  felt  the 
beauty  of  Egyptian  sculpture  or  Chinese  or  Indian  painting  or 
music:  that  they  have  also  the  hardihood  to  deny  their  beauty, 
however,  proves  nothing. 

It  is  also  possible  to  forget  that  certain  works  are  beautiful: 
the  eighteenth  century  had  thus  forgotten  the  beauty  of  Gothic 
sculpture  and  primitive  Italian  painting,  and  the  memory  of  their 
beauty  was  only  restored  by  a  great  effort  in  the  course  of  the 
nineteenth.  There  may  also  exist  natural  objects  or  works  of 
art  which  humanity  only  very  slowly  learns  to  regard  as  in  any 
way  beautiful;  the  western  aesthetic  appreciation  of  desert  and 
mountain  scenery,  for  example,  is  no  older  than  the  nineteenth 
century;  and  it  is  notorious  that  artists  of  the  highest  rank  are 
often  not  understood  till  long  after  their  death.  So  that  the  more 
we  consider  the  variety  of  human  election,  the  more  we  must 
admit  the  relativity  of  taste. 

And  yet  there  remain  philosophers  firmly  convinced  that  an 
absolute  Beauty  (rasa)^  exists,  just  as  others  maintain  the  con- 
ceptions of  absolute  Goodness  and  absolute  Truth.  The  lovers 
of  God  identify  these  absolutes  with  Him  (or  It)  and  maintain 
that  He  can  only  be  known  as  perfect  Beauty,  Love  and 
Truth.  It  is  also  widely  held  that  the  true  critic  (rasika)  is  able 
to  decide  which  works  of  art  are  beautiful  (rasavant)  and  which 
are  not ;  or  in  simpler  words,  to  distinguish  works  of  genuine  art 
from  those  that  have  no  claim  to  be  so  described.  At  the  same 
time  we  must  admit  the  relativity  of  taste,  and  the  fact  that  all 
gods  (devas  and  Isvaras)  are  modelled  after  the  likeness  of  men. 

It  remains,  then,  to  resolve  the  seeming  contradictions.  This 
is  only  to  be  accomplished  by  the  use  of  more  exact  terminology. 
So  far  have  I  spoken  of  'beauty'  without  defining  my  meaning, 
and  have  used  one  word  to  express  a  multiplicity  of  ideas.  But 
we  do  not  mean  the  same  thing  when  we  speak  of  a  beautiful  girl 
and  a  beautiful  poem ;  it  will  be  still  more  obvious  that  we  mean 
two  different  things,  if  we  speak  of  beautiful  weather  and  a  beauti- 
ful picture.  In  point  of  fact,  the  conception  of  beauty  and  the  ad- 
jective "beautiful"  belong  exclusively  to  aesthetic  and  should  only 
be  used  in  aesthetic  judgment.  We  seldom  make  any  such  judg- 
ments when  we  speak  of  natural  objects  as  beautiful;  we  gen- 

^  Rasa,  rasavant  and  rasika  are  the  principal  terms  of  Indian  aesthetics, 
explained  in  the  preceding  chapter. 


40 


THAT  BEAUTY  IS  A  STATE 


erally  mean  that  such  objects  as  we  call  beautiful  are  congenial 
to  us,  practically  or  ethically.  Too  often  we  pretend  to  judge  a 
work  of  art  in  the  same  way,  calling  it  beautiful  if  it  represents 
some  form  or  activity  of  which  we  heartily  approve,  or  if  it 
attracts  us  by  the  tenderness  or  gaiety  of  its  colour,  the  sweet- 
ness of  its  sounds  or  the  charm  of  its  movement.  But  when  we 
thus  pass  judgment  on  the  dance  in  accordance  with  our  sympa- 
thetic attitude  towards  the  dancer's  charm  or  skill,  or  the  mean- 
ing of  the  dance,  we  ought  not  to  use  the  language  of  pure 
aesthetic.  Only  when  we  judge  a  work  of  art  aesthetically  may 
we  speak  of  the  presence  or  absence  of  beauty,  we  may  call  the 
work  rasavant  or  otherwise;  but  when  we  judge  it  from  the 
standpoint  of  activity,  practical  or  ethical,  we  ought  to  use  a 
corresponding  terminology,  calling  the  picture,  song  or  actor 
"lovely,"  that  is  to  say  lovable,  or  otherwise,  the  action  "noble," 
the  colour  "brilliant,"  the  gesture  "graceful,"  or  otherwise,  and 
so  forth.  And  it  will  be  seen  that  in  doing  this  we  are  not  really 
judging  the  work  of  art  as  such,  but  only  the  material  and  the 
separate  parts  of  which  it  is  made,  the  activities  they  represent, 
or  the  feelings  they  express. 

Of  course^  when  we  come  to  choose  such  works  of  art  to  live 
with,  there  is  no  reason  why  we  should  not  allow  the  sympathetic 
and  ethical  considerations  to  influence  our  judgment.  Why  should 
the  ascetic  invite  annoyance  by  hanging  in  his  cell  some  repre- 
sentation of  the  nude,  or  the  general  select  a  lullaby  to  be  per- 
formed upon  the  eve  of  battle?  When  every  ascetic  and  every 
soldier  has  become  an  artist  there  will  be  no  more  need  for  works 
of  art :  in  the  meanwhile  ethical  selection  of  some  kind  is  allow- 
able and  necessary.  But  in  this  selection  we  must  clearly  under- 
stand what  we  are  doing,  if  we  would  avoid  an  infinity  of  error, 
culminating  in  that  type  of  sentimentality  which  regards  the 
useful,  the  stimulating  and  the  moral  elements  in  works  of  art  as 
the  essential.  We  ought  not  to  forget  that  he  who  plays  the 
villain  of  the  piece  may  be  a  greater  artist  than  he  who  plays  the 
hero.  For  beauty — in  the  profound  words  of  Millet — does  not 
arise  from  the  subject  of  a  work  of  art,  but  from  the  necessity 
that  has  been  felt  of  representing  that  subject. 

We  should  only  speak  of  a  work  of  art  as  good  or  bad  with 
reference  to  its  aesthetic  quality ;  only  the  subject  and  the  material 
of  the  work  are  entangled  in  relativity.    In  other  words,  to  say 


INDIAN  PAINTING. 


PLATE  IV 


Ajanta  fresco:  right,  Bodhisattva;  left,  coronation.     Buddhist  Painting  of  6th 

or  7th  Century. 


THAT  BEAUTY  IS  A  STATE  4I 

that  a  work  of  art  is  more  or  less  beautiful,  or  rasavant,  is  to 
define  the  extent  to  which  it  is  a  work  of  art,  rather  than  a  mere 
illustration.  However  important  the  element  of  sympathetic 
magic  in  such  a  work  may  be,  however  important  its  practical 
applications,  it  is  not  in  these  that  its  beauty  consists. 

What,  then,  is  Beauty,  what  is  rasa,  what  is  it  that  entitles  us 
to  speak  of  divers  works  as  beautiful  or  rasavant f  What  is  this 
sole  quality  which  the  most  dissimilar  works  of  art  possess  in 
common?  Let  us  recall  the  history  of  a  work  of  art.  There  is 
(1)  an  aesthetic  intuition  on  the  part  of  the  original  artist, — the 
poet  or  creator;  then  (2)  the  internal  expression  of  this  intuition, 
— the  true  creation  or  vision  of  beauty,  (3)  the  indication  of  this 
by  external  signs  (language)  for  the  purpose  of  communication, 
— the  technical  activity ;  and  finally,  (4)  the  resulting  stimulation 
of  the  critic  or  rasika  to  reproduction  of  the  original  intuition,  or 
of  some  approximation  to  it. 

The  source  of  the  original  intuition  may,  as  we  have  seen,  be 
any  aspect  of  life  whatsoever.  To  one  creator  the  scales  of  a  fish 
suggest  a  rhythmical  design,  another  is  moved  by  certain  land- 
scapes, a  third  elects  to  speak  of  hovels,  a  fourth  to  sing  of 
palaces,  a  fifth  may  express  the  idea  that  all  things  are  enlinked, 
enlaced  and  enamoured  in  terms  of  the  General  Dance,  or  he  may 
express  the  same  idea  equally  vividly  by  saying  that  "not  a  spar- 
row falls  to  the  ground  without  our  Father's  knowledge."  Every 
artist  discovers  beauty,  and  every  critic  finds  it  again  when  he 
tastes  of  the  same  experience  through  the  medium  of  the  external 
signs.  But  where  is  this  beauty?  We  have  seen  that  it  cannot 
be  said  to  exist  in  certain  things  and  not  in  others.  It  may  then 
be  claimed  that  beauty  exists  everywhere ;  and  this  I  do  not  deny, 
though  I  prefer  the  clearer  statement  that  it  may  be  discovered 
anywhere.  If  it  could  be  said  to  exist  everywhere  in  a  material 
and  intrinsic  sense,  we  could  pursue  it  with  our  cameras  and 
scales,  after  the  fashion  of  the  experimental  psychologists:  but 
if  we  did  so,  we  should  only  achieve  a  certain  acquaintance  with 
average  taste — we  should  not  discover  a  means  of  distinguishing 
forms  that  are  beautiful  from  forms  that  are  ugly.  Beauty  can 
never  thus  be  measured,  for  it  does  not  exist  apart  from  the  artist 
himself,  and  the  rasika  who  enters  into  his  experience.^ 

1  Cf.  "The  secret  of  art  lies  in  the  artist  himself"— Kuo  Jo  Hsu,  (12th 
century),  quoted  in  The  Kokka,  No.  244. 


42  THAT  BEAUTY  IS  A  STATE 

All  architecture  is  what  you  do  to  it  when  you  look  upon  it. 

Did  you  think  it  was  in  the  white  or  grey  stone?  or  the  lines  of  the 

arches  and  cornices? 
All  music  is  what  awakes  in  you  when  you  are  reminded  of  it  by  the 

instruments, 
It  is  not  the  violins  and  the  cornets  .   .   .  nor  the  score  of  the  baritone 

singer 
It  is  nearer  and  further  than  they.^ 

When  every  sympathetic  consideration  has  been  excluded,  how- 
ever, there  still  remains  a  pragmatic  value  in  the  classification 
of  works  of  art  as  beautiful  or  ugly.  But  what  precisely  do  we 
mean  by  these  designations  as  applied  to  objects?  In  the  works 
called  beautiful  we  recognize  a  correspondence  of  theme  and  ex- 
pression, content  and  form:  while  in  those  called  ugly  we  find 
the  content  and  form  at  variance.  In  time  and  space,  however, 
the  correspondence  never  amounts  to  an  identity:  it  is  our  own 
activity,  in  the  presence  of  the  work  of  art,  which  completes  the 
ideal  relation,  and  it  is  in  this  sense  that  beauty  is  what  we  "do 
to"  a  work  of  art  rather  than  a  quality  present  in  the  object. 
With  reference  to  the  object,  then  "more"  or  "less"  beautiful 
will  imply  a  greater  or  less  correspondence  between  content  and 
form,  and  this  is  all  that  we  can  say  of  the  object  as  such:  or 
in  other  words,  art  is  good  that  is  good  of  its  kind.  In  the 
stricter  sense  of  completed  internal  oesthetic  activity,  however, 
beauty  is  absolute  and  cannot  have  degrees. 

The  vision  of  beauty  is  spontaneous,  in  just  the  same  sense 
as  the  inward  light  of  the  lover  (bhakta).  It  is  a  state  of  grace 
that  cannot  be  achieved  by  deliberate  effort;  though  perhaps  we 
can  remove  hindrances  to  its  manifestation,  for  there  are  many 
witnesses  that  the  secret  of  all  art  is  to  be  found  in  self-forget- 
fulness.^  And  we  know  that  this  state  of  grace  is  not  achieved 
in  the  pursuit  of  pleasure;  the  hedonists  have  their  reward,  but 
they  are  in  bondage  to  loveliness,  while  the  artist  is  free  in 
beauty. 

It  is  further  to  be  observed  that  when  we  speak  seriously  of 
works  of  art  as  beautiful,  meaning  that  they  are  truly  works  of 
art,  valued  as  such  apart  from  subject,  association,  or  technical 
charm,  we  still  speak  elliptically.     We  mean  that  the  external 

iWalt  Whitman. 

2  E.  G.  Riciotto  Canudo :  "It  is  certain  that  the  secret  of  all  art  .  .  . 
lies  in  the  faculty  of  self-oblivion" — (Music  as  a  Religion  of  the  Future). 


PLATE  V 


INDIAN  ARCHITECTURE   AND   SCULPTURE. 


■rqr-s: 


Figure  a.     Temple  at  Badanil,  Sth  Century. 


Figure  u.     Ai^^uKi:>    LcUiiii\.     :5iinie  >-cuipLuic.     MamallapuraiTi,  8th  Ccntury. 


THAT  BEAUTY  IS  A  STATE  43 

signs — poems,  pictures,  dances,  and  so  forth — are  effective  re- 
minders. We  may  say  that  they  possess  significant  form.  But 
this  can  only  mean  that  they  possess  that  kind  of  form  which 
reminds  us  of  beauty,  and  awakens  in  us  aesthetic  emotion.  The 
nearest  explanation  of  significant  form  should  be  such  form  as 
exhibits  the  inner  relations  of  things;  or,  after  Hsieh  Ho,  "which 
reveals  the  rhythm  of  the  spirit  in  the  gestures  of  living  things." 
All  such  works  as  possess  significant  form  are  linguistic ;  and,  if 
we  remember  this,  we  shall  not  fall  into  the  error  of  those  who 
advocate  the  use  of  language  for  language's  sake,  nor  shall  we 
confuse  the  significant  forms,  or  their  logical  meaning  or  moral 
value,  with  the  beauty  of  which  they  remind  us. 

Let  us  insist,  however,  that  the  concept  of  beauty  has  originated 
with  the  philosopher,  not  with  the  artist:  he  has  been  ever  con- 
cerned with  saying  clearly  what  had  to  be  said.  In  all  ages  of 
creation  the  artist  has  been  in  love  with  his  particular  subject — 
when  it  is  not  so,  we  see  that  his  work  is  not  'felt' — he  has  never 
set  out  to  achieve  the  Beautiful,  in  the  strict  aesthetic  sense,  and 
to  have  this  aim  is  to  invite  disaster,  as  one  who  should  seek  to 
fly  without  wings. 

It  is  not  to  the  artist  that  one  should  say  the  subject  is  imma- 
terial :  that  is  for  the  philosopher  to  say  to  the  philistine  who  dis- 
likes a  work  of  art  for  no  other  reason  than  that  he  dislikes  it. 

The  true  critic  (rasika)  perceives  the  beauty  of  which  the 
artist  has  exhibited  the  signs.  It  is  not  necessary  that  the  critic 
should  appreciate  the  artist's  meaning — every  work  of  art  is  a 
kamadhenu,  yielding  many  meanings — for  he  knows  without 
reasoning  whether  or  not  the  work  is  beautiful,  before  the  mind 
begins  to  question  what  it  is  "about."  Hindu  writers  say  that  the 
capacity  to  feel  beauty  (to  taste  rasa)  cannot  be  acquired  by 
study,  but  is  the  reward  of  merit  gained  in  a  past  life ;  for  many 
good  men  and  would-be  historians  of  art  have  never  perceived 
it.  The  poet  is  bom,  not  made ;  but  so  also  is  the  rasika,  whose 
genius  differs  in  degree,  not  in  kind,  from  that  of  the  original 
artist.  In  western  phraseology  we  should  express  this  by  saying 
that  experience  can  only  be  bought  by  experience ;  opinions  must 
be  earned.  We  gain  and  feel  nothing  merely  when  we  take  it  on 
authority  that  any  particular  works  are  beautiful.  It  is  far  better 
to  be  honest,  and  to  admit  that  perhaps  we  cannot  see  their 
beauty.    A  day  may  come  when  we  shall  be  better  prepared. 


44 


THAT  BEAUTY  IS  A  STATE 


The  critic,  as  soon  as  he  becomes  an  exponent,  has  to  prove 
his  case;  and  he  cannot  do  this  by  any  process  of  argument,  but 
only  by  creating  a  new  work  of  art,  the  criticism.  His  audience, 
catching  the  gleam  at  second-hand — but  still  the  same  gleam,  for 
there  is  only  one — has  then  the  opportunity  to  approach  the 
original  work  a  second  time,  more  reverently. 

When  I  say  that  works  of  art  are  reminders,  and  the  activity 
of  the  critic  is  one  of  reproduction,  I  suggest  that  the  vision  of 
even  the  original  artist  may  be  rather  a  discovery  than  a  creation. 
If  beauty  awaits  discovery  everywhere,  that  is  to  say  that  it  waits 
upon  our  recollection  (in  the  sufi  sense  and  in  Wordsworth's)  : 
in  aesthetic  contemplation  as  in  love  and  knowledge,  we  momen- 
tarily recover  the  unity  of  our  being  released  from  individuality. 

There  are  no  degrees  of  beauty;  the  most  complex  and  the 
simplest  expression  remind  us  of  one  and  the  same  state.  The 
sonata  cannot  be  more  beautiful  than  the  simplest  lyric,  nor  the 
painting  than  the  drawing,  merely  because  of  their  greater  elabo- 
ration. Civilized  art  is  not  more  beautiful  than  savage  art,  merely 
because  of  its  possibly  more  attractive  ethos.  A  mathematical 
analogy  is  found  if  we  consider  large  and  small  circles;  these 
differ  only  in  their  content,  not  in  their  circularity.  In  the  same 
way,  there  cannot  be  any  continuous  progress  in  art.  Immediately 
a  given  intuition  has  attained  to  perfectly  clear  expression,  it 
remains  only  to  multiply  and  repeat  this  expression.  This  repe- 
tition may  be  desirable  for  many  reasons,  but  it  almost  invariably 
involves  a  gradual  decadence,  because  we  soon  begin  to  take  the 
experience  for  granted.  The  vitality  of  a  tradition  persists  only 
so  long  as  it  is  fed  by  intensity  of  imagination.  What  we  mean 
by  creative  art,  however,  has  no  necessary  connection  with 
novelty  of  subject,  though  that  is  not  excluded.  Creative  art  is 
art  that  reveals  beauty  where  we  should  have  otherwise  over- 
looked it,  or  more  clearly  than  we  have  yet  received.  Beauty  is 
sometimes  overlooked  just  because  certain  expressions  have  be- 
come what  we  call  "hackneyed";  then  the  creative  artist  dealing 
with  the  same  subject  restores  our  memory.  The  artist  is 
challenged  to  reveal  the  beauty  of  all  experiences,  new  and  old. 

Many  have  rightly  insisted  that  the  beauty  of  a  work  of  art  is 
independent  of  its  subject,  and  truly,  the  humility  of  art,  which 
finds  its  inspiration  everywhere,  is  identical  with  the  humility 
of  Love,  which  regards  alike  a  dog  and  a  Brahman — and  of 


THAT  BEAUTY  IS  A  STATE  45 

Science,  to  which  the  lowest  form  is  as  significant  as  the  highest. 
And  this  is  possible,  because  it  is  one  and  the  same  undivided 
all.  "If  a  beauteous  form  we  view,  'Tis  His  reflection  shining 
through." 

It  will  now  be  seen  in  what  sense  we  are  justified  in  speaking 
of  Absolute  Beauty,  and  in  identifying  this  beauty  with  God. 
We  do  not  imply  by  this  that  God  (who  is  without  parts)  has  a 
lovely  form  which  can  be  the  object  of  knowledge;  but  that  in 
so  far  as  we  see  and  feel  beauty,  we  see  and  are  one  with  Him. 
That  God  is  the  first  artist  does  not  mean  that  He  created  forms, 
which  might  not  have  been  lovely  had  the  hand  of  the  potter 
slipped:  but  that  every  natural  object  is  an  immediate  realization 
of  His  being.  This  creative  activity  is  comparable  with  aesthetic 
expression  in  its  non-volitional  character;  no  element  of  choice 
enters  into  that  world  of  imagination  and  eternity,  but  there  is 
always  perfect  identity  of  intuition-expression,  soul  and  body. 
The  human  artist  who  discovers  beauty  here  or  there  is  the 
ideal  guru  of  Kabir,  who  "reveals  the  Supreme  Spirit  wherever 
the  mind  attaches  itself." 


BUDDHIST  PRIMITIVES 

The  Early  Buddhist  view  of  art  is  strictly  hedonistic.  Just  as 
little  as  Early  Buddhism  dreamed  of  an  expression  of  its  char- 
acteristic ideas  through  poetry,  drama,  or  music,  so  little  was  it 
imagined  that  the  arts  of  sculpture  and  painting  could  be  anything 
but  worldly  in  their  purpose  and  effect.  The  arts  were  looked 
upon  as  physical  luxuries,  and  loveliness  as  a  snare.  "Beauty  is 
nothing  to  me,"  says  the  Dasa  Dhamma  Sutta,  "neither  the 
beauty  of  the  body  nor  that  that  comes  of  dress."  The  Brethren 
were  forbidden  to  allow  the  figfures  of  men  and  women  to  be 
painted  on  monastery  walls,  and  were  permitted  only  representa- 
tions of  wreaths  and  creepers.^  The  psychological  foundation  of 
this  attitude  is  nowhere  more  clearly  revealed  than  in  a  passage 
of  the  Visuddhi  Magga,  where  we  find  that  painters,  musicians, 
perfumers,  cooks,  and  elixir-prescribing  physicians  are  all  classed 
together  as  purveyors  of  sensuous  luxuries,  whom  others  honour 
"on  account  of  love  and  devotion  to  the  sensations  excited  by 
forms  and  other  objects  of  sense."  This  is  the  characteristic 
Hlnayana  position  throughout,  and  it  is,  of  course,  conspicuous 
also  in  the  Jaina  system,  and  in  certain  phases  of  Brahmanical 
thought,  particularly  in  the  period  contemporary  with  early 
Buddhism. 

It  is  only  in  the  third  and  second  centuries  b.  c.  that  we  find  the 
Buddhists  patronizing  craftsmen  and  employing  art  for  edifying 
ends.  From  what  has  just  been  said,  however,  it  will  be  well 
understood  that  there  had  not  at  this  time  come  into  being  any 
truly  Buddhist  or  Brahmanical  idealistic  art;  and  thus  "Early 
Buddist"  art  was  necessarily  the  popular  Brahmanical  art  and 
animistic  art  of  the  day,  adapted  to  Buddhist  requirements.  The 
only  exception  to  this  rule  is  that  special  phase  of  Early  Buddhist 
art  which  is  represented  by  the  capital  of  the  Asoka  columns,  of 
which  the  forms  are  not  merely  non-Buddhist,  but  of  extra-Indian 
origin.^ 

The  Indian  non-Buddhist  art  that  we  have  evidence  of  in  the  age 

1  Cullavagga,  vi,  3,  2. 

2  Visvakarma,  SO.  SI. 


PLATE  VI 


BUDDHIST  PRIMITIVES. 


Figure    a.      Seated    Buddha,    Gandhara,        Figure    b.      Dryad,    SanchI,    2nd    century, 
1st  century,  A.D.  B.C. 


Figure  c.   Lay  worshippers  at  a  Buddha  Shrine.     AmaravatT,  2nd  century,  A.D. 


BUDDHIST  PRIMITIVES  47 

of  Asoka  and  in  the  period  immediately  following  Asoka,  is 
chiefly  concerned  with  the  cult  of  nature-spirits — the  Earth  God- 
dess, the  Nagas  or  Serpent  kings  of  the  waters,  and  the  Yaksha 
kings  who  rule  the  Four  Quarters.  The  Maurya  types  are  rep- 
resented by  the  well-known  free-standing  female  figure  at  Besna- 
gar/  and  the  Parkham  figure^  now  in  the  Mathura  Museum. 
The  early  Buddhist  art  of  SanchI  and  Bharhut,  probably  slightly 
later,  reflects  the  prevalence  of  the  animistic  cults  in  placing  low- 
relief  figures  of  the  Yaksha,  guardians  of  the  Four  Quarters,  as 
protectors  of  the  entrance  gateways.^  That  the  nature-spirits 
should  thus  act  as  guardians  of  Buddhist  shrines  reflects  the 
essential  victory  of  Buddhism,  precisely  as  the  story  of  the  Naga 
Muchalinda,  who,  in  the  literary  tradition,  shelters  the  Buddha 
during  the  week  of  storms. 

Besides  the  Guardians  of  the  Quarters  we  find  at  Sanchi  figures 
of  beautiful  Yakshinis  or  dryads,  whose  function  may  be  partly 
protective,  but  is  also  in  large  degree  honorary  and  decorative. 
The  Yakshini  figure  here  reproduced  [Plate  VI,  b]  is  typical  of 
all  that  is  best  in  the  art  of  SanchI;  but  in  what  different  world 
this  happy  dryad  moves  from  that  of  the  Pali  Suttas,  where 
orthodox  Buddhism  tries  to  prove  that  "as  the  body  when  dead 
is  repulsive,  so  also  is  it  when  alive" !  Buddhist  monasticism — 
to  use  the  language  of  Blake — sought  consistently  to  bolt  "and  bar 
the  "Western  Gates" :  but  our  Sanchi  dryad  rather  seems  to  say 
"the  soul  of  sweet  delight  can  never  be  defiled." 

The  art  of  SanchI  is  essentially  pagan,  and  this  appears  not 
only  in  its  fearless  happiness,  untinged  by  puritan  misgiving  or 
by  mystic  intuition,  but  also  in  the  purely  representative  and  real- 
istic technique.  It  was  in  the  main  a  later  Mahayana  and  Vaish- 
nava  achievement  of  the  Indian  lyric  spirit  to  discover  that  the 
two  worlds  of  spiritual  purity  and  sensuous  delight  need  not,  and 
perhaps  ultimately  cannot,  be  divided. 

In  any  case  the  SanchI  art  is  plainly  not  an  expression  of  Early 
Buddhist  feeling:  and  so  also  it  is  not  primitive,  but,  on  the  con- 
trary, it  is  the  classic  achievement  of  an  old  popular  art  already 
long  practised  in  less  permanent  materials.     If  there  is  at  this 

^  Visvakarmd,  64. 
2  Visvakarma,  26. 

^  A  much  later  example  of  the  same  arrangement  is  illustrated  in 
Visvakarma,  75. 


48  BUDDHIST  PRIMITIVES 

time  any  Buddhist  art  that  can  be  fairly  called  primitive,  it  is 
only  to  be  recognized  in  architecture,  where  the  simple 
forms  of  the  early  stupas,  and  their  undecorated  railings,  and  the 
severe  design  of  the  early  excavated  chaitya-hsilh  truly  reflect 
the  intellectual  and  austere  enthusiasm  of  Early  Buddhism. 

Another  part  of  the  art  of  the  Bharhut  railing  and  the  Sanchi 
gateways  is  devoted  to  the  illustration  of  edifying  legends,  partic- 
ularly stories  of  the  former  lives  of  the  Buddha,  and  of  the  last 
incarnation.  The  work  is  delicately  executed  in  low  relief — we 
know  from  a  contemporary  inscription  that  amongst  the  crafts- 
men who  contributed  to  the  decoration  of  the  Sanchi  toranas 
were  the  "ivory-workers  of  Bhilsa" — and  affords  us  a  remarkable 
record  of  Indian  life,  with  its  characteristic  environment,  manners 
and  cults  set  out  with  evident  realism  and  a  wealth  of  circum- 
stantial detail.  But  for  all  their  interest  these  reliefs,  too,  arc 
essentially  illustrations  of  edifying  anecdotes,  and  only  to  a 
limited  extent — less,  for  example,  than  the  similar,  but,  of  course, 
very  much  later^  illustrations  at  Borobodur — directly  express  the 
Early  Buddhist  view  of  life  and  death. 

There  is,  however,  one  respect  in  which  that  view  is  perfectly 
reflected;  in  the  fact  that  the  figure  of  the  Master  himself  is 
nowhere  represented.  Even  in  the  group  of  episodes  which 
illustrate  the  Great  Renunciation — Prince  Siddhattha's  departure 
from  home,  riding  upon  the  back  of  the  horse  Kanthaka,  and 
attended  by  the  groom  Channa — Kanthaka's  back  is  bare,  and 
we  see  only  the  figures  of  the  Devas  who  lift  up  the  feet  of  the 
horse  lest  men  should  be  roused  by  the  sound  of  his  hoofs,  while 
the  presence  of  the  Prince  is  only  indicated  by  the  parasol  of 
dominion  borne  beside  the  horse.  In  other  compositions  the 
Buddha  is  represented  by  symbols  such  as  the  Wisdom  Tree  or 
the  conventionally  represented  footprints,  the  "Feet  of  the  Lord" 
[Plate  VI,  c].  It  will  be  realized  at  once  that  the  absence  of  the 
Buddha  figure  from  the  world  of  living  men — where,  however, 
there  yet  remain  the  traces  of  his  ministry,  literally  footprints 
on  the  sands  of  time — is  a  true  artistic  rendering  of  the  Master's 
guarded  silence  respecting  the  after-death  state  of  those  who  have 
attained  Nirvana:  "the  Perfect  One  is  released  from  this,  that 
his  being  should  be  gauged  by  the  measure  of  the  corporeal 
world,"  he  is  released  from  "name  and  form."  In  the  omission 
of  the  figure  of  the  Buddha,  the  Early  Buddhist  art  is  truly  Budd- 


BUDDHIST  PRIMITIVES 


PJ.ATE  VII 


Buddha   in    Samadhi.      Stone    sculpture,    Ceylon,  2nd    century,    A.  D. 


BUDDHIST  PRIMITIVES  49 

dhist :  for  the  rest,  it  is  an  art  about  Buddhism,  rather  than  Bud- 
dhist art. 

Changes  were  meanwhile  proceeding  in  the  material  of  Bud- 
dhist belief.  This  belief  is  no  longer  merely  intellectual,  but  has 
undergone  an  emotional  development  akin  to  that  which  finds 
expression  in  the  bhakti  doctrine  of  the  Bhagavad  Gitd: 

Even  they  that  be  born  of  sin.  even  women,  traffickers,  and  serfs, 
if  they  turn  to  Me,  come  to  the  Supreme  Path:  be  assured,  O  son 
of  Kuntl.  that  none  who  is  devoted  to  Me  is  lost. 

Similarly  we  find,  even  in  so  early  a  text  as  the  Majjhima 
Nikdya  that  those  who  have  not  yet  even  entered  the  Paths,  "are 
sure  of  heaven  if  they  have  love  and  faith  towards  Me."  Gradu- 
ally the  idea  of  Buddhahood  replaces  that  of  Arahatta :  the  orig- 
inal agnosticism  is  ignored,  and  the  Buddha  is  endowed  with  all 
the  qualities  of  transcendental  godhead  as  well  as  with  the  physical 
peculiarities  or  perfections  of  the  Superman  (mahd-purusha). 
The  Buddha  thus  conceived,  together  with  the  Bodhisattvas  or 
Buddhas-to-be,  presently  engaged  in  the  active  work  of  salvation, 
became  the  object  of  a  cult  and  was  regarded  as  approachable 
by  worship.  In  all  this  we  see  not  merely  an  internal  develop- 
ment of  metaphysics  and  theology,  but  also  the  influence  of  the 
lay  community:  for  a  majority  of  men,  and  still  more  the  majority 
of  women,  have  always  been  more  ready  to  worship  than  to  know. 

At  Amaravati  we  still  find  that  the  Buddha  is  represented  by 
symbols,  but  it  may  be  clearly  seen  from  the  passionate  devotion 
of  those  who  worship  at  the  symbol-shrines — and  many  of  these 
are  women,  as  in  the  case  of  the  fragment  here  reproduced  in 
Plate  VI,  c — that  the  One  adored  must  have  been  conceived  in 
others  terms  than  those  of  a  purely  intellectual  psychological 
analysis.  Even  before  the  Buddha  figure  is  represented  in  official 
Buddhist  art,  the  Buddha  had  become  an  object  of  adoration,  a 
very  personal  god:  and  it  cannot  surprise  us  that  the  Master's 
figure  should  soon  appear  wherever  Buddhist  piety  erected  shrines 
and  monuments.  We  know  that  images  of  Hindu  gods  were 
already  in  use  in  the  second  century,  b.  c,  and  it  is  highly  probable 
that  Buddha  figures  were  in  similar  private  use  long  before  they 
took  their  place  in  a  public  cult. 

Before,  however,  we  speak  of  the  Buddha  images,  we  must 
refer  to  a  second  phase  of  religious  experience,  which  plays  a 


so  BUDDHIST  PRIMITIVES 

great  part  alike  in  the  development  of  Buddhism  and  Hinduism. 
This  is  the  practice  of  Yoga,  whereby  enlightenment  and  emanci- 
pation are  sought  to  be  attained  by  meditation  calculated  to 
release  the  individual  from  empirical  consciousness.  Even  in  the 
earliest  Buddhist  praxis  it  would  be  difficult  to  exaggerate  the  part 
which  these  contemplative  exercises  play  in  the  spiritual  history 
of  the  Brethren,  and  to  a  lesser  extent  of  laymen,  for  while  the 
most  abstract  meditations  lead  to  the  attainment  of  Nirvana  and 
the  station  of  "No-return,"  the  lesser  no  less  certainly  led  to 
rebirth  in  the  higher  heavens.  It  is  just  for  purposes  of  medita- 
tion that  lonely  places  and  roots  of  trees  are  so  highly  praised  in 
the  Buddhist  literature,  and  of  this  the  classic  example  is  that  of 
the  Buddha  himself,  who  reached  the  final  enlightenment  while 
seated  in  yogi-fashion  at  the  foot  of  the  Wisdom-tree.  The 
essence  of  the  method  lies  in  the  concentration  of  thought  upon 
a  single  point,  carried  so  far  that  the  duality  of  subject  and 
object  is  resolved  into  a  perfect  unity — "when,"  in  the  words  of 
Schelling,  "the  perceiving  self  merges  in  the  self-perceived.  At 
that  moment  we  annihilate  time  and  the  duration  of  time ;  we  are 
no  longer  in  time,  but  time,  or  rather  eternity  itself,  is  in  us."  A 
very  beautiful  description  of  the  yogi  is  given  as  follows  in  the 
Bhagavad  Gitd,^  and  as  quoted  here  in  a  condensed  form  applies 
almost  equally  to  Buddhist  and  Brahmanical  practice,  for  the 
yoga  is  a  praxis  rather  than  a  form  of  sectarian  belief : — 

Abiding  alone  in  a  secret  place,  without  craving  and  without  pos- 
sessions, he  shall  take  his  seat  upon  a  firm  seat,  neither  over-high 
nor  over-low,  and  with  the  working  of  the  mind  and  of  the  senses 
held  in  check,  with  body,  head  and  neck  maintained  in  perfect  equi- 
poise, looking  not  round  about  him,  so  let  him  meditate,  and  thereby 
reach  the  peace  of  the  Abyss:  and  the  likeness  of  one  such,  who 
knows  the  boundless  joy  that  lies  beyond  the  senses  and  is  grasped 
by  intuition,  and  who  swerves  not  from  the  truth,  is  that  of  a  lamp 
in  a  windless  place  that  does  not  flicker. 

Long  before  the  Buddha  image  became  a  cult  object,  the 
familiar  form  of  the  seated  yogi  must  have  presented  itself  to 
the  Indian  mind  in  inseparable  association  with  the  idea  of  a 
mental  discipline  and  of  the  attainment  of  the  highest  station  of 

1  Bhagavad  Gitd.  vi.  10-21 — omitting  the  theistic  elements. 


BUDDHIST  PRIMITIVES. 


PLATE  VIII 


Standing   Bodhisattva.      Stone   sculpture.    Ceylon,    2nd    century.    AD. 


BUDDHIST  PRIMITIVES 


51 


self-oblivion;  and  when  the  development  of  imagery  followed 
there  was  no  other  form  which  could  have  been  made  a  uni- 
versally recognized  symbol  of  Him-wlio-had-thus-attained. 

This  figure  of  the  seated  Buddha-yogi,  wuth  a  far  deeper 
content,  is  as  purely  monumental  art  as  that  of  the  Egyptian 
pyramids ;  and  since  it  represents  the  greatest  ideal  which  Indian 
sculpture  ever  attempted  to  express,  it  is  well  that  we  find  pre- 
served even  a  few  magnificent  examples  of  comparatively  early 
date.  Amongst  these  the  colossal  figure  at  Anuradhapura  is 
almost  certainly  the  best  [Plate  VII].  The  same  ancient  Bud- 
dhist site  affords  examples  of  a  Bodhisattva,  here  reproduced  on 
Plate  VIII,  and  of  two  standing  Buddhas,  illustrated  in  Plates 
IX  and  X,  while  nearly  related  to  these  are  the  standing 
figures  of  Buddhas  lately  excavated  at  Amaravati,  reproduced 
on  Plate  XL  To  all  these  works  we  may  fairly  assign  the 
honoured  name  of  primitives,  since  their  massive  forms 
and  austere  outline  are  immediately  determined  by  the  moral 
grandeur  of  the  thesis  and  the  suppressed  emotion  of  its  realiza- 
tion, without  any  intrusion  of  individuality  or  parade  of  skill. 
The  fulness  of  the  modelling  expresses  a  high  degree  of  vitality, 
but  does  not  yet  show  the  conscious  elegance  and  suavity  of 
Gupta  types. 

We  are  not  in  position  to  precisely  date  these  Buddhist  primi- 
tives of  Anuradhapura  and  Amaravati,  but  they  may  not  be 
earlier  than  the  first  or  second  century  a.  d.  and  can  hardly  be 
later  than  the  third  or  fourth.  In  describing  these  works  as 
primitive,  it  is  not,  of  course,  suggested  that  they  are  the  earliest 
or  nearly  the  earliest  of  Buddha  figures  extant,  nor  that  all  of 
them  are  absolutely  free  from  any  element  of  western  formulation, 
but  merely  that  in  them  the  primitive  inspiration  is  better  pre- 
served than  anywhere  else,  I  have  already  suggested  that  the 
figures  of  the  seated  Buddha,  if  not  the  standing  types,  probably 
came  into  use  as  cult  objects  a  good  deal  earlier,  perhaps  in  the 
second  century  b.  c.  ;  and  if  these  were  generally  made  in  wood 
or  other  impermanent  materials,  this  would  be  in  accord  with  all 
that  we  know  of  the  general  development  of  Indian  plastic  art 
and  architecture.    In  any  case,  as  M.  Foucher  points  out,*  the 


^  Foucher  (A.),  L'Origine  grecque  de  I'Image  du  Bouddha,  Paris,  1913. 
p.  31. 


52 


BUDDHIST  PRIMITIVES 


conventional  character  of  the  Buddha  figure  of  the  Kanishka 
reliquary 

denote  un  art  deja  stereotype,  et  .  .  .  suffit  pour  reporter  d'au 
moins  cent  ans  en  arriere  et  faire  par  suite  remonter  au  I®*"  siecle 
avant  notre  ere  la  creation  du  type  plastique  du  Bienheureux. 

The  same  may  be  said  of  the  Bodhisattvas.  Indra  and  Brahma 
were  perhaps  the  types  from  which  the  sculptural  representations 
of  Avalokitesvara  and  Maitreya  were  evolved,  and  Mr.  Spooner 
has  recorded  his  view  that  this  evolution  "was  an  accomplished 
fact  prior  to  any  form  of  the  Gandhara  school  with  which  we  are 
yet  familiar,"  pointing  out  here  too  that  "the  forms  of  both  are 
stereotyped"  already  in  the  earliest  examples  from  Gandhara.^ 

We  have  so  far  left  out  of  account  the  abundant  and  well- 
known  Graeco-Buddhist  art  of  Gandhara,  dating  from  the  1st  to 
the  4th  century  a.  d.,  as  well  as  the  school  of  Mathura,  which  in 
part  derives  from  the  older  art  of  Sanchi  and  Bharhut,  and  is 
partly  dependent  upon  Gandhara.  This  omission  is  not,  as  M. 
Foucher  would  suggest,  "par  engouement  d'estheticien  ou  ran- 
cune  de  nationaliste,"^  but  because  we  are  here  concerned  to 
discover  the  sources  of  inspiration  of  Buddhist  imagery  and  to 
learn  how  this  inspiration  was  first  and  most  fully  expressed. 
That  many  western  formulae  were  absorbed  into  Indian  art 
through  Gandhara  does  not  touch  the  question  of  feeling;  we 
must  avoid  the  common  error  of  confusing  "Formensprache" 
with  "Geist."  It  is  even  easy  to  exaggerate  the  importance  of  the 
western  formulae,  as  such,  for  whatever  else  in  Buddhist  art  is 
borrowed,  the  cross-legged  figure  seated  upon  a  lotus  throne  is 
entirely  Indian  in  form  as  well  as  in  idea ;  and  besides  this  seated 
figure,  the  standing  Buddha  and  the  images  of  all  the  Buddhist 
gods  are  but  of  secondary  importance. 

For  several  reasons^  it  seems  probable  that  the  actual  Gand- 
hara sculptures  are  mainly  the  work  of  western  craftsmen  em- 
ployed by  the  Gandhara  kings  to  interpret  Buddhist  ideas,  rather 
than  Indian  workmen  under  western  guidance;  and  if  some  of 
the  workmen  were  Indian  by  birth,  they  nevertheless  did  not  give 
expression  to  Indian   feeling.     We  have  the  parallel  modem 

*  Spooner,  D.  B.     Archaeological  Survey  of  India,  Ann.  Rep.,   1907-8 
(1911),  p.  144. 
2  Foucher  (A.),  loc.  cit.,  p.  41. 


BUDDHIST  PRIMITIVES. 


PLATE  IX 


STANDING  BUDDHA. 
Stone   sculpture,   Ceylon,  2nd  century,   A.D. 


BUDDHIST  PRIMITIVES. 


PLATE  X 


Standing   Buddha.      Stone   .sculpture,   Ceylon,  2nd   century,   A.D. 


BUDDHIST  PRIMITIVES  53 

example  of  the  late  Raja  Ravi  Varma,  who,  despite  the  nominally 
Indian  subject  matter  of  his  paintings,  entirely  fails  to  reflect  the 
Indian  spirit. 

The  manner  in  which  the  western  formulae  have  been  gradually 
Indianized,  alike  in  the  northwest  and  in  the  school  of  Mathura, 
and  thus,  as  Professor  Oskar  Miinsterberg  remarks,  "first  de- 
veloped under  national  and  Buddhist  inspiration  into  a  new  and 
genuine  art,"^  has  been  studied  in  considerable  detail  by  many 
scholars ;  but  what  is  equally  or  more  significant  for  our  enquiry 
is  the  manner  in  which  certain  Indian  formulae  and  Indian  ideas 
are  misrepresented  at  Gandhara,  for  misrepresentation  necessarily 
implies  the  pre-existence  of  a  type  to  be  misinterpreted.  The 
plainest  case  is  afforded  by  the  Buddha  figure  seated  on  a  "lotus 
throne"  (padmasana).  In  Gandhara  sculpture  the  seated  figure 
is  uncomfortably  and  unstably  balanced  on  a  lotus  flower  that  is 
far  too  small,  and  with  its  pointed  petals,  like  an  artichoke,^  sug- 
gests a  seat  of  penance  rather  than  of  ease  (Plate  VI,  a).  The 
true  sense  of  the  padmasana  is,  of  course,  to  indicate  spiritual 
purity  or  divinity,  and  the  symbol  is  only  appropriately  combined 
with  that  of  the  seated  yogi,  when  this  function  is  fulfilled  with- 
out detracting  from  the  one  essential  quality  of  repose.  It  is 
specially  emphasized  in  yoga  texts  that  the  seat  of  the  yogi 
is  to  be  firm  and  easy,  "sthira-sukha,"  and  where  this  condition  is 
overlooked,  it  is  impossible  to  recognize  an  immediate  expression 
of  the  original  thesis. 

The  foregoing  argument  supports  the  view  already  men- 
tioned, that  the  seated  Buddha  image  in  the  age  of 
Kanishka  was  "deja  stereotype."  It  takes  us,  however, 
somewhat  further,  for  in  connection  with  the  far  stronger, 
though  to  archaeologists  less  convincing,  aesthetic  evidence, 
it  shows  plainly  that  Gandhara  sculpture  is  not  primitive 
Buddhist  art.  When,  then,  are  we  to  look  for  the  proto- 
type of  the  seated  figure  thus  "deja  stereotype?"  Can  we 
postulate  a  Roman  yogi,  seated  on  a  lotus  throne,  and  with  hands 
in  the  dhydni  mudra,  to  set  beside  the  Lateran  Sophocles  of 
which  the  influence  is  evident  in  standing  images?  The  sug- 
gestion is  sufficiently  absurd  to  need  no  refutation.    The  seated 

*  A  characteristic  example  may  be  studied  in  Vincent  Smith,  History 
of  Fine  Art  in  India  and  Ceylon,  Plate  xxiv. 
2  Miinsterberg  (O.),  Chinesische  Kunstgeschichte,  p.  117,  n. 


54  BUDDHIST  PRIMITIVES 

Buddha,  as  we  have  already  suggested  on  d  priori  grounds,  can 
only  be  of  Indian  origin;  and  this  being  so,  it  will  be  seen  how 
great  an  exaggeration  is  involved  in  speaking  of  the  "Greek 
Origin  of  the  Image  of  Buddha." 

It  has  been  sufficient  for  our  purpose  to  explain  in  what  senses 
Gandhara  sculpture  cannot  be  regarded  as  primitive  and  autoch- 
thonous Buddhist  art ;  it  has  not  been  necessary  to  emphasize  also 
how  little  the  smug  and  complacent  features  of  the  Gandhara 
Buddhas  and  Bodhisattvas,  and  their  listless  and  eflFeminate  ges- 
tures, reflect  the  intellectual  vigour  or  the  devotional  passion  of 
Buddhist  thought.  For  the  benefit  of  M.  Foucher,  however,  and 
of  other  scholars  who  may  suppose,  with  him,  that  Mr.  Havell, 
Professor  Munsterberg,  and  I,  have  cared  more  for  Indian  art 
than  for  art,  I  may  point  out  that  our  estimate  of  Gandhara 
sculpture  as  of  small  aesthetic  significance  must  not  be  taken  as 
evidence  of  any  prejudice  against  the  art  of  Europe;  it  simply 
indicates  concurrence  in  the  view  that  "in  the  long  sands  and  flats 
of  Roman  realism  the  stream  of  Greek  inspiration  is  lost  for 
ever."  To  admire  Gandhara  art,  as  art,  is  not  a  compliment  to 
the  greatness  of  the  Greeks,  but  only  shows  how  far  that  great- 
ness has  been  misunderstood.  If  it  is  possible  for  a  European 
critic  to  write  of  the  mosaics  of  the  Galla  Placidia  at  Ravenna 
that  they  are  "still  coarsely  classical,"  and  that  "there  is  a  nasty, 
woolly  realism  about  the  sheep,  and  about  the  good  shepherd  more 
than  a  suspicion  of  the  stodgy,  Graeco-Roman  Apollo,"^  then 
surely  we  may  criticize  the  sculptures  of  Gandhara  in  the  same 
terms  without  incurring  charges  of  bad  faith. 

To  resume :  Early  Buddhist  art  is  popular,  sensuous  and  ani- 
mistic Indian  art  adapted  to  the  purposes  of  the  illustration  of 
Buddhist  anecdote  and  the  decoration  of  Buddhist  monuments; 
Gandhara  art  is  mixed,  and  misinterpreted  equally  both  eastern 
and  western  formulae,  which  must  be  older  than  itself,  while  it  is 
not  Buddhist  in  expression;  the  earliest  Indian  primitives  of 
Buddhist  art  properly  so-called  are  probably  lost.  In  northern 
India  the  absence  of  primitives  is  partly  to  be  accounted  for  by 
the  fact  that  Buddhist  inspiration  was  there  absorbed,  not  in 
direct  creation,  but  in  adapting  Grseco-Roman  motifs  to  its  own 
spiritual  ends.     In  southern  India  and  Ceylon  the  same  energy 

iBell  (Give),  ^r/,  p.  128. 


BUDDHIST  PRIMITIVES. 


PLATE  XT 


'if'*.  ^  '     '/ 


Standing  images  of  Buddha.     Stone  sculpture,  2nd  century.  A.  D.    Amaravati. 


BUDDHIST  PRIMITIVES 


55 


working  in  greater  isolation  found  a  more  direct  expression ;  and 
though  the  earliest  masterpieces  may  be  lost,  there  are  still  pre- 
served at  Anuradhapura  and  AmaravatI  magnificent  works, 
which  we  may  fairly  speak  of  as  Buddhist  primitives.* 


1  Early  Buddhist  art  in  China  and  Japan  is  also  "primitive"  in  the 
aesthetic  sense,  precisely  as  Christian  art  in  Europe  preserved  its  primi- 
tive inspiration  for  six  hundred  years,  because  "some  new  race  was 
always  catching  the  inspiration  and  feeling  and  expressing  it  with  primitive 
sensibility  and  passion." 


THE  DANCE  OF  SIVA 

"The  Lord  of  Tillai's  Court  a  mystic  dance  performs; 
what's  that,  my  dear?" — Tiruvagagam,  XII,  14. 

Amongst  the  greatest  of  the  names  of  Siva  is  Nataraja,  Lord 
of  Dancers,  or  King  of  Actors.  The  cosmos  is  His  theatre,  there 
are  many  different  steps  in  His  repertory,  He  Himself  is  actor 
and  audience — 

When  the  Actor  beateth  the  drum. 
Everybody  cometh  to  see  the  show; 
When  the  Actor  collecteth  the  stage  properties 
He  abideth  alone  in  His  happiness. 

How  many  various  dances  of  Siva  are  known  to  His  worship- 
pers I  cannot  say.  No  doubt  the  root  idea  behind  all  of  these 
dances  is  more  or  less  one  and  the  same,  the  manifestation  of 
primal  rhythmic  energy.  Siva  is  the  Eros  Protogonos  of  Lucian, 
when  he  wrote : 

"It  would  seem  that  dancing  came  into  being  at  the  beginning 
of  all  things,  and  was  brought  to  light  together  with  Eros,  that 
ancient  one,  for  we  see  this  primeval  dancing  clearly  set  forth  in 
the  choral  dance  of  the  constellations,  and  in  the  planets  and 
fixed  stars,  their  interweaving  and  interchange  and  orderly  har- 
mony." 

I  do  not  mean  to  say  that  the  most  profound  interpretation  of 
Siva's  dance  was  present  in  the  minds  of  those  who  first  danced 
in  frantic,  and  perhaps  intoxicated  energy,  in  honour  of  the  pre- 
Aryan  hill-god,  afterwards  merged  in  Siva.  A  great  motif  in 
religion  or  art,  any  great  symbol,  becomes  all  things  to  all  men ; 
age  after  age  it  yields  to  men  such  treasure  as  they  find  in  their 
own  hearts.  Whatever  the  origins  of  Siva's  dance,  it  became 
in  time  the  clearest  image  of  the  activity  of  God  which  any  art 
or  religion  can  boast  of.  Of  the  various  dances  of  Siva  I  shall 
only  speak  of  three,  one  of  them  alone  forming  the  main  subject 
of  interpretation.  The  first  is  an  evening  dance  in  the  Hima- 
layas, with  a  divine  chorus,  described  as  follows  in  the  Siva 
Pradosha  Stotra: 


THE  DANCE  OF  SIVA  57 

"Placing  the  Mother  of  the  Three  Worlds  upon  a  golden  throne, 
studded  with  precious  gems,  Sulapani  dances  on  the  heights  of 
Kailasa,  and  all  the  gods  gather  round  Him: 

"Sarasvati  plays  on  the  vlnd,  Indra  on  the  flute,  Brahma  holds 
the  time-marking  cymbals,  Lakshml  begins  a  song,  Vishnu  plays 
on  a  drum,  and  all  the  gods  stand  round  about: 

"Gandharvas,  Yakshas,  Patagas,  Uragas,  Siddhas,  Sadhyas, 
Vidyadharas,  Amaras,  Apsarases,  and  all  the  beings  dwelling 
in  the  three  worlds  assemble  there  to  witness  the  celestial  dance 
and  hear  the  music  of  the  divine  choir  at  the  hour  of  twilight." 

This  evening  dance  is  also  referred  to  in  the  invocation  preced- 
ing the  Katha  Sarit  Sdgara. 

In  the  pictures  of  this  dance,  ^iva  is  two-handed,  and  the  co- 
operation of  the  gods  is  clearly  indicated  in  their  position  of 
chorus.  There  is  no  prostrate  Asura  trampled  under  Siva's  feet. 
So  far  as  I  know,  no  special  interpretations  of  this  dance  occur 
in  Saiva  literature. 

The  second  well  known  dance  of  Siva  is  called  the  Tdndava, 
and  belongs  to  His  tdmasic  aspect  as  Bhairava  or  Vira-bhadra. 
It  is  performed  in  cemeteries  and  burning  grounds,  where  Siva, 
usually  in  ten-armed  form,  dances  wildly  with  Devi,  accompanied 
by  troops  of  capering  imps.  Representations  of  this  dance  are 
common  amongst  ancient  sculptures,  as  at  Elura,  Elephanta, 
and  also  Bhuvanesvara.  The  tdndava  dance  is  in  origin  that 
of  a  pre-Aryan  divinity,  half-god,  half-demon,  who  holds  his 
midnight  revels  in  the  burning  ground.  In  later  times,  this  dance 
in  the  cremation  ground,  sometimes  of  Siva,  sometimes  of  Devi, 
is  interpreted  in  Saiva  and  Sakta  literature  in  a  most  touching 
and  profound  sense. 

Thirdly,  we  have  the  Nadanta  dance  of  Nataraja  before  the 
assembly  (sabha)  in  the  golden  hall  of  Chidambaram  or  Tillai, 
the  centre  of  the  Universe,  first  revealed  to  gods  and  rishis  after 
the  submission  of  the  latter  in  the  forest  of  Taragam,  as  related 
in  the  Koyil  Purdnam.  The  legend,  which  has  after  all,  no  very 
close  connection  with  the  real  meaning  of  the  dance,  may  be 
summarised  as  follows: 

In  the  forest  of  Taragam  dwelt  multitudes  of  heretical  rishis, 
following  of  the  Mimamsa.  Thither  proceeded  Siva  to  confute 
them,  accompanied  by  Vishnu  disguised  as  a  beautiful  woman, 
and  Ati-Seshan.    The  rishis  were  at  first  led  to  violent  dispute 


58  THE  DANCE  OF  SIVA 

amongst  themselves,  but  their  anger  was  soon  directed  against 
Siva,  and  they  endeavoured  to  destroy  Him  by  means  of  incanta- 
tions. A  fierce  tiger  was  created  in  sacrificial  fires,  and  rushed 
upon  Him;  but  smiling  gently,  He  seized  it  and,  with  the  nail  of 
His  little  finger,  stripped  off  its  skin,  and  wrapped  it  about  Him- 
self like  a  silken  cloth.^  Undiscouraged  by  failure,  the  sages 
renewed  their  offerings,  and  produced  a  monstrous  serpent,  which 
however,  Siva  seized  and  wreathed  about  His  neck  like  a  gar- 
land. Then  He  began  to  dance;  but  there  rushed  upon  Him  a 
last  monster  in  the  shape  of  a  malignant  dwarf,  Muyalaka.  Upon 
him  the  God  pressed  the  tip  of  His  foot,  and  broke  the  creature's 
back,  so  that  it  writhed  upon  the  ground;  and  so,  His  last  foe 
prostrate,  Siva  resumed  the  dance,  witnessed  by  gods  and  rishis. 

Then  Ati  Seshan  worshipped  Siva,  and  prayed  above  all  things 
for  the  boon,  once  more  to  behold  this  mystic  dance ;  Siva  prom- 
ised that  he  should  behold  the  dance  again  in  sacred  Tillai,  the 
centre  of  the  Universe. 

This  dance  of  Siva  in  Chidambaram  or  Tillai  forms  the  motif 
of  the  South  Indian  copper  images  of  Sri  Nataraja,  the  Lord  of 
the  Dance.  These  images  vary  amongst  themselves  in  minor 
details,  but  all  express  one  fundamental  conception.  Before  pro- 
ceeding to  enquire  what  these  may  be,  it  will  be  necessary  to 
describe  the  image  of  Sri  Nataraja  as  typically  represented.  The 
images  then,  represent  Siva  dancing,  having  four  hands,  with 
braided  and  jewelled  hair  of  which  the  lower  locks  are  whirling 
in  the  dance.  In  His  hair  may  be  seen  a  wreathing  cobra,  a 
skull,  and  the  mermaid  figure  of  Ganga ;  upon  it  rests  the  crescent 
moon,  and  it  is  crowned  with  a  wreath  of  Cassia  leaves.  In  His 
right  ear  He  wears  a  man's  earring,  a  woman's  in  the  left ;  He  is 
adorned  with  necklaces  and  armlets,  a  jewelled  belt,  anklets, 
bracelets,  finger  and  toe-rings.  The  chief  part  of  His  dress 
consists  of  tightly  fitting  breeches,  and  He  wears  also  a  fluttering 
scarf  and  a  sacred  thread.  One  right  hand  holds  a  drum,  the 
other  is  uplifted  in  the  sign  of  do  not  fear:  one  left  hand  holds 
fire,  the  other  points  down  upon  the  demon  Muyalaka,  a  dwarf 
holding  a  cobra ;  the  left  foot  is  raised.  There  is  a  lotus  pedestal, 
from  which  springs  an  encircling  glory  (tiruvdsi),  fringed  with 
flame,  and  touched  within  by  the  hands  holding  drum  and  fire. 

*  A  similar  story  is  elsewhere  related  about  an  elephant ;  and  these 
legends  account  for  the  elephant  or  tiger  skin,  which  Siva  wears. 


THE  DANCE  OF  SIVA  59 

The  images  are  of  all  sizes,  rarely  if  ever  exceeding  four  feet  in 
total  height. 

Even  without  reliance  upon  literary  references,  the  interpreta- 
tion of  this  dance  would  not  be  difficult.  Fortunately,  however, 
we  have  the  assistance  of  a  copious  contemporary  literature,  which 
enables  us  to  fully  explain  not  only  the  general  significance  of  the 
dance,  but  equally,  the  details  of  its  concrete  symbolism.  Some 
of  the  peculiarities  of  the  Nataraja  images,  of  course,  belong  to 
the  conception  of  Siva  generally,  and  not  to  the  dance  in  particu- 
lar. Such  are  the  braided  locks,  as  of  a  yogi :  the  Cassia  garland: 
the  skull  of  Brahma :  the  figure  of  Ganga,  (the  Ganges  fallen  from 
heaven  and  lost  in  Siva's  hair)  :  the  cobras:  the  different  earrings, 
betokening  the  dual  nature  of  Mahadev,  'whose  half  is  Uma' :  and 
the  four  arms.  The  drum  also  is  a  general  attribute  of  Siva, 
belonging  to  his  character  of  Yogi,  though  in  the  dance,  it  has 
further  a  special  significance.  What  then  is  the  meaning  of  Siva's 
Nadanta  dance,  as  imderstood  by  Saivas?  Its  essential  signifi- 
cance is  given  in  texts  such  as  the  following : 

"Our  Lord  is  the  Dancer,  who,  like  the  heat  latent  in  firewood, 
diffuses  His  power  in  mind  and  matter,  and  makes  them  dance 
in  their  turn."^ 

The  dance,  in  fact,  represents  His  five  activites  (Paiicakritya) , 
viz:  Srishti  (overlooking,  creation,  evolution),  Sthiti  (preserva- 
tion, support),  Samhara  (destruction,  evolution),  Tirohhava 
(veiling,  embodimjent,  illusion,  and  also,  giving  rest),  Anugraha 
(release,  salvation,  grace).  These,  separately  considered,  are  the 
activities  of  the  deities  Brahma,  Vishnu,  Rudra,  Mahesvara  and 
Sadasiva. 

This  cosmic  activity  is  the  central  motif  of  the  dance.  Further 
quotations  will  illustrate  and  explain  the  more  detailed  symbol- 
isms.   Uninai  Vilakkam,  verse  36,  tells  us : 

"Creation  arises  from  the  drum :  protection  proceeds  from  the 
hand  of  hope :  from  fire  proceeds  destruction :  the  foot  held  aloft 

*  Kadavul  Mamunivar's  Tiruvatavurdr  Puranam,  Puttaraivatil,  Venra- 
carukkam,  stanza  75,  translated  by  Nallasvami  Flllai,  Sivajnanahodhatn, 
p.  74.    This  could  also  be  rendered: 

Like  heat  latent  in  firewood,  he  fills  all  bodies ; 
Our  Father  dances,  moving  all  souls  into  action,  know  ye! 
Compare  Eckhart,  "Just  as  the  fire  infuses  the  essence  and  clearness 
into  the  dry  wood,  so  has  God  done  with  man." 


6o  THE  DANCE  OF  SIVA 

gives  release."  It  will  be  observed  that  the  fourth  hand  points 
to  this  lifted  foot,  the  refuge  of  the  soul. 

We  have  also  the  following  from  Chidambara  Mummani  Kovai: 

"O  my  Lord,  Thy  hand  holding  the  sacred  drtun  has  made  and 
ordered  the  heavens  and  earth  and  other  worlds  and  innumerable 
souls.  Thy  lifted  hand  protects  both  the  conscious  and  uncon- 
scious order  of  thy  creation.  All  these  worlds  are  transformed 
by  Thy  hand  bearing  fire.  Thy  sacred  foot,  planted  on  the 
ground,  gives  an  abode  to  the  tired  soul  struggling  in  the  toils 
of  causality.  It  is  Thy  lifted  foot  that  grants  eternal  bliss  to 
those  that  approach  Thee.  These  Five-Actions  are  indeed  Thy 
Handiwork." 

The  following  verses  from  the  Tirukuttu  Darshana  (Vision  of 
the  Sacred  Dance),  forming  the  ninth  tantra  of  Tirumular's 
Tirumantram,  expand  the  central  motif  further: 

"His  form  is  everywhere:  all-pervading  in  His  Siva-Sakti: 

Chidambaram  is  everywhere,  everywhere  His  dance : 

As  Siva  is  all  and  omnipresent, 

Everywhere  is  Siva's  gracious  dance  made  manifest. 

His  five-fold  dances  are  temporal  and  timeless. 

His  five-fold  dances  are  His  Five  Activties. 

By  His  grace  He  performs  the  five  acts, 

This  is  the  sacred  dance  of  Uma-Sahaya. 

He  dances  with  Water,  Fire,  Wind  and  Ether, 

Thus  our  Lord  dances  ever  in  the  court. 

Visible  to  those  who  pass  over  Maya  and  Mahamaya  (illusion 
and  super-illusion) 

Our  Lord  dances  His  eternal  dance. 

The  form  of  the  Sakti  is  all  delight — 

This  united  delight  is  Uma's  body: 

This  form  of  Sakti  arising  in  time 

And  uniting  the  twain  is  the  dance" 

His  body  is  Akas,  the  dark  cloud  therein  is  Muyalaka, 

The  eight  quarters  are  His  eight  arms. 

The  three  lights  are  His  three  eyes. 

Thus  becoming,  He  dances  in  our  body  as  the  congregation." 
This  is  His  dance.  Its  deepest  significance  is  felt  when  it  is 
realised  that  it  takes  place  within  the  heart  and  the  self.  Every- 
where is  God :  that  Everywhere  is  the  heart.  Thus  also  we  find 
another  verse : 


THE  DANCE  OF  SIVA  6l 

"The  dancing  foot,  the  sound  of  the  tinkhng  bells. 

The  songs  that  are  sung  and  the  varying  steps, 

The  form  assumed  by  our  Dancing  Gurupara — 

Find  out  these  within  yourself,  then  shall  your  fetters  fall  away." 

To  this  end,  all  else  but  the  thought  of  God  must  be  cast  out  of 
the  heart,  that  He  alone  may  abide  and  dance  therein.  In 
Unmai  Vilakkam,  we  find: 

"The  silent  sages  destroying  the  threefold  bond  are  established 
where  their  selves  are  destroyed.  There  they  behold  the  sacred 
and  are  filled  with  bliss.  This  is  the  dance  of  the  Lord  of  the 
assembly,  'whose  very  form  is  Grace'." 

With  this  reference  to  the  'silent  sages'  compare  the  beautiful 
words  of  Tirumular: 

"When  resting  there  they  (the  yogis  who  attain  the  highest 
place  of  peace)  lose  themselves  and  become  idle.  .  .  .  Where  the 
idlers  dwell  is  the  pure  Space.  Where  the  idlers  sport  is  the 
Light.  What  the  idlers  know  is  Vedanta.  What  the  idlers  find 
is  the  deep  sleep  therein." 

§iva  is  a  destroyer  and  loves  the  burning  ground.  But  what 
does  He  destroy  ?  Not  merely  the  heavens  and  earth  at  the  close 
of  a  world-cycle,  but  the  fetters  that  bind  each  separate  soul.^ 
Where  and  what  is  the  burning  ground  ?  It  is  not  the  place  where 
our  earthly  bodies  are  cremated,  but  the  hearts  of  His  lovers,  laid 
waste  and  desolate.  The  place  where  the  ego  is  destroyed  sig- 
nifies the  state  where  illusion  and  deeds  are  burnt  away:  that  is 
the  crematorium,  the  burning-ground  where  5ri  Nataraja  dances, 
and  whence  He  is  named  Sudalaiyadi,  Dancer  of  the  burning- 
ground.  In  this  simile,  we  recognize  the  historical  connection 
between  Siva's  gracious  dance  as  Nataraja,  and  His  wild  dance 
as  the  demon  of  the  cemetery. 

This  conception  of  the  dance  is  current  also  amongst  Saktas, 
especially  in  Bengal,  where  the  Mother  rather  than  the  Father- 
aspect  of  Siva  is  adored.     Kali  is  here  the  dancer,  for  whose 

^  Cf .  Marcel  Schwob.  Le  Livre  de  Monelle. 

"This  is  the  teaching:  Destroy,  destro}'',  destroy.  Destroy  within  your- 
self, destroy  all  around  you.  Make  room  for  your  soul  and  for  other 
souls.  Destroy,  because  all  creation  proceeds  from  destruction  .... 
For  all  building  up  is  done  with  debris,  and  nothing  in  the  world  is  new 
but  shapes.  But  the  shapes  must  be  perpetually  destroyed  .  .  .  Break 
every  cup  from  which  you  drink." 


62  THE  DANCE  OF  SIVA 

entrance  the  heart  must  be  purified  by  fire,  made  empty  by  renun- 
ciation.   A  Bengali  Hymn  to  Kali  voices  this  prayer : 

"Because  Thou  lovest  the  Burning-ground, 

I  have  made  a  Burning-ground  of  my  heart — 

That  Thou,  Dark  One,  haunter  of  the  Burning-ground, 

Mayest  dance  Thy  eternal  dance. 

Nought  else  is  within  my  heart,  O  Mother : 

Day  and  night  blazes  the  funeral  pyre: 

The  ashes  of  the  dead,  strewn  all  about, 

I  have  preserved  against  Thy  coming, 

With  death-conquering  Mahakala  neath  Thy  feet 

Do  Thou  enter  in,  dancing  Thy  rhythmic  dance, 

That  I  may  behold  Thee  with  closed  eyes." 

Returning  to  the  South,  we  find  that  in  other  Tamil  texts  the 
purpose  of  diva's  dance  is  explained.  In  Sivajnana  Siddhiyar, 
Supaksha,  Sutra  V,  5,  we  find, 

"For  the  purpose  of  securing  both  kinds  of  fruit  to  the  count- 
less souls,  our  Lord,  with  actions  five,  dances  His  dance."  Both 
kinds  of  fruit,  that  is  Iham,  reward  in  this  world,  and  Param,  bliss 
in  Mukti. 

Again,  Untnai  Vilakkam,  v.  32,  37,  39  inform  us 

"The  Supreme  Intelligence  dances  in  the  soul  .  .  .  for  the 
purpose  of  removing  our  sins.  By  these  means,  our  Father 
scatters  the  darkness  of  illusion  {m&ya),  burns  the  thread  of 
causality  {karma),  stamps  down  evil  {mala,  anava,  avidyS), 
showers  Grace,  and  lovingly  plunges  the  soul  in  the  ocean  of 
Bliss  {ananda).  They  never  see  rebirths,  who  behold  this 
mystic  dance." 

The  conception  of  the  world  process  as  the  Lord's  pastime  or 
amusement  {llld)  is  also  prominent  in  the  Saiva  scriptures.  Thus 
Tirumijlar  writes,  "The  perpetual  dance  is  His  play."  This  spon- 
taneity of  Siva's  dance  is  so  clearly  expressed  in  Skryabin's  Poem 
of  Ecstasy  that  the  extracts  following  will  serve  to  explain  it 
better  than  any  more  formal  exposition — what  Skryabin  wrote 
is  precisely  what  the  Hindu  imager  moulded : 
"The  Spirit  {purusha)  playing. 
The  Spirit  longing. 

The  Spirit  with  fancy  {yoga-maya)  creating  all. 
Surrenders  himself  to  the  bliss  {ananda)  of  love   .   .   . 


THE  DANCE  OF  SIVA  63 

Amid  the  flowers  of  His  creation  (prakriti),  He  lingers  in  a 

kiss.   .   .  . 
Blinded  by  their  beauty,  He  rushes,  He  frolics.  He  dances, 

He  whirls.  .  .  . 
He  is  all  rapture,  all  bliss,  in  this  play  (Md) 
Free,  divine,  in  this  love  struggle. 
In  the  marvellous  grandeur  of  sheer  aimlessness. 
And  in  the  union  of  counter-aspirations 
In  consciousness  alone,  in  love  alone. 
The   Spirit   learns   the   nature    (svabhava)    of    His   divine 

being.  .  .  . 
*  O,  my  world,  my  life,  my  blossoming,  my  ecstasy ! 
Your  every  moment  I  create 

By  negation  of  all  forms  previously  lived  through : 
I  am  eternal  negation  (neti,  neti).     .     .     .' 
Enjoying  this  dance,  choking  in  this  whirlwind. 
Into  the  domain  of  ecstasy,  He  takes  swift  flight. 
In  this  unceasing  change   (samsdra,  nitya  bhava),  in  this 

flight,  aimless,  divine 
The  Spirit  comprehends  Himself, 
In  the  power  of  will,  alone,  free, 
Ever-creating,  all-irradiating,  all-vivifying, 
Divinely  playing  in  the  multiplicity  of  forms.  He  compre- 
hends Himself.  .   .   . 
'  I  already  dwell  in  thee,  O,  my  world. 
Thy  dream  of  me — 'twas  I  coming  into  existence.  .  .  . 
And  thou  art  all — one  wave  of  freedom  and  bliss.     .     .     .' 
By   a   general   conflagration    (mahd-pralaya)    the   universe 

(samsara)  is  embraced 
The  Spirit  is  at  the  height  of  being,  and  He  feels  the  tide 

unending 
Of  the  divine  power  (sakti)  of  free  will.    He  is  all-daring: 
What  menaced,  now  is  excitement. 
What  terrified,  is  now  delight.  ... 
And  the  universe  resounds  with  the  joyful  cry  I  am."* 
This  aspect  of  Siva's  immanence  appears  to  have  given  rise  to 
the  objection  that  he  dances  as  do  those  who  seek  to  please  the 
eyes  of  mortals:  but  it  is  answered  that  in  fact  He  dances  to 

^  From  the  translation  by  Lydia  L.  Pimenoff  Noble,  published  in  the 
Boston  Symphony  Orchestra  Programme,  October  29,  1917. 


64  THE  DANCE  OF  §IVA 

maintain  the  life  of  the  cosmos  and  to  give  release  to  those  who 
seek  Him.  Moreover,  if  we  understand  even  the  dances  of 
human  dancers  rightly,  we  shall  see  that  they  too  lead  to  free- 
dom.^ But  it  is  nearer  the  truth  to  answer  that  the  reason  of 
His  dance  lies  in  His  own  nature,  all  his  gestures  are  own-nature- 
born  (svabhdva-jah) ,  spontaneous,  and  purposeless — for  His  be- 
ing is  beyond  the  realm  of  purposes. 

In  a  much  more  arbitrary  way  the  dance  of  Siva  is  identified 
with  the  Pancdkshara,  or  five  syllables  of  the  prayer  Si-va-ya-na- 
ma,  'Hail  to  5iva.'  In  Unmai  Vilakkam  we  are  told:  "If  this 
beautiful  Five-Letters  be  meditated  upon,  the  soul  will  reach  the 
land  where  there  is  neither  light  nor  darkness,  and  there  Sakti 
will  make  it  One  with  Sivam."^ 

Another  verse  of  Unmai  Vilakkam  explains  the  fiery  arch 
{tiruvasi)  :  The  Panchakshara  and  the  Dance  are  identified  with 
the  mystic  syllable  *Om,'  the  arch  being  the  kombu  or  hook  of 
the  ideograph  of  the  written  symbol :  "The  arch  over  Sri  Nata- 
raja  is  Omkara;  and  the  akshara  which  is  never  separate  from 
the  Omkara  is  the  contained  splendour.  This  is  the  Dance 
of  the  Lord  of  Chidambaram." 

The  Tiru-Arul-Payan  however  (Ch.  ix.  3)  explains  the  tiruvdsi 
more  naturally  as  representing  the  dance  of  Nature,  contrasted 
with  Siva's  dance  of  wisdom. 

"The  dance  of  nature  proceeds  on  one  side:  the  dance  of  en- 
lightenment on  the  other.  Fix  your  mind  in  the  centre  of  the 
latter." 

I  am  indebted  to  Mr.  Nallasvami  Pillai  for  a  commentary  on 
this: 

The  first  dance  is  the  action  of  matter — material  and  individual 
energy.  This  is  the  arch,  tiruvdsi,  Omkara,  the  dance  of  Kali. 
The  other  is  the  Dance  of  Siva — the  akshara  inseparable  from 
the  Omkara — called  ardhamdtra  or  the  fourth  letter  of  the  Pra- 
nava — Chaturtam  and  Turiyam.  The  first  dance  is  not  possible 
unless  Siva  wills  it  and  dances  Himself. 

The  general  result  of  this  interpretation  of  the  arch  is,  then, 
that  it  represents  matter,  nature,  Prakriti ;  the  contained  splen- 
dour, Siva  dancing  within  and  touching  the  arch  with  head, 
hands  and  feet,  is  the  universal  omnipresent  Spirit  (Picrusha). 

^  See  Nandikesvara,  The  Mirror  of  Gesture^  translated  by  Coomara- 
swamy  and  Duggirala,  p.  11. 


THE  DANCE  OF  SIVA  65 

Between  these  stands  the  individual  soul,  as  ya  is  between  Si-va 
and  na-ma. 

Now  to  summarize  the  whole  interpretation  we  find  that  The 
Essential  Significance  of  Siva's  Dance  is  threefold:  First,  it  is 
the  image  of  his  Rhythmic  Play  as  the  Source  of  all  Movement 
within  the  Cosmos,  which  is  Represented  by  the  Arch:  Secondly, 
the  Purpose  of  his  Dance  is  to  Release  the  Countless  souls  of 
men  from  the  Snare  of  Illusion:  Thirdly  the  Place  of  the  Dance, 
Chidambaram,  the  Centre  of  the  Universe,  is  within  the  Heart. 

So  far  I  have  refrained  from  all  aesthetic  criticism  and  have 
endeavoured  only  to  translate  the  central  thought  of  the  con- 
ception of  Siva's  dance  from  plastic  to  verbal  expression,  with- 
out reference  to  the  beauty  or  imperfection  of  individual  works. 
But  it  may  not  be  out  of  place  to  call  attention  to  the  grandeur  of 
this  conception  itself  as  a  synthesis  of  science,  religion  and  art. 
How  amazing  the  range  of  thought  and  sympathy  of  those  rishi- 
artists  who  first  conceived  such  a  type  as  this,  affording  an  image 
of  reality,  a  key  to  the  complex  tissue  of  life,  a  theory  of  nature, 
not  merely  satisfactory  to  a  single  clique  or  race,  nor  acceptable 
to  the  thinkers  of  one  century  only,  but  universal  in  its  appeal 
to  the  philosopher,  the  lover,  and  the  artist  of  all  ages  and  all 
countries.  How  supremely  great  in  power  and  grace  this  danc- 
ing imiage  must  appear  to  all  those  who  have  striven  in  plastic 
forms  to  give  expression  to  their  intuition  of  Life! 

In  these  days  of  specialization,  we  are  not  accustomed  to  such 
a  synthesis  of  thought;  but  for  those  who  'saw'  such  images  as 
this,  there  could  have  been  no  division  of  life  and  thought  into 
water-tight  compartments.  Nor  do  we  always  realize,  when  we 
criticise  the  merits  of  individual  works,  the  full  extent  of  the 
creative  power  which,  to  borrow  a  musical  analogy,  could  dis- 
cover a  mode  so  expressive  of  fundamental  rhythms  and  so  pro- 
foundly significant  and  inevitable. 

Every  part  of  such  an  image  as  this  is  directly  expressive,  not 
of  any  mere  superstition  or  dogma,  but  of  evident  facts.  No 
artist  of  today,  however,  great,  could  more  exactly  or  more  wisely 
create  an  image  of  that  Energy  which  science  must  postulate 
behind  all  phenomena.  If  we  would  reconcile  Time  with  Eter- 
nity, we  can  scarcely  do  so  otherwise  than  by  the  conception  of 
alternations  of  phase  extending  over  vast  regions  of  space  and 
great  tracts  of  time.      Especially  significant,  then,  is  the  phase 


66  THE  DANCE  OF  SIVA 

alternation  implied  by  the  drum,  and  the  fire  which  'changes/ 
not  destroys.  These  are  but  visual  symbols  of  the  theory  of  the 
day  and  night  of  Brahma. 

In  the  night  of  Brahma,  Nature  is  inert,  and  cannot  dance  till 
Siva  wills  it:  He  rises  from  His  rapture,  and  dancing  sends 
through  inert  matter  pulsing  waves  of  awakening  sound,  and 
lo!  matter  also  dances  appearing  as  a  glory  round  about  Him. 
Dancing,  He  sustains  its  manifold  phenomena.  In  the  fulness  of 
time,  still  dancing,  he  destroys  all  forms  and  names  by  fire  and 
g^ves  new  rest.    This  is  poetry ;  but  none  the  less,  science. 

It  is  not  strange  that  the  figure  of  Nataraja  has  commanded 
the  adoration  of  so  many  generations  past:  familiar  with  all 
scepticisms,  expert  in  tracing  all  beliefs  to  primitive  supersti- 
tions, explorers  of  the  infinitely  great  and  infinitely  small,  we  are 
worshippers  of  Nataraja  still. 


r 


PLATE  XII 


IMAGES  WITH  MANY  ARMS. 


k 


Brahma.      Brahmanical    stone    sculpture,    Elephanta,    8th    Century. 


INDIAN  IMAGES  WITH  MANY  ARMS 

Certain  writers,  speaking  of  the  many-armed  images  of  Indian 
art,  have  treated  this  pecuUarity  as  an  unpardonable  defect. 
"After  300  A.D.,"  says  Mr.  Vincent  Smith,  "Indian  sculpture 
properly  so-called  hardly  deserves  to  be  reckoned  as  art.  The 
figures  both  of  men  and  animals  become  stiff  and  formal,  and  the 
idea  of  power  is  clumsily  expressed  by  the  multiplication  of 
members.  The  many-headed,  many-armed  gods  and  goddesses 
whose  images  crowd  the  walls  and  roofs  of  madiaeval  temples 
have  no  pretentions  to  beauty,  and  are  frequently  hideous  and 
grotesque."^  Mr.  Maskell  speaks  of  "these  hideous  deities  with 
animals'  heads  and  innumerable  arms."^  Sir  George  Birdwood 
considers  that  "the  monstrous  shapes  of  the  Puranic  deities  are 
unsuitable  for  the  higher  forms  of  artistic  representation;  and 
this  is  possibly  why  sculpture  and  painting  are  unknown  as  fine 
arts  in  India."'  Quotations  of  this  kind  could  be  multiplied,  bur 
enough  has  been  given  to  show  that  for  a  certain  class  of  critics 
there  exists  the  underlying  assumption  that  in  Indian  art  the 
multiplications  of  limbs  or  heads,  or  addition  of  any  animal  at- 
tributes, is  in  itself  a  very  grave  defect,  and  fatal  to  any  claim  for 
merit  in  the  works  concerned. 

In  reply  to  criticisms  of  this  kind  it  would  be  useless  to  cite 
examples  of  Greek  art  such  as  the  Victory  of  Samothrace  or  the 
head  of  Hypnos:  of  Egyptian,  such  as  the  figures  of  Sekhet  or 
other  animal  divinities:  of  Byzantine  or  mediaeval  angels:  or 
modern  works  such  as  some  of  M.  Rodin's.  For  it  is  clear  that 
all  these,  if  the  critics  be  consistent,  must  suffer  equal  condem- 
nation. 

Let  me  digress  at  this  point  to  class  the  critics :  for  I  fear  that 

*  Imperial  Gazetteer  of  India.  1910,  vol.  II. 

^Ivories,  1915.  p.  332. 

^Industrial  Arts  of  India,  1880,  p.  125.  If  the  fine  arts  were  until 
recently  "unknown  in  India,"  perhaps  this  can  be  explained  by  the 
remark  of  B.  H.  Baden-Powell,  who  says  that  "In  a  country  like  this 
we  must  not  expect  to  find  anything  that  appeals  to  mind  or  deep 
feeling."  For  "unknown"  to  Sir  George  Birdwood  or  Mr.  Baden- 
Powell  need  not  imply  anything  more  than  "unrecognized." 

It  is  fair  to  say  that  Mr.  Vincent  Smith's  opinions  have  been  con- 
siderably modified  since  1910. 


68  INDIAN  IMAGES  WITH   MANY  ARMS 

I  ought  to  apologise  for  putting  forward  in  this  chapter  what  is 
obvious.  The  difficuhy  is  one  that  has  been  raised  exclusively 
by  philologists  and  historians :  in  a  considerable  experience  I  have 
never  heard  these  objections  raised  by  artists  or  by  connoisseurs. 
These  notes  are  dedicated,  then,  only  to  the  philologist  and  the 
historian,  and  may  be  neglected  by  all  others. 

The  condemnations  quoted  are  certainly  to  be  justified  if  we 
are  to  agree  to  find  the  final  aim  of  art  in  representation:  then 
let  us  seek  the  most  attractive  models  and  carefully  copy  them. 

But  this  test  of  verisimilitude  has  never  been  anything  more 
than  the  result  of  a  popular  misunderstanding.  Let  us  submit 
the  Indian,  Greek  or  Egyptian  figures  to  recognized  standards, 
and  to  criticism  a  little  more  penetrating  than  is  involved  in 
merely  counting  heads  or  arms. 

Leonardo  says  that  that  figure  is  most  worthy  of  praise  which 
by  its  action  best  expresses  the  passion  that  animates  it. 

Hsieh  Ho  demands  that  the  work  of  art  should  exhibit  the 
fusion  of  the  rhythm  of  the  spirit  with  the  movement  of  living 
things. 

Mr.  Holmes  suggests  that  a  work  of  art  must  possess  in  some 
degree  the  four  qualities  of  Unity,  Vitality,  Infinity  and  Repose. 

In  other  words,  a  work  of  art  is  great  in  so  far  as  it  expresses 
its  own  theme  in  a  form  at  once  rhythmic  and  impassioned: 
through  a  definite  pattern  it  must  express  a  motif  deeply  felt. 

From  this  point  of  view  it  would  seem  that  we  must  take  each 
work  of  art  upon  its  own  merits.  To  apply  the  simplest  tests  just 
quoted — I  wish  to  speak  with  the  greatest  possible  simplicity — an 
image  with  many  arms  or  heads  may  be  called  an  inferior  work 
of  art,  or  inartistic,  if  it  lacks  any  one  of  the  four  qualities 
demanded  by  Mr.  Holmes,  or  as  we  may  say,  if  it  is  not '  felt.'  But 
if  it  has  such  qualities,  if  it  is  felt,  need  we  further  concern 
ourselves  with  arithmetic? 

The  artist  does  not  choose  his  own  problems:  he  finds  in  the 
canon  instruction  to  make  such  and  such  images  in  such  and 
such  a  fashion — for  example,  an  image  of  Nataraja  with  four 
arms  (Frontispiece),  of  Brahma  with  four  heads,  Plate  XII,  of 
Mahisha-mardinI  with  ten  arms,  Plate  XIII,  or  of  Ganesa  with 
an  elephant's  head.  Our  critics  are  bold  enough  to  assert  that 
in  obeying  these  instructions  he  cannot  create  a  work  of  art.  It 
would  have  been  fairer  and  more  moderate  to  suggest  that  the 


IMAGES  WITH  MANY  ARMS.  PLATE  XIII 


.JJj^.SSK/KTT-    :'^'?«^.«.,-^ 


Durga  as   Chandl   slaying   Mahisha.     Brahmanical   bronze.     Java.        11  th   Century. 


INDIAN  IMAGES   WITH  MANY  ARMS  69 

problems  propounded  are  often  very  difficult ;  this  would  have  left 
open  the  way  to  recognize  a  successful  effort,  if  such  could  be 
found.  To  have  overcome  the  difficulties  would  then  be  a  proof 
of  artistic  capacity — and  I  suppose  it  should  be  the  aim  of  the 
historian  of  art  to  discover  such  proofs. 

The  accompanying  illustration,  Plate  XIII,  shows  a  Javanese 
figure  of  Mahisha-mardini  with  ten  arms,  slaying  the  demon  Ma- 
hisha.  She  is  here  an  dread  avenging  power:  yet  she  is  neither 
cruel  nor  angry,  but  rather  sad  with  the  sadness  of  those  who  are 
wise,  playing  an  inevitable  part,  though  at  heart  no  more  than  the 
spectator  of  a  drama.  This  entire  figure,  damaged  as  it  is, 
shows  what  tenderness  may  be  expressed,  even  in  rajasic  images. 
And  this  peace  and  tenderness  find  expression  in  the  movement 
of  the  whole  figure,  and  not  by  any  arbitrary  means:  no  part 
of  the  whole  is  at  war  with  any  other,  and  this  is  what  we  mean 
by  unity.  It  would  indeed  be  futile  to  condemn  an  image  such 
as  this  because  it  has  ten  arms.  Or  take  the  Nataraja  image  of 
the  primal  rhythmic  energy  underlying  all  phenomenal  appear- 
ances and  activity:  here  is  perpetual  movement,  perpetually 
poised — the  rhythm  of  the  spirit. 

The  death  of  Hiranyakasipu,  Plate  XIV,  is  a  work  that  may 
be  called  grotesque.  We  have  long  learnt  however  that  this  cannot 
be  used  as  a  mere  term  of  abuse.  It  would  be  difficult  to  imagine 
a  more  splendid  rendering  of  the  well  known  theme  of  the  impious 
king  who  met  his  death  at  the  hands  of  the  avenging  deity  in  man- 
lion  form.  The  hand  upon  the  shoulder,  the  shrinking  figure  with 
the  mocking  smile  that  has  had  no  time  to  fade — what  could  be 
more  terrible  ?  These  are  figures  expressing  by  their  action  their 
animating  passions:  or  if  not  so,  then  none  have  ever  been.  It 
would  be  unkind  to  contrast  a  work  such  as  this  with  the  'truth  to 
nature'  of  the  Laokoon. 

In  these  figures  we  cannot  speak  of  the  many  arms  as  'addi- 
tional members'  because  in  a  human  being  they  might  appear  to 
be  such.  We  have  here  a  work  of  art  which  is,  or  is  not  a  unity. 
If  the  work  is  a  unity  we  can  no  more  speak  of  added  elements, 
than  we  can  speak  of  ornament  in  a  work  of  art  as  something 
added  to  an  expression  that  would  not  otherwise  be  beautiful. 
It  is  not  by  addition  or  removal  that  we  create.  Before  these 
works  we  can  only  ask,  are  these,  or  are  they  not,  clear  and  im- 
passioned expressions  o.f  their  subject  matter?    All  unprejudiced 


yo  INDIAN  IMAGES  WITH  MANY  ARMS 

and  competent  observers  would  then  agree  that  amongst  Indian 
images  there  are  some  of  which  we  can  say  that  they  are  such 
adequate  expressions,  and  of  others  that  they  are  not:  but  to 
recognize  those  and  these  requires  a  rather  more  subtle  approach 
than  that  involved  in  the  arithmetical  process  of  counting  arms 
or  heads. 

Certain  developments  in  the  most  modem  art  could  be  quoted 
in  comparison  with  the  Indian  complex  figures,  and,  indeed,  the 
method  of  these  is  more  than  modern.  Some  painters  of  the 
present  day  have  sought  by  many  strange  devices  to  create  a 
synthetic  and  symphonic  art  representing  a  continuity  of  thought 
or  action,  and  an  interpretation  of  ideas  belonging  to  more  than 
a  single  phase  of  personality — an  art  of  interpretation.  And  if, 
as  we  now  realise,  even  the  human  personality  is  compound,  we 
should  understand  that  this  must  be  even  more  true  of  a  cosmic 
divinity,  who  is,  indeed,  able  by  a  division  of  upadhis,  to  func- 
tion in  many  places  at  one  time.  To  reflect  such  conceptions  in 
art  demands  a  synthetic  rather  than  a  representative  language. 
It  might  well  be  claimed,  then,  that  this  method  adopted  some- 
times in  India,  sometimes  in  Egypt,  sometimes  in  Greece,  and 
still  employed,  has  proved  successful  from  the  practical  point  of 
view,  of  pure  expression,  the  getting  said  what  had  to  be  said: 
and  this  is  after  all  the  sure  and  safe  foundation  of  art. 

These  forms  remain  potentially  equally  satisfactory,  too, 
whether  as  philosophers  we  regard  them  as  purely  abstract  ex- 
pressions, or  with  the  artists  themselves  regard  them  as  realistic 
presentations  of  another  order  of  life  than  our  own,  deriving 
from  a  deva-loka,  other  than  the  world  we  are  familiar  with, 
but  not  necessarily  unknowable  or  always  invisible.  The  distinc- 
tion in  any  case  is  slight,  for  the  images  equally  belong  to  a 
world  of  their  own,  however  we  regard  them. 

The  criticism  of  the  philologists  ultimately  resolves  itself  into 
a  complaint  that  the  art  is  not  always  representative  ('true  to 
nature').  I  have  tried  to  show  that  it  is  true  to  experience  and 
feeling.  But  aside  from  that,  whatever  in  a  work  of  art  is 
ostensibly  representative  must  be  judged  according  to  the  logic 
of  the  world  it  represents — even  if  that  world  be  no  other  than 
the  idea-world  of  the  sadhanas  and  dhydna  mantrams.  All  worlds 
are  idea-worlds  of  one  kind  or  another,  and  we  should  also  remem- 
ber that  'recognition'  does  not  necessarily  imply  any  real  knowl- 


IMAGES    WITH    MANY    ARMS.  PLATE  XIV 


Death  of  Hiranyakasipu.     Brahmanical  stone  sculpture.     Elura,  8th  Century. 


INDIAN  IMAGES  WITH  MANY  ARMS  71 

edge  of  things  in  themselves — we  do  not  know  that  men  have 
really  two  arms,  that  is  merely  an  'intelligible  representation.' 
It  is  no  criticism  of  a  fairy  tale  to  say  that  in  our  world  we  meet 
no  fairies:  we  should  rather,  and  do  actually,  condemn  on  the 
score  of  insincerity,  a  fairy  tale  which  should  be  so  made  as  to 
suggest  that  in  the  writer's  world  there  were  no  fairies.  It  is  no 
criticism  of  a  beast-fable  to  say  that  after  all  animals  do  not 
talk  English  or  Sanskrit.  Nor  is  it  a  criticism  of  an  Indian  icon 
to  point  out  that  we  know  no  human  beings  with  more  than 
two  arms. 

To  appreciate  any  art,  moreover,  we  ought  not  to  concentrate 
our  attention  upon  its  peculiarities — ethical  or  formal — but  should 
endeavour  to  take  for  granted  whatever  the  artist  takes  for 
granted.  No  motif  appears  bizarre  to  those  who  have  been 
familiar  with  it  for  generations:  and  in  the  last  analysis  it  must 
remain  beyond  the  reach  of  all  others  so  long  as  it  remains  in 
their  eyes  primarily  bizarre. 

If  circumstances  then  compel  the  philologist  and  the  historian 
to  classify  the  extant  materials  for  the  study  of  Indian  art,  their 
studies  will  be  the  more  valuable  the  more  strictly  they  are  con- 
fined to  the  archaeological  point  of  view.  For  those  should  not 
air  their  likes  and  dislikes  in  Oriental  art,  who  when  they  speak 
of  art  mean  mere  illustration :  for  there  they  will  rarely  meet  with 
what  they  seek,  and  the  expression  of  their  disappointment  be- 
comes wearisome. 


INDIAN  MUSIC 

Music  has  been  a  cultivated  art  in  India  for  at  least  three 
thousand  years.  The  chant  is  an  essential  element  of  Vedic 
ritual ;  and  the  references  in  later  Vedic  literature,  the  scriptures 
of  Buddhism,  and  the  Brahmanical  epics  show  that  it  was  already 
highly  developed  as  a  secular  art  in  centuries  preceding  the  begin- 
ning of  the  Christian  era.  Its  zenith  may  perhaps  be  assigned 
to  the  Imperial  age  of  the  Guptas — from  the  fourth  to  the  sixth 
century  A.  D.  This  was  the  classic  period  of  Sanskrit  literature, 
culminating  in  the  drama  of  Kalidasa;  and  to  the  same  time  is 
assigned  the  monumental  treatise  of  Bharata  on  the  theory  of- 
music  and  drama. 

The  art  music  of  the  present  day  is  a  direct  descendant  of 
these  ancient  schools,  whose  traditions  have  been  handed  down 
with  comment  and  expansion  in  the  guilds  of  the  hereditary 
musicians.  While  the  words  of  a  song  may  have  been  composed 
at  any  date,  the  musical  themes  communicated  orally  from  master 
to  disciple  are  essentially  ancient.  As  in  other  arts  and  in  life, 
so  here  also  India  presents  to  us  the  wonderful  spectacle  of  the 
still  surviving  consciousness  of  the  ancient  world,  with  a  range 
of  emotional  experience  rarely  accessible  to  those  who  are  pre- 
occupied with  the  activities  of  over-production,  and  intimidated 
by  the  economic  insecurity  of  a  social  order  based  on  competition. 

The  art  music  of  India  exists  only  under  cultivated  patron- 
age, and  in  its  own  intimate  environment.  It  corresponds  to  all 
that  is  most  classical  in  the  European  tradition.  It  is  the  chamber- 
music  of  an  aristocratic  society,  where  the  patron  retains  music- 
ians for  his  own  entertainment  and  for  the  pleasure  of  the  circle 
of  his  friends:  or  it  is  temple  music,  where  the  musician  is  the 
servant  of  God.  The  public  concert  is  unknown,  and  the  liveli- 
hood of  the  artist  does  not  depend  upon  his  ability  and  will  to 
amuse  the  crowd.  In  other  words,  the  musician  is  protected. 
Under  these  circumstances  he  is  under  no  temptation  to  be  any- 
thing but  a  musician;  his  education  begins  in  infancy,  and  his 
art  remains  a  vocation.  The  civilizations  of  Asia  do  not  afford 
to  the  inefficient  amateur  those  opportunities  of  self-expression 


PLATE  XV 


INDIAN  MUSIC. 


Chamber-music  of  an  aristocratic  society.'     Late  Mughal   painting,  ISth  century. 


INDIAN  MUSIC  73 

which  are  so  highly  appreciated  in  Europe  and  America.  The 
arts  are  nowhere  taught  as  a  social  accomplishment;  on  the  one 
hand  there  is  the  professional,  proficient  in  a  traditional  art,  and 
on  the  other  the  lay  public.  The  musical  cultivation  of  the  public 
does  not  consist  in  "everybody  doing  it,"  but  in  appreciation  and 
reverence. 

I  have  indeed  heard  the  strange  objection  raised  that  to  sing 
the  music  of  India  one  must  be  an  artist;  and  this  objection  seems 
to  voice  a  typically  democratic  disapproval  of  superiority.  But 
it  would  be  nearly  as  true  to  say  that  the  listener  must  respond 
with  an  art  of  his  own,  and  this  would  be  entirely  in  accord  with 
Indian  theories  of  aesthetic.  The  musician  in  India  finds  a 
model  audience — technically  critical.  Out  somewhat  indifferent  to 
voice  production.  The  Indian  audience  listens  rather  to  the  song 
than  to  the  singing  of  the  song:  those  who  are  musical,  perfect 
the  rendering  of  the  song  by  the  force  of  their  own  imagination 
and  emotion.  Under  these  conditions  the  actual  music  is  better 
heard  than  where  the  sensuous  perfection  of  the  voice  is  made  a 
sine  qua  non:  precisely  as  the  best  sculpture  is  primitive  rather 
than  suave,  and  we  prefer  conviction  to  prettiness — "It  is  like 
the  outward  poverty  of  God,^  whereby  His  glory  is  nakedly 
revealed."  None  the  less  the  Indian  singer's  voice  is  sometimes 
of  great  intrinsic  beauty,  and  isometimes  used  with  sensitive 
intelligence  as  well  as  skill.  It  is  not,  however,  the  voice  that 
makes  the  singer,  as  so  often  happens  in  Europe. 

Since  Indian  music  is  not  written,  and  cannot  be  learnt  from 
books,  except  in  theory,  it  will  be  understood  that  the  only  way 
for  a  foreigner  to  learn  it  must  be  to  establish  between  himself 
and  his  Indian  teachers  that  special  relationship  of  disciple  and 
master  which  belongs  to  Indian  education  in  all  its  phases:  he 
must  enter  into  the  inner  spirit  and  must  adopt  many  of  the 
outer  conventions  of  Indian  life,  and  his  study  must  continue 
until  he  can  improvise  the  songs  under  Indian  conditions  and  to 
the  satisfaction  of  Indian  professional  listeners.  He  must  possess 
not  only  the  imagination  of  an  artist,  but  also  a  vivid  memorj' 
and  an  ear  sensitive  to  microtonal  inflections. 

The  theory  of  scale  is  everywhere  a  generalisation  from  the 

1  Mahesvara,  who  wanders  through  the  world  a  penniless  and  naked 
ascetic. 


74 


INDIAN  MUSIC 


facts  of  song.  The  European  art  scale  has  been  reduced  to 
twelve  fixed  notes  by  merging  nearly  identical  intervals  such  as 
D  sharp  and  E  flat,  and  it  is  also  tempered  to  facilitate  modulation 
and  free  change  of  key.  In  other  words,  the  piano  is  out  of 
tune  by  hypothesis.  Only  this  compromise,  necessitated  in  the 
development  of  harmony,  has  made  possible  the  triumphs  of 
modern  orchestration.  A  purely  melodic  art,  however,  may  be 
no  less  intensely  cultivated,  and  remains  the  advantages  of  pure 
intonation  and  modal  colouring. 

Apart  from  the  keyed  instruments  of  modem  Europe  there 
scarcely  exists  an  absolutely  fixed  scale:  at  any  rate,  in  India 
the  thing  fixed  is  a  group  of  intervals,  and  the  precise  vibration 
value  of  a  note  depends  on  its  position  in  a  progression,  not  on 
its  relation  to  a  tonic.  The  scale  of  twenty-two  notes  is  simply 
the  sum  of  all  the  notes  used  in  all  the  songs — no  musician  sings 
a  chromatic  scale  from  C  to  C  with  twenty-two  stopping  places, 
for  this  would  be  a  mere  totir  de  force. 

The  'quarter-tone'  or  sruti  is  the  microtonal  interval  between 
two  successive  scale  notes:  but  as  the  theme  rarely  employs 
two  and  never  three  scale  notes  in  succession,  the  microtonal 
interval  Is  not  generally  conspicuous  except  in  ornament. 

Every  Indian  song  is  said  to  be  in  a  particular  rdga  or  rdgini 
— raginl  being  the  feminine  of  raga,  and  indicating  an  abridge- 
ment or  modification  of  the  main  theme.  The  raga,  like  the  old 
Greek  and  the  ecclesiastical  mode,  is  a  selection  of  five,  six,  or 
seven  notes,  distributed  along  the  scale;  but  the  raga  is  more 
particularized  than  a  mode,  for  it  has  certain  characteristic  pro- 
gressions, and  a  chief  note  to  which  the  singer  constantly  returns. 
None  of  the  ragas  employs  more  than  seven  substantive  notes,  and 
there  is  no  modulation:  the  strange  tonality  of  the  Indian  song 
is  due  to  the  use  of  unfamiliar  intervals,  and  not  to  the  use  of 
many  successive  notes  with  small  divisions. 

The  raga  may  be  best  defined  as  a  melody-mould  or  the  ground 
plan  of  a  song.  It  is  this  ground  plan  which  the  master  first  of 
all  communicates  to  the  pupil;  and  to  sing  is  to  improvise  upon 
the  theme  thus  defined.  The  possible  number  of  ragas  is  very 
large,  but  the  majority  of  systems  recognise  thirty-six,  that  is  to 
say  six  ragas,  each  with  five  raginis.  The  origin  of  the  ragas 
is  various:  some,  like  Pahari,  are  derived  from  local  folk-song, 
others,  like  Jog,  from  the  songs  of  wandering  ascetics,  and  still 


INDIAN  MUSIC. 


PLATE    XVJ 


Ratan   Devi,   singer  of   Indian   songs   in   America 
(Photograph   by   Arnold   Genthe.) 


INDIAN  MUSIC 


75 


others  are  the  creation  of  great  musicians  by  whose  names  they 
are  known.  More  than  sixty  are  mentioned  in  a  Sanskrit-Tibetan 
vocabulary  of  the  seventh  century,  with  names  such  as  'With-a- 
voice-like-a-thunder-cloud/  'Like-the-god-Indra/  and  'Delighting- 
the  heart.'  Amongst  the  raga  names  in  modern  use  may  be  cited 
'Spring/  Evening  beauty/  'Honey-flower/  'The  swing/  'Intoxi- 
cation/ 

Psychologically  the  word  raga,  meaning  colouring  or  passion, 
suggests  to  Indian  ears  the  idea  of  mood ;  that  is  to  say  that  pre- 
cisely as  in  ancient  Greece,  the  musical  mode  has  definite  ethos. 
It  is  not  the  purpose  of  the  song  to  repeat  the  confusion  of  life, 
but  to  express  and  arouse  particular  passions  of  body  and  soul 
in  man  and  nature.  Each  raga  is  associated  with  an  hour  of 
the  day  or  night  when  it  may  be  appropriately  sung,  and  some 
are  associated  with  particular  seasons  or  have  definite  magic 
effects.  Thus  there  is  still  believed  the  well-known  story  of  a 
musician  whose  royal  patron  arbitrarily  insisted  on  hearing  a 
song  in  the  Dipak  raga,  which  creates  fire:  the  musician  obeyed 
under  protest,  but  as  the  song  proceeded,  he  burst  into  flames, 
which  could  not  be  extinguished  even  though  he  sprang  into  the 
waters  of  the  Jamna.  It  is  just  because  of  this  element  of  magic, 
and  the  association  of  he  ragas  with  the  rhythmic  ritual  of  daily 
and  seasonal  life,  that  their  clear  outlines  must  not  be  blurred  by 
modulation:  and  this  is  expressed,  when  the  ragas  are  personi- 
fied as  musical  genii,  by  saying  that  'to  sing  out  of  the  raga'  is 
to  break  the  limbs  of  these  musical  angels.  A  characteristic  story 
is  related  of  the  prophet  Narada,  when  he  was  still  but  a  learner. 
He  thought  that  he  had  mastered  the  whole  art  of  music;  but 
the  all-wise  Vishnu,  to  curb  his  pride,  revealed  to  him  in  the 
world  of  the  gods,  a  spacious  building  where  there  lay  men  and 
women  weeping  over  their  broken  arms  and  legs.  They  were 
the  ragas  and  raginis,  and  they  said  that  a  certain  sage  of  the 
name  of  Narada,  ignorant  of  music  and  unskillful  in  performance, 
had  sung  them  amiss,  and  therefore  their  features  were  distorted 
and  their  limbs  broken,  and  until  they  were  sung  truly  there  would 
be  no  cure  for  them.  Then  Narada  was  humbled,  and  kneeling 
before  Vishnu  prayed  to  be  taught  the  art  of  music  more  per- 
fectly: and  in  due  course  he  became  the  great  musician  priest 
of  the  gods, 

Indian  music  is  a  purely  melodic  art,  devoid  of  any  harmonised 


yd  INDIAN  MUSIC 

accompaniment  other  than  a  drone.  In  modern  European  art, 
the  meaning  of  each  note  of  the  theme  is  mainly  brought  out  by 
the  notes  of  the  chord  which  are  heard  with  it;  and  even  in 
unaccompanied  melody,  the  musician  hears  an  implied  harmony. 
Unaccompanied  folk-song  does  not  satisfy  the  concert-goer's  ear ; 
as  pure  melody  it  is  the  province  only  of  the  peasant  and  the 
specialist.  This  is  partly  because  the  folk-air  played  on  the 
piano  or  written  in  staff  notation  is  actually  falsified;  but  much 
more  because  under  the  conditions  of  European  art,  melody  no 
longer  exists  in  its  own  right,  and  music  is  a  compromise  between 
melodic  freedom  and  harmonic  necessity.  To  hear  the  music  of 
India  as  Indians  hear  it  one  must  recover  the  sense  of  a  pure 
intonation  and  must  forget  all  implied  harmonies.  It  is  just  like 
the  effort  which  we  have  to  make  when  for  the  first  time,  after 
being  accustomed  to  modern  art,  we  attempt  to  read  the  language 
of  early  Italian  or  Chinese  painting,  where  there  is  expressed 
with  equal  economy  of  means  all  that  intensity  of  experience 
which  nowadays  we  are  accustomed  to  understand  only  through 
a  more  involved  technique. 

Another  feature  of  Indian  song — and  so  also  of  the  instru- 
mental solo — is  the  elaborate  grace.  It  is  natural  that  in  Europe, 
where  many  notes  are  heard  simultaneously,  grace  should  appear 
as  an  unnecessary  elaboration,  added  to  the  note,  rather  than  a 
structural  factor.  But  in  India  the  note  and  the  microtonal 
grace  compose  a  closer  unity,  for  the  grace  fulfils  just  that  func- 
tion of  adding  light  and  shade  which  in  harmonised  music  is 
attained  by  the  varying  degrees  of  assonance.  The  Indian  song 
without  grace  would  seem  to  Indian  ears  as  bald  as  the  European 
art  song  without  the  accompaniment  which  it  presupposes. 

Equally  distinctive  is  the  constant  portamento,  or  rather, 
glissando.  In  India  it  is  far  more  the  interval  than  the  note  that 
is  sung  or  played,  and  we  recognize  accordingly  a  continuity  of 
sound :  by  contrast  with  this,  the  European  song,  which  is  verti- 
cally divided  by  the  harmonic  interest  and  the  nature  of  the 
keyed  instruments  which  are  heard  with  the  voice,  seems  to  un- 
accustomed Indian  ears  to  be  "full  of  holes." 

All  the  songs,  except  the  'alaps'  are  in  strict  rhythms.  These 
are  only  difficult  to  follow  at  a  first  hearing  because  the  Indian 
rhythms  are  founded,  as  in  prosody,  on  contrasts  of  long  and 
short  duration,  while  European  rhythms  are  based  on  stress,  as 


INDIAN  MUSIC. 


PLATE  XVII 


TodI  Ragini   (a  musical  mode).     Rajput  paiuting,   16th  century     Museum  of  Fine 

Arts,  Boston. 


/ 


INDIAN  MUSIC  yy 

in  dance  or  marching.  The  Indian  musician  does  not  mark  the 
beginning  of  the  bar  by  accent.  His  fixed  unit  is  a  section,  or 
group  of  bars  which  are  not  necessarily  ahke,  while  the  Euro- 
pean fixed  unit  is  typically  the  bar,  of  which  a  varying  number 
constitute  a  section.  The  European  rhythm  is  counted  in  mul- 
tiples of  2  or  3,  the  Hindu  in  sums  of  2  or  3.  Some  of  the 
countings  are  very  elaborate:  Ata  Tala,  for  example,  is  counted 
as  5  plus  5  plus  2  plus  2.  The  frequent  use  of  cross  rhythms 
also  complicates  the  form.  Indian  music  is  modal  in  times  as 
well  as  melody.  For  all  these  reasons  it  is  difficult  to  grasp 
immediately  the  point  at  which  a  rhythm  begins  and  ends,  although 
this  is  quite  easy  for  the  Indian  audience  accustomed  to  quanti- 
tative poetic  recitation.  The  best  way  to  approach  the  Indian 
rhythm  is  to  pay  attention  to  the  phrasing,  and  ignore  pulsation. 

The  Indian  art-song  is  accompanied  by  drums,  or  by  the  instru- 
ment known  as  a  tambura,  or  by  both.  The  tambura  is  of  the 
lute  tribe,  but  without  frets :  the  four  very  long  strings  are  tuned 
to  sound  the  dominant,  the  upper  tonic  twice,  and  the  octave 
below,  which  are  common  to  all  ragas:  the  pitch  is  adjusted  to 
suit  the  singer's  voice.  The  four  strings  are  fitted  with  simple 
resonators — shreds  of  wool  between  the  string  and  the  bridge — 
which  are  the  source  of  their  'life' :  and  the  strings  are  continu- 
ously sounded,  making  a  pedal  point  background  very  rich  in 
overtones,  and  against  this  dark  ground  of  infinite  potentiality 
the  song  stands  out  like  an  elaborate  embroidery.  The  tambura 
must  not  be  regarded  as  a  solo  instrument,  nor  as  an  object  of 
separate  interest  like  the  piano  accompaniment  of  a  modem  song: 
its  soimd  is  rather  the  ambient  in  which  the  song  lives  and  moves 
and  has  its  being, 

India  has,  besides  the  tambura,  many  solo  instruments.  By 
far  the  most  important  of  these  is  the  vlnd.  This  classic  instru- 
ment, which  ranks  with  the  violin  of  Europe  and  the  koto  of 
Japan,  and  second  only  to  the  voice  in  sensitive  response,  differs 
chiefly  from  the  tambura  in  having  frets,  the  notes  being  made 
with  the  left  hand  and  the  strings  plucked  with  the  right.  The 
delicate  nuances  of  microtonal  grace  are  obtained  by  deflection 
of  the  strings,  whole  passages  being  played  in  this  manner  solely 
by  a  lateral  movement  of  the  left  hand,  without  a  fresh  plucking. 
While  the  only  difficulty  in  playing  the  tambura  is  to  maintain 
an  even  rhythm  independently  of  the  song,  the  vlnd  presents  all 


78  INDIAN  MUSIC 

the  difficulties  of  technique  that  can  be  imagined,  and  it  is  said 
that  at  least  twelve  years  are  required  to  attain  proficiency. 

The  Indian  singer  is  a  poet,  and  the  poet  a  singer.  The 
dominant  subject  matter  of  the  songs  is  human  or  divine  love  in 
all  its  aspects,  or  the  direct  praise  of  God,  and  the  words  are 
always  sincere  and  passionate.  The  more  essentially  the  singer 
is  a  musician,  however,  the  more  the  words  are  regarded  merely 
as  the  vehicle  of  the  music:  in  art-song  the  words  are  always 
brief,  voicing  a  mood  rather  than  telling  any  story,  and  they  are 
used  to  support  the  music  with  little  regard  to  their  own  logic — 
precisely  as  the  representative  element  in  a  modem  painting 
merely  serves  as  the  basis  for  an  organisation  of  pure  form  or 
coulour.  In  the  musical  form  called  alap — an  improvisation  on 
the  raga  theme,  this  preponderance  of  the  music  is  carried  so  far 
that  only  meaningless  syllables  are  used.  The  voice  itself  is  a 
musical  instrument,  and  the  song  is  more  than  the  words  of  the 
song.  This  form  is  especially  favoured  by  the  Indian  virtuoso, 
who  naturally  feels  a  certain  contempt  for  those  whose  first 
interest  in  the  song  is  connected  with  the  words.  The  voice  has 
thus  a  higher  status  than  in  Europe,  for  the  music  exists  in  its 
own  right  and  not  merely  to  illustrate  the  words.  Rabindranath 
Tagore  has  written  on  this : 

When  I  was  very  young  I  heard  the  song,  'Who  dressed  you  like 
a  foreigner?',  and  that  one  line  of  the  song  painted  such  a  strange 
picture  in  my  mind  that  even  now  it  is  sounding  in  my  memory.  I 
once  tried  to  compose  a  song  myself  under  the  spell  of  that  line.  As 
I  hummed  the  tune,  I  wrote  the  first  line  of  the  song,  'I  know  thee, 
thou  stranger,'  and  if  there  were  no  tune  to  it,  I  cannot  tell  what 
meaning  would  be  left  in  the  song.  But  by  the  power  of  the  spell 
of  the  tune  the  mysterious  figure  of  that  stranger  was  evoked  in  my 
mind.  My  heart  began  to  say,  'There  is  a  stranger  going  to  and 
fro  in  this  world  of  ours  —  her  house  is  on  the  further  shore  of  an 
ocean  of  mystery — sometimes  she  is  to  be  seen  in  the  autumn  morning, 
sometimes  in  the  flowery  midnight — sometimes  we  receive  an  intima- 
tion of  her  in  the  depths  of  our  heart — sometimes  I  hear  her  voice 
when  I  turn  my  ear  to  the  sky.'  The  tune  of  my  song  led  me  to  the 
very  door  of  that  stranger  who  ensnares  the  universe  and  appears 
in  it,  and  I  said: 

'Wandering  over  the  world 

I  come  to  thy  land : 

I  am  a  guest  at  thy  door,  thou  stranger.* 

One  day,  many  days  afterwards,  there  was  someone  going  along  the 
road  singing: 

'How  does  that  unknown  bird  go  to  and  away  from  the  cage? 
Could  I  but  catch  it,  I  would  set  the  chain  of  my  mind  about  its  feet!' 


INDIAN  MUSIC. 


PLATE  XVIII 


Madhu-madhavi   Kagini  (a  musical  mode).    'The  sweet,  sweet  rumbling  of  thunder 
is  heard. '     Rajput  painting,  16th  centurj^.  Museum  of  Fine  Arts,  Boston. 


INDIAN  MUSIC 


79 


I  saw  that  that  folk-song,  too,  said  the  very  same  thing!  Sometimes 
the  unknown  bird  comes  to  the  closed  cage  and  speaks  a  word  of  the 
limitless  unknown — the  mind  would  keep  it  forever,  but  cannot.  What 
but  the  tune  of  a  song  could  report  the  coming  and  going  of  that 
unknown  bird?  Because  of  this  I  always  feel  a  hesitation  in  publish- 
ing a  book  of  songs,  for  in  such  a  book  the  main  thing  is  left  out. 

This  Indian  music  is  essentially  impersonal:  it  reflects  an 
emotion  and  an  experience  which  are  deeper  and  wider  and  older 
than  the  emotion  or  wisdom  of  any  single  individual.  Its  sorrow 
is  without  tears,  its  joy  without  exultation  and  it  is  passionate 
without  any  loss  of  serenity.  It  is  in  the  deepest  sense  of  the 
words  all-human.  But  when  the  Indian  prophet  speaks  of  inspira- 
tion, it  is  to  say  that  the  Vedas  are  eternal,  and  all  that  the  poet 
achieves  by  his  devotion  is  to  hear  or  see:  it  is  then  Sarasvati, 
the  goddess  of  speech  and  learning,  or  Narada,  whose  mission  it 
is  to  disseminate  occult  knowledge  in  the  sound  of  the  strings  of 
his  Vina,  or  Krishna,  whose  flute  is  forever  calling  us  to  leave  the 
duties  of  the  world  and  follow  Him — it  is  these,  rather  than  any 
human  individual,  who  speak  through  the  singer's  voice,  and  are 
seen  in  the  movements  of  the  dancer. 

Or  we  may  say  that  this  is  an  imitation  of  the  music  in  heaven. 
The  master  musicians  of  India  are  always  represented  as  the 
pupils  of  a  god,  or  as  visiting  the  heavenworld  to  learn  there  the 
music  of  the  spheres — that  is  to  say,  their  knowledge  springs 
from  a  source  far  within  the  surface  of  the  empirical  activity 
of  the  waking  consciousness.  In  this  connection  it  is  explained 
why  it  is  that  human  art  must  be  studied,  and  may  not  be  identi- 
fied with  the  imitation  of  our  everyday  behaviour.*  When  Siva 
expounds  the  technique  of  the  drama  to  Bharata — the  famous 
author  of  the  Ndtya  Sastra — he  declares  that  human  art  must  be 
subject  to  law,  because  in  man  the  inner  and  outer  life  are  still 
in  conflict.  Man  has  not  yet  found  Himself,  but  all  his  activity 
proceeds  from  a  laborious  working  of  the  mind,  and  all  his  virtue 
is  self-conscious.  What  we  call  our  life  is  uncoordinated,  and 
far  from  the  harmony  of  art,  which  rises  above  good  and  evil. 
It  is  otherwise  with  the  gods,  whose  every  gesture  immediately 
reflects  the  affections  of  the  inner  life.  Art  is  an  imitation  of 
that  perfect  spontaneity — the  identity  of  intuition  and  expression 
in  those  who  are  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  which  is  within  us. 

*  This  is  like  the  principle  of  '  conscious  control '  advanced  by  F.  M. 
Alexander  in  Man's  Supreme  Inheritance. 


8o  INDIAN  MUSIC 

Thus  it  is  that  art  is  nearer  to  Hfe  than  any  fact  can  be;  and  Mr. 
Yeats  has  reason  when  he  says  that  Indian  music,  though  its 
theory  is  elaborate  and  its  technique  so  difficult,  is  not  an  art, 
but  life  itself. 

For  it  is  the  inner  reality  of  things,  rather  than  any  transient 
or  partial  experience  that  the  singer  voices.  "Those  who  sing 
here,"  says  ^ankaracharya,  "sing  God" :  and  the  Vishnu  Purdna 
adds,  "All  songs  are  a  part  of  Him,  who  wears  a  form  of  sound."* 
We  could  deduce  from  this  a  metaphysical  interpretation  of 
technique.  In  all  art  there  are  monumental  and  articulate  ele- 
ments, masculine  and  feminine  factors  which  are  unified  in 
perfect  form.  We  have  here  the  sound  of  the  tambura  which  is 
heard  before  the  song,  during  the  song,  and  continues  after  it: 
that  is  the  timeless  Absolute,  which  as  it  was  in  the  beginning, 
is  now  and  ever  shall  be.  On  the  other  hand  there  is  the  song 
itself  which  is  the  variety  of  Nature,  emerging  from  its  source 
and  returning  at  the  close  of  its  cycle.  The  harmony  of  that 
undivided  Ground  with  this  intricate  Pattern  is  the  unity  of 
Spirit  and  Matter.  We  see  from  this  why  this  music  could  not 
be  improved  by  harmonisation,  even  if  harmonisation  were  pos- 
sible without  destroying  the  modal  bases:  for  in  breaking  up  the 
ground  into  an  articulate  accompaniment,  we  should  merely  create 
a  second  melody,  another  universe,  competing  with  the  freedom  of 
the  song  itself,  and  we  should  destroy  the  peace  on  which  it  rests. 

This  would  defeat  the  purpose  of  the  singer.  Here  in  this 
ego-conscious  world  we  are  subject  to  mortality.  But  this  mor- 
tality is  an  illusion,  and  all  its  truths  are  relative:  over  against 
this  world  of  change  and  separation  there  is  a  timeless  and  space- 
less Peace  which  is  the  source  and  goal  of  all  our  being — "that 
noble  Pearl,"  in  the  words  of  Behmen,  "which  to  the  World 
appears  Nothing,  but  to  the  Children  of  Wisdom  is  All  Things." 
Every  religious  teacher  offers  us  those  living  waters.  But  the 
way  is  hard  and  long:  we  are  called  upon  to  leave  houses  and 
lands,  fathers  and  mothers  and  wives  to  achieve  an  end  which 
in  our  imperfect  language  we  can  only  speak  of  as  Non-existence. 
Many  of  us  have  great  possessions,  and  the  hardest  of  these  to 
surrender  are  our  own  will  and  identity.  What  guarantee  have 
we  that  the  reward  will  be  commensurate  with  the  sacrifice  ? 

^  Ci.  the  Granth  Sahib  (Japjl  xxvii)  :  "How  many  musicians,  how  many 
ragas  and  raginls  and  how  many  singers  sing  Thee?" 


INDIAN  MUSIC. 


PLATE  XIX 


Todi   Rilgiiii    (a   nui>ical    mode).     Rajput   painting,    ISth   century.      Calcutta    >cii()ol 

of  Art. 


INDIAN  MUSIC  8l 

Indian  theory  declares  that  in  the  ecstasies  of  love  and  art  we 
already  receive  an  intimation  of  that  redemption.  This  is  also 
the  katharsis  of  the  Greeks,  and  it  is  found  in  the  aesthetic  of 
modern  Europe  when  Goethe  says 

For  beauty  they  have  sought  in  every  age 

He  who  perceives  it  is  from  himself  set  free 

aus  sich  entriickt.    We  are  assured  by  the  experience  of  aesthetic 
contemplation  that  Paradise  is  a  reality. 

In  other  words  the  magical  effects  of  a  song  in  working  mere 
miracles  are  far  surpassed  by  its  effects  upon  our  inner  being. 
The  singer  is  still  a  magician,  and  the  song  is  a  ritual,  a  sacred 
ceremony,  an  ordeal  which  is  designed  to  set  at  rest  that  wheel 
of  the  imagination  and  the  senses  which  alone  hinder  us  from 
contact  with  reality.  But  to  achieve  this  ordeal  the  hearer 
must  cooperate  with  the  musician  by  the  surrender  of  the  will, 
and  by  drawing  in  his  restless  thought  to  a  single  point  of  con- 
centration: this  is  not  the  time  or  place  for  curiosity  or  admira- 
tion. Our  attitude  towards  an  unknovm  art  should  be  far  from 
the  sentimental  or  romantic,  for  it  can  bring  us  nothing  that  we 
have  not  already  with  us  in  our  own  hearts:  the  peace  of  the 
Abyss  which  underlies  all  art  is  one  and  the  same,  whether  we 
find  it  in  Europe  or  in  Asia. 


STATUS  OF  INDIAN  WOMEN 

In  the  Mahabharata  there  is  reported  a  conversation  between 
Siva  and  Uma.  The  Great  God  asks  her  to  describe  the  duties 
of  v^^omen,  addressing  her,  in  so  doing,  in  terms  which  acknowl- 
edge her  perfect  attainment  of  the  highest  wisdom  possible  to 
man  or  god — terms  which  it  would  be  hard  to  parallel  anywhere 
in  western  literature.    He  says: 

"Thou  that  dost  know  the  Self  and  the  not-Self,  expert  in  every 
work:  endowed  with  self-restraint  and  perfect  same-sightedness 
towards  every  creature:  free  from  the  sense  of  I  and  my — thy  power 
and  energy  are  equal  to  my  own,  and  thou  hast  practised  the  most 
severe  discipline.  O  Daughter  of  Himalaya,  of  fairest  eyebrows, 
and  whose  hair  ends  in  the  fairest  curls,  expound  to  me  the  duties 
of  women  in  full." 

Then  She,  who  is  queen  of  heaven,  and  yet  so  sweetly  human, 
answers : 

"The  duties  of  woman  are  created  in  the  rites  of  wedding,  when 
in  presence  of  the  nuptial  fire  she  becomes  the  associate  of  her  Lord. 
for  the  performance  of  all  righteous  deeds.  She  should  be  beautiful 
and  gentle,  considering  her  husband  as  her  god  and  serving  him  as 
such  in  fortune  and  misfortune,  health  and  sickness,  obedient  even 
if  commanded  to  unrighteous  deeds  or  acts  that  may  lead  to  her  own 
destruction.  She  should  rise  early,  serving  the  gods,  always  keeping 
her  house  clean,  tending  to  the  domestic  sacred  fire,  eating  only 
after  the  needs  of  gods  and  guests  and  servants  have  been  satisfied, 
devoted  to  her  father  and  mother  and  the  father  and  mother  of  her 
husband.  Devotion  to  her  Lord  is  woman's  honour,  it  is  her  eternal 
heaven;  and  O  Mahesvara," 

she  adds,  with  a  most  touching  human  cry, 

"I  desire  not  paradise  itself  if  thou  are  not  satisfied  with  me!" 

"She  is  a  true  wife  who  gladdens  her  husband,"  says  Raja- 
sekhara  in  the  Karpura  Manjarl.  The  extract  following  is  from 
the  Laws  of  Manu : 

"Though  destitute  of  virtue,  or  seeking  pleasure  elsewhere,  or 
devoid  of  good  qualities,  a  husband  must  be  constantly  worshipped 
as  a  god  by  a  faithful  wife  ...  If  a  wife  obeys  her  husband,  she 
will  for  that  reason  alone  be  exalted  in  heaven." 


STATUS  OF  INDIAN  WOMEN  83 

"The  production  of  children,  the  nurture  of  those  born,  and  the 
daily  life  of  men,  of  these  matters  woman  is  visibly  the  cause." 

"She  who  controlling  her  thoughts,  speech  and  acts,  violates  not 
her  duty  to  her  Lord,  dwells  with  him  after  death  in  heaven,  and  in 
this  world  is  called  by  the  virtuous  a  faithful  wife." 


Similar  texts  from  a  variety  of  Indian  sources  could  be  indefi- 
nitely multiplied. 

If  such  are  the  duties  of  women,  women  are  accorded  corres- 
ponding honour,  and  exert  a  corresponding  influence  upon  society. 
This  power  and  influence  do  not  so  much  belong  to  the  merely 
young  and  beautiful,  nor  to  the  wealthy,  as  to  those  who  have 
lived — mothers  and  grandmothers — or  who  follow  a  religious 
discipline — widows  or  nuns.  According  to  Manu:  'A  master 
exceedeth  ten  tutors  in  claim  to  honour;  the  father  a  hundred 
masters ;  but  the  mother  a  thousand  fathers  in  right  to  reverence 
and  in  the  function  of  teacher.'  When  Rama  accepted  Kaikeyi's 
decree  of  banishment,  it  was  because  *  a  mother  should  be  as 
much  regarded  by  a  son  as  is  a  father,'  Even  at  the  present  day 
it  would  be  impossible  to  over-emphasize  the  influence  of  Indian 
mothers  not  only  upon  their  children  and  in  all  household  affairs, 
but  upon  their  grown-up  sons  to  whom  their  word  is  law.  Ac- 
cording to  my  observation,  it  is  only  those  sons  who  have  received 
an  'English'  education  in  India  who  no  longer  honour  their  fathers 
and  mothers. 

No  story  is  more  appropriate  than  that  of  Madalasa  and  her  son 
Vikranta  to  illustrate  the  position  of  the  Indian  mother  as  teacher. 
As  Vikranta  grew  up  day  by  day,  the  Markandeya  Pur  ana  relates, 
Madalasa  'taught  him  knowledge  of  the  Self^  by  ministering  to 
him  in  sickness ;  and  as  he  grew  in  strength  and  there  waxed  in 
him  his  father's  heart,  he  attained  to  knowledge  of  the  Self  by 
his  mother's  words.'  And  these  were  Madalasa's  words,  spoken 
to  the  baby  crying  on  her  lap: 

"My  child,  thou  art  without  a  name  or  form,  and  it  is  but  in 
fantasy  that  thou  hast  been  given  a  name.  This  thy  body,  framed 
of  the  five  elements,  is  not  thine  in  sooth,  nor  art  thou  of  it.  Why 
dost  thou  weep?  Or,  maybe,  thou  weepest  not;  it  is  a  sound 
self -bom  that  cometh  forth  from  the  king's  son. . .  .In  the  body 

*  'Knowledge  of  the  Self — the  Adhyatmavidya  referred  to  above,  p.  7. 


84  STATUS  OF  INDIAN  WOMEN 

dwells  another  self,  and  therewith  abideth  not  the  thought  that 
'This  is  mine/  which  appertaineth  to  the  flesh.  Shame  that  man 
is  so  deceived!" 

Even  in  recent  times,  in  families  where  the  men  have  received 
an  English  education  unrelated  to  Indian  life  and  thought,  the 
inheritance  of  Indian  modes  of  thought  and  feeling  rests  in  the 
main  with  women;  for  a  definite  philosophy  of  life  is  bound  up 
with  household  ritual  and  traditional  etiquette  and  finds  expres- 
sion equally  in  folk-tale  and  cradle-song  and  popular  poetry,  and 
in  those  pauranic  and  epic  stories  which  constitute  the  household 
Bible  literature  of  India.  Under  these  conditions  it  is  often 
the  case  that  Indian  women,  with  all  their  faults  of  sentimentality 
and  ignorance,  have  remained  the  guardians  of  a  spiritual  culture 
which  is  of  greater  worth  than  the  efficiency  and  information  of 
the  educated. 

It  is  according  to  the  Tantrik  scriptures,  devoted  to  the  cult 
of  the  Mother  of  the  World,  that  women,  who  partake  of  her 
nature  more  essentially  than  other  living  beings,  are  especially 
honoured;  here  the  woman  may  be  a  spiritual  teacher  (guru), 
and  the  initation  of  a  son  by  a  mother  is  more  fruitful  than  any 
other.  One  doubts  how  far  this  may  be  of  universal  application, 
believing  with  Paracelsus  that  woman  is  nearer  to  the  world  than 
man,  of  which  the  evidence  appears  in  her  always  more  personal 
point  of  view.  But  all  things  are  possible  to  women  such  as 
Madalasa. 

The  claim  of  the  Buddhist  nun — 'How  should  the  woman's 
nature  hinder  us?' — has  never  been  systematically  denied  in 
India.  It  would  have  been  contrary  to  the  spirit  of  Indian  culture 
to  deny  to  individual  women  the  opportunity  of  saintship  or 
learning  in  the  sense  of  closing  to  them  the  schools  of  divinity 
or  science  after  the  fashion  of  the  Western  academies  in  the 
nineteenth  century.  But  where  the  social  norm  is  found  in  mar- 
riage and  parenthood  for  men  and  women  alike,  it  could  only 
have  been  in  exceptional  cases  and  under  exceptional  circum- 
stances that  the  latter  specialised,  whether  in  divinity,  like  Auvvai, 
Mira  Bal,  or  the  Buddhist  nuns,  in  science,  likeLTlavatT,  or  in  war, 
like  Qiand  Bib!  or  the  Rani  of  JhansT.  Those  set  free  to  cultivate 
expert  knowledge  of  science  or  to  follow  with  undivided  allegi- 
ance either  religion  or  any  art,  could  only  be  the  sannydsini  or 
devotee,  the  widow,  and  the  courtesan.     A  majority  of  women 


PLATE  XX 


INDIAN  WOMEN. 


A  Hindu  lady  at  her  toilet.     Rajput  drawing.  18th  century.     Collection  of 

the  author. 


STATUS  OF  INDIAN  WOMEN  85 

have  always,  and  naturally,  preferred  marriage  and  motherhood 
to  either  of  these  conditions.  But  those  who  felt  the  call  of  reli- 
gion, those  from  whom  a  husband's  death  removed  the  central 
motif  of  their  life,  and  those  trained  from  childhood  as  expert 
artists,  have  always  maintained  a  great  tradition  in  various 
branches  of  cultural  activity,  such  as  social  service  or  music. 
What  we  have  to  observe  is  that  Hindu  sociologists  have  always 
regarded  these  specializations  as  more  or  less  incompatible  with 
wifehood  and  motherhood ;  life  is  not  long  enough  for  the  achieve- 
ment of  many  different  things, 

Hinduism  justifies  no  cult  of  ego-expression,  but  aims  con- 
sistently at  spiritual  freedom.  Those  who  are  conscious  of  a 
sufficient  inner  life  become  the  more  indifferent  to  outward  ex- 
pression of  their  own  or  any  changing  personality.  The  ultimate 
purposes  of  Hindu  social  discipline  are  that  men  should  unify 
their  individuality  with  a  wider  and  deeper  than  individual  life, 
should  fulfil  appointed  tasks  regardless  of  failure  or  success, 
distinguish  the  timeless  from  its  shifting  forms,  and  escape  the 
all-too-narrow  prison  of  the  'I  and  mine.* 

Anonymity  is  thus  in  accordance  with  the  truth;  and  it 
is  one  of  the  proudest  distinctions  of  the  Hindu  culture. 
The  names  of  the  'authors'  of  the  epics  are  but  shadows, 
and  in  later  ages  it  was  a  constant  practise  of  writers  to 
suppress  their  own  names  and  ascribe  their  work  to  a  mythical 
or  famous  poet,  thereby  to  gain  a  better  attention  for  the  truth 
that  they  would  rather  claim  to  have  'heard'  than  to  have  'made/ 
Similarly,  scarcely  a  single  Hindu  painter  or  sculptor  is  known 
by  name;  and  the  entire  range  of  Sanskrit  literature  cannot 
exhibit  a  single  autobiography  and  but  little  history.  Why  should 
women  have  sought  for  modes  of  self-advertisement  that  held  no 
lure  even  for  men?  The  governing  concept  of  Hindu  ethics  is 
vocation  (dharma)  ;  the  highest  merit  consists  in  the  fulfilment  of 
'one's  own  duty,'  in  other  words,  in  dedication  to  one's  calling. 
Indian  society  was  highly  organized ;  and  where  it  was  considered 
wrong  for  a  man  to  fulfil  the  duties  of  another  man  rather  than 
his  own,  how  much  more  must  a  confusion  of  function  as  between 
woman  and  man  have  seemed  wrong,  where  differentiation  is  so 
much  more  evident.  In  the  words  of  Manu :  'To  be  mothers  were 
women  created,  and  to  be  fathers  men ;'  and  he  adds  significantly 
'therefore  are  religious  sacraments  ordained  in  the  Veda  to  be 


86  STATUS  OF  INDIAN  WOMEN 

observed  by  the  husband  together  with  the  wife.'* 

The  Asiatic  theory  of  marriage,  which  would  have  been  per- 
fectly comprehensible  in  the  Middle  Ages,  before  the  European 
woman  had  become  an  economic  parasite,  and  which  is  still  very 
little  removed  from  that  of  Roman  or  Greek  Christianity,  is  not 
readily  intelligible  to  the  industrial  democratic  consciousness  of 
Europe  and  America,  which  is  so  much  more  concerned  for  rights 
than  for  duties,  and  desires  more  than  anything  else  to  be  released 
from  responsibilities — regarding  such  release  as  freedom.  It  is 
thus  that  Western  reformers  would  awaken  a  divine  discontent 
in  the  hearts  of  Oriental  women,  forgetting  that  the  way  of  ego- 
assertion  cannot  be  a  royal  road  to  realisation  of  the  Self.  The 
industrial  mind  is  primarily  sentimental,  and  therefore*  cannot 
reason  clearly  upon  love  and  marriage;  but  the  Asiatic  analysis 
is  philosophic,  religious  and  practical. 

Current  Western  theory  seeks  to  establish  marriage  on  a  basis 
of  romantic  love  and  free  choice;  marriage  thus  depends  on 
the  accident  of  'falling  in  love.'  Those  who  are  'crossed  in  love' 
or  do  not  love  are  not  required  to  marry.  This  individualistic 
position,  however,  is  only  logically  defensible  if  at  the  same  time 
it  is  recognized  that  to  fall  out  of  love  must  end  the  marriage. 
It  is  a  high  and  religious  ideal  which  justifies  sexual  relations  only 
as  the  outward  expression  demanded  by  passionate  love  and  re- 
gards an  intimacy  continued  or  begun  for  mere  pleasure,  or  for 
reasons  of  prudence,  or  even  as  a  duty,  as  essentially  immoral ; 
it  is  an  ideal  which  isolated  individuals  and  groups  have  constantly 
upheld;  and  it  may  be  that  the  ultimate  development  of  idealistic 
individualism  will  tend  to  a  nearer  realisation  of  it.  But  do  not  let 
us  deceive  ourselves  that  because  the  Western  marriage  is  nomi- 
nally founded  upon  free  choice,  it  therefore  secures  a  permanent 
unity  of  spiritual  and  physical  passion.  On  the  contrary,  perhaps 
in  a  majority  of  cases,  it  holds  together  those  who  are  no  longer 
'in  love';  habit,  considerations  of  prudence,  or,  if  there  are  chil- 
dren, a  sense  of  duty  often  compel  the  passionless  continuance  of 
a  marriage  for  the  initiation  of  which  romantic  love  was  felt  to 
be  a  sine  qua  non.    Those  who  now  live  side  by  side  upon  a  basis 


^  Jahangir  observes  in  his  'Memoirs'  that  the  Hindu  woman  'is  the 
half  of  a  man.  and  his  companion  in  religious  ceremonies.'  Cf.  the  Prema 
Sagcra,  ch.  xxiv:  'without  a  wife  a  sacrifice  is  not  fruitful.' 


..;r-:rxx>->-»- 


jwj:~~^zu%  L.r .  •  '.-^''  wi; / 


mm 


Chand  Bibi,  called  Chand  Sultan.    Defender  of  Ahmadnagar  against  Akbar,   1695. 
Rajput  painting,   18th  century.     Collection  of  Lady  Herringham. 


STATUS  OF  INDIAN  WOMEN  87 

of  affection  and  common  interest  would  not  have  entered  upon 
marriage  on  this  basis  alone. 

If  the  home  is  worth  preserving  under  modern  conditions — and 
in  India  at  any  rate,  the  family  is  still  the  central  element  of  social 
organization,  then  probably  the  'best  solution'  will  always  be 
found  in  some  such  compromise  as  is  implied  in  a  more  or  less 
permanent  marriage ;  though  greater  tolerance  than  is  now  usual 
must  be  accorded  to  exceptions  above  and  below  the  norm.  What 
are  we  going  to  regard  as  the  constructive  basis  of  the  normal 
marriage  ? 

For  Hindu  sociologists  marriage  is  a  social  and  ethical  relation- 
ship, and  the  begetting  of  children  the  payment  of  a  debt.  Ro- 
mantic love  is  a  brief  experience  of  timeless  freedom,  essentially 
religious  and  ecstatic,  in  itself  as  purely  antisocial  as  every  glimpse 
of  Union  is  a  denial  of  the  Relative;  it  is  the  way  of  Mary.  It 
is  true  the  glamour  of  this  experience  may  persist  for  weeks  and 
months,  when  the  whole  of  life  is  illimiined  by  the  partial  merg- 
ing of  the  consciousness  of  the  lover  and  beloved ;  but  sooner  or 
later  in  almost  every  case  there  must  follow  a  return  to  the  world 
of  unreality,  and  that  insight  which  once  endowed  the  beloved 
with  innumerable  perfections  fades  in  the  light  of  commonsense. 
The  lovers  are  fortunate  if  there  remains  to  them  a  basis  of  com- 
mon interest  and  common  duty  and  a  mutuality  of  temperament 
adequate  for  friendship,  affection  and  forbearance;  upon  this 
chance  depends  the  possibility  of  happiness  during  the  greater 
part  of  almost  every  married  life.  The  Hindu  marriage  differs 
from  the  marriage  of  sentiment  mainly  in  putting  these  considera- 
tions first.  Here,  as  elsewhere,  happiness  will  arise  from  the  ful- 
filment of  vocation,  far  more  than  when  immediate  satisfaction 
is  made  the  primary  end.  I  use  the  term  vocation  advisedly ;  for 
the  Oriental  marriage,  like  the  Oriental  actor's  art,  is  the  fulfil- 
ment of  a  traditional  design,  and  does  not  depend  upon  the  acci- 
dents of  sensibility.  To  be  such  a  man  as  Rama,  such  a  wife  as 
Sita,  rather  than  to  express  'oneself,'  is  the  aim.  The  formula  is 
predetermined  ;  husband  and  wife  alike  have  parts  to  play;  and 
it  is  from  this  point  of  view  that  we  can  best  understand  the 
meaning  of  Manu's  law,  that  a  wife  should  look  on  her  husband 
as  a  god,  regardless  of  his  personal  merit  or  demerits — it  would 
be  beneath  her  dignity  to  deviate  from  a  woman's  norm  merely 
because  of  the  failure  of  a  man.    It  is  for  her  own  sake  and  for 


88  STATUS  OF  INDIAN  WOMEN 

the  sake  of  the  community,  rather  than  for  his  alone,  that  life 
must  be  attuned  to  the  eternal  unity  of  Purusha  and  Prakriti. 

Whatever  the  ultimate  possibilities  of  Western  individualism, 
Hindu  society  was  established  on  a  basis  of  group  morality.  It  is 
true  that  no  absolute  ethic  is  held  binding  on  all  classes  alike; 
but  w^ithin  a  given  class  the  freedom  of  the  individual  is  subordi- 
nated to  the  interest  of  the  group,  the  concept  of  duty  is  para- 
mount. How^  far  this  concept  of  duty  trenches  on  the  liberty  of 
the  individual  may  be  seen  in  Rama's  repudiation  of  Sita,  subse- 
quent to  the  victory  in  Lanka  and  the  coronation  at  Ayodhya; 
although  convinced  of  her  perfect  fidelity,  Rama,  who  stands  in 
epic  history  as  the  mirror  of  social  ethics,  consents  to  banish  his 
wife,  because  the  people  murmur  against  her.  The  argument  is 
that  if  the  king  should  receive  back  a  wife  who  had  been  living 
in  another  man's  house,  albeit  faithful,  popular  morality  would 
be  endangered,  since  others  might  be  moved  by  love  and  par- 
tiality to  a  like  rehabilitation  but  with  less  justification.  Thus  the 
social  order  is  placed  before  the  happiness  of  the  individual, 
whether  man  or  woman.  This  is  the  explanation  of  the  greater 
peace  which  distinguishes  the  arranged  marriage  of  the  East  from 
the  self-chosen  marriage  of  the  West;  where  there  is  no  deception 
there  can  be  no  disappointment.  And  since  the  conditions  on 
which  it  is  founded  do  not  change,  it  is  logical  that  Hindu  mar- 
riage should  be  indissoluble;  only  when  social  duties  have  been 
fulfilled  and  social  debts  paid,  is  it  permissible  for  the  householder 
to  relinquish  simultaneously  the  duties  and  the  rights  of  the  social 
individual.  It  is  also  logical  that  when  the  marriage  is  childless,  it 
is  permissible  to  take  a  second  wife  with  the  consent — and  often 
at  the  wish — of  the  first. 

It  is  sometimes  asked,  what  opportunities  are  open  to  the  Ori- 
ental woman?  How  can  she  express  herself?  The  answer  is 
that  life  is  so  designed  that  she  is  given  the  opportunity  to  be  a 
woman — in  other  words,  to  realise,  rather  than  to  express  herself. 
It  is  possible  that  modern  Europe  errs  in  the  opposite  direction. 
We  must  also  remember  that  very  much  which  passes  for  edu- 
cation nowadays  is  superficial ;  some  of  it  amounts  to  little  more 
than  parlor  tricks,  and  nothing  is  gained  by  communicating  this 
condition  to  Asia,  where  I  have  heard  of  modern  parents  who 
desired  that  their  daughters  should  be  taught  'a  little  French'  or  'a 
few  strokes  on  the  violin.*  The  arts  in  India  are  professional  and 


INDIAN  WOMEN. 


PLATE  XXII 


^^ 


Wdr>^lr''^M!if'f.y>  ^J>y:>^^:^m 


Hindu  marriage.     From  a  Mughal  painting,  about  1600. 


STATUS  OF  INDIAN  WOMEN  89 

vocational,  demanding  undivided  service;  nothing  is  taught  to 
the  amateur  by  way  of  social  accomplishment  or  studied  super- 
ficially. And  woman  represents  the  continuity  of  the  racial  life, 
an  energy  which  cannot  be  divided  or  diverted  without  a  corres- 
ponding loss  of  racial  vitality ;  she  can  no  more  desire  to  be  some- 
thing other  than  herself,  than  the  Vaishya  could  wish  to  be  known 
as  a  Kshattriya,  or  the  Kshattriya,  as  a  Brahman. 

It  has  been  shown  in  fact,  some  seventy-five  per  cent,  of  West- 
ern graduate  women  do  not  marry;  and  apart  from  these,  if 
it  be  true  that  five-sixths  of  a  child's  tendencies  and  activities 
are  already  determined  before  it  reaches  school  age,  and  that  the 
habits  then  deeply  rooted  cannot  be  greatly  modified,  if  it  be  true 
that  so  much  depends  on  deliberate  training  while  the  instincts 
of  the  child  are  still  potential  and  habits  unformed,  can  we  say 
that  women  whose  social  duties  or  pleasures,  or  self-elected 
careers  or  unavoidable  wage  slavery  draws  them  into  the  outer 
world,  are  fulfilling  their  duty  to  the  race,  or  as  we  should  say, 
the  debt  of  the  ancestors  ?  The  modern  suffragist  declares  that  the 
state  has  no  right  to  demand  of  woman,  whether  directly  or 
indirectly,  by  bribe  or  pressure  of  opinion,  that  she  consider  her- 
self under  any  obligation,  in  return  for  the  protection  afforded 
her,  to  produce  its  future  citizens.  But  we  are  hardly  likely  to 
see  this  point  of  view  accepted  in  these  days  when  the  right  of 
society  to  conscript  the  bodies  of  men  is  almost  universally  con- 
ceded. It  is  true  that  many  who  do  not  acquiesce  in  the  existing 
industrial  order  are  prepared  to  resist  conscription  in  the  military 
sense,  that  is  to  say,  conscription  for  destruction;  but  we  are 
becoming  accustomed  to  the  idea  of  another  kind  of  conscription, 
or  rather  co-operation,  based  on  service,  and  indeed,  according 
to  either  of  the  two  dynamic  theories  of  a  future  society — the 
syndicalist  and  the  individualistic — it  must  appear  that  without 
the  fulfilment  of  function  there  can  exist  no  rights.  From  the  co- 
operative point  of  view  society  has  an  absolute  right  to  compel 
its  members  to  fulfil  the  functions  that  are  necessary  to  it;  and 
only  those  who,  like  the  anchorite,  voluntarily  and  entirely  re- 
nounce the  advantages  of  society  and  the  protection  of  law  have 
a  right  to  ignore  the  claims  of  society.^    From  the  individualist 

*  A  vigorous  society  can  well  afford  to  support,  and  in  the  interests  of 
spiritual  values  will  gladly  support,  so  far  as  support  is  necessary,  not 
only  thinkers  and  artists^  whose  function  is  obvious,  but  also  a  certain 


90  STATUS  OF  INDIAN  WOMEN 

point  of  vieWj  on  the  other  hand,  the  fulfilment  of  function  is 
regarded  as  a  spontaneous  activity,  as  is  even  now  true  in  the 
cases  of  the  thinker  and  the  artist ;  but  even  the  individualist  does 
not  expect  to  get  something  for  nothing,  and  the  last  idea  he  has  is 
to  compel  the  service  of  others. 

I  doubt  if  anyone  will  deny  that  it  is  the  function  or  nature  of 
women,  as  a  group — not  necessarily  in  every  individual  case — in 
general,  to  be  mothers,  alike  in  spiritual  and  physical  senses. 
What  we  have  to  do  then,  is  not  to  assert  the  liberty  of  women  to 
deny  the  duty  or  right  of  motherhood,  however  we  regard  it,  but 
to  accord  this  function  a  higher  protection  and  honour  than  it 
now  receives.  And  here,  perhaps,  there  is  still  something  to  be 
learnt  in  Asia.  There  the  pregnant  woman  is  auspicious,  and 
receives  the  highest  respect;  whereas  in  many  industrial  and 
secular  Western  societies  she  is  an  object  of  more  or  less  open 
ridicule,  she  is  ashamed  to  be  seen  abroad,  and  tries  to  conceal 
her  condition,  sometimes  even  by  means  that  are  injurious  to  her 
own  and  the  child's  health.  That  this  was  not  the  case  in  a  more 
vital  period  of  European  civilization  may  be  seen  in  all  the 
literature  and  art  of  the  Middle  Ages,  and  particularly  in  the 
status  of  the  Virgin  Mary,  whose  motherhood  endeared  her  to 
the  folk  so  much  more  nearly  than  her  virginity. 

To  avoid  misunderstanding,  let  me  say  in  passing,  that  in 
depicting  the  life  of  Hindu  women  as  fulfilling  a  great  ideal, 
I  do  not  mean  to  indicate  the  Hindu  social  formula  as  a  thing  to 
be  repeated  or  imitated.  This  would  be  a  view  as  futile  as  that 
of  the  Gothic  revival  in  architecture;  the  reproduction  of  period 
furniture  does  not  belong  to  life.  A  perfection  that  has  been  can 
never  be  a  perfection  for  us. 

Marriage  was  made  for  man,  not  man  for  marriage.  One  would 
gladly  accept  for  Europe  very  soon,  and  for  Asia  in  due  time, 
temporary  marriage,  the  endowment  of  motherhood,  and  matri- 
archal succession,  or  whatever  other  forms  our  own  spiritual  and 
economic  necessity  may  determine  for  us — not  because  such 
forms  may  be  absolutely  better  than  the  Asiatic  or  mediaeval 
European  institutions,  but  because  they  correspond  more  nearly 

number  of  thorough-going  rebels  who  to  all  appearances  are  mere  idlers. 
But  the  idler,  whether  anchorite  or  courtezan,  must  not  demand  to  be 
supported  in  luxury,  and  must  recognize  that  whatever  he  or  she  receives 
is  given  in  love,  and  not  according  to  law. 


PLATE  XXIII 


'^A^^^i^-^r^  ^-^i^ 


Riidha   in   her  kitchen :    Krishna   at   the   window.    Rajput   painting.      18th  century. 

Lahore  Museum. 


STATUS  OF  INDIAN  WOMEN 


91 


to  our  inner  life.  In  comparing  one  social  order  with  another,  I 
have  no  faith  in  any  millennium  past  or  future,  but  only  in  the 
best  attainable  adaptation  of  means  to  ends;  and,  'let  the  ends 
determine  the  means,'  should  be  the  evidence  of  our  idealism. 

Let  us  now  return  to  the  Indian  Sati  and  try  to  understand  her 
better.  The  root  meaning  of  the  word  is  essential  being,  and 
we  have  so  far  taken  it  only  in  the  wide  sense.  But  she  who 
refuses  to  live  when  her  husband  is  dead  is  called  Sati  in  a  more 
special  sense,  and  it  is  only  so  that  the  word  (suttee)  is  well- 
known  to  Europeans.  This  last  proof  of  the  perfect  unity  of  body 
and  soul,  this  devotion  beyond  the  grave,  has  been  chosen  by  many 
Western  critics  as  our  reproach ;  we  differ  from  them  in  thinking 
of  our  'suttees'  not  with  pity,  but  with  understanding,  respect,  and 
love.  So  far  from  being  ashamed  of  our  'suttees'  we  take  a  pride 
in  them;  that  is  even  true  of  the  most  'progressive'  amongst  us. 
It  is  very  much  like  the  tenderness  which  our  children's  children 
may  some  day  feel  for  those  of  their  race  who  were  willing  to 
throw  away  their  lives  for  'their  country  right  or  wrong,'  though 
the  point  of  view  may  seem  to  us  then,  as  it  seems  to  so  many 
already,  evidence  rather  of  generosity  than  balanced  judgment. 

The  criticism  we  make  on  the  institution  of  Sati  and  woman's 
blind  devotion  is  similar  to  the  final  judgment  we  are  about  to 
pass  on  patriotism.  We  do  not,  as  pragmatists  may,  resent  the 
denial  of  the  ego  for  the  sake  of  an  absolute,  or  attach  an  undue 
importance  to  mere  life;  on  the  contrary  we  see  clearly  that  the 
reckless  and  useless  sacrifice  of  the  'suttee'  and  the  patriot  is 
spiritually  significant.  And  what  remains  perpetually  clear  is 
the  superiority  of  the  reckless  sacrifice  to  the  calculating  assertion 
of  rights.  Criticism  of  the  position  of  the  Indian  woman  from 
the  ground  of  assertive  feminism,  therefore,  leaves  us  entirely 
unmoved :  precisely  as  the  patriot  must  be  unmoved  by  an  appeal 
to  self-interest  or  a  merely  utilitarian  demonstration  of  futility. 
We  do  not  object  to  dying  for  an  idea  as  'suttees'  and  patriots 
have  died;  but  we  see  that  there  may  be  other  and  greater  ideas 
we  can  better  serve  by  living  for  them. 

For  some  reason  it  has  come  to  be  believed  that  Sati  must  have 
been  a  man-made  institution  imposed  on  women  by  men  for 
reasons  of  their  own,  that  it  is  associated  with  feminine  servility, 
and  that  it  is  peculiar  to  India.  We  shall  see  that  these  views  are 
historically  unsound.     It  is  true  that  in  aristocratic  circles  Sati 


92 


STATUS  OF  INDIAN  WOMEN 


became  to  some  degree  a  social  convention/  and  pressure  was  put 
on  imwilling  individuals,  precisely  as  conscripts  are  even  now 
forced  to  suffer  or  die  for  other  people's  ideas;  and  from  this 
point  of  view  we  cannot  but  be  glad  that  it  was  prohibited  by  law 
in  1829  on  the  initiative  of  Raja  Rammohun  Roy.  But  now 
that  nearly  a  century  has  passed  it  should  not  be  difficult  to 
review  the  history  and  significance  of  Sati  more  dispassionately 
than  was  possible  in  the  hour  of  controversy  and  the  atmosphere 
of  religious  prejudice. 

It  is  not  surprising  that  the  Idea  of  Sati  occupies  a  considerable 
place  in  Indian  literature.  Parvati  herself,  who  could  not  endure 
the  insults  levelled  against  her  husband  by  her  father,  is  the  proto- 
type of  all  others.  In  the  early  Tamil  lyrics  we  read  of  an  earthly 
bride  whom  the  Brahmans  seek  to  dissuade  from  the  sacrifice; 
but  she  answers  that  since  her  lord  is  dead,  the  cool  waters  of  the 
the  lotus  pool  and  the  flames  of  the  funeral  pyre  are  alike  to  her. 
Another  pleads  to  share  her  hero's  grave,  telling  the  potter  that 
she  has  fared  with  her  lord  over  many  a  desert  plain,  and  ask- 
ing him  to  make  the  funeral  urn  large  enough  for  both.  Later 
in  history  we  read  of  the  widowed  mother  of  Harsha  that  she 
replied  to  her  son's  remonstrances : 

"I  am  the  lady  of  a  great  house ;  have  you  forgotten  that  I  am 
the  lioness-mate  of  a  great  spirit,  who,  like  a  lion,  had  his  delight 
in  a  hundred  battles?" 

A  man  of  such  towering  genius  and  spiriLuality  as  Kablr  so 
takes  for  granted  the  authenticity  of  the  impulse  to  Sati  that  he 
constantly  uses  it  as  an  image  of  surrender  of  the  ego  to  God ;  and 
indeed,  in  all  Indian  mystical  literature  the  love-relation  of  woman 
to  man  is  taken  unhesitatingly  as  an  immediate  reflection  of  spiri- 
tual experience.  This  is  most  conspicuous  in  all  the  Radha- 
Krishna  literature.  But  here  let  us  notice  more  particularly  the 
beautiful  and  very  interesting  poem  of  Muhammad  Riza  Nau'i, 
written  in  the  reign  of  Akbar  upon  the  'suttee'  of  a  Hindu  girl 
whose  betrothed  was  killed  on  the  very  day  of  the  marriage. 
This  Musulman  poet,  to  whom  the  Hindus  were  'idolaters,'  does 
not  relate  his  story  in  any  spirit  of  religious  intolerance  or 
ethical  condescension;  he  is  simply  amazed  'that  after  the  death 
of  men,  the  woman  shows  forth  her  marvellous  passion.'    He 

^  'Social  conventions'  are  rarely  'mow-made  laws'  alone. 


STATUS  OF  INDIAN  WOMEN  93 

does  not  wonder  at  the  wickedness  of  men,  but  at  the  generosity 
of  women;  how  different  from  the  modern  critic  who  can  see 
no  motive  but  self-interest  behind  a  social  phenomenon  that 
passes  his  comprehension! 

This  Hindu  bride  refused  to  be  comforted  and  wished  to  be 
burnt  on  the  pyre  of  her  dead  betrothed.  When  Akbar  was 
informed  of  this,  he  called  the  girl  before  him  and  offered 
wealth  and  protection,  but  she  rejected  all  his  persuasion  as 
well  as  the  counsel  of  the  Brahmans,  and  would  neither  speak 
nor  hear  of  anything  but  the  Fire. 

Akbar  was  forced,  though  reluctantly,  to  give  his  consent  to 
the  sacrifice,  but  sent  with  her  his  son  Prince  Daniyal  who  con- 
tinued to  dissuade  her.  Even  from  amidst  the  flames,  she  replied 
to  his  remonstrances,  *Do  not  annoy,  do  not  annoy,  do  not  annoy/ 
'Ah,'  exclaims  the  poet: 

"Let  those  whose  hearts  are  ablaze   with  the   Fire   of   Love  learn 

courage  from  this  pure  may! 
Teach  me,  O  God,  the  Way  of  Love,  and  enflame  my  heart  with  this 

maiden's  Fire." 
Thus  he  prays  for  himself;  and  for  her: 

"Do  Thou,  O  God,  exalt  the  head  of  that  rare  hidden  virgin,  whose 

purity  exceeded  that  of  the  Houris. 
Do  Thou  endear  her  to  the  first  kissing  of  her  King,  and  graciously 

accept  her  sacrifice." 

Matter  of  fact  accounts  of  more  modern  'suttees'  are  given  by 
Englishmen  who  have  witnessed  them.  One  which  took  place  in 
Baroda  in  1825  is  described  by  R.  Hartley  Kennedy,  the  widow 
persisting  in  her  intention  in  spite  of  "several  fruitless  endeavours 
to  dissuade  her."  A  more  remarkable  case  is  described  by  Sir 
Frederick  Halliday.  Here  also  a  widow  resisted  all  dissuasion, 
and  finally  proved  her  determination  by  asking  for  a  lamp,  and 
holding  her  finger  in  the  flame  until  it  was  burnt  and  twisted 
like  a  quill  pen  held  in  the  flame  of  a  candle;  all  this  time  she 
gave  no  sign  of  fear  or  pain  whatever.  Sir  F.  Halliday  had 
therefore  to  grant  her  wish,  even  as  Akbar  had  had  to  do  three 
centuries  earlier. 

It  is  sometimes  said  by  Indian  apologists  that  at  certain  times 
or  places  in  India — amongst  the  Buddhists,  or  the  Marathas.  or 
in  the  epics — there  was  no  purdah;  or  that  certain  historic  or 
mythic  individual  women  were  not  secluded.     Such  statements 


94 


STATUS  OF  INDIAN  WOMEN 


ignore  the  fact  that  there  are  other  kinds  of  seclusion  than  those 
afforded  by  palace  walls.  For  example,  though  Rama,  Laksh- 
man  and  Sita  had  lived  together  in  forest  exile  for  many  years 
in  closest  affection,  it  is  expressly  stated  that  Lakshman  had 
never  raised  his  eyes  above  his  brother's  wife's  feet,  so  that 
he  did  not  even  know  her  appearance.  To  speak  more  generally, 
it  is  customary  for  Hindus,  when  occasion  arises  for  them  to 
address  an  unknown  woman,  to  call  her  'mother'  irrespective 
of  her  age  or  condition.  These  unseen  walls  are  a  seclusion 
equally  absolute  with  any  purdah.  One  result  is  that  the  streets 
of  an  Indian  city  by  night  are  safer  for  a  woman  than  those 
of  any  city  in  Europe.  I  have  known  more  than  one  European 
woman,  acquainted  with  India,  express  her  strong  conviction  of 
this. 

Western  critics  have  often  asserted  that  the  Oriental  woman 
is  a  slave,  and  that  we  have  made  her  what  she  is.  We  can  only 
reply  that  we  do  not  identify  freedom  with  self-assertion,  and  that 
the  Oriental  woman  is  what  she  is,  only  because  our  social  and 
religious  culture  has  permitted  her  to  be  and  to  remain  essentially 
feminine.  Exquisite  as  she  may  be  in  literature  and  art,  we  dare 
not  claim  for  ourselves  as  men  the  whole  honour  of  creating 
such  a  type,  however  persistently  the  industrious  industrial  critic 
would  thrust  it  upon  us. 

The  Eastern  woman  is  not,  at  least  we  do  not  claim  that  she  is, 
superior  to  other  women  in  her  innermost  nature ;  she  is  perhaps 
an  older,  purer  and  more  specialised  type,  but  certainly  an  uni- 
versal type,  and  it  is  precisely  here  that  the  industrial  woman 
departs  from  type.  Nobility  in  women  does  not  depend  upon 
race,  but  upon  ideals;  it  is  the  outcome  of  a  certain  view  of  life. 

Savitrl,  PadmavatI,  Sita,  Radha,  Uma,  Lilavatl,  Tara — our 
divine  and  human  heroines — have  an  universal  fellowship,  for 
everything  feminine  is  of  the  Mother.  Who  could  have  been 
more  wholly  devoted  than  Alcestis,  more  patient  than  Griselda, 
more  loving  than  Deirdre,  more  soldier  than  Joan  of  Arc,  more 
Amazon  than  Brynhild? 

When  the  Titanic  sank,  there  were  many  women  who  refused 
— perhaps  mistakenly,  perhaps  quite  rightly — that  was  their  own 
affair — to  be  rescued  without  their  husbands,  or  were  only  torn 
from  them  by  force ;  dramatic  confirmation  of  the  conviction  that 
love-heroism  is  always  and  everywhere  the  same,  and  not  only 


STATUS  OF  INDIAN  WOMEN 


95 


in  India,  nor  only  in  ages  past,  may  be  stronger  than  death. 

I  do  not  think  that  the  Indian  ideal  has  ever  been  the  exclusive 
treasure  of  any  one  race  or  time,  but  rather,  it  reappears  wherever 
woman  is  set  free  to  be  truly  herself,  that  is  wherever  a  suffici- 
ently religious,  heroic  and  aesthetic  culture  has  afforded  her 
the  necessary  protection.  Even  the  freedom  which  she  seeks  in 
modern  self-assertion — which  I  would  grant  from  the  stand- 
point of  one  who  will  not  govern — is  merely  an  inverted  concept 
of  protection,  and  it  may  be  that  the  more  she  is  freed  the  more 
she  will  reveal  the  very  type  we  have  most  adored  in  those  who 
seemed  to  be  slaves.  Either  way  would  be  happier  for  men  than 
the  necessity  of  protecting  women  from  themselves,  and  the 
tyranny  of  those  who  are  not  capable  of  friendship,  being  neither 
bound  nor  free. 

The  cry  of  our  Indian  Sati,  "Do  not  annoy,  do  not  annoy,"  and 
"No  one  has  any  right  over  the  life  of  another;  is  not  that  my 
own  affair?"  is  no  cry  for  protection  from  a  fate  she  does  not 
seek;  it  is  individualistic,  and  has  been  uttered  by  every  woman 
in  the  world  who  has  followed  love  beyond  the  grave.  Deirdre 
refused  every  offer  of  care  and  protection  from  Conchubar:  "It 
is  not  land  or  earth  or  food  I  am  wanting,"  she  said,  "or  gold  or 
silver  or  horses,  but  leave  to  go  to  the  grave  where  the  sons  of 
Usnach  are  lying."  Emer  called  to  Cuchullain  slain:  "Love  of 
my  life,  my  friend,  my  sweetheart,  my  one  choice  of  the  men  of 
the  world,  many  is  the  women,  wed  or  unwed,  envied  me  until 
to-day,  and  now  I  will  not  stay  living  after  you." 

Irish  women  were  free,  but  we  are  used  even  more  to  look  on 
the  old  Teutonic  type  as  representative  of  free  and  even  ama- 
zonian  womanhood.  We  do  not  think  of  Brynhild,  Shield-may  and 
Victory-wafter,  as  compelled  by  men  to  any  action  against  her 
will,  or  as  weakly  submissive.  Yet  when  Sigurd  was  slain  she 
became  'suttee' ;  the  prayers  of  Gunnar  availed  as  little  as  those  of 
Conchubar  with  Deirdre.  He  "laid  his  arms  about  her  neck, 
and  besought  her  to  live  and  have  wealth  from  him ;  and  all  others 
in  like  wise  letted  her  from  dying;  but  she  thrust  them  all  from 
her,  and  said  that  it  was  not  the  part  of  any  to  let  her  in  that 
which  was  her  will."  And  the  second  heroic  woman  figured  in  the 
saga,  wedded  to  Sigurd,  though  she  did  not  die,  yet  cried  when 
he  was  betrayed: 


96  STATUS  OF  INDIAN  WOMEN 

Now  am  I  as  little 
As  the  leaf  may  be 
Amid  wind-swept  wood. 
Now  when  dead  he  lieth. 

"She  who  is  courteous  in  her  mind,"  says  the  Shacktafehk, 
"with  shyness  shall  her  face  be  bright;  of  all  the  beauties  of  the 
body,  none  is  more  shining  than  shyness."  This  theory  of 
courtesy,  of  supreme  gentleness — "full  sweetly  bowing  down 
her  head,"  says  the  English  Merlin,  "as  she  that  was  shamefast," 
runs  also  through  all  mediaeval  chivalry.  Yet  it  is  about  this  shy 
quiet  being,  a  mystery  to  men,  that  the  whole  mediaeval  world 
turns ;  "first  reserve  the  honour  to  God,"  says  Malory,  "and  sec- 
ondly, the  quarrel  must  come  of  thy  lady."  Like  Uma  and  Sita, 
Virgin  Mary  is  the  image  of  a  perfect  being — 

For  in  this  rose  conteined  was 
Heaven  and  earth  in  litel  space — 

and  for  a  little  while,  in  poetry  and  architecture,  we  glimpse  an 
idealisation  of  woman  and  woman's  love  akin  to  the  praise  of 
Radha  in  the  contemporary  songs  of  Chandidas  and  Vidyapati. 

But  for  our  purpose  even  more  significant  than  the  religious 
and  knightly  culture,  the  product  of  less  quickly  changing  con- 
ditions, and  impressive  too  in  its  naivete,  is  the  picture  of  the 
woman  of  the  people  which  we  can  gather  from  folk-song  and 
lyric.  Here  was  a  being  obviously  strong  and  sensible,  not  with- 
out knowledge  of  life,  and  by  no  means  economically  a  parasite. 
If  we  study  the  folk  speech  anywhere  in  the  world  we  shall  see 
that  it  reveals  woman,  and  not  the  man,  as  typically  the  lover; 
when  her  shyness  allows,  it  is  she  who  would  pray  for  man's  love, 
and  will  serve  him  to  the  utmost.  Industrialism  reverses  this 
relation,  making  man  the  suppliant  and  the  servant,  a  condition 
as  unnatural  as  any  other  of  its  characteristic  perversions. 

The  woman  of  the  folk  does  not  bear  resentment.  Fair  Helen, 
who  followed  Child  Waters  on  foot,  and  bore  his  child  in  a  stable, 
is  overheard  singing: 

Lullaby,  my  owne  deere  child! 
I  wold  thy  father  were  a  king. 
Thy  mother  layd  on  a  beere. 

Is  she  not  like  the  Bengali  Malanchamala,  whose  husband  had 


STATUS  OF  INDIAN  WOMEN  97 

married  a  second  wife,  and  left  her  unloved  and  forgotten — who 
says,  "though  I  die  now,  and  become  a  bird  or  a  lesser  creature 
or  whatever  befall  me,  I  care  not,  for  I  have  seen  my  darling 
happy  ?" 

If  woman  under  industrialism  is  unsatisfied,  it  would  be  diffi- 
cult to  say  how  much  man  also  loses.  For  woman  is  naturally 
the  lover,  the  bestower  of  life: 

Conjunction  with  me  renders  life  long. 

1  give  youth  when  I  enter  upon  amorousness.^ 

Her  complaint  is  not  that  man  demands  too  much,  but  that 
he  will  accept  too  little. 

Long  time  have  I  been  waiting  for  the  coming  of  my  dear; 
Sometimes  I  am  uneasy  and  troubled  in  my  mind. 
Sometimes  I  think  I'll  go  to  my  lover  and  tell  him  my  mind. 
But  if  I  should  go  to  my  lover,  my  lover  he  will  say  me  nay, 
If  I  show  to  him  my  boldness,  he'll  ne'er  love  me  again.^ 

And  it  is  to  serve  him,  not  to  seek  service  from  him  that 
she  desires: 

In  the   cold  stormy  weather,  when  the  winds  are  a-blowing. 
My  dear,  I  shall  be  willing  to  wait  on  you  then.^ 

The  Oriental  woman,  perhaps  is  not  Oriental  at  all,  but  simply 
woman.  If  the  modern  woman  could  accept  this  thought,  per- 
haps she  would  seek  a  new  way  of  escape,  not  an  escape  from 
love,  but  a  way  out  of  industrialism.  Could  we  not  undertake  this 
quest  together? 

It  is  true  that  the  modern  woman  is  justified  in  her  discontent. 
For  of  what  has  she  not  been  robbed  ?  The  organization  of  society 
for  competition  and  exploitation  has  made  possible  for  the  few, 
and  only  the  very  few,  more  physical  comfort  and  greater  security 
of  life;  but  even  these  it  has  robbed  of  all  poise,  of  the  power 
to  walk  or  to  dress  or  to  marry  wisely,  or  to  desire  children  or 
lovers,  or  to  believe  in  any  power  not  legally  exteriorised.  From 
faith  in  herself  to  a  belief  in  votes,  what  a  descent ! 

Decade  after  decade  since  the  fourteenth  century  has  seen  her 

^  Nizaml. 

2  Eastern  Counties  folk-song. 

3  Somerset  folksong. 


98  STATUS  OF  INDIAN  WOMEN 

influence  reduced.  It  was  paramount  in  religion,  in  poetry,  in 
music,  in  architecture  and  in  all  life.  But  men,  when  they 
reformed  the  church  and  taught  you  that  love  was  not  a  sacra- 
ment without  the  seal  of  clerical  approval;  when  they  forced 
your  music  into  modes  of  equal  temperament ;  when  they  substi- 
tuted knowledge  for  feeling  and  wisdom  in  education,^  when  they 
asked  you  to  pinch  your  shoes  and  your  waists,  and  persuaded  you 
to  think  this  a  refinement,  and  the  language  of  Elizabethan  poetry 
coarse ;  when  at  last  they  taught  you  to  become  Imperialists,  and 
went  away  alone  to  colonise  and  civilise  the  rest  of  the  world, 
leaving  you  in  England  with  nothing  particular  to  do;  when,  if 
you  have  the  chance  to  marry  at  all,  it  is  ten  or  fifteen  years  too 
late —  who  can  wonder  that  you  are  dissatisfied,  and  claim  the 
right  to  a  career  of  your  own  "not  merely  to  earn  your  livelihood, 
but  to  provide  yourself  with  an  object  in  life?"^  How  many 
women  have  only  discovered  an  object  in  life  since  the  energies 
of  men  have  been  employed  in  activities  of  pure  destruction? 
What  a  confession !  To  receive  the  franchise  would  be  but  a  small 
compensation  for  all  you  have  suffered,  if  it  did  not  happen  that 
we  have  now  seen  enough  of  representative  government  and  the 
tyranny  of  majorities  to  understand  their  futility.  Let  women  as 
well  as  men,  turn  away  their  eyes  from  the  delusions  of  govern- 
ment, and  begin  to  understand  direct  action,  finding  enough  to 
do  in  solving  the  problems  of  their  own  lives,  without  attempting 
to  regulate  those  of  other  people.  No  man  of  real  power  has 
either  time  or  strength  for  any  other  man's  work  than  his  own, 
and  this  should  be  equally  true  for  women.  Aside  from  all 
questions  of  mere  lust  for  power  or  demand  for  rights,  untold 
evils  have  resulted  from  the  conviction  that  it  is  our  God-given 
duty  to  regulate  other  people's  lives — the  effects  of  the  current 
theories  of  'uplift,'  and  of  the  'white  man's  burden'  are  only  single 
examples  of  this;  and  even  if  the  intentions  are  good,  we  need 
not  overlook  the  fact  that  the  way  to  hell  is  often  paved  with  good 
intentions. 

Meanwhile  there  lies  an  essential  weakness  in  the  propaganda 
of  emancipation,  inasmuch  as  the  argument  is  based  on  an  unques- 
tioning acceptance  of  male  values.  The  so-called  feminist  is  as 
much  enslaved  by  masculine  ideals  as  the  so-called  Indian  nation- 

1  Cf .  The  Great  State,  p.  127. 

2  From  an  advertisement  in  the  Englishwoman's  Year  Book,  1911. 


STATUS  OF  INDIAN  WOMEN 


99 


alist  is  enslaved  by  European  ideals.  Like  industrial  man,  the 
modem  woman  values  industry  more  than  leisure,  she  seeks  in 
every  way  to  externalise  her  life,  to  achieve  success  in  men's 
professions,  she  feigns  to  be  ashamed  of  her  sexual  nature,  she 
claims  to  be  as  reasonable,  as  learned,  as  expert  as  any  man,  and 
her  best  men  friends  make  the  same  claims  on  her  behalf.  But 
just  in  proportion  as  she  lacks  a  genuine  feminine  idealism,  inas- 
much as  she  wishes  to  be  something  other  than  herself,  she  lacks 
power. 

The  claim  of  women  to  share  the  loaves  and  fishes  with  indus- 
trial man  may  be  as  just  as  those  of  Indian  politicians.  But  the 
argument  that  women  can  do  what  men  can  do  ("we  take  all 
labour  for  our  province,"  says  Olive  Schreiner)  like  the  argu- 
ment that  Indians  can  be  prepared  to  govern  themselves  by  a 
course  of  studies  in  democracy,  implies  a  profound  self-distrust. 
The  claim  to  equality  with  men,  or  with  Englishmen — what  an 
honour !  That  men,  or  Englishmen,  as  the  case  may  be,  should 
grant  the  claim — what  a  condescension ! 

If  there  is  one  profound  intuition  of  the  non-industrial  con- 
sciousness, it  is  that  the  qualities  of  men  and  women  are  incom- 
mensurable. "The  sexes  are  differently  entertained,"  says  Nova- 
lis,  "man  demands  the  sensational  in  intellectual  form,  woman 
the  intellectual  in  sensational  form.  What  is  secondary  to  the 
man  is  paramount  to  the  woman.  Do  they  not  resemble  the 
Infinite,  since  it  is  impossible  to  square  (quadriren)  them,  and 
they  can  only  be  approached  through  approximation?"  Is  not 
the  Hindu  point  of  view  possibly  right ;  not  that  men  and  woman 
should  approach  an  identity  of  temperament  and  function,  but 
that  for  the  greatest  abundance  of  life,  there  is  requisite  the 
greatest  possible  sexual  differentiation? 

What  is  it  that  great  men — poets  and  creators,  not  men  of 
analysis — demand  of  women?  It  is,  surely,  the  requirements  of 
the  prolific,  rather  than  of  the  devourers,  which  are  of  most 
significance  for  the  human  race,  which  advances  under  the  guid- 
ance of  leaders,  and  not  by  accident.  The  one  thing  they  have 
demanded  of  women  is  Life. 

To  one  thing  at  least  the  greatest  men  have  been  always  indif- 
ferent, that  is,  the  amount  of  knowledge  a  woman  may  possess. 
It  was  not  by  her  learning  that  Beatrice  inspired  Dante,  or  the 
washerwoman  Chandidas.    When  Cuchullain  chose  a  wife,  it  was 


lOO  STATUS  OF  INDIAN  WOMEN 

Emer,  because  she  had  the  six  gifts  of  beauty,  voice,  sweet 
speech,  needlework,  wisdom  and  charity.  We  know  only  of 
Helen  that  "strangely  like  she  was  to  some  immortal  spirit;"  in 
other  words,  she  was  radiant.  Radha's  shining  made  the  ground 
she  stood  on  bright  as  gold.  The  old  English  poet  wrote  of  one 
like  her 

Her  luve  lumes  liht 
As  a  launterne  a  nyht. 

It  is  this  radiance  in  women,  more  than  any  other  quality,  that 
urges  men  to  every  sort  of  heroism,  be  it  martial  or  poetic. 

Everyone  understands  the  heroism  of  war ;  we  are  not  surprised 
at  Lady  Hamilton's  adoration  of  Nelson.  But  the  activity  of 
war  is  atavistic,  and  highly  civilised  people  such  as  the  Chinese 
regard  it  with  open  contempt.  What  nevertheless  we  do  not  yet 
understand  is  the  heroism  of  art,  that  exhausting  and  perpetual 
demand  which  all  creative  labour  makes  alike  on  body  and  soul. 
The  artist  must  fight  a  continual  battle  for  mastery  of  himself 
and  his  environment;  his  work  must  usually  be  achieved  in  the 
teeth  of  violent,  ignorant  and  often  well-organised  opposition, 
or  against  still  more  wearing  apathy,  and  in  any  case,  even  at  the 
best,  against  the  intense  resistance  which  matter  opposes  to  the 
moulding  force  of  ideas,  the  tamasic  quality  in  things.  The 
ardent  love  of  women  is  not  too  great  a  reward  for  those  who 
are  faithful.  But  it  is  far  more  than  the  reward  of  action,  it  is 
the  energy  without  w^hich  action  may  be  impossible.  As  pure 
male,  the  Great  God  is  inert,  and  his  'power'  is  always  feminine, 
and  it  is  she  who  leads  the  hosts  of  heaven  against  the  demons. 

When  man  of  necessity  spent  his  life  in  war  or  in  hunting, 
when  women  needed  a  personal  physical  as  well  as  a  spiritual 
protection,  then  she  could  not  do  enough  for  him  in  personal 
service;  we  have  seen  in  the  record  of  folk-song  and  epic  how 
it  is  part  of  woman's  innermost  nature  to  worship  man.  In  the 
words  of  another  Indian  scripture,  her  husband  is  for  her  a 
place  of  pilgrimage,  the  giving  of  alms,  the  performance  of  vows, 
and  he  is  her  spiritual  teacher — this  according  to  the  same  school 
which  makes  the  initiation  of  son  by  mother  eight  times  more 
efficacious  than  any  other.  What  we  have  not  yet  learnt  is  that 
like  relations  are  needed  for  the  finest  quality  of  life,  even  under 
conditions  of  perpetual  peace;  the  tenderness  of  women  is  as 


STATUS  OF  INDIAN  WOMEN  loi 

necessary  to  man  now,  as  ever  it  was  when  his  first  duty  was  that 
of  physical  warfare,  and  few  men  can  achieve  greatness,  and  then 
scarcely  without  the  danger  of  a  one-sided  development,  whose 
environment  lacks  this  atmosphere  of  tenderness.  Woman  pos- 
sesses the  power  of  perpetually  creating  in  man  the  qualities  she 
desires,  and  this  is  for  her  an  infinitely  greater  power  than  the 
possession  of  those  special  qualities  could  ever  confer  upon  her 
directly. 

Far  be  it  from  us,  however,  to  suggest  the  forcing  of  any 
preconceived  development  upon  the  modern  individualist.  We 
shall  accomplish  nothing  by  pressing  anything  in  moulds.  What  I 
have  tried  to  explain  is  that  notwithstanding  that  the  formula  of 
woman's  status  in  Oriental  society  may  have  ere  now  crystallised 
— as  the  formulae  of  classic  art  have  become  academic — neverthe- 
less this  formula  represented  once,  and  still  essentially  represents, 
although  'unfelt'  in  realisation,  a  veritable  expression  of  woman's 
own  nature.  If  not  so,  then  the  formula  stands  self -condemned. 
I  do  not  know  if  through  our  modern  idealistic  individualism  it 
may  be  possible  to  renounce  all  forms  and  formulae  for  ever — I 
fear  that  it  is  only  in  heaven  that  there  shall  be  neither  marrying 
nor  giving  in  marriage — but  were  that  the  case,  and  every  creature 
free  to  find  itself,  and  to  behave  according  to  its  own  nature,  then 
it  is  possible,  at  least,  that  the  'natural'  relation  of  woman  to 
man  would  after  all  involve  the  same  conditions  of  magic  that  are 
implied  in  the  soon-to-be-discarded  conventional  and  calculated 
forms  of  mediaeval  art  and  Oriental  society.  If  not,  we  must 
accept  things  as  they  really  are — however  they  may  be. 

Meanwhile,  it  would  be  worth  while  to  pause  before  we  make 
haste  to  emancipate,  that  is  to  say,  reform  and  industrialise  the 
Oriental  woman.  For  it  is  not  for  Asia  alone  that  she  preserves 
a  great  tradition,  in  an  age  that  is  otherwise  preoccupied.  If  she 
too  should  be  persuaded  to  expend  her  power  upon  externals, 
there  might  come  a  time  on  earth  when  it  could  not  be  believed 
that  such  women  had  ever  lived,  as  the  ancient  poets  describe ;  it 
would  be  forgotten  that  woman  had  ever  been  unselfish,  sensuous 
and  shy.  Deirdre,  Brynhild,  Alcestis,  Sita,  Radha,  would  then 
be  empty  names.  And  that  would  be  a  loss,  for  already  it  has 
been  felt  in  Western  schools  that  we  "are  not  furnished  with 
adequate  womanly  ideals  in  history  and  literature."^ 

1  Stanley  Hall.  Youth,  ed.  1909,  p.  286. 


102  STATUS  OF  INDIAN  WOMEN 

The  industrial  revolution  in  India  is  of  external  and  very  recent 
origin ;  there  is  no  lack  of  men,  and  it  is  the  sacred  duty  of  par- 
ents to  arrange  a  marriage  for  every  daughter :  there  is  no  diverg- 
ence of  what  is  spiritual  and  what  is  sensuous:  Indian  women 
do  not  deform  their  bodies  in  the  interests  of  fashion:  they  arc 
more  concerned  about  service  than  rights:  they  consider  barren- 
ness the  greatest  possible  misfortune,  after  widowhood.  In 
a  word,  it  has  never  happened  in  India  that  women  have  been 
judged  by  or  have  accepted  purely  male  standards.  What  pos- 
sible service  then,  except  in  a  few  externals,  can  the  Western 
world  render  to  Eastern  women?  Though  it  may  be  able  to 
teach  us  much  of  the  means  of  life,  it  has  everything  yet  to  relearn 
about  life  itself.  And  what  we  still  remember  there,  we  would 
not  forget  before  we  must. 


SAHAJA 

Sahaja,    sahaja,    everyone    speaks    of   sahaja. 
But  who  knows  what  sahaja  means? 

Chandidas. 

The  last  achievement  of  all  thought  is  a  recognition  of  the 
identity  of  spirit  and  matter,  subject  and  object;  and  this  reunion 
is  the  marriage  of  Heaven  and  Hell,  the  reaching  out  of  a  con- 
tracted universe  towards  its  freedom,  in  response  to  the  love  of 
Eternity  for  the  productions  of  time.  There  is  then  no  sacred 
or  profane,  spiritual  or  sensual,  but  everything  that  lives  is  pure 
and  void.  This  very  world  of  birth  and  death  is  also  the  great 
Abyss. 

In  India  we  could  not  escape  the  conviction  that  sexual  love 
has  a  deep  and  spiritual  significance.  There  is  nothing  with 
which  we  can  better  compare  the  'mystic  union'  of  the  finite  with 
its  infinite  ambient — that  one  experience  which  proves  itself  and 
is  the  only  ground  of  faith — than  the  self-oblivion  of  earthly 
lovers  locked  in  each  other's  arms,  where  'each  is  both.'  Physical 
proximity,  contact,  and  interpenetration  are  the  expressions  of 
love,  only  because  love  is  the  recognition  of  identity.  These  two 
are  one  flesh,  because  they  have  remembered  their  unity  of 
spirit.  This  is  moreover  a  fuller  identity  than  the  mere  sympathy 
of  two  individuals;  and  each  as  individual  has  now  no  more 
significance  for  the  other  than  the  gates  of  heaven  for  one  who 
stands  within.  It  is  like  an  algebraic  equation  where  the  equation 
is  the  only  truth,  and  the  terms  may  stand  for  anything.  The 
least  intrusion  of  the  ego,  however,  involves  a  return  to  the  illu- 
sion of  duality. 

This  vision  of  the  beloved  has  no  necessary  relation  to  empir- 
ical reality.  The  beloved  may  be  in  every  ethical  sense  of  the 
word  unworthy — and  the  consequences  of  this  may  be  socially  or 
ethically  disastrous:  but  nevertheless  the  eye  of  love  perceives 
her  divine  perfection  and  infinity,  and  is  not  deceived.  That  one 
is  chosen  by  the  other  is  therefore  no  occasion  of  pride:  for  the 
same  perfection  and  infinity  are  present  in  every  grain  of  sand, 
and  in  the  raindrop  as  much  as  in  the  sea. 

To  carry  through  such  a  relationship,  however,  and  to  reach  a 
goal,  to  really  progress  and  not  merely  to  achieve  an  intimation — 


104  SAHAJA 

for  this  it  is  necessary  that  both  the  lover  and  the  beloved  should 
be  of  one  and  the  same  spiritual  age  and  of  the  same  moral  fibre. 
For  if  not,  as  Chandidas  says,  the  woman  who  loves  an  unworthy 
man  will  share  the  fate  of  a  flower  that  is  pierced  with  thorns, 
she  will  die  of  a  broken  heart:  and  the  youth  who  falls  in  love 
with  a  woman  of  lower  spiritual  degree  will  be  tossed  to  and 
fro  in  great  unrest  and  will  give  way  to  despair. 

Because  the  stages  of  human  love  reflect  the  stations  of  spiritual 
evolution,  it  is  said  that  the  relationship  of  hero  and  heroine  re- 
veals an  esoteric  meaning,  and  this  truth  has  been  made  the  basis 
of  the  well  known  allegories  of  Radha  and  Krishna,  which  are 
the  dominant  motif  of  mediaeval  Hinduism,  Here,  illicit  love 
becomes  the  very  type  of  salvation:  for  in  India,  where  social 
convention  is  so  strict,  such  a  love  involves  a  surrender  of  all 
that  the  world  values,  and  sometimes  of  life  itself.  When  Krishna 
receives  the  milkmaids,  and  tells  them  he  owes  them  a  debt  that 
can  never  be  paid,  it  is  because  they  have  come  to  him  "like  the 
vairagi  who  has  renounced  his  home" — neither  their  duties  nor 
their  great  possessions  hindered  them  from  taking  the  way  of 
Mary,    The  great  seducer  makes  them  his  own. 

All  this  is  an  allegory — the  reflection  of  reality  in  the  mirror  of 
illusion.  This  reality  is  the  inner  life,  where  Krishna  is  the 
Lord,  the  milkmaids  are  the  souls  of  men,  and  Brindaban  the 
field  of  consciousness.  The  relation  of  the  milkmaids  with  the 
Divine  Herdsman  is  not  in  any  sense  a  model  intended  to  be 
realised  in  human  relationships,  and  the  literature  contains  explicit 
warnings  against  any  such  confusion  of  planes. 

The  interpretation  of  this  mystery,  however,  is  so  well  known 
as  to  need  no  elaboration.  But  there  is  a  related  cult,  which  is 
called  Sahaja,^  which  constitutes  a  practical  discipline,  a  'rule/ 
and  what  we  have  to  speak  of  here  concerns  this  more  difficult 
and  less  familiar  teaching. 

In  sahaja,  the  adoration  of  young  and  beautiful  girls  was  made 
the  path  of  spiritual  evolution  and  ultimate  emancipation.  By 
this  adoration  we  must  understand  not  merely  ritual  worship 
(the  Kumari  Puja),  but  also  'romantic  love.' 

This  doctrine  seems  to  have  originated  with  the  later  Tantrik 
Buddhists.  Kanu  Bhatta  already  in  the  tenth  century  wrote 
Sahaja  love  songs  in  Bengal.     The  classic  exponent,  however,  is 

^  Root  meaning,  cognate,  or  innate,  and  hence,  "spontaneous." 


INDIAN  SCULPTURE. 


PLATE  XXIV 


Where  each  is  both."    Rock-cut  sculpture.     Brahmanical.     Elura. 
8th  century. 


SAHAJA  105 

Chandidas,  who  lived  in  the  fourteenth  century.  Many  other 
poets  wrote  in  the  same  sense.  Chandidas  himself  was  called  a 
madman — a  term  in  Bengali  which  signifies  a  man  of  eccentric 
ideas  who  nevertheless  endears  himself  to  everyone.  He  was 
Brahman  and  a  priest  of  the  temple  of  Vasuli  Devi  near  Bolpur. 
One  day  he  was  walking  on  the  river  bank  where  women  were 
washing  clothes.  By  some  chance  there  was  a  young  girl  whose 
name  was  Rami :  she  raised  her  eyes  to  his.  There  was  a  meet- 
ing of  Dante  and  Beatrice.  From  this  time  on  Chandidas  was 
filled  with  love.  Rami  was  very  beautiful :  but  in  Hindu  society 
what  can  a  washerwoman  be  to  a  Brahman?  She  could  only 
take  the  dust  of  his  feet.  He,  however,  openly  avowed  his  love 
in  his  songs,  and  neglected  his  priestly  duties.  He  would  fall  into 
a  dream  whenever  he  was  reminded  of  her. 

The  love  songs  of  Chandidas  were  more  like  h3mins  of  devo- 
tion: "I  have  taken  refuge  at  your  feet,  my  beloved.  When  I 
do  not  see  you  my  mind  has  no  rest.  You  are  to  me  as  a  parent 
to  a  helpless  child.  You  are  the  goddess  herself — the  garland 
about  my  neck — my  very  universe.  All  is  darkness  without  you, 
you  are  the  meaning  of  my  prayers.  I  cannot  forget  your  grace 
and  your  charm — and  yet  there  is  no  desire  in  my  heart." 

Chandidas  was  excommunicated,  for  he  had  affronted  the 
whole  orthodox  community.  By  the  good  offices  of  his  brother 
he  was  once  on  the  point  of  being  taken  back  into  society,  on 
condition  of  renoimcing  Rami  forever,  but  when  she  was  told 
of  this  she  went  and  stood  before  him  at  the  place  of  the  reunion 
— never  before  had  she  looked  upon  his  face  so  publicly — then  he 
forgot  every  promise  of  reformation,  and  bowed  before  her  with 
joined  hands  as  a  priest  approaches  his  household  goddess. 

It  is  said  that  a  divine  vision  was  vouchsafed  to  certain  of  the. 
Brahmans  there  present — for  Rami  was  so  transfigured  that  she 
seemed  to  be  the  Mother  of  the  Universe  herself,  the  Goddess: 
that  is  to  say  that  for  them,  as  for  Chandidas  himself,  the  doors 
of  perception  were  cleansed,  and  they  too  saw  her  divine  per- 
fection. But  the  rest  of  them  saw  only  the  washerwoman,  and 
Chandidas  remained  an  outcast. 

He  has  explained  in  his  songs  what  he  means  by  Sahaja.  The 
lovers  must  refuse  each  other  nothing,  yet  never  fall.  Inwardly, 
he  says  of  the  woman,  she  will  sacrifice  all  for  love,  but  out- 
wardly she  will  appear  indifferent.     This  secret  love  must  find 


I06  SAHAJA 

expression  in  secret :  but  she  must  not  yield  to  desire.  She  must 
cast  herself  freely  into  the  sea  of  contempt,  and  yet  she  must 
never  actually  drink  of  forbidden  waters :  she  must  not  be  shaken 
by  pleasure  or  pain.  Of  the  man  he  says  that  to  be  a  true  lover 
he  must  be  able  to  make  a  frog  dance  in  the  mouth  of  a  snake, 
or  to  bind  an  elephant  w^ith  a  spider's  web.  That  is  to  say,  that 
although  he  plays  with  the  most  dangerous  passions,  he  must  not 
be  carried  away.  In  this  restraint,  or  rather,  in  the  temper  that 
makes  it  possible,  lies  his  salvation.  "Hear  me,"  says  Chandidas, 
"to  attain  salvation  through  the  love  of  woman,  make  your  body 
hke  a  dry  stick — for  He  that  pervades  the  universe  seen  of  none, 
can  only  be  found  by  one  who  knows  the  secret  of  love."  It  is 
not  surprising  if  he  adds  that  one  such  is  hardly  to  be  found  in 
a  million. 

This  doctrine  of  romantic  love  is  by  no  means  unique :  we  meet 
with  it  also  at  the  summit  levels  of  European  culture,  in  the  thir- 
teenth century.  "And  so  far  as  love  is  concerned,"  says  a  modern 
Russian  (Kuprin),  "I  tell  you  that  even  this  has  its  peaks 
which  only  one  out  of  millions  is  able  to  climb." 

Before  attempting  to  understand  the  practise  of  Sahaja  we  must 
define  the  significance  of  the  desired  salvation — the  spiritual  free- 
dom {moksha)  which  is  called  the  ultimate  purpose,  the  only  true 
meaning  of  life,  and  by  hypothesis  the  highest  good  and  per- 
fection of  our  nature.  It  is  a  release  from  the  ego  and  from 
becoming:  it  is  the  realisation  of  self  and  of  entity — when  'noth- 
ing of  ourself  is  left  in  us.'  This  perfect  state  must  be  one  with- 
out desire,  because  desire  implies  a  lack:  whatever  action  the 
jlvan  mukta  or  spiritual  freeman  performs  must  therefore  be  of 
the  nature  of  manifestation,  and  will  be  without  purpose  or  inten- 
tion. Nothing  that  he  does  will  be  praiseworthy  or  blameworthy, 
and  he  will  not  think  in  any  such  terms, —  as  the  Mahahh&rata 
says,  with  many  like  texts,  'He  who  considers  himself  a  doer  of 
good  and  evil  knows  not  the  truth,  I  trow.'  Nothing  that  the 
freeman  does  will  be  'selfish,*  for  he  has  lost  the  illusion  of  the 
ego.  His  entire  being  will  be  in  all  he  does,  and  it  is  this  which 
makes  the  virtue  of  his  action.    This  is  the  innocense  of  desires. 

Then  and  then  only  is  the  lover  free — when  he  is  free  from 
willing.  He  who  is  free  is  free  to  do  what  he  will — but  first, 
as  Nietzsche  says,  he  must  be  such  as  can  will,  or  as  Riimi  ex- 
presses it,  must  have  surrendered  will.    This  is  by  no  means  the 


SAHAJA  107 

same  as  to  do  what  one  likes,  or  avoid  what  one  does  not  like, 
for  he  is  very  far  from  free  who  is  subject  to  the  caprices  or 
desires  of  the  ego.  Of  course,  if  the  doors  of  perception  were 
cleansed  we  should  know  that  we  are  always  free  ('It  is  nought 
indeed  but  thine  own  hearing  and  willing  that  do  hinder  thee, 
so  that  thou  dost  not  hear  and  see  God') — for  the  world  itself 
is  manifestation  and  not  the  handiwork  of  the  Absolute.  The 
most  perfect  love  seeks  nothing  for  itself,  requiring  nothing,  and 
offers  nothing  to  the  beloved,  realizing  her  infinite  perfection 
which  cannot  be  added  to:  but  we  do  not  know  this  except  in 
moments  of  perfect  experience. 

Ver}^  surely  the  love  of  woman  is  not  the  only  way  to  approach 
this  freedom.  It  is  more  likely  by  far  the  most  dangerous  way, 
and  perhaps  for  many  an  impossible  way.  We  do  not  however 
write  to  condemn  or  to  advocate,  but  to  explain. 

In  reading  of  romantic  love  we  are  apt  to  ponder  over  what 
is  left  unsaid.  What  did  the  writers  really  mean?  What  was 
the  actual  physical  relation  of  the  Provencal  lover  to  his  mistress, 
of  Chandidas  to  Rami?  I  have  come  to  see  now  that  even  if  we 
knew  this  to  the  last  detail  it  would  tell  us  nothing.  He  who 
looks  upon  a  woman  with  desire  (be  it  even  his  wife)  has  already 
committed  adultery  with  her  in  his  heart,  for  all  desire  is  adultery. 
We  remember  that  saying,  but  do  not  always  remember  that  the 
converse  is  also  true — that  he  who  embraces  a  woman  without 
desire  has  added  nothing  to  the  sum  of  his  mortality.  Action  is 
then  inaction.  It  is  not  by  non-participation  but  by  non-attach- 
ment that  we  live  the  spiritual  life.  So  that  he  in  Sahaja  who 
merely  represses  desire,  fails.  It  is  easy  not  to  walk,  but  we  have 
to  walk  without  touching  the  ground.  To  refuse  the  beauty  of 
the  earth — which  is  our  birthright — from  fear  that  we  may  sink 
to  the  level  of  pleasure  seekers — that  inaction  would  be  action, 
and  bind  us  to  the  very  flesh  we  seek  to  evade.  The  virtue  of 
the  action  of  those  who  are  free  beings  lies  in  the  complete  co- 
ordination of  their  being — ^body,  soul  and  spirit,  the  inner  and 
outer  man^  at  one. 

The  mere  action,  then,  reveals  nothing.  As  do  the  slaves  of 
passion  impelled  by  purpose  and  poverty,  so  do  the  spiritually 
free,  out  of  the  abundance  of  the  bestowing  virtue.  Only  the 
searcher  of  hearts  can  sift  the  tares  from  the  wheat;  it  is  not  for 
mortal  man  to  judge  of  another's  state  of  grace. 


lo8  SAHAJA 

When  we  say  that  the  Indian  culture  is  spiritual,  we  do  not 
mean  that  it  is  not  sensuous.  It  is  perhaps  more  sensuous  than 
has  ever  been  realised — because  a  sensuousness  such  as  this, 
which  can  classify  three  hundred  and  sixty  kinds  of  the  fine 
emotions  of  a  lover's  heart,  and  pause  to  count  the  patterns  gentle 
teeth  may  leave  on  the  tender  skin  of  the  beloved,  or  to  decor- 
ate her  breasts  with  painted  flowers  of  sandal  paste — and  carries 
perfect  sweetness  through  the  most  erotic  art — is  inconceivable 
to  those  who  are  merely  sensual  or  by  a  superhuman  effort  are 
merely  self-controlled.  The  Indian  temperament  makes  it  pos- 
sible to  speak  of  abstract  things  meme  entre  les  baisers. 

For  this  to  be  possible  demands  a  profound  culture  of  the 
sexual  relationship — something  altogether  different  from  the  "in- 
nocence" of  Western  girlhood  and  the  brutal  violence  of  the  "first 
night"  and  the  married  orgy.  The  mere  understanding  of  what 
is  meant  by  Sahaja  demands  at  least  a  racial  if  not  an  individual 
education  in  love — an  education  related  to  athletics  and  dancing, 
music  and  hygiene.  The  sexual  relation  in  itself  must  not  be  so 
rare  or  so  exciting  as  to  intoxicate:  one  should  enjoy  a  woman 
as  one  enjoys  any  other  living  thing,  any  forest,  flower  or  moun- 
tain that  reveals  itself  to  those  who  are  patient.  One  should  not 
be  forced  to  the  act  of  love  by  a  merely  physical  tension :  minutes 
suffice  for  that,  but  hours  are  needed  for  the  perfect  ritual. 
What  the  lover  seeks  should  be  the  full  response,  and  not  his 
mere  pleasure :  and  by  this  I  do  not  mean  anything  so  sentimental 
as  "forbearance"  or  "self-sacrifice,"  but  what  will  please  him 
most.  Under  these  conditions  violence  has  no  attractions :  in 
Arabia,  Burton  tells  us,  the  Musulmans  respected  even  their 
slaves,  and  it  was  "pundonor,"  a  point  of  culture,  that  a  slave, 
like  any  other  woman,  must  be  wooed.  (There  has  been  no  actual 
slavery  in  India,  or  very  little). 

Lafcadio  Hearn  has  pointed  out  the  enormous  degree  to  which 
modern  European  literature  is  permeated  with  the  idea  of  love. 
This  is  however  as  nothing  compared  with  what  we  find  in  the 
Vaishnava  literature  of  Hindustan.  There,  however,  there  is  al- 
ways interpretation :  in  European  romantic  literature  there  is 
rarely  anything  better  than  description.  That  should  be  only  a 
passing  phase,  for  the  real  tendency  of  Western  sexual  freedom 
is  certainly  idealistic,  and  its  forms  are  destined  to  be  developed 
until  the  spiritual  significance  of  love  is  made  clear. 


SAHAJA  109 

Under  the  sway  of  modern  hedonism,  where  nothing  is  accepted 
as  an  end,  and  everything  is  a  means  to  something  else,  the  pre- 
conditions for  understanding  Sahaja  scarcely  exist.  Sahaja  has 
nothing  to  do  with  the  cult  of  pleasure.  It  is  a  doctrine  of  the 
Tao,  and  a  path  of  non-pursuit.  All  that  is  best  for  us  comes  of 
itself  into  our  hands — but  if  we  strive  to  overtake  it,  it  perpetu- 
ally eludes  us. 

In  the  passionless  spontaneous  relation  of  Sahaja,  are  we  to  sup- 
pose that  children  are  ever  to  be  begotten?  I  think  not.  It  is 
true  that  in  early  times  it  was  considered  right  for  the  hermit 
who  has  renounced  the  world  and  the  flesh  to  grant  the  request 
of  a  woman  who  comes  to  him  of  her  own  will  and  desires  a 
child.  But  this  is  quite  another  matter — and  incidentally  a  wise 
eugenic  disposition,  removing  an  objection  to  monasticism  which 
some  have  found  in  its  sterilisation  of  the  best  blood.  The  Sahaja 
relation,  on  the  contrary,  is  an  end  in  itself,  and  cannot  be  associ- 
ated with  social  and  eugenic  ideas.  Those  who  are  capable  of 
such  love  must  certainly  stand  on  the  plane  of  the  'men  of  old,' 
who  did  not  long  for  descendants,  and  said  'Why  should  we 
long  for  descendants,  we  whose  self  is  the  universe?  For 
longing  for  children  is  longing  for  possessions,  and  longing 
for  possessions  is  longing  for  the  world :  one  like  the'  other  is 
merely  longing.'^  We  cannot  admit  such  a  longing  in  Sahaja. 
It  is  however  just  possible  that  such  a  relation  as  this  might  be 
employed  by  the  Powers  for  the  birth  of  an  avatar:  and  in  such 
a  case  we  should  understand  what  was  meant  by  immaculate 
conception  and  virgin  birth — she  being  virgin  who  has  never 
been  moved  by  desire. 

The  Sahaja  relation  is  incommensurable  with  marriage,  cate- 
gorically regarded  as  contract,  inasmuch  as  this  relation  is  under- 
taken for  an  end,  the  definite  purpose  of  'fulfilling  social  and 
religious  duties,'  and  in  particular,  of  paying  the  'debt  to  the 
ancestors'  by  begetting  children. 

Those  whose  view  of  life  is  exclusively  ethical  will  hold  that 
sexual  intimacy  must  be  sanctified,  justified  or  expiated  by  at 
least  the  wish  to  beget  and  to  accept  the  consequent  responsibili- 
ties of  partenthood.  There  is,  indeed,  something  inappropriate 
in  the  position  of  those  who  pursue  the  pleasures  of  life  and 

1  Brihaddranyaka  Upanishad. 


no  SAHAJA 

evade  by  artificial  means  their  natural  fruit.  But  this  point 
of  view  presupposes  that  the  sexual  intimacy  was  a  sought  pleas- 
ure: what  we  have  discussed  is  something  quite  other  than  this, 
and  without  an  element  of  seeking. 

It  is  only  by  pursuing  what  is  not  already  ours  by  divine  right 
that  we  go  astray  and  bring  upon  ourselves  and  upon  others  infi- 
nite suffering — to  those  who  do  not  pursue,  all  things  will  offer 
themselves.    What  we  truly  need,  we  need  not  strive  for. 

It  will  be  seen  from  all  this  how  necessary  it  is  that  sexual  in- 
timacy should  not  in  itself  be  considered  an  unduly  exciting  ex- 
perience. It  is  more  than  likely  also  that  those  who  are  capable 
of  this  spontaneous  control  will  have  been  already  accustomed 
to  willed  control  under  other  circumstances:  and  a  control  of 
this  kind  implies  a  certain  training.  We  may  remark  in  passing 
that  in  'birth  control'  we  see  an  objection  to  the  use  of  artificial 
means — an  objection  additional  to  what  is  obvious  on  aesthetic 
grounds — in  the  fact  that  such  means  remove  all  incentive  to  the 
practice  of  .y^//-control.  Those  who  have  good  reason  to  avoid 
procreation  at  any  time,  should  make  it  a  point  of  pride  to  ac- 
complish this  by  their  own  strength — and  in  any  case,  no  man 
who  has  not  this  strength  can  be  sure  of  his  ability  to  play  his 
part  to  perfection,  but  may  at  any  time  meet  with  a  woman  whom 
he  cannot  satisfy. 

How  is  one  to  avoid  in  such  a  relation  as  Sahaja  the  danger 
of  self-deception,^  the  pestilence  of  suppressed  desires,  and  even 
of  physical  overstrain  and  tension  ? 

For  very  highly  perfected  beings  it  may  be  true  that  those 
subtle  exchanges  of  nervous  energy  which  are  effected  in  sexual 
intercourse — and  are  necessary  to  full  vitality — can  be  effected 
by  mere  intimacy,  in  a  relation  scarcely  passionate  in  the  com- 
mon sense.  We  read,  indeed,  of  other  worlds  where  even  gen- 
eration may  be  effected  by  an  exchange  of  glances.  But  it  is 
given  to  few  to  function  always  on  such  a  plane  as  this.  Are  we 
then  to  forbid  to  those  who  need  the  consolations  of  mortal  af- 
fection— are  we  to  forbid  to  these  the  passionless  intimacy  of 
Sahaja?  Why  should  we  do  so?  Even  for  those  who  cannot 
renounce  the  sheltered  valleys  of  the  personal  life  for  ever,  it 
is  well  sometimes  to  breathe  the  cold  air  of  the  perpetual  snows. 

^"How  nicely  can  doggrish  lust  beg  for  a  piece  of  spirit,  when  flesh  is 
denied  it !" — Nietzsche. 


SAHAJA  in 

We  should  add  that  'to  whom  chastity  is  difficult,  it  is  to  be  dis- 
suaded' :  in  order  to  be  sure  of  our  ground  we  should  not  at- 
tempt the  practise  of  a  degree  of  continence  beyond  our  power. 
We  should  also  be  careful  not  to  'mix  our  planes'  or  to  make 
one  thing  an  excuse  for  another.  We  must  recognize  everything 
for  what  it  really  is — the  relative  as  relative,  the  absolute  as  abso- 
lute— and  render  unto  Caesar  those  things,  and  only  those,  which 
are  lawfully  his. 

We  are  now,  perhaps,  in  a  better  position  to  know  what  is 
meant  by  Chandidas  when  he  speaks  of  the  difficulties  and  the 
meaning  of  Sahaja.  What  he  intends  by  'never  falling*  (sail) 
is  a  perpetual  uncalculated  life  in  the  present,  and  the  mainte- 
nance, not  of  deliberate  control,  but  of  unsought,  unshaken  seren- 
ity in  moments  of  greatest  intimacy:  he  means  that  under  cir- 
cumstances of  temptation  none  should  be  felt — not  that  tempta- 
tion should  be  merely  overcome.  And  to  achieve  this  he  does 
not  pray  to  be  delivered  from  temptation,  but  courts  it. 

Here  nothing  is  to  be  done  for  one  another,  but  all  for  love. 
There  is  to  be  no  effort  to  evoke  response,  and  none  to  withhold 
it.  All  this  is  far  removed  from  the  passion  and  surrender,  the 
tricks  of  seduction,  and  the  shyness,  of  the  spiritual  allegory  and 
of  the  purely  human  experience. 


INTELLECTUAL  FRATERNITY' 

"To   mark   by   some   celebration   the   intellectual    fraternity   of 

mankind." 

Alike  to  those  who  grieve  for  Europe  in  her  hour  of  civil  war, 
and  to  those  who  would  offer  tribute  at  the  shrine  of  William 
Shakespeare,  it  must  appear  appropriate  and  significant  to  pub- 
lish tokens  of  the  brotherhood  of  man  in  art.  For  it  is  likely  the 
prestige  of  Empire  may  be  completely  shattered  in  the  present 
conflict  of  rival  imperialisms :  it  may  appear  henceforth  a  matter 
for  shame  to  exercise  political  domination  over  men  of  another 
race:  and  where  until  lately  it  has  been  the  custom  to  proclaim 
the  conqueror's  civilizing  purposes,  a  common  civilization  of  the 
world  will  demand  of  us  a  mutual  understanding  carried  at  least 
so  far  that  we  may  substitute  for  the  endeavour  to  do  one  another 
good,  an  effort  based  on  common  needs  and  human  purposes,  con- 
ceived in  intellectual  fraternity.  None  has  been  more  distin- 
guished than  William  Shakespeare,  in  his  profound  appreciation 
of  the  common  humanity  of  an  infinite  variety  of  man.  Civiliza- 
tion must  henceforth  be  human  rather  than  local  or  national,  or 
it  cannot  exist.  In  a  world  of  rapid  communications  it  must  be 
founded  in  the  common  purposes  and  intuitions  of  humanity, 
since  in  the  absence  of  common  motives,  there  cannot  be  coopera- 
tion for  agreed  ends.  In  the  decades  lately  passed — in  terms  of 
'real  duration,'  now  so  far  behind  us — it  has,  indeed,  been  fash- 
ionable to  insist  upon  a  supposed  fundamental  divergence  of 
European  and  Asiatic  character:  and  those  who  held  this  view 
were  not  entirely  illogical  in  thinking  the  wide  earth  not  wide 
enough  for  Europe  and  Asia  to  live  in  side  by  side.  For  artificial 
barriers  are  very  frail :  and  if  either  white  or  yellow  'peril'  were 
in  truth  an  essentially  inhuman  force,  then  whichever  party  be- 
lieved itself  to  be  the  only  human  element,  must  have  desired  the 
extermination,  or  at  least  the  complete  subordination  of  the  other. 

But  the  premises  were  false:  the  divergences  of  character  are 

*  Contributed  to  the  "Book  of  Homage  to  Shakespeare,"  edited  by 
Israel  Gollancz,  London  1916. 


INTELLECTUAL  FRATERNITY  Il3 

superficial,  and  the  deeper  we  penetrate,  the  more  we  discover 
an  identity  in  the  inner  Ufe  of  Europe  and  Asia.  Can  we,  in 
fact,  point  to  any  elemental  experience  or  to  any  ultimate  goal 
of  man  which  is  not  equally  European  and  Asiatic?  Does  one 
not  see  that  these  are  the  same  for  all  in  all  ages  and  continents. 
Who  that  has  breathed  the  clear  mountain  air  of  Upanishads,  of 
Gautama,  ^ankara  and  Kablr,  of  Rumi,  of  Laotse  and  Jesus  (I 
mention  so  far  Asiatic  prophets  only)  can  be  alien  to  those  who 
have  sat  at  the  feet  of  Plato  and  Kant,  Tauler,  Behmen  and 
Ruysbroeck,  Whitman,  Nietzsche  and  Blake?  The  latter  may 
well  come  to  be  regarded  as  the  supreme  prophet  of  a  post- 
industrial  age,  and  it  is  significant  that  one  could  not  find  in 
Asiatic  scripture  a  more  typically  Asiatic  purpose  than  is  revealed 
in  his  passionate  will  to  be  delivered  from  the  bondage  of  division : 

"I  will  go  down  to  self-annihilation  and  Eternal  Death, 
Lest  the  Last  Judgment  come  and  find  me  unannihilate, 
And  I  be  seized  and  giv'n  into  the  hands  of  my  own  Selfhood." 

But  it  is  not  only  in  Philosophy  and  Religion — Truth  and 
Love — but  also  in  Art  that  Europe  and  Asia  are  united :  and  from 
this  triple  likeness  we  may  well  infer  that  all  men  are  alike  in 
their  divinity.  Let  us  only  notice  here  the  singular  agreement  of 
Eastern  and  Western  theories  of  Drama  and  Poetry,  illustrating 
what  has  been  said  with  special  reference  to  the  hero  of  our  cele- 
bration :  for  the  work  of  Shakespeare  is  in  close  accordance  with 
Indian  canons  of  Dramatic  Art. 

"  I  made  this  Drama,"  says  Brahma,  "  to  accord  with  the  movement  of 
the  world,  whether  at  work  or  play,  in  peace  or  laughter,  battle,  lust  or 
slaughter — yielding  the  fruit  of  righteousness  to  those  who  are  followers 
of  a  moral  law,  and  pleasures  to  the  followers  of  pleasure — informed  with 
the  divers  moods  of  the  soul — following  the  order  of  the  world  and  all  its 
weal  and  woe.  That  which  is  not  to  be  found  herein  is  neither  craft  nor 
wisdom,  nor  any  art,  nor  is  it  Union.  That  shall  be  Drama  which  aflfords 
a  place  of  entertainment  in  the  world,  and  a  place  of  audience  for  the 
Vedas,  for  philosophy  and  for  the  sequence  of  events." 

And  poetry  is  justified  to  man  inasmuch  as  it  yields  the  four- 
fold Fruit  of  Life — Virtue,  Pleasure,  Wealth  and  Spiritual  Free- 
dom. The  Western  reader  may  inquire,  "How  Spiritual  Free- 
dom?" and  the  answer  is  to  be  found  in  the  disinterestedness  of 
aesthetic  contemplation,  where  the  spirit  is  momentarily   freed 


114 


INTELLECTUAL  FRATERNITY 


from   the  entanglement   of   good   and   evil.     We    read   in   the 
dramatic  canon  of  Dhanamjaya,  for  example : 

"There  is  no  theme,  whether  delightful  or  disgusting,  cruel  or  gra- 
cious, high  or  low,  obscure  or  plain,  of  fact  or  fancy,  that  may  not 
be  successfully  employed  to  communicate  aesthetic  emotion." 

We  may  also  note  the  words  of  Chuang  Tzu : 

"The  mind  of  the  sage  being  in  repose,  becomes  the  mirror  of  the 
Universe." 

and  compare  them  with  those  of  Whitman,  who  avows  himself 
not  the  poet  of  goodness  only,  but  also  the  poet  of  wickedness. 
It  is  sometimes  feared  that  the  detachment  of  the  Asiatic  vision 
tends  towards  inaction.  If  this  be  partly  true  at  the  present 
moment,  it  arises  from  the  fullness  of  the  Asiatic  experience, 
which  still  contrasts  so  markedly  with  European  youth.  If  the 
everlasting  conflict  between  order  and  chaos  is  for  the  present 
typically  European,  it  is  because  spiritual  wars  no  less  than  physi- 
cal must  be  fought  by  those  who  are  of  military  age.  But  the 
impetuosity  of  youth  cannot  completely  compensate  for  the  insight 
of  age,  and  we  must  demand  of  a  coming  race  that  men  should 
act  with  European  energy,  and  think  with  Asiatic  calm — the  old 
ideal  taught  by  Krishna  upon  the  field  of  battle : 

"IndiflFerent  to  pleasure  and  pain,  to  gain  and  loss,  to  conquest  and 
defeat,  thus  make  ready  for  the  fight.  ...  As  do  the  foolish, 
attached  to  works,  so  should  the  wise  do,  but  without  attachment, 
seeking  to  establish  order  in  the  world." 

Europe,  too,  in  violent  reaction  from  the  anarchy  of  laissez- 
faire,  is  conscious  of  a  will  to  the  establishment  of  order  in  the 
world.  But  European  progress  has  long  remained  in  doubt, 
because  of  its  lack  of  orientation.  It  is  significant  that  the 
discovery  of  Asia  should  coincide  with  the  present  hour  of 
decision :  for  Asiatic  thought  again  affirms  the  unity  and  inter- 
dependence of  all  life,  at  the  moment  when  Europe  begins  to 
realize  that  the  Fruit  of  Life  is  not  easily  attainable  in  a  society 
based  upon  division.  In  honouring  the  genius  of  Shakespeare, 
then,  we  do  not  merely  offer  homage  to  the  memory  of  individual, 
but  are  witnesses  to  the  intellectual  fraternity  of  mankind:  and 
it  is  that  fraternity  which  assures  us  of  the  possibility  of  coopera- 
tion in  a  common  task,  the  creation  of  a  social  order  founded  on 
Union. 


COSMOPOLITAN  VIEW 
OF  NIETZSCHE 

Certainly,  Nietzsche  was  not  a  philosopher  in  the  strict  sense 
of  the  word.  He  is  essentially  a  poet  and  sociologist,  and  above 
all,  a  mystic.  He  stands  in  the  direct  line  of  European  mysticism, 
and  though  less  profound,  speaks  with  the  same  voice  as  Blake 
and  Whitman.  These  three  might,  indeed,  be  said  to  voice  the 
religion  of  modem  Europe — the  religion  of  Idealistic  Individual- 
ism. If  it  were  realised  that  his  originality  does  not  consist  in 
an  incomprehensible  and  unnatural  novelty,  but  in  a  poetic  re- 
statement of  a  very  old  position,  it  might  be  less  needful  to  waste 
our  breath  in  the  refutation  of  theses  he  never  upheld. 

It  is  true  that  we  find  in  his  work  a  certain  violence  and  exag- 
geration :  but  its  very  nature  is  that  of  passionate  protest  against 
unworthy  values,  Pharisaic  virtue,  and  snobisme,  and  the  fact  that 
this  protest  was  received  with  so  much  execration  suggests  that 
he  may  be  a  true  prophet.  The  stone  which  the  builders  rejected : 
Blessed  are  ye  when  men  shall  revile  you.  Of  special  significance 
is  the  beautiful  doctrine  of  the  Superman — so  like  the  Chinese 
concept  of  the  Superior  Man,  and  the  Indian  Mahd  Purusha,  Bo- 
dhisattva  and  Jwan-mukta. 

Amongst  the  chief  marks  of  the  mystic  are  a  constant  sense  of 
the  unity  and  interdependence  of  all  life,  and  of  the  interpenetra- 
tion  of  the  spiritual  and  material — opposed  to  Puritanism,  which 
distinguishes  the  sacred  from  the  secular.  So  too  is  the  sense  of 
being  everywhere  at  home — unlike  the  religions  of  reward  and 
punishment,  which  speak  of  a  future  paradise  and  hell,  and  attach 
an  absolute  and  eternal  value  to  good  and  evil.  "All  things,"  he 
says,  "are  enlinked,  enlaced  and  enamoured":  "I  conjure  you, 
my  brethren,  remain  true  to  the  earth,  and  believe  not  those  who 
speak  to  you  of  superearthly  hopes" :  "For  me — how  could  there 
be  an  outside  of  me?  There  is  no  outside":  "Every  moment 
beginneth  existence,  around  every  'Here'  rolleth  the  ball  'There.' 
The  middle  is  everywhere" :  "Becoming  must  appear  justified  at 
every  instant  .  .  .  the  present  must  not  under  any  circum- 
stances be  justified  by  a  future,  nor  the  past  be  justified  for  the 


1 1 6  COSMOPOLITAN  VIEW  OF  NIETZSCHE 

sake  of  the  present."  All  these  are  characteristic  mystic  intui- 
tions, or  logical  deductions  from  monism,  in  close  accord  with 
the  Brahmanical  formula,  "That  art  thou." 

The  doctrine  of  the  Superman,  whose  virtue  stands  "beyond 
good  and  evil,"  who  is  at  once  the  flower  and  the  leader  and 
saviour  of  men,  has  been  put  forward  again  and  again  in  the 
world's  history.  A  host  of  names  for  this  ideal  occur  in  Indian 
literature:  he  is  the  Arhat  (adept),  Buddha  (enlightened),  Jina 
(conqueror),  Tlrthakara  (finder  of  the  ford),  the  Bodhisattva 
(incarnation  of  the  bestowing  virtue),  and  above  all  Jlvan-mukta 
(freed  in  this  life),  whose  actions  are  no  longer  good  or  bad,  but 
proceed  from  his  freed  nature. 

Let  us  see  what  Nietzsche  himself  has  to  say  of  the  Superman. 
"Upward  goeth  our  course  onward  from  genera  to  super-genera. 
But  a  horror  to  me  is  the  degenerating  sense,  which  saith  'All 
for  myself."  Is  that  the  doctrine  of  selfishness  ?  As  well  accuse 
the  Upanishad,  where  it  declares  that  all  things  are  dear  to  us 
for  the  sake  of  the  Self.  For  the  monist  there  is  no  true  distinc- 
tion of  selfish  and  unselfish,  for  all  interests  are  identical.  Self- 
realisation  is  perfect  service,  and  our  supreme  and  only  duty  is  to 
become  what  we  are  {That  art  thou).  This  is  idealistic  individ- 
ualism, and  this  doctrine  of  inner  harmony  is  valid  on  all  planes,^ 
for  we  are  not  saved  by  what  we  do,  only  by  what  we  are.  "Ye 
constrain,"  he  says,  "all  things  to  flow  towards  you  and  into  you, 
so  that  they  shall  flow  back  again  out  of  your  fountain  as  the 
gifts  of  your  love.  Verily,  an  appropriator  of  all  values  must 
such  a  bestowing  love  become:  but  healthy  and  holy  call  I  this 
selfishness  .  .  .  But  another  selfishness  there  is,  an  all-too- 
poor  and  hungry  kind,  which  would  always  steal — with  the  eye 
of  the  thief  it  looketh  upon  all  that  is  lustrous :  with  the  craving 
of  hunger  it  measureth  him  who  hath  abundance :  and  ever  doth 
it  prowl  round  the  table  of  bestowers."  It  is  the  author  of  a 
supposed  apotheosis  of  the  "Blonde  Beast,"  who  exclaims: 
"Better  to  perish  than  to  fear  and  hate :  far  better  to  perish  than 
to  be  feared  and  hated  !" 

Nietzsche  has  certainly  a  contempt  for  pity — that  is,  for  senti- 


*  See,  for  example,  Artzibashef's  Sanine,  where  the  one  man  who 
is  at  peace  with  himself,  though  far  from  a  highly  spiritual  type,  is 
still  the  most  lovable. 


COSMOPOLITAN  VIEW  OF  NIETZSCHE  117 

mentalizing  over  one's  own  sufferings  or  those  of  others.  Natu- 
rally, life  is  hard:  for  the  higher  man  it  should  be  ever  harder 
by  choice.  "My  suffering  and  my  fellow-suffering — what  matter 
about  them !"  "Ye  tell  me  'Life  is  hard  to  bear.'  But  for  what 
purpose  should  ye  have  your  pride  in  the  morning  and  your 
resignation  in  the  evening?"  This  is  certainly  different  from  the 
"greatest  happiness  of  the  greatest  number,"  which  Western 
democracies  have  made  their  aim. 

It  is  hardly  worth  while  to  refer  to  those  who  bracket  our 
poet-philosopher  and  mystic  with  the  Treitschkes  and  Crambs, 
and  would  make  him  one  of  the  prime  instigators  of  a  "Euro- 
Nietzschean"  war.  It  would  be  easy  to  show  by  quotation  how 
he  scorned  alike  the  mediocrity  of  Germany  and  England,  and 
how  he  regarded  France  as  "still  the  seat  of  the  most  intelligent 
and  refined  culture  of  Europe,"  and  contrasted  the  French  esprit 
with  "our  German  infirmity  of  taste."  Better  than  this,  however, 
will  be  to  show  how  well  he  understood  the  fundamental  unity  of 
Europe — a  unity  of  suffering  now,  but  then  as  now  a  unity  of 
movement,  by  the  side  of  which  the  present  hatreds  assume  the 
proportions  of  a  mere  episode — and  how  little  he  could  ever  have 
associated  patriotism  with  greatness : 

"Owing,"  he  says,  "to  the  morbid  estrangement  which  the 
nationality-craze  has  induced  and  still  induces  amongst  the  nations 
of  Europe,  owing  also  to  the  short-sighted  and  hasty-handed  poli- 
ticians, who  with  the  help  of  this  craze,  are  at  present  in  power, 
and  do  not  suspect  to  what  extent  the  disintegrating  policy  they 
pursue  must  necessarily  be  only  an  interlude  policy — owing  to 
all  this,  and  much  more  that  is  altogether  unmentionable  at  pres- 
ent, the  most  unmistakable  signs  that  Europe  wishes  to  he  one, 
are  now  overlooked,  or  arbitrarily  and  falsely  misinterpreted. 
With  all  the  more  profound  and  large-minded  men  of  this  century, 
the  real  general  tendency  of  the  mysterious  labour  of  their  souls 
was  to  prepare  the  way  for  that  new  synthesis  and  tentatively  to 
anticipate  the  European  of  the  future;  only  in  their  simulations, 
or  in  their  weaker  moments,  in  old  age,  perhaps,  did  they  belong 
to  the  'fatherlands' — they  only  rested  from  themselves  when  they 
became  'patriots'."  And  what  may  be  said  to  prove  the  truth  of 
this  sense  of  European  unity,  which  even  ten  years  ago  might  have 
seemed  a  too  brilliant  generalization,  is  the  fact  that  we  see  now, 
that  not  only  Europe,  but  the  whole  world,  and  in  precisely  the 


Il8  COSMOPOLITAN  VIEW  OF  NIETZSCHE 

same  way,  through  the  mysterious  labours  of  great  men,  has  long 
striven  to  be  one,  and  is  now,  perhaps  for  the  first  time  in  history, 
within  a  measurable  distance  of  realising  its  unconscious  purpose. 

The  "Will  to  Power"  has  nothing  to  do  with  tyranny — it  is 
opposed  alike  to  the  tyranny  of  the  autocrat  and  the  tyranny  of 
the  majority.  The  Will  to  Power  asserts  that  our  life  is  not  to 
be  swayed  by  motives  of  pleasure  or  pain,  the  "pairs  of  opposites," 
but  is  to  be  directed  towards  its  goal,  and  that  goal  is  the  free- 
dom and  spontaneity  of  the  Jlvan-mukta.  And  this  is  beyond 
good  and  evil.  This  also  set  out  in  the  Bhagavad  Glia:  the  hero 
must  be  superior  to  pity  (asocydnanvasocastvam)  ;  resolute  for 
the  fray,  but  unattached  to  the  result,  for,  as  Whitman  expresses 
it,  "battles  are  lost  in  the  same  spirit  in  which  they  are  won."  If  he 
be  wounded,  he  will  urge  his  comrades  onward,  rather  than  ask 
them  to  delay  to  condole  with  him :  and  he  will  not  insult  them  by 
supposing  that  they  in  their  turn  would  do  otherwise.  "Let  your 
love  be  stronger  than  your  pity":  but  that  is  not  self-love,  it  is 
not  even  neighbour-love  or  patriotism — "Higher  than  love  to  your 
neighbour  is  love  to  the  furthest  and  future  ones ;  higher  still  than 
love  to  men  is  love  to  things  and  phantoms  .  .  'Myself  do  I 
offer  unto  my  love,  and  my  neighbour  as  myself — such  is  the 
language  of  all  creators."  "Ah!  that  ye  understood  my  word," 
he  says:  "do  ever  what  ye  will — but  first  be  such  as  can  will 
.  .  .  .  He  who  cannot  command  himself  shall  obey."  This 
is  infinitely  remote  from  the  doctrine  of  "getting  our  own  way" 
or  "doing  what  we  like" — "a  horror  to  us,"  as  he  says,  "is  the 
degenerating  sense,  which  saith  'All  for  myself." 

The  teaching  of  Nietzsche  is  a  pure  nishkama  dharma:  "Do  I 
then  strive  after  happiness f  I  strive  after  my  work!"  and  "All 
those  modes  of  thinking,"  he  says,  "which  measure  the  worth  of 
things  according  to  pleasure  and  pain,  are  plausible  modes  of 
thought  and  naivetes,  which  everyone  conscious  of  creative 
powers  and  an  artist's  conscience  will  look  down  upon  with 
scorn."  For  the  Superman,  as  we  should  say,  is  not  swayed  by 
the  pairs  of  opposites.  'Do  what  ye  will' :  this  doctrine  is  neither 
egotistic  nor  altruistic.  Not  egotistic,  for  to  yield  to  all  the 
promptings  of  the  senses,  to  be  the  slave  of  caprice,  is  to  be 
moulded  by  our  environment,  and  the  very  reverse  of  far-willing: 
it  is  precisely  himself  the  Superman  may  not  spare.  It  is  not 
altruistic,  for  where  there  is  naught  external  to  myself,  there 


COSMOPOLITAN  VIEW  OF  NIETZSCHE 


119 


can  be  no  altruism.  The  highest  duty  is  that  of  self-realisation. 
"Physician,  heal  thyself,"  exclaims  Nietzsche:  "then  wilt  thou 
also  heal  thy  patient.  Let  it  be  his  best  cure  to  see  with  his 
eyes  him  who  maketh  himself  whole."  This  is  nothing  but  the 
old  doctrine  of  Chuang  Tzu:  "The  sages  of  old  first  got  Tao 
for  themselves,  and  then  got  it  for  others.  Before  you  possess 
this  3^ourself,  what  leisure  have  you  to  attend  to  the  doings  of 
wicked  men?  Cherish  and  preserve  your  own  self,  and  all  the 
rest  will  prosper  of  itself."  It  reminds  us  also  of  Jesus :  "First 
cast  out  the  mote  from  thine  own  eye." 

The  leaders  of  humanity  have  never  been  such  as  have  acted 
from  a  sense  of  duty,  in  the  ordinary  sense  of  the  word.  Duty  is 
but  a  means  of  playing  safe  for  those  who  lack  the  Bestowing 
Virtue.  The  activity  of  genius  is  not  an  obedience  to  rules,  but 
dedication  of  life  to  what  is  commanded  from  within,  even 
though  it  should  appear  to  all  others  as  evil. 

Was  Jesus  humble,  or  did  He 

Give  any  proofs  of  humility? 

When  but  a  child  He  ran  away. 

And  left  His  parents  in  dismay: 

These  were  the  words  upon  His  tongue 

"I  am  doing  My  Father's  business." 

What  constitutes  the  virtue  of  any  action  is  the  complete  co- 
ordination of  the  actor.  We  should  act  according  to  our  own 
nature :  and  when  that  nature  has  developed  to  its  fullest  stature, 
then  what  is  divine  attains  complete  manifestation.  It  is  with 
preoccupations  such  as  this  that  Nietzsche  exclaims  with  such 
profound  conviction: 

"That  ye  might  become  weary  of  saying:  'that  an  action  is 
good  because  it  is  unselfish.''  Ah !  my  friends !  That  your  very 
self  be  in  your  action,  as  the  mother  is  in  the  child:  let  that  be 
your  formula  of  virtue." 

This  is  the  very  prayer  of  Socrates,  "and  may  the  outward  and 
inward  man  be  at  one" — all  else  is  hypocrisy.  The  inferior  man 
regulates  his  life  by  externals :  inasmuch  as  he  is  constrained  by 
desire  for  long  life,  reputation,  riches,  rank  or  offspring,  he  is 
not  free.     The  superior  man  is  of  another  sort,  and  of  him  it 


I20  COSMOPOLITAN  VIEW  OF  NIETZSCHE 

may  be  said,  with  Chuang  Tzu,  "that  they  Uve  in  accordance  with 
their  own  nature.  In  the  whole  world  they  have  no  equal.  They 
regulate  their  life  by  inward  things." 

"What  are  not  the  powerful  doing?"  says  the  Prema  Sdgara 
"Who  knows  their  course  of  action?  They,  indeed,  do  nothing 
for  themselves;  but  to  those  that  do  them  honour  and  seek  their 
aid,  they  grant  their  prayers.  Such  is  their  path,  that  they  appear 
united  to  all ;  but  upon  reflection  thou  shalt  perceive  that  they 
stand  aloof  from  all,  as  the  lotus  leaf  from  water."  "The  man 
of  perfect  virtue"  (Superman),  says  Chuang  Tzu  again,  "in 
repose  has  no  thoughts,  in  action  no  anxiety.  He  recognizes  no 
right,  nor  wrong,  nor  good,  nor  bad.  Within  the  Four  Seas,  when 
all  profit — that  is  his  pleasure ;  when  all  share — that  is  his  repose. 
Men  cling  to  him  as  children  who  have  lost  their  mothers;  they 
rally  round  him  as  wayfarers  who  have  missed  their  road."  For 
his  is  the  Bestowing  Virtue. 

According  to  Asvaghosha,  too,  "it  is  said  that  we  attain  to  Nir- 
vana and  that  various  spontaneous  displays  of  activity  are  accom- 
plished." The  Bodhisattvas  do  not  consider  the  ethics  of  their 
behaviour:  "they  have  attained  to  spontaneity  of  action,  because 
their  discipline  is  in  unison  with  the  wisdom  and  activity  of  all 
Tathagatas."  "Jesus  was  all  virtue,  because  he  acted  from  im- 
pulse and  not  from  rules."  When  Nietzsche  says  that  the  Super- 
man is  the  meaning  of  the  earth  he  means  what  we  mean  when 
we  speak  of  a  Bodhisattva,  or  of  a  Jlvan-fnukta.  This  type  which 
represents  the  highest  attainment  and  purpose  of  humanity  is  the 
most  difficult  thing  for  self-assertive  minds  to  grasp.  A  being 
"beyond  good  and  evil,"  a  law  unto  himself.  "How  wicked!" 
exclaims  the  ordinary  man :  "for  even  I  feel  it  my  duty  to  con- 
form to  the  rules  of  morality  and  to  restrain  my  selfish  desires." 

Thus  we  shall  never  comprehend  the  selfishness  which  Nietzsche 
and  other  mystics  praise,  if  we  interpret  it  according  to  the  lights 
of  those  who  believe  that  all  actions  should  be  praiseworthy. 
The  pattern  of  man's  behaviour  is  not  to  be  found  in  any  code, 
but  in  the  principles  of  the  universe,  which  is  continually  reveal- 
ing to  us  its  own  nature.     Consider  the  lilies  .  .  . 

There  exists  a  voluptuousness  that  is  not  sensuality,  a  passion 
for  power  that  is  not  self-assertion,  and  a  selfishness  that  is  more 
generous  than  any  altruism.  These  are  distinctions  which  Nietz- 
sche himself  is  careful  to  insist  upon,  and  only  wilful  misunder- 


COSMOPOLITAN  VIEW  OF  NIETZSCHE  121 

standing  ignores  it.  It  is  precisely  of  the  great  man  who  fails 
that  he  says :  "Once  they  thought  of  becoming  heroes ;  but  sen- 
suahsts  are  they  now."  "Art  thou  the  victorious  one  (jina),"  he 
says,  "the  self-conqueror,  the  ruler  of  thy  passions,  the  master  of 
thy  virtues?  Thus  do  I  ask  thee.  Or  does  the  animal  speak  in 
thy  wish,  and  necessity  ?  or  isolation  ?  or  discord  in  thee  ?"  "What 
I  warn  people  against  .  .  .  confounding  debauchery,  and  the 
principle  'laisser  aller*  (i.  e.  'never  mind')  with  the  Will  to 
Power — the  latter  is  the  exact  reverse  of  the  former."  "And 
verily,  it  is  no  commandment  for  to-day  and  to-morrow  to  learn 
to  love  oneself.  Rather  is  it  of  all  arts  the  finest,  subtlest,  last 
and  patientest."  "True  and  ideal  selfishness  consists  in  always 
watching  over  and  restraining  the  soul,  so  that  our  productiveness 
may  come  to  a  beautiful  termination." 

So  far,  then,  from  a  doctrine  of  self-indulgence,  it  is  a  form  of 
asceticism  or  ardor  (tapas)  which  Nietzsche  would  have  us  im- 
pose on  ourselves,  if  we  are  strong  enough.  This  was  precisely 
the  view  of  Manu  when  he  established  a  severe  rule  of  life  for 
the  Brahman,  and  one  far  easier  for  the  Sudra.  And  understand- 
ing this,  Nietzsche  has  praised  the  institution  of  caste,  for  he 
thought  it  right  that  life  should  grow  colder  towards  the  summit. 
As  the  Markandeya  Pur  ana  pronounces,  a  Brahman  should  do 
nothing  for  the  sake  of  enjoyment. 

Those  who  have  comprehended  the  decline  and  fall  of  Western 
civilization  will  recognize  in  Nietzsche  the  reawakening  of  the 
conscience  of  Europe. 


YOUNG  INDIA 

In  order  to  understand  Young  India,  one  must  understand  the 
world.  What  is  the  meaning  of  youth  or  age  in  cycles  of  civili- 
zation, as  well  as  in  individuals?  In  terms  of  reality,  this  is  not 
a  question  of  dates  or  years,  but  of  experience.  India  is  at  once 
unbelievably  old  and  incredibly  yoimg,  utterly  sophisticated  and ' 
pathetically  naive.  Her  great  achievements  of  the  past — in  philos- 
ophy, art  and  social  organization — possess  an  indestructible  value, 
and  there  can  be  no  true  citizenship  of  the  world  of  which  the 
roots  do  not  reach  back  into  this  ground,  at  least  as  far  as  they 
reach  back  into  the  classic  culture  of  the  Mediterranean.  There 
is  no  point  at  which  the  speculation,  experiment,  success  or  failure 
which  constitute  Indian  civilization  do  not  touch  the  vital  prob- 
lems of  the  present  day.  And  yet  we  cannot  say  that  modern 
India  has  created  anything. 

We  stand  in  the  West  at  the  close  of  the  great  cycle  of  Christian 
civilization  which  attained  its  zenith,  let  us  say,  in  the  twelfth  or 
thirteenth  century,  when  the  creative  will  of  man  swept  far  beyond 
its  personal  boundaries,  striving  to  establish  an  order  in  the 
outer  world  to  correspond  with  the  universal  order  of  the  world 
of  imagination  or  eternity.  From  the  thirteenth  to  the  twentieth 
century  one  can  follow  the  progressive  decay  of  life — the  ever 
fainter  expression  of  the  creative  will,  loosening  social  integra- 
tion, the  substitution  of  contract  for  status,  the  advancement  of 
material  and  moral  to  the  exclusion  of  spiritual  values,  the  decline 
of  vision,  up  to  this  present  hour  of  pure  chaos,  when  life  and 
art  are  evidence  of  centuries  of  aimlessness. 

The  war  in  Europe  is  no  unfortunate  accident,  but  the  inevit- 
able outcome  of  European  civilization.  How  clearly  this  was 
already  apparent  towards  the  close  of  the  nineteenth  century  is 
to  be  seen  in  the  remarkable  words  of  Viscount  Torio,  published 
in  1890:  "Occidental  civilization  .  .  .  must  ultimately  end  in 
disappointment  and  demoralization.  .  .  .  Peaceful  equality  can 
never  be  attained  until  built  up  among  the  ruins  of  annihilated 
Western  States  and  the  ashes  of  extinct  Western  peoples."  And, 
indeed,  we  cannot  be  surprised  that  the  philosophy  of  internecine 


YOUNG  INDIA 


123 


peace  should  have  been  transferred  at  last  to  the  visible  field  of 
battle. 

We  feel  that  the  intention  of  this  war  has  been  to  make  the 
world  safe  for  exploitation;  this  might  have  been  accomplished 
by  a  decisive  victory  on  either  side.  And  "Victory  breeds 
hatred:  because  the  conquered  are  unhappy."^  The  best  one 
could  hope  for  was  that  the  struggle  would  go  on  long  enough  and 
be  sufficiently  inconclusive  to  destroy  the  prestige  of  Imperialism 
and  exploitation  for  many  centuries.  Nevertheless,  democracy 
understood  politically  as  the  tyranny  of  a  majority  is  no  more 
congenial  to  liberty  than  an  autocracy,  for  it  implants  or  assumes 
in  every  one  the  desire  to  govern.  But  those  only  are  worthy 
to  govern,  as  the  Chinese  say,  who  would  rather  be  excused. 
Representative  government  has  everywhere  been  found  to  involve 
no  more  than  the  victory  of  the  most  powerful  interests.  And 
even  revolts  have  not  created  liberty — 

The  Iron  hand  crushed  the  tyrant's  head 
And  became  a  tyrant  in  his  stead. 

Every  oppressed  nationality  oppresses  some  other  or  embraces 
the  oppression  of  class  by  class.  Our  sympathies  are  then  not 
only  with  the  oppressed,  but  with  the  oppressor,  for  both  alike 
are  in  need  of  salvation  from  the  same  group  of  false  values. 
The  liberty  that  we  concede  is  of  far  greater  significance  to  us 
than  any  liberty  we  can  take  by  force  or  receive  by  gift. 

Perhaps  we  ought  not  to  include  the  Russians  in  these  criti- 
cisms. In  Russia  more  clearly  than  anywhere  else,  the  religion 
of  Europe — the  idealistic  individualism  of  Blake  and  Whitman 
and  Nietzsche — has  found  expression  in  art  and  action.  It  is  a 
tragic  reflection  that  those  who  laid  down  their  arms  were  not 
wrong,  but  only  too  right.  Yet  we  cannot  collectively  abandon 
the  use  of  force  in  a  day  or  establish  the  kingdom  of  heaven  in 
a  week:  to  find  the  Paradise  still  upon  earth  is  possible  only  for 
the  individual,  never  for  the  race  ...  If  we  cannot  see  our 
way  to  the  end  of  all  government,  however,  we  can  see  that  the 
least  amount  of  government  it  is  possible  to  live  with  is  the  best, 
and  the  less  we  are  mixed  up  with  it  the  better  for  us :  or,  rather, 

1  Dhammapada. 


124  YOUNG  INDIA 

the  better  we  are,  the  less  we  shall  wish  to  be  involved  in  it.  Need- 
less to  say,  in  refusing  to  govern,  we  do  not  refuse  to  cooperate : 
but  to  accomplish  this,  we  must  serve,  not  one  another,  but  ends 
beyond  ourselves. 

Let  us  pause  now  to  see  what  has  been  going  on  in  India,  and 
first  to  consider  the  past  as  it  survives  side  by  side  with  the  Young 
India  that  is  the  final  subject  of  our  argument.  Broadly  con- 
trasted with  the  opportunist  industrial  order  of  today  ("a  des- 
perately precarious  institutional  situation"),*  where  the  whole 
energy  of  man  is  used  up  in  making  sure  of  mere  existence,  the 
civilization  of  India  presents  to  us  the  spectacle  of  something 
stable  and  leisurely:  and  this  not  merely  by  virtue  of  some  kind 
of  inertia,  but  as  the  result  of  deliberate  organization  based  on 
a  definite  view  (definite,  whether  right  or  wrong)  of  the  mean- 
ing and  purpose  of  life.  The  principles  of  government  are  de- 
fined, not  by  the  interested,  but  by  the  disinterested;  that  is  to 
say,  by  the  philosopher  who  has  no  personal  ends  to  serve  and 
no  "stake  in  the  country" ;  he  is  the  law-giver,  and  the  status  of 
the  executive  power  is  inferior.  In  a  stable  cooperative  society 
the  achievement  of  mere  life,  the  solution  of  the  bare  economic 
problem,  is  taken  for  granted,  and  there  remains  abundant  energy 
for  the  pursuit  of  the  real  ends  of  life.  These  were  defined  in 
India  in  the  famous  formula  of  "Human  Aim"  (purnshdrtha), 
on  the  one  hand  temporarily  as  vocational  activity  (function,  or 
duty),  winning  wealth  and  enjoying  pleasure;  and  on  the  other 
hand  eternally  as  spiritual  freedom.  Obviously  the  latter  object 
is  the  main  concern  of  all  higher  men. 

Here  are  the  criteria  of  ethical  judgment.  That  is  a  priori 
right,  which  tends  to  the  achievement  of  one  or  all  of  these  ends 
(all  being  good  in  their  degree  or  kind),  and  that  is  wrong,  which 
involves  the  attainment  of  any  end  not  appropriate  to  the  indi- 
vidual concerned,  or  Involves  a  failure  to  attain  what  is  appro- 
priate. We  speak  of  right  or  wrong  accordingly  as  purely  rela- 
tive to  individuality  and  circumstance ;  and  since  all  men  are  really 
unlike,  it  requires  but  a  slight  development  of  the  doctrine  of 
"own-morality"  of  the  vocational  groups,  which  is  the  basis  of 
organized  ethics,  to  reach  the  pure  individualism  which  is  the 
ultimate  religion  alike  of  Asia  and  modem  Europe.    The  indi- 

*  Veblen,  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship. 


YOUNG  INDIA  X2$ 

vidual  who  attains  this  ground  of  liberty  is  called  in  India  "jivan- 
mukta,"  free  in  this  life,  since  nothing  of  himself  is  left  in  him. 
This  is  the  concept  of  superman ;  but  it  demands  also  the  entirety 
of  man  at  every  stage  of  development.  There  can  be  no  doubt 
that  this  latter  end  of  spiritual  freedom — to  become  what  we 
are — dominated  in  India  all  others;  so  that  the  connotation  of 
success  in  India  has  but  little  in  common  with  its  connotation  in 
America. 

Let  us  speak  of  two  conspicuous  features  of  the  Hindu  social 
order.  First,  the  caste  system.  This  system,  of  which  the  lines 
are  drawn  at  once  ethnically  and  culturally  (not  pecuniarily), 
represents  an  integration  (not  a  division)  of  society  in  vocational 
groups  internally  democratic,  and  outwardly  answerable  to  other 
groups  only  for  the  fulfillment  of  their  'own  function.*  It  is 
somewhat  as  if,  for  example,  the  farmers  of  the  whole  United 
States  should  be  answerable  to  the  community  at  large  only  for 
the  production  of  good  and  sufficient  food,  in  return  for  the 
means  of  production  guaranteed  to  them,  while  as  a  group  they 
should  remain  completely  autonomous  in  all  other  respects,  e.  g., 
in  matters  of  marriage  and  divorce,  education,  wages  and  hours 
of  labor,  etc.,  while  none  could  be  called  on  for  any  other  public 
service  than  their  own.  In  place  of  States,  then,  we  should 
have  nation-wide,  someday  perhaps  world-wide,  vocational  groups 
directly  founded  on  the  instinct  of  workmanship  and  the  inheri- 
tance of  aptitude. 

It  was  assumed  in  India  that  heredity  determined  birth  In  the 
appropriate  environment.  This  may  have  been  true  of  an  ordered 
society  like  that  of  ancient  India,  but  it  could  not  apply  to  the 
melting  pot,  and  we  may  expect  that  the  coming  development 
of  syndicalism  will  differ  chiefly  from  the  caste  system  in  per- 
mitting intermarriage  and  choice  or  change  of  occupation  under 
certain  conditions,  though  still  recognizing  the  general  desirability 
of  marriage  within  the  group  and  of  following  one's  parent's 
calling.  In  such  a  reinstatement  of  the  instinct  of  workmanship 
in  the  West,  and  a  certain  relaxation  of  caste  rule  in  the  East, 
it  is  possible  to  foresee  a  common  sociological  agreement  of  the 
workers  of  the  world. 

Secondly,  marriage.  In  India  the  home  Is  still  the  foundation 
of  all  social  thought ;  in  Europe  and  America  the  home  as  deter- 
mined by  existing  tradition  is  already  a  lost  cause — a  profound 


126  YOUNG  INDIA 

distinction,  and  yet,  under  the  same  influences  the  same  result 
is  bound  to  succeed  even  in  India,  though  the  ancient  order  may 
be  long  in  dying.  The  Indian  marriage  is  an  impersonal  con- 
tract, undertaken  as  a  social  debt,  by  men  and  women  alike,  not 
for  happiness,  but  for  the  fulfillment  of  social  and  religious 
duties.  It  is  not  based  on  romantic  love  or  passion,  and  it  is 
indissoluble,  just  because  it  is  undertaken  for  ends  that  are  real- 
izable apart  from  individual  interest.  To  be  perfect  wife  or  hus- 
band is  not  so  much  a  question  of  personal  adaptation  as  of  edu- 
cation, since  ethical  culture  is  achieved  through  hero-worship  and 
the  general  knowledge  of  epic  literature.  The  end  is  a  perfect 
harmony  based  on  self-forgetfulness — an  order  exquisite  in  form, 
and  possibly  superior  to  the  romantic  concept  of  the  harmony  of 
selves  which  underlies  the  modem  theory  of  marriage  or  liaison 
based  on  love,  but  incongruous  with  our  necessity  to  prove  for 
ourselves  the  spiritual  and  dynamic  value  of  passion. 

One  further  observation  on  the  past:  it  was  from  beginning 
to  end  an  era  of  proficiency  in  handicraft,  rather  than  of  ingeni- 
ous mechanism.  The  industrial  arts  attained  an  unsurpassed 
perfection  with  great  economy  of  means.  Sculpture  had  already 
declined,  but  painting  and  architecture  were  still  at  a  very  high 
level  at  the  end  of  the  eighteenth  century.  Music,  poetry  and 
dancing  survive  today,  however,  precariously. 

In  the  nineteenth  century  we  have  to  remark  two  special 
conditions  beside  the  survival  of  the  past  in  the  present.  First, 
that  the  Indian  culture  was  already  decadent,  that  is  to  say,  suf- 
fering from  the  inevitable  consequences  of  all  formulation.  The 
formula,  however  admirable,  is  inherited  rather  than  earned,  it 
becomes  an  end  instead  of  a  means,  and  its  meaning  is  forgotten, 
so  that  it  is  insecure.  Secondly,  political  subjection  coincided 
with  the  impact  of  the  industrial  revolution  and  of  the  dead 
weight  of  empirical  science  apprehended  simply  as  the  basis  of 
economic  success.  All  this  implied  a  transvaluation  of  all  values, 
in  an  arbitrary  rather  than  a  constructive  sense — in  the  main  a 
degradation  of  values  and  a  diversion  of  energy  compressing  into 
half  a  century  a  process  that  has  occupied  five  hundred  years  in 
Europe. 

Let  us  emphasize  again  that  the  war  is  merely  the  evidence 
and  not  the  cause  of  European  chaos:  there  is  immediate  hope 
for  Europe  since  he  that  is  down  need  fear  no  fall.     Western 


YOUNG  INDIA 


127 


civilization  stands  at  the  beginning  of  a  new  movement,  and  is 
not  without  renewed  reHgious  motivation.  But  India  affords  the 
most  tragic  spectacle  of  the  world,  since  we  see  there  a  living  and 
magnificent  organization,  akin  to,  but  infinitely  more  complete 
than  that  of  mediaeval  Europe,  still  in  the  process  of  destruction. 
Inheriting  incalculable  treasure,  she  is  still  incalculably  poor, 
and  most  of  all  in  the  naivete  with  which  she  boasts  of  the  pov- 
erty that  she  regards  as  progress.  One  questions  sometimes 
whether  it  would  not  be  wiser  to  accelerate  the  process  of  destruc- 
tion than  to  attempt  to  preserve  the  broken  fragments  of  the 
great  tradition. 

It  is  hard  to  realize  how  completely  the  continuity  of  Indian 
life  has  been  severed.  A  single  generation  of  English  education 
suffices  to  break  the  threads  of  tradition  and  to  create  a  nonde- 
script and  superficial  being  deprived  of  all  roots — a  sort  of  intel- 
lectual pariah  who  does  not  belong  to  the  East  or  the  West,  the 
past  or  the  future.  The  greatest  danger  for  India  is  the  loss  of 
her  spiritual  integrity.  Of  all  Indian  problems  the  educational 
is  the  most  difficult  and  most  tragic.  As  things  now  stand  it  is 
dominated  by  political  considerations  in  the  sense  that  loyalty 
is  more  essential  than  personality  in  a  teacher — even  university 
professors  are  subject  to  espionage  and  their  activity  to  censor- 
ship: it  is  dominated  by  economic  considerations,  too,  for  the 
present  system  is  really  a  vested  interest  in  the  hands  of  Mac- 
millans  and  Longmans  and  the  younger  graduates  of  English 
universities,  while  the  power  of  the  missionary  school  is  derived 
from  the  contributions  of  those  who  are  interested  much  more  in 
proselytizing  than  in  education.  In  all  government  and  mission- 
ary institutions  there  is  the  widest  possible  divergence  between 
the  ideals  of  the  school  and  the  ideals  of  the  home :  the  teachers 
do  not  in  one  case  in  a  hundred  effect  any  real  contact  with  their 
pupils,  whatever  they  may  believe  to  the  contrary. 

Modem  pedagogic  theory  teaches  us  that  the  aim  of  education 
should  be  not  so  much  the  levelling  up  of  faculties  and  the  pro- 
duction of  uniform  types  as  the  intensive  cultivation  of  the  facul- 
ties we  have.  Ruskin  was  never  more  right  than  when  he  said 
that  education  means  finding  out  what  people  have  tried  to  do, 
and  helping  them  to  do  it  better.  There  has  been  no  "finding  out" 
in  India,  but  only  a  complete  inversion  of  values.  And  what  does 
this  imply?    From  the  hom.e  to  the  world,  from  the  freedom  of 


128  YOUNG  INDIA 

the  spirit  it  was  the  aim  of  every  great  Hindu  to  attain,  from  the 
great  example  of  Bhishma  and  Rama,  from  the  pursuit  and 
acquisition  of  Yoga,  from  the  celestial  songs  of  Radha  and 
Krishna,  from  the  knowledge  which  is  in  unity  to  the  knowledge 
of  manifold  things,  this  was  a  descent  from  the  Himalayas  to 
the  plains.^  It  is  true  that  this  was  inevitable.  The  English,  in 
spite  of  Macaulay  and  Cramb,  are  not  entirely  to  blame  for  it. 
A  renunciation  of  what  appears  to  be  obsolete  is  justified;  polit- 
ical and  economic  problems  cannot  be  ignored;  man  and  man's 
world  are  still  to  be  explored:  but  with  all  that  there  has  been 
too  little  love,  too  much  of  snobism,  too  indiscriminate  a  taste,  and 
too  little  distaste,  and  now  only  the  greatest  souls  by  a  supreme 
effort  can  achieve  a  synthesis  of  the  past  and  the  future. 

In  the  midst  of  all  these  conditions  we  have  seen  the  rise  of 
Indian  Nationalism,  the  growth  of  Young  India.  Fundamentally 
this  has  been  a  political  movement  covering  a  wide  range  of  pur- 
poses, from  those  of  the  Moderates  who  desire  to  see  a  gradual 
progress  towards  colonial  self-government,  to  those  of  the  Ex- 
tremists who  would  like  to  see  the  last  Englishmen  driven  out  of 
India  at  the  earliest  opportunity. 

There  is  no  question  but  that  India  has  had  and  still  has  many 
just  grievances,  some  inseparable  from  any  foreign  domination 
and  some  peculiar  to  the  present  situation.  For  example,  Indians 
are  excluded  to  a  very  large  extent  from  the  higher  paid  posts 
of  the  civil  and  educational  service:  while  India  is  freely  open 
to  British  economic  explanation,  Indian  settlers  are  arbitrarily 
excluded  from  other  parts  of  the  Empire.  The  system  of  police 
espionage  and  the  searching  of  private  houses,  the  censorship  of 
private  correspondence,  the  law  against  the  possession  of  arms, 
the  not  infrequent  imprisonment  and  even  deportation  of  influ- 
ential men  without  charge  or  trial,  and  particular  measures  such 
as  the  partition  of  Bengal  are  constant  provocatives  of  a  very 
natural  resentment.  The  color  prejudice  is  such  that  educated 
Indians  are  often  insulted  by  Englishmen  in  railway  trains  and 
to  all  intents  and  purposes  are  excluded  from  English  society. 
Many  of  these  grievances  depend  immediately  on  the  fact  that 
India  is  never  regarded  by  the  Englishman  as  his  home:  a  con- 
quest resulting  in  the  establishment  of  an  English  dynasty  related 

*  Dinesh  Chandra  Sen.  History  of  Bengali  Language  and  Literature. 


YOUNG  INDIA  129 

by  marriage  to  the  Indian  aristocracy  (however  the  latter  might 
have  resented  it),  and  identified  with  Indian  interests,  would 
have  involved  far  more  vital  integrations  than  now  exist.  This 
was  what  happened  in  the  case  of  the  Mughals.  As  it  is,  the 
sympathy  between  rulers  and  ruled  and  the  common  understand- 
ing are  admittedly  less  than  was  the  case  fifty  years  ago, 

A  large  part  of  the  Indian  unrest  is,  of  course,  economic,  and 
due  to  the  disturbance  of  settled  conditions  by  industrial  compe- 
tition, and  the  impact  of  the  era  of  technology  upon  an  era  of 
handicraft.  Conditions  of  this  kind  are  not  so  much  traceable 
to  foreign  domination  as  to  world-wide  economic  disorder.  As 
for  the  war,  it  can  only  be  said  to  concern  the  Indians  indirectly, 
or  rather,  they  are  directly  concerned  only  because  of  the  political 
association  with  Britain.  It  is  interesting  to  note  that  two  particu- 
lar grievances  have  been  remedied  since  the  outbreak  of  the  war : 
the  excise  duty  on  cotton  has  been  removed,  and  very  recently, 
Indians  have  been  allowed  to  qualify  as  commissioned  officers. 
It  is  certain  that  far-reaching  changes  in  the  direction  of  self- 
government  will  be  made  immediately  after  the  war,  and  this 
must  result  equally  from  the  actual  situation  and  from  the  prin- 
ciples of  freedom  to  which  the  Allies  have  declared  their  alle- 
giance. It  is,  however,  with  a  certain  distaste  that  one  is  com- 
pelled to  enumerate  these  various  grievances  and  to  refer  to  the 
inevitable  resentments  they  must  evoke:  for  Indian  national 
idealism  has  a  wider  significance  than  the  redress  of  grievances. 

Moderate  nationalism  has  found  expression  not  only  in  polit- 
ical, but  also  in  economic,  social  and  educational  activities.  Eco- 
nomically in  the  Swadeshi  ('own-country')  movement,  which, 
despite  the  heroic  idealism  of  communities  and  individuals,  in  the 
main  represents  a  rather  pathetic  endeavour  to  'get  back'  at 
European  trade,  without  much  reference  to  the  quality  or  desir- 
ability of  particular  industries  or  the  conditions  of  manufacture. 
Indian  economists  are  still  or  have  remained  until  very  recently 
in  the  early  Victorian  stage,  enthusiastic  believers  in  factory  pro- 
duction and  laissez-faire.  Even  in  Western  universities  the 
student  is  rarely  brought  in  touch  with  current  thought,  and  this 
is  still  more  true  of  universities  in  India.  The  Indian  student  has 
little  opportunity  to  realise  that  the  accepted  forms  of  European 
thought  are  necessarily  far  behind  its  real  development.  Western 
society  is  in  process  of  such  rapid  change  that  it  must  be  regarded 


I30  YOUNG  INDIA 

as  tragic  or  ridiculous  that  the  prestige  of  power  should  have 
provoked  imitation :  and  this  at  the  best  implies  provincialism,  for 
sociological,  like  sartorial  fashions,  travel  round  the  world  at 
second  hand  long  after  they  have  been  forgotten  at  their  source. 
Creation  or  death. 

Social  endeavor  has  been  in  the  nature  of  what  is  here  known 
as  "uplift,"  and  has  been  especially  directed  to  the  elevation  of 
the  depressed  classes,  the  reduction  of  caste  institutionalism,  and 
the  "emanicipation"  of  women.  A  recrudescence  of  puritanism, 
like  a  return  to  the  early  Buddhist  fear  of  the  world,  but  really 
of  Christian  missionary  and  bourgeois  origin,  and  no  better  rea- 
soned than  similar  movements  in  modem  America,  leads  to  the 
condemnation  of  exquisite  national  costumes  as  "indecent"  and 
to  absurd  apologies  for  classic  literature  and  art :  and  the  dancer 
has  been  driven  from  the  temple  to  the  streets.  We  must 
class  here  also  as  Moderate  activities  such  movements  as  are 
represented  by  the  Bengal  National  College,  the  Fergusson  Col- 
lege, Poona,  the  diffusion  of  popular  education  in  Baroda,  and 
part  of  the  work  of  the  Arya  Samaj,  and  the  Servants  of  India. 
The  effects  are  meritorious  rather  than  inspiring.  Sometimes  the 
genuine  English  educationalist,  seeking  to  restore  the  Indian 
classics  or  vernaculars  to  their  real  place  in  Indian  curricula,  is 
met  by  the  determined  opposition  of  the  Nationalists:  and  it  is 
not  without  reason  that  Professor  Patrick  Geddes,  who,  I  am 
glad  to  say,  has  been  entrusted  with  the  organization  of  the  Hindu 
University  at  Benares^  has  remarked  that  it  would  be  a  mistake 
to  allow  the  Europeanized  Indian  graduates  to  have  their  way 
with  Indian  education :  "that  would  be  continuing  our  mistake," 
as  he  says,  "not  correcting  it." 

There  have  been  somewhat  parallel  developments  in  religion, 
typified  in  the  eclecticism  of  the  Brahmo  Samaj — a  sort  of 
Unitarianism  combining  Hindu  philosophy  with  Nonconformist 
ethics. 

The  keynote  of  most  of  these  activities,  as  of  the  political  pro- 
gramme of  the  National  Congress  and  the  Moderate  press,  is  to 
be  recognized  in  a  complete  acceptance  of  European  models,  and, 
indeed,  of  European  sources  of  inspiration:  they  represent  the 
just  wish  of  Indians  to  do  for  themselves  what  is  now  done  or 
left  undone  by  others.     But  this  is  a  somewhat  uninspiring  and 

1  Since  writing  this  I  learn  with  regret  that  this  is  no  longer  the  case. 


PLATE  XXV 


INDIAN  PAINTING. 


A  School  of  Philosophy.     Rajput  painting,  18th  century.  Collection  of  the  author. 


YOUNG  INDIA  I31 

insufficient  programme,  regarded  from  the  standpoint  of  futurist 
Europeans,  who  expect  from  the  East,  not  a  repetition  of  their 
own  mistakes,  but  a  positive  contribution  to  the  solution  of  prob- 
lems that  face  the  whole  world,  and  no  longer  merely  a  single 
race  or  continent. 

The  beauty  and  logic  of  Indian  life  belong  to  a  dying  past :  the 
nineteenth  century  has  degraded  much  and  created  nothing.  If 
any  blame  for  this  is  to  be  laid  on  alien  shoulders,  it  should  be 
only  in  the  sense  that  if  it  must  be  that  offences  come,  woe  unto 
them  through  whom  they  come.  It  is  an  ungrateful  and  unro- 
mantic  task  to  govern  a  subject  race.  England  could  not  in  any 
case  have  inspired  a  new  life:  the  best  she  could  have  done  would 
have  been  to  understand  and  conserve  through  patronage  and 
education  the  surviving  categories  of  Indian  civilization — archi- 
tecture, music,  handicrafts,  popular  and  classic  literature,  and 
schools  of  philosophy — and  that  she  failed  here  is  to  have  been 
found  wanting  in  imagination  and  sympathy.  It  should  not  have 
been  regarded  as  the  highest  ideal  of  Empire  "to  give  to  all  men 
an  English  mind." 

If  I  speak  now  of  the  Idealists  as  distinguished  from  the 
Moderates,  it  is  because  they  alone  possess  a  genuine  sense  of 
the  future.  Needless  to  say,  it  is  not  the  idealist  who  is 
"impatient":  it  is  the  opportunist  who  has  not  the  patience  to 
pursue  a  distant  end.  It  should  also  be  emphasized  that  there 
is  never  a  hard  and  fast  line  separating  the  Idealist  from 
the  Moderate;  these  are  types  that  may  be  combined  in  a  single 
individual,  and  are  almost  always  represented  in  any  group. 
I  also  dismiss  the  questions  of  disloyalty  and  sedition  as  irrele- 
vant for  the  present  discussion:  and  as  I  have  said  elsewhere, 
loyalty  is  too  often  sentimentality  or  interest  and  disloyalty  no 
more  than  irritation — if  loyalty  were  always  friendship  and  dis- 
loyalty detachment  one  could  welcome  either. 

The  first  reaction  of  the  idealist  is  recognizable  in  disillusion. 
He  begins  to  see  that  people  are  not  inspired  or  made  happy  by 
government  but  by  themselves — he  loses  faith  in  politics,  and 
turns  to  direct  action,  more  often  than  otherwise,  educational. 
He  is  no  longer  deceived  by  the  prestige  of  European  power — 
very  often  he  has  lived  for  many  years  in  Europe  or  America, 
and  has  learnt  to  regard  both  "progress"  and  "civilization"  with 
distaste  and  distrust.    He  begins  to  see  things  as  they  really  are 


132  YOUNG  INDIA 

and  regards  his  Indian  life  no  longer  with  disparagement,  but 
with  a  new  understanding  and  affection.  He  begins  to  see  that 
life  is  an  art,  and  is  rather  a  means  than  an  end. 

The  first  expression  of  national  idealism  is  then  a  rehabilita- 
tion of  the  past.  We  have  turned  from  the  imitation  of  European 
formulae  to  follow  the  historical  development  of  our  own  beliefs, 
our  architecture,  sculpture,  music  and  literature,  and  of  all  the 
institutions,  social  and  religious,  with  which  they  are  inseparably 
intertwined;  and  to  preserve  and  defend  the  Prolific  against  the 
Devourers.  This  is  fundamentally  a  process  of  creative  intro- 
spection preparatory  to  renewed  activity. 

It  does  not  matter  that  the  realization  of  what  we  have  lost  has 
come  too  late:  this  was  inevitable.  For  a  moment,  perhaps,  we 
desired  to  turn  back  the  hands  of  the  clock,  but  that  was  only 
sentimentality,  and  it  was  not  long  before  we  remembered  that 
fresh  waters  are  ever  flowing  in  upon  us.  We  have  learnt  that  we 
are  exiled;  but  we  would  not  and  cannot  return.  In  India,  as  in 
Europe,  the  vestiges  of  ancient  civilization  must  be  renounced: 
we  are  called  from  the  past  and  must  make  our  home  in  the  future. 
But  to  understand,  to  endorse  with  passionate  conviction,  and  to 
love  what  we  have  left  behind  us  is  the  only  possible  foundation 
for  power.  If  the  time  has  hardly  yet  come  for  the  creation  of 
new  values — and  it  cannot  long  be  delayed — let  us  remember 
that  time  and  suffering  are  essential  to  all  creation. 

We  see  now  springing  up  all  over  India  societies  of  literary 
or  historical  research  or  sociological  experiment,  and  schools  of 
national  education.  In  Bengal,  for  example,  the  Sahitya  Parishad 
(library,  MSS.  and  research),  in  the  United  Provinces  the  Na- 
gari  Pracharini  Sabha  (Hindu  texts  and  a  great  dictionary),  in 
Poona  the  Gayan  Samaj  (study  and  encouragement  of  pure 
music),  in  Madura  the  Tamil  Sangam  (modelled  after  the  old 
Tamil  literary  academies),  religious  organizations  such  as  the 
Arya  Samaj  (in  part),  the  Ramakrishna  order,  the  Vivekananda 
societies,  and  the  Theosophical  society  (in  part)  :  and  the  Bud- 
dhist revival  in  Ceylon.  There  are  signs  of  life  even  in  the  uni- 
versities, though  the  most  interesting  development  in  this  direc- 
tion is  the  newly  established  Hindu  University  in  Benares,  which 
gives  at  least  an  equal  place  to  indigenous  and  to  foreign  learning. 
A  time  must  come  and  will  come  when  Indian  universities  will 
be  once  more  places  of  pilgrimage  for  foreign  students.    Beside 


"  MERELY  AN  INHERITANCE."  PLATE   XXVI 


Figure  a.     One  of  the  gates  of  Jaipur. 
(Photograph  by  Mr.  Thornton  Oakley) 


Figure  b.    Laying  a  warp  in  Madura. 


YOUNG  INDIA  133 

this  there  are  many  individual  Indian  scholars  publishing  their 
results  in  association  with  European  savants,  with  the  Archaeo- 
logical Survey  of  India  or  through  the  various  Asiatic  societies 
or  in  separate  volumes.  Private  collections  of  ancient  works  of 
art  are  being  made  and  interest  is  taken  in  museums  and  the 
preservation  of  ancient  monuments. 

The  inner  meaning  of  most  of  these  activities  is  to  be  found  in 
the  concept  of  National  Education:  a  return  to  the  aims  of 
Oriental  education  in  general,  the  development  of  personality 
rather  than  the  mere  acquisition  of  knowledge,  and  above  all,  a 
reunion  of  those  links  of  understanding  which  have  been  so 
roughly  broken :  and  to  the  end  that  we  may  see  the  last  of  those 
"educated"  Indians  who  are  Indian  only  in  name.  Up  till  now 
the  sterility  of  higher  education  in  India  has  been  far  more 
unfortunate  than  the  absence  of  elementary  literary  education  for 
the  masses  and  for  women.  The  latter  have  always  possessed 
and  have  not  yet  lost,  what  the  progressive  amongst  the  men  have 
lost,  the  incalculable  advantage  of  familiarity  through  oral  tradi- 
tion with  an  epic  literature  vast  in  amount  and  saturated  with 
a  great  philosophy.  To  some  extent,  indeed,  India  may  be  said 
to  be  now  a  land  of  cultivated  peasants  and  uncultivated  leaders 
• — "Their  ordinary  Plowmen  and  Husbandmen,"  said  Knox 
without  exaggeration,  "do  speak  elegantly  and  are  full  of  compli- 
ment. And  there  is  no  difference  between  the  ability  and  speech 
of  a  Countryman  and  a  Courtier" — a  fact  which  affords  us  a  good 
deal  of  food  for  reflection. 

Amongst  the  schools  of  national  education  two  or  three  are  of 
special  importance:  Sir  Rabindrath  Tagore's  school  at  Bolpur, 
the  Kalasala  at  Masulipatam,  and  the  Gurukula  of  the  Arya 
Samaj  at  Hardwar.  In  all  these  the  mother-tongue  is  made  the 
medium  of  instruction,  and  English  takes  a  second  though  still 
very  important  place :  there  had  been  danger  of  creating  an  edu- 
cated class  unable  to  express  itself  perfectly  in  any  language.  The 
Gurukula,  it  has  been  said  very  truly,  is  perhaps  the  most  fas- 
cinating educational  experiment  in  the  world.  It  is  for  boys  of 
all  castes,  from  the  highest  to  the  lowest,  and  no  distinctions  are 
made.  Tuition  is  free  and  the  teachers  are  unpaid.  The  first 
seven  years  are  devoted  entirely  to  Sanskrit,  religion  and  physical 
culture,  and  the  twelve  years  following  to  Western  literature, 
science  and  laboratory  work:  at  the  age  of  twenty-five  the  man 


134  YOUNG  INDIA 

is  ready  to  go  out  into  the  world.  During  the  whole  of  this  time 
the  pupils  remain  in  charge  of  their  teacher,  without  returning 
home,  nor  are  they  permitted  to  meet  any  women  except  tlieir 
mothers.  There  are  institutions  for  the  education  of  girls  on 
somewhat  similar  but  less  severe  lines:  since  the  marriage  of 
spiritual  equals  is  taken  for  granted  in  the  foundations  of  Hindu 
society.  The  most  conspicuous  feature  of  the  system  is  its  return 
to  the  impersonal  and  philosophic  concepts  of  culture  which  have 
always  been  characteristic  of  the  East,  and  the  combination  of 
this  ancient  wisdom  with  modern  and  practical  knowledge. 

At  the  same  time  the  return  of  idealism  has  brought  with  it 
a  renewed  appreciation  of  indigenous  art  and  popular  mythology, 
and  has  sought  expression  in  creative  activity.  These  matters 
have  been  closed  books  to  the  politicians  and  social  reformers: 
even  now  there  is  perhaps  no  country  in  the  world  so  completely 
lacking  in  cultivated  and  conscious  taste  as  modern  India,  for 
as  we  have  said,  all  that  is  so  beautiful  in  the  life  that  we  see 
by  riverside,  in  temples  or  homes,  and  in  the  streets,  is 
merely  an  inheritance,  and  those  who  have  been  mis-educated 
would  gladly  exchange  it  all  for  the  cheapest  commercial  art  of 
Western  stores  and  music  halls  and  for  the  villa  architecture  of 
a  London  suburb. 

There  has  been  a  revival  of  painting  in  Bengal,  inspired  by 
Abanindronath  Tagore  and  his  brother,  nephews  of  the  well 
known  poet.  But  important  as  this  movement  has  been,  its  main 
significance  belongs  to  appreciation  rather  than  production.  It 
may  be  compared  rather  to  the  work  of  the  pre-Raphaelites  than 
to  that  of  the  great  post-Impressionists — the  time  for  these  has 
not  yet  arrived.  It  has  proved  impossible  for  those  who  have  not 
seen  the  ancient  gods  to  represent  them:  and  the  powers  to  be 
are  not  yet  seen  or  heard,  only  the  movement  of  their  dance  is 
faintly  felt. 

But  for  the  great  idealists  of  younger  India,  nationalism  is  not 
enough.  Patriotism  is  parochial,  and  even  banal,  and  there  are 
finer  parts  great  souls  may  play.  Certainly  not  as  missionaries  or 
propagandists — the  day  has  gone  by  for  sectarian  groupings  and 
for  invitations  to  be  "one  of  us" :  but  as  equally  concerned  with 
all  others  in  the  exploration  of  the  thousand  paths  that  have  never 
yet  been  trodden.  It  is  life,  and  not  merely  Indian  life  that  claims 
our  loyalty.    The  pursuit  of  mere  liberty  is  not  enough:  it  is  not 


"AIERELY  AN  INHERITANCE." 


PLATE  XXVII 


The  Bathing  Ghat  at  Benares. 


YOUNG  INDIA 


135 


his  happiness,  but  his  task  that  concerns  the  idealist.  For  those 
who  pursue  a  distant  end  there  is  no  time  to  devote  to  what  is 
momentary. 

Freedom  is  always  open  to  those  who  are  free.  And  free  for 
what  ?  For  the  very  same  ends  that  are  foreseen  by  the  idealists 
of  Europe:  how  could  there  be  a  divergence  of  idealism  from 
idealism  ?  The  chosen  people  of  the  future  cannot  be  any  nation 
or  race,  but  an  aristocracy  of  the  earth  uniting  the  virility  of 
European  youth  to  the  serenity  of  Asiatic  age.  Already  the 
leaders  of  thought  in  every  nation  understand  each  other  very 
well,  and  all  significant  movements  are  international  and  world- 
wide— as  has  always  been  the  case  to  a  greater  extent  than  we  are 
apt  to  realize.  We  only  await  the  declaration  of  peace  to  renew 
our  comraderie  with  the  other  idealists,  and  meanwhile  we  will 
not  betray  our  common  cause.  The  flowering  of  humanity  is 
more  to  us  than  the  victory  of  any  party.  The  only  condition  of 
a  renewal  of  life  in  India,  or  elsewhere,  should  be  a  spiritual,  not 
merely  an  economic  and  political  awakening,  and  it  is  on  this 
ground  alone  that  it  will  ever  be  possible  to  bridge  the  gulf  which 
has  been  supposed  to  divide  the  East  from  the  West. 

To  the  idealist  all  interests  are  identical  because  all  life  is  one. 
The  only  and  real  significance  of  Young  India  for-  the  world  will 
be  revealed  in  the  great  men  who  are  given  to  the  common  life : 
one  great  philosopher,  poet,  painter,  scientist  or  singer  shall  be 
accounted  in  the  last  judgment  more  than  all  the  concessions  won 
by  all  the  Congresses  in  a  hundred  years. 

And  so  while  India  is  occupied  with  national  education  and 
social  reconstruction  at  home,  she  must  also  throw  in  her  lot 
with  the  world:  what  we  need  for  the  creation  of  a  common 
civilization  is  the  recognition  of  common  problems,  and  to  coop- 
erate in  their  solution. 

Meanwhile  it  is  not  sufficient  for  the  Western  world  to  stand 
aside  from  the  development  of  Asia,  with  idle  curiosity  or  appre- 
hension wondering  what  will  happen  next.  There  is  serious 
danger  that  the  degradation  of  Asia  will  ultimately  menace  the 
security  of  European  social  idealism,  for  the  standing  of  idealism 
is  even  more  precarious  in  modern  Asia  than  in  modern  Europe : 
and  that  would  be  a  strange  nemesis  if  European  post-Industrial- 
ists should  utimately  be  defeated  by  an  Industrialism  or  Imperial- 
ism of  European  origin  established  in  the  East! 


136  YOUNG  INDIA 

Asia  is  like  the  artist  in  the  modern  city — doing  nothing  great, 
mainly  because  nothing  heroic  is  demanded  of  him :  it  is  enough 
if  he  pleases  and  amuses  us,  we  do  not  take  him  seriously.  It  is 
with  something  of  this  romantic  attitude  that  Europe  and  Amer- 
ica have  regarded  India.  The  merely  philological  studies  of  the 
universities  have  been  conducted  in  such  an  arid  fashion  as  to 
be  comparatively  inaccessible  to  artistic  spirits :  on  the  other  hand, 
Indian  thought  has  been  popularized  and  perverted  in  many  forms 
that  are  vague,  mysterious,  and  feminine,  and  so  brought  into 
disrepute.  What  is  really  needed  is  a  point  of  view  which  is 
practical,  rather  than  scholastic  or  sentimental:  some  power  to 
grasp  what  is  essential,  disentangled  by  clear  thinking  from  a 
mass  of  incorrect  assumptions.  The  challenge  of  the  East  is  very 
precise:  To  what  end  is  your  life?  Without  an  answer  to  this 
question  there  may  indeed  be  change,  but  progress  is  impossible  ; 
for  without  a  sense  of  direction,  who  knows  if  we  do  not  return 
upon  our  footsteps  in  everlasting  circles?  I  conclude  then  with 
this  reminder:  that  the  future  of  India  depends  as  much  upon 
what  is  asked  of  her  as  upon  what  she  is. 


INDIVIDUALITY,  AUTONOMY 
AND  FUNCTION* 

The  object  of  government  is  to  make  the  governed  behave  as 
the  governors  wish.  This  is  true  of  'good'  and  'bad'  govern- 
ment aUke,  and  ahke  of  the  rule  of  a  conqueror,  of  a  hereditary 
monarchy  and  of  majority  government  by  representation. 

The  repudiation  of  tyranny  must  ultimately  involve  a  repudia- 
tion of  majority  rule.  Consider  a  community  of  five.  It  is  im- 
possible to  deny  that  the  rule  of  three,  in  so  far  as  it  affects  the 
other  two,  is  as  much  an  arbitrary  constraint  as  the  rule  of  one 
affecting  the  other  four.  It  is  very  liable  to  be  less  intelligent. 
In  any  case,  however,  the  rule  of  three  becomes,  on  the  basis 
of  votes,  a  rule  of  two:  and  a  majority  government  will  mean 
the  rule  of  two  over  three. 

Inasmuch,  however,  as  each  of  the  five  is  unique,  and  'one 
law  for  the  lion  and  the  ox  is  oppression,'  there  can  be  no 
entirely  just  solution  outside  the  autonomy  of  each.  This,  which  is 
widely  admitted  to  be  true  for  nations,  is  no  less  true  for 
individuals. 

From  an  existing  tyranny  it  is  possible  to  arrive  at  an  indi- 
vidual autonomy  in  two  ways.  In  the  first  place  four  of  the  five 
may  revolt  against  the  arbitrary  rule  of  the  one,  setting  up  in 
place  of  it  the  rule  of  the  majority.  The  remaining  two  may 
then  assert  their  'right'  of  self-determination  as  against  the  major- 
ity. Ultimately  each  of  the  five  will  become  autonomous :  each,  as 
it  were,  sitting  armed  in  his  own  house,  prepared  to  repel  the 
intruder.  This  may  be  described  as  a  disintegration  sanctioned 
by  the  presumed  diversity  of  interests  which  a  pluralistic  philoso- 
phy must  assert. 

Since,  however,  each  still  desires  to  govern  (to  feel  it  one's 
'duty'  to  govern  is  only  the  same  thing  in  other  words),  and 
nothing  prevents  the  exercise  of  governing  powers  but  fear  of 
resistance,  the  desire  will  be  translated  into  action  as  soon  as 
opportunity  affords:  and  one,  or  a  group  of  two,  three,  or  four 
of  the  five  must  be  regarded  as  merely  awaiting  (consciously  or 

1  Sva-bhdva,  sva-rajya,  sva-dharma. 


138         INDIVIDUALITY.  AUTONOMY  AND  FUNCTION 

unconsciously)  the  favorable  moment.  In  the  meantime  co- 
operation for  common  ends  is  excluded  by  mutual  suspicion :  each 
of  the  five  will  have  to  exercise  all  of  the  functions  necessary 
to  the  existence  of  an  individual,  and  only  a  fraction  of  the 
activity  of  each  will  be  vocational.  This  is  the  inevitable  conse- 
quence of  resistance,  and  of  that  sort  of  desire  to  take  part  in 
government  which  finds  expression  in  the  demand  for  votes. 

The  anarchy  approached  by  self-assertion,  however  justified,  is 
therefore  the  anarchy  of  chaos:  resistance,  however  inevitable, 
can  of  itself  only  create  an  unstable  equilibrium,  which  must  tend 
to  reconstitute  the  status  quo  ante. 

The  second  approach  to  individual  autonomy  is  through  renun- 
ciation— a  repudiation  of  the  will  to  govern.  As  we  are  speaking 
in  terms  of  time^  we  must  conceive  of  this  idea  as  originating 
with  one  of  the  five,  and  spreading  to  the  others.  Let  us,  how- 
ever, ignore  the  transition  period,  and  suppose  that  the  idea  of 
government  has  become,  for  each  of  the  five,  even  more  distaste- 
ful than  the  idea  of  being  governed. 

In  this  situation  there  is  nothing  to  prevent  a  recognition  of 
common  interests,  or  co-operation  to  achieve  them  (co-operation 
is  not  government).  This  will  be  an  integration  founded  on  the 
presumed  identity  of  all  interests  which  a  monistic  philosophy 
must  assert.  Neither  of  the  five  will  expect  to  receive  from 
any  of  the  others  something  for  nothing:  but  the  principle 
of  mutual  aid  or  co-operation  will  permit  each  one  to  fulfil  his 
own  function.    Activity  will  be  vocational,  that  is  to  say,  willing. 

The  anarchy  approached  by  renunciation  is  thus  an  anarchy 
of  spontaneity:  only  a  renunciation  of  the  will  to  govern  could 
create  a  stable  equilibrium.  Everyone  who  believes  in  the  self- 
determination  of  national  groups  is  to  that  extent  an  anarchist. 
And  while  we  must  acknowledge  that  a  state  of  entire  liberty 
can  never  be  attained,  because  the  will  to  govern  can  never  be 
totally  eradicated,  nevertheless  it  can  be  shown  that  activity  based 
on  anarchic  principles  may  be  and  often  is  far  more  immediately 
and  practically  effective  than  an  activity  of  control.  Contrast, 
for  example,  the  result  of  granting  a  large  measure  of  autonomy 
to  the  Boers  with  the  consequences  of  withholding  it  in  Ireland. 

"The  last  ideal  of  a  future  state,"  says  Dmitri  Merezhkovski, 
"can  only  consist  in  the  creation  of  new  religious  forms  of 
thought  and  affairs;  a  new  religious  synthesis  between  the  in- 


INDIVIDUALITY.  AUTONOMY  AND  FUNCTION  139 

dividual  and  society,  composed  of  unending  love  and  unending 
liberty."  Far  be  it  from  me  to  assert  that  such  a  millennium 
could  ever  be  realised.  But  he  who  knows  not  whither  he  saileth 
knows  not  which  is  a  fair  or  a  foul  wind  for  him.  It  cannot  be 
tmw^ise  to  shape  our  course  towards  the  desired  haven.  So 
much,  at  least,  is  possible  to  every  individual:  and  only  he  is  an 
individualist  in  truth,  who  does  not  will  to  govern  any  other 
than  himself. 

The  'will  to  govern'  must  not  be  confused  with  the  'will 
to  power.'  The  will  to  govern  is  the  will  to  govern  others:  the 
will  to  power  is  the  will  to  govern  oneself. 

Those  who  would  be  free  should  have  the  will  to  power  without 
the  will  to  govern.  If  such  as  these  are  chosen  to  advise  the 
executive,  which  cannot  be  entirely  dispensed  with,  this  should 
tend  to  the  greatest  degree  of  freedom  and  justice  practically 
possible. 


Certain  of  these  essays  now  rewritten 
first  appeared  in  the  Burlington  Maga- 
zine, the  Athenaeum,  the  Modern  Re- 
view, the  Musical  Quarterly,  the  Socio- 
logical Review  and  the  Modern  School 
Magazine. 


university  of  California 

SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  ^BRARY  FACIUTY 

405  Hilgard  Avenue,  Los  Angeles,  CA  90024-1388 

Return  this  material  to  the  library 

from  which  it  was  borrowed. 


JUN  1  n  1999 
SEE.  OtffiAIISTRY 


UCLA  LIBRARY 


A     000  452  366 


