The Transformation of Nature in Art — Ananda K. Coomaraswamy (Harvard University Press, 1934)

# Acquisition header
  Source: https://archive.org/details/dli.ernet.234006 (file: 234006-The Transformation Of Nature In Art_djvu.txt)
  Retrieved: 2026-06-15 for vedanta-timeline primary-source corpus.
  Format: Internet Archive OCR plain text (_djvu.txt). Public domain (author d. 1947; work first publ. 1934).
  Note: leading/trailing library-card OCR boilerplate retained as-is.

RATAN TATA LIBRARY 


DELHI UNIVERSITY LIBRARY SYSTEM J 

WARNING: { 

Please point out to the j 
t Counter Stoff physical damage to * 
| the book before borrowing, if any. f 




RATAN TATA LIBRARY, (DULS) 

(Delhi School of Economics) 

Ac. No. () *^0 1 £ 

This book should be returned on or before the date last 
stamped below. An overdue charge of lOPaise per day 
on general books and 25 Paise per day on text book will be 
charged for the first two days and 50 Paise from the third 
day the book is kept overtime. 




THE TRANSFORMATION OF 
NATURE IN ART 




THE TRANSFORMATION 
OF NATURE IN ART 


ANANDA K. COOMARASWAMY 


New York 

DOVER PUBLICATIONS 



Copyright 1934, 

by the President and the Fellows of Harvard College. 


This new Dover edition, first published in 1956, is an un¬ 
abridged and unaltered republication of the second edition. 
It is published by special arrangement with Harvard Uni¬ 
versity Press. 


Manufactured in the United States of America 



Contents 


I. The Theory of Art in Asia . i 

II. Meister Eckhart’s View of Art. 59 

III. Reactions to Art in India. 97 

IV. Aesthetic of the Sukranitisara. in 

V. Parok^a . 119 

VI. Abhasa . 139 

VII. Origin and Use of Images in India.153 

Notes. 171 

Sanskrit Glossary.215 

List of Chinese Characters .231 

Bibliography.235 















Chapter I 


THE THEORY OF ART IN ASIA 




Chapter I 


THE THEORY OF ART IN ASIA 

Tadbhavatu krtdrthatd vaidagdhyasya , 

MalatlmSdhava, I, 32 f. 

I N THE following pages there is presented a statement 
of Oriental aesthetic theory based mainly on Indian and 
partly on Chinese sources; at the same time, by means of 
notes and occasional remarks, a basis is offered for a general 
theory of art coordinating Eastern and Western points of 
view. Whenever European art is referred to by way of con¬ 
trast or elucidation, it should be remembered that “ Euro¬ 
pean art” is of two very different kinds, one Christian and 
scholastic, the other post-Renaissance and personal. It will 
be evident enough from our essay on Eckhart, and might 
have been made equally clear from a study of St Thomas 
and his sources, that there was a time when Europe 
and Asia could and did actually understand each other 
very well. Asia has remained herself; but subsequent to 
the extroversion of the European consciousness and its 
preoccupation with surfaces, it has become more and more 
difficult for European minds to think in terms of unity, 
and therefore more difficult to understand the Asiatic 
point of view. It is just possible that the mathematical 
development of modem science, and certain corresponding 



4 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 

tendencies in modem European art on the one hand, 
and the penetration of Asiatic thought and art into the 
Western environment on the other, may represent the 
possibility of a renewed rapprochement. The peace and 
happiness of the world depend on this possibility. But for 
the present, Asiatic thought has hardly been, can hardly 
be, presented in European phraseology without distortion, 
and what is called the appreciation of Asiatic art is mainly 
based on categorical misinterpretations. Our purpose in 
the present volume is to place the Asiatic and the valid 
European views side by side, not as curiosities, but as rep¬ 
resenting actual and indispensable truth; not endeavoring 
to prove by any argumentation what should be apparent to 
the consciousness of the intelligent — sacetasdm anubhavah 
pramdrtam, tatra kevcdarh! 

The scope of the discussion permits only a brief reference 
to Muhammadan art: Islamic aesthetics could be pre¬ 
sented only by an author steeped in Arabic philosophy and 
familiar with the literature on calligraphy, poetics, and the 
legitimacy of music. But it must be pointed out in passing 
that this Islamic art, which in so many ways links East with 
West, and yet by its aniconic character seems to stand in 
opposition to both, really diverges not so much in funda¬ 
mental principles as in literal interpretation. For natural¬ 
ism is antipathetic to religious art of all kinds, to art of any 
kind, and the spirit of the traditional Islamic interdiction 
of the representation of living forms is not really infringed 
by such ideal representations as are met with in Indian 



THE THEORY OF ART IN ASIA 5 

or Christian iconography, or Chinese animal painting. The 
Muhammadan interdiction refers to such naturalistic rep¬ 
resentations as could theoretically, at the Judgment Day, 
be required to function biologically; but the Indian icon 
is not constructed as though to function biologically, the 
Christian icon cannot be thought of as moved by any other 
thing than its form, and each should, strictly speaking, be 
regarded as a kind of diagram, expressing certain ideas, and 
not as the likeness of anything on earth. 

Let us now consider what is art and what are the values 
of art from an Asiatic, that is, mainly Indian and Far East¬ 
ern, point of view. It will be natural to lay most stress on 
India, because the systematic discussion of aesthetic prob¬ 
lems has been far more developed there than in China, 
where we have to deduce the theory from what has been 
said and done by painters, rather than from any doctrine 
propounded by philosophers or rhetoricians. 

In the first place, then, we find it clearly recognized that 
the formal element in art represents a purely mental activ¬ 
ity, ciUa-sannd} From this point of view, it will appear 
natural enough that India should have developed a highly 
specialized technique of vision. The maker of an icon, hav¬ 
ing by various means proper to the practice of Yoga elimi¬ 
nated the distracting influences of fugitive emotions and 
creature images, self-willing and self-thinking, proceeds to 
visualize the form of the devata , angel or aspect of God, 
described in a given canonical prescription, sadhana , 
mantram , dhydna . The mind “pro-duces” or “draws” 



6 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 
(dkarsatiy this form to itself, as though from a great dis¬ 
tance. Ultimately, that is, from Heaven, where the types 
of art exist in formal operation; immediately, from “the 
immanent space in the heart ” {antar-hxdaya-akatd)* the 
common focus (sarhstdva, “concord ”) 4 of seer and seen, at 
which place the only possible experience of reality takes 
place . 5 The true-knowledge-purity-aspect ( jndna-sattva - 
riipa) thus conceived and inwardly known (antar-jneya) re¬ 
veals itself against the ideal space ( dkdta ) like a reflection 
(pratibimbavat) , or as if seen in a dream ( svapnavat ). The 
imager must realize a complete self-identification with it 
(dlmdnarh . . . dhydyal , or bhavayet) , whatever its peculi¬ 
arities (ndndlaksanalamkrtam) , even in the case of opposite 
sex or when the divinity is provided with terrible super¬ 
natural characteristics; the form thus known in an act of 
non-differentiation, being held in view as long as may be 
necessary (evarh ruparh yavad icchati tdvad vibhavayet) , is 
the model from which he proceeds to execution in stone, 
pigment, or other material . 8 

The whole process, up to the point of manufacture, be¬ 
longs to the established order of personal devotions, in 
which worship is paid to an image mentally conceived 
{dhydtvd yajet) ; in any case, the principle involved is that 
true knowledge of an object is not obtained by merely em¬ 
pirical observation or reflex registration (pratyaksa), but 
only when the knower and known, seer and seen, meet in an 
act transcending distinction ( anayor advaita). To worship 
any Angel in truth one must become the Angel: “whoever 



THE THEORY OF ART IN ASIA 7 

worships a divinity as other than the self, thinking ‘He is 
one, and I another/ knows not,” Bxhaddraryyaka Upanisad , 

1, 4 , io. 

The procedure on the part of the imager, above outlined, 
implies a real understanding of the psychology of aesthetic 
intuition. To generalize, whatever object may be the art¬ 
ist’s chosen or appointed theme becomes for the time being 
the single object of his attention and devotion; and only 
when the theme has thus become for him an immediate ex¬ 
perience can it be stated authoritatively from knowledge. 
Accordingly, the language of Yoga may be employed even 
in the case of a portrait, for example Mdlavikagnimitra , II, 

2, where, the painter having missed something of the beauty 
of the model, this is attributed to a relaxation of concentra¬ 
tion, an imperfect absorption, Hthila-samadhi , not to want 
of observation. Even when a horse is to be modelled from 
life we still find the language of Yoga employed: “having 
concentrated, he should set to work” (dhydlvd kurydt ), 
Sukranitisdra, IV, 7, 73. 

Here indeed European and Asiatic art meet on absolutely 
common ground; according to Eckhart, the skilled painter 
shows his art, but it is not himself that it reveals to us, and 
in the words of Dante, “Who paints a figure, if he cannot be 
it, cannot draw it,” Chi pinge figura, si non pud esser lei , non 
la pud porre? It should be added that the idea of Yoga 
covers not merely the moment of intuition, but also execu¬ 
tion: Yoga is dexterity in action, karmasu kauSala , Bhaga - 
vad Gita, II, 50. So, for example, in Sankar&carya’s meta- 



8 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 
phor of the arrow-maker “who perceives nothing beyond 
his work when he is buried in it,” and the saying, “I have 
learnt concentration from the maker of arrows.” The 
words yogyd, application, study, practice, and yukti, ac¬ 
complishment, skill, virtuosity, are often used in connec¬ 
tion with the arts. 

An ideal derivation of the types that are to be represented 
or made by the human artist is sometimes asserted in an¬ 
other way, all the arts being thought of as having a divine 
origin, and as having been revealed or otherwise brought 
down from Heaven to Earth: “our Saiva Agamas teach 
that the architecture of our temples is all Kailasabhavana, 
that is of forms prevailing in Kailasa.” A very striking 
enunciation of this principle will be found in Aitareya 
Brahmayn, VI, 27: “It is in imitation ( anukfiti ) of the 
angelic (deva) works of art ( Silpani ) that any work of art 
(Silpa) is accomplished ( adhigamyate ) here; for example, a 
clay elephant, a brazen object, a garment, a gold object, 
and a mule-chariot are ‘works of art.’ A work of art 
(Silpa), indeed (ha), is accomplished in him who compre¬ 
hends this. For these (angelic) works of art (Silpdni, viz. 
the metrical Silpa texts) are an integration of the Self 
(dtma-samskfti); and by them the sacrificer likewise inte¬ 
grates himself (dtmdnam samskurute) in the mode of rhythm 
(chandomaya) .” Corresponding to this are many passages 
of the Rg Veda in which the artistry of the incantation 
(mantra) is compared to that of a weaver or carpenter. 
Sometimes the artist is thought of as visiting some heaven. 



THE THEORY OF ART IN ASIA 9 

and there seeing the form of the angel or architecture to be 
reproduced on earth; sometimes the architect is spoken of 
as controlled by Visvakarma, originally an essential name 
of the Supreme Artificer, later simply of the master archi¬ 
tect of the angels, and patron of human craftsmen; or 
Visvakarma may be thought of as himself assuming the 
form of a human architect in order to produce a particular 
work; or the required form may be revealed in a dream. 8 

Nor is any distinction of kind as between fine and deco¬ 
rative, free or servile, art to be made in this connection. 
Indian literature provides us with numerous lists of the 
eighteen or more professional arts ( Silpa ) and the sixty-four 
avocational arts ( kala ); and these embrace every kind of 
skilled activity, from music, painting, and weaving to horse¬ 
manship, cookery, and the practice of magic, without dis¬ 
tinction of rank, all being equally of angelic origin. 9 

It is thus, and will become further, evident that all the 
forms of Indian art and its derivatives in the Far East are 
ideally determined. We must now give greater precision 
to this statement, discussing what is implied in Asia by 
likeness or imitation, and what is the nature of Asiatic 
types. Lastly we shall be in a position to consider the formal 
theory of aesthetic experience. 

First of all with regard to representation ( dkfti, sadrtya, 
Ch. hsing-ssti, 4617, 10289, and wu-hsing } 12777, 4617) and 
imitation (anukara, anukarar^a , anukfti ). We find it stated 
that “sadffya is essential to the very substance ( pradhana) 
of painting,” Visy,udharmottara , XLII, 48; the word has 



IO TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 
usually been translated by “likeness,” and may bear this 
sense, but it will be shown below that the meaning properly 
implied is something more like “correspondence of formal 
and representative elements in art.” In drama we meet 
with such definitions as lokavftta-anukarana, “ following the 
movement (or operation) of the world,” and yo ’yarh 
svabhavo lokasya . . . ndtyam ily abhidhiyate , 10 “which 
designates the intrinsic nature of the world”; or again, 
what is to be exhibited on the stage is avaslhdna, “condi¬ 
tions” or “emotional situations,” or the hero, Rama, or 
the like, is thought of as the model, anukdrya . 11 In China, 
in the third canon of Hsieh Ho, we have “According to 
nature (ivu, 12777) make shape ( hsing , 4617) ”; 12 and the 
common later phrase hsing-ssu, “shape-resemblance,” in 
the same way seems to define art as an imitation of Nature. 
In Japan, Seami, the great author and critic of No, asserts 
that the arts of music and dancing consist entirely in imi¬ 
tation (monomane ). 13 

However, if we suppose that all this implies a conception 
of art as something seeking its perfection in the nearest 
possible approaches to illusion we shall be greatly mis¬ 
taken. It will appear presently that we should err equally 
in supposing that Asiatic art represents an “ideal” world, 
a world “idealized” in the popular (sentimental, religious) 
sense of the words, that is, perfected or remolded nearer 
to the heart’s desire; which were it so might be described 
as a blasphemy against the witness of Perfect Experience, 
and a cynical depreciation of life itself. We shall find that 



THE THEORY OF ART IN ASIA II 

Asiatic art is ideal in the mathematical sense: like Nature 
{natura naturans ), not in appearance (viz. that of ens 
naturata ), but in operation. 

It should be realized that from the Indian (metaphysical) 
and Scholastic points of view, subjective and objective are 
not irreconcilable categories, one of which must be regarded 
as real to the exclusion of the other. Reality ( satya ) sub¬ 
sists there where the intelligible and sensible meet in the 
common unity of being, and cannot be thought of as exist¬ 
ing in itself outside and apart from, but rather as, knowl¬ 
edge or vision, that is, only in act. All this is also implied 
in the Scholastic definition of truth as adaequatio rei et 
intellectus , Aristotle’s identity of the soul with what it knows, 
or according to St Thomas, “knowledge comes about in so 
far as the object known is within the knower” {Sum. Theol., 
I, Q. 59, A. 2), in radical contradiction to the conception of 
knowledge and being as independent acts, which point of 
view is only logically, and not immediately, valid. Translat¬ 
ing this from psychological to theological terms, we should 
say not that God has knowledge, but that Knowledge (Pure 
Intellect, prajnd) is one of the names of God (who is pure 
act); or metaphysically, by an identification of Being {sat) 
with Intelligence {cit), as in the well-known concatenation 
sac-cit-ananda (where it is similarly implied that love sub¬ 
sists only in the act of love, not in the lover or beloved but 
in union). 

Now as to s&dffya : literal meanings are sym-visibility, 
con-similarity; secondary meanings, coordination, analogy. 



12 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 
That aesthetic sddfSya does not imply naturalism, veri¬ 
similitude, illustration, or illusion in any superficial sense 
is sufficiently shown by the fact that in Indian lists of 
factors essential to painting it is almost always mentioned 
with pratnaw, “criterion of truth,” here “ideal propor¬ 
tion”; in the Indian theories of knowledge empirical obser¬ 
vation ( pratyaksa ) as supplying only a test, and not the 
material of theory, is regarded as the least valid amongst 
the various pramdyas- Pramdna will be discussed more 
fully below; here it will suffice to point out that the con¬ 
stant association of sddfSya and pramdna in lists of the 
essentials in painting, for example the Six Limbs, 14 pre¬ 
cludes our giving to either term a meaning flatly contra¬ 
dicting that of the other. Ideal form and natural shape, 
although distinct in principle, were not conceived as in¬ 
commensurable, but rather as coincident in the common 
unity of the symbol. 

In Rhetoric, sadrtya is illustrated by the example “The 
young man is a lion” (Bhartpnitra, Abhidha-vjtti-matrika, 
p. 17, and commonly quoted elsewhere); and this analogy 
very well demonstrates what is really meant by aesthetic 
“imitation.” Vasubandhu, AbhidharmakoSa, IX, Poussin, 
pp. 280, 281, explains the relation of knowledge (vijndna) 
to its object by saying that knowledge arises only in the act 
of knowing, by an immediate assimilation ( taddkdratd ) to 
its object, neither knower nor known existing apart from 
the act of knowledge. The nature of the assimilation (tadd¬ 
kdratd) is illustrated by the sddfSya of seed and fruit, which 



THE THEORY OF ART IN ASIA 13 

is one of reciprocal causality. The Nyaya-Vaisesika defini¬ 
tion of sadffya (quoted by Das Gupta, History of Indian 
Philosophy , I, 318) viz. tadbhinnatve sati tadgata-bhuyodhar- 
mavaUvant y is literally “the condition of embracing in itself 
things of a manifold nature which are distinct from itself,” 
or more briefly the condition of “identity in difference.” 

SadfSya is then “similitude,” but rather such as is im¬ 
plied by “simile” than by “simulacrum.” It is in fact 
obvious that the likeness between anything and any repre¬ 
sentation of it cannot be a likeness of nature, but must be 
analogical or exemplary, or both of these. What the repre¬ 
sentation imitates is the idea or species of the thing, by 
which it is known intellectually, rather than the substance 
of the thing as it is perceived by the senses. 

Sadffya, “visual correspondence,” has nevertheless been 
commonly misinterpreted as having to do with two appear¬ 
ances, that of the work of art and that of the model. It 
refers, actually, to a quality wholly self-contained within 
the work of art itself, a correspondence of mental and sen¬ 
sational factors in the work. This correspondence is indeed 
analogous to the correspondence of person and substance 
in the thing to be “imitated”; but the object and the work 
of art are independently determined, each to its own good, 
and physically incommensurable, being the same only as 
to type. SddfSya as the ground ( pradhdna ) of painting may 
be compared to sdhitya as the body ( tarlrd) of poetry, con¬ 
sistently defined as the “consent of sound and meaning” 
(Sabddrtha), and to sdrUpya, denoting the aspectual coordi- 



14 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 

nation of concept and percept essential to knowledge. 15 
Accordingly, the requirement of sddffya does not merely 
not exclude the formal element in art, but positively asserts 
the necessity of a concord of pictorial and formal elements. 
The whole point of view outlined above is already implied 
in the Kausitaki Upanisad, III, 8, where the sensational 
and intelligible (formal) elements of appearance are dis¬ 
tinguished as bhuta-mdtrd and prajnd-mdtrd , and it is as¬ 
serted that “truly, from either alone, no aspect (rupa) 
whatsoever would be produced.’* 

As to the Indian drama, the theme is exhibited by means 
of gestures, speech, costume, and natural adaptation of the 
actor for the part; and of these four, the first three are 
highly conventional in any case, while with regard to the 
fourth not only is the appearance of the actor formally 
modified by make-up or even a mask, but Indian treatises 
constantly emphasize that the actor should not be carried 
away by the emotions he represents, but should rather be 
the ever-conscious master of the puppet show performed by 
his own body on the stage, The exhibition of his own emo¬ 
tions would not be art. 16 

As to Chinese wu-hsing and hsing-ssui, a multitude of 
passages could be adduced to show that it is not the 
outward appearance ( hsing ) as such, but rather the idea 
(i, 5367) in the mind of the artist, or the immanent divine 
spirit (shen, 9819), or the breath of life (< ch'i , 1064), that is 
to be revealed by a right use of natural forms. We have 
not merely the first canon of Hsieh Ho, which asserts that 



THE THEORY OF ART IN ASIA 15 

the work of art must reveal “the operation (yiin, 13817) of 
the spirit (ch’i) in life-movement,” but also such sayings as 
“By means of natural shape ( hsing ) represent divine spirit 
(shSn ),” “The painters of old painted the idea (i) and not 
merely the shape (hsing)” “When Chao Tze Yiin paints, 
though he makes few brush-strokes, he expresses the idea 
(i, 5367) already conceived; mere skill ( kung y 6553) cannot 
accomplish (neng) this” (Ostasiatische Zeitschrift , NF. 8, 
p. 105, text 4), or with reference to a degenerate period, 
“Those painters who neglect natural shape (hsing) and se¬ 
cure the formative idea (i chih , 5367, 1783) are few,” “What 
the age means by pictures is resemblance ($$«),” and “The 
form was like (hsing-ssu), but the expression (; yiin , 13843) 
weak.” 

The Japanese No, which “can move the heart when not 
only representation but song, dance, mimic, and rapid 
action are all eliminated, emotion as it were springing out 
of quiescence,” is actually the most formal and least natu¬ 
ralistic of all kinds of drama in the world. 

Thus none of the terms cited by any means implies a view 
of art as finding its perfection in illusion; for the East, as 
for St Thomas, ars imiiatur naturam in sua operatione. 

The principle most emphasized in Indian treatises as es¬ 
sential to art is pramdryi . 17 The Indian theories of knowl¬ 
edge regard as the source of truth not empirical perception 
(pratyaksa) but an inwardly known model (antarjneya-rupa) 
“which at the same time gives form to knowledge and is 
the cause of knowledge” (Dignaga, kdrikd 6), it being only 



l6 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 
required that such knowledge shall not contradict experi¬ 
ence. It will be realized that this is also the method of 
science, which similarly uses experiment as the test rather 
than as the source of theory. Pramdrjxi as principle is the 
self-evident immediate ( svatah ) perception of what is cor¬ 
rect under given conditions. As independent of memory, 
pramdr^a cannot be identified with authority, but it may 
embody elements derived from authority, when considered 
not as principle but as canon. As not contrary to experi¬ 
ence, pramdrjxi means what is “true” here and now, but 
might not be correct in the light of wider experience or 
under changed conditions; in other words, the “develop¬ 
ment” of a theory is not excluded, nor the development of 
a design while in the course of execution. The doctrine can 
also be made clearer by the analogy of conscience, Anglo- 
Saxon “inwit,” still understood as an inward criterion 
which at the same time gives form to conduct and is the 
cause of conduct. But whereas the Occidental conscience 
operates only in the field of ethics, and as to art a man 
is not ashamed to say “I know what I like,” the Oriental 
conscience, pramdr^a , cf. Chinese chih , 1753, licmg, 7015, 
cheng , 720 (used by Hsiian Tsang), /, 5367, etc., governs all 
forms of activity, mental, aesthetic, and ethical (, specula - 
bilium, factibilium, agibilium). Truth, Beauty, and Love as 
activities and therefore relative, are thus connected by 
analogy, and not by likeness, none deriving its sanction 
from any other, but each from a common principle of order 
inherent in the nature of God, or in Chinese terms of Heaven 



THE THEORY OF ART IN ASIA 17 

and Earth. To sum up, pramdna means in philosophy the 
norm of properly directed thought, in ethics the norm of 
properly directed action, in art the norm of properly con¬ 
ceived design, practically the recta ratio factibilium of St 
Thomas. 

Thus the idea of pramdna implies the existence of types 
or archetypes, which might at first thought be compared 
with those of Plato and the derived European tradition. 
But whereas Platonic types are types of being, external to 
the conditioned universe and thought of as absolutes re¬ 
flected in phenomena, Indian types are those of sentient 
activity or functional utility conceivable only in a contin¬ 
gent world. Oriental types, Indian Siva-Sakti, Chinese Yang 
and Yin, or Heaven and Earth, are not thought of as me¬ 
chanically reflected in phenomena, but as representing to our 
mentality the operative principles by which we “explain” 
phenomena—just as, for example, the concept of the short¬ 
est distance between two points may be said to “explain” 
the existence of a perceptible straight line. Thus Indian 
types representing sentiences or powers are analogous to 
those of Scholastic theology and the energies of science, 
but not comparable with Plato’s types. 

Just as conscience is externalized in rules of conduct, or 
the principles of thought in logic, so aesthetic pramdna 
finds expressions in rules (vidhi, niyama ), or canons of pro¬ 
portion (tdla, tdlamdna, pratndndni), proper to different 
types, and in the laksaqas of iconography and cultivated 
taste, prescribed by authority and tradition; and only 



1 8 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 
that art “ which accords with canonical standards ( Sastra - 
mdna) is truly lovely, none other, forsooth!” (Sukrani- 
tisdra , IV, 4,105-106). As to the necessity for such rules, 
contingent as they are by nature, and yet binding in a given 
environment, this follows from the imperfection of human 
nature as it is in itself. Man is indeed more than a merely 
instinctive and behavioristic animal, but he has not yet 
attained to such an identification of the inner and outer, 
contemplative and active, life as should enable him to act 
at the same time without discipline and altogether con¬ 
veniently. On the one hand, the gambolling of lambs, how¬ 
ever charming, is not yet dancing; on the other, the human 
artist, even the master whom Ching Hao calls “Profound” 
or “Mysterious” ( miao , 7857) and who “works in a style 
appropriate to his subject,” can hardly lay claim to the 
spontaneity of the “Divine” (, shen , 9819) painter “who 
makes no effort of his own, his hand moves spontaneously.” 18 

There exists, in fact, dating from the T’ang period, a 
threefold Chinese classification (San p’ing , 9552, 9273) of 
painting as Divine (shen, 9819), Profound or Mysterious 
(miao, 7857), and Accomplished (neng, 8184). The first of 
these implies an absolute perfection; representing rather 
the goal than the attainable in human art; the second is 
such mastery as approaches perfection, the third is mere 
dexterity. A fourth class, the Marvellous or Extraordinary 
(i, 5536), was added later, with Taoist implications, to 
denote a more personal kind of “philosophical” or “liter¬ 
ary” painting, great in achievement, though not the work 



THE THEORY OF ART IN ASIA 19 

of professional artists, and not governed by traditional rules; 
i thus corresponds very nearly to what is meant by “genius,” 
with all its virtues and limitations. 19 

A striking Indian parallel to the San p'ing occurs in 
RajaSekhara’s Kdvya-mmdrhsd, Ch. II, where the crea¬ 
tive faculty ( kdrayitri pratibhd ) is considered as of three 
kinds, viz. Innate ( sahajd ), Gotten ( dhdryd ), and Learnt 
(aupadeSikd ), poets being correspondingly classed as sd- 
rasvata (from Sarasvatl, Sakti of Brahma, and mother of 
learning and wisdom), dbhydsika (trained, adept, voca¬ 
tional), and aupadeSika (taught, depending on rules or 
recipes). Here sdrasvata and sahaja clearly correspond to 
shen\ dhdryd and dbhydsika to miao, involving the idea of 
mastery; and aupadeSikd to neng, having a trick rather 
than a habit. The one thing most necessary to the human 
workman is abhydsa, “practice,” otherwise thought of as 
anuSila, “devoted application” or “obedience,” the fruit 
of which is Slistatva, “habitus,” or second nature, skill, lit. 
“dingingness,” “adherence”; and this finds expression in 
the performance as mddhurya, “grace” or “facility” ( Ndtya 
Sdstra, Benares ed., XXVI, 34; Kdvyamald ed., XXII, 34). 

The Six Canons of Hsieh Ho, referring to painting, were 
first published in the fifth century, and have remained 
authoritative to the present day. They have been discussed 
at great length by Far Eastern and European authors, the 
chief differences of opinion centering on the Taoist or Con- 
fucian interpretation of the first canon. 20 The following 
version is based directly on the text: 



20 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 

(1) Operation or revolution (yiin, 13817), or concord or 
reverberation (yiin, 13843), of the spirit (ch’i, 1064) in life 
movement. 

(2) Rendering of the “bones” (essential structure) by 
the brush. 

(3) According to the object (natural species, wu, 12777) 
make shape ( hsing, 4617). 

(4) According to the kind, apply, or distribute, color. 

(5) Right composition, lit. “design due-placing.” 

(6) Traditional ( ch’uan , 2740) procedure, lit. “handed 
down model, or method, draw accordingly.” 

Of these canons, the first is of primary metaphysical im¬ 
portance, and may be said to control all the others, each of 
which taken by itself has a straightforward meaning. The 
second canon demands a rendering of character rather than 
of mere outward aspect; the third and fourth refer to mass 
and color as means of representation; the fifth refers to 
the proper and appropriate placing of things represented, 
according to their natural relationships, and must thus be 
distinguished from composition or design in the sense in 
which these words are now used; the last implies the copy¬ 
ing of ancient masterpieces and adherence to wonted 
methods and ascertained rules. These Six Canons have 
close analogies in Indian theory, but there is no good reason 
to suppose that they are of Indian origin. 

In connection with the last canon, it may be remarked 
that a condition of spontaneity (shin, sahaja) outside of 
and above ascertained rules, though not against them, can 



THE THEORY OF ART IN ASIA 21 

be imagined, as in the Bhagavad Gita , II, 46, where the 
knower of Brahman is said to have no further use for the 
Vedas, or when St Augustine says, “Love God, and do what 
you will.” But if the liberated being ( jivanmukta ) or saint 
in a state of grace is thus free to act without deliberation 
as to duty, it is because for him there no longer exists a 
separation of self and not-self; if for the true Yogin pra - 
tyaksa must imply a presentation indistinguishable from 
that of the inwardly known form ( jnana-sattva-rupa ), this 
will be evidence, not of genius, but of a fully matured self 
(Jfef/ 4 /maw), a perfected visual habit, such that the seer now 
sees not merely projected sensations, but as he ought to see, 
virtually without duality, loving all things alike. 

All art thus tends towards a perfection in which pictorial 
and formal elements are not merely reconciled, but com¬ 
pletely identified. At this distant but ever virtually present 
point, all necessity for art disappears, and the Islamic 
doctors are justified in their assertion that the only true 
artist (musawir) is God, in Indian terms nirmdna-kdraka. 

The metaphor of God as the supreme artist appears 
also in the Christian Scholastic tradition, for example St 
Thomas, Sum . Theol. } Q. 74, A. 3, “as the giving form to a 
work of art is by means of the form of the art in the mind of 
the artist, which may be called his intelligible word, so the 
giving form to every creature is by the word of God; and 
for this reason in the works of distinction and adornment 
the Word is mentioned . . . the words, God saw that it was 
good . . . express a certain satisfaction taken by God in 



22 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 
his works, as of an artist in his art.” Eckhart makes con¬ 
stant use of the same idea. Cf. notes 21, 57. Needless to 
point out, the concept of “creation” (nirtnaqa, karma) is a 
religious ( bhaktivdda ) translation of what in metaphysics 
is spoken of as manifestation, procession, or expression 
(sfsti ); or psychologically simply as a “coming to be” 
( utpada , bhava, yatha-bhuta, etc.), dependent on second or 
mediate causes. 

As the author of the Chieh Tzu Yiian expresses it, “When 
painting has reached divinity ( shen ) there is an end of the 
matter.” A conception of this kind can be recognized in 
the Chinese story of the painter Wu Tao-tzu, who painted 
on a palace wall a glorious landscape, with mountains, for¬ 
ests, clouds, birds, men, and all things as in Nature, a veri¬ 
table world-picture; while the Emperor his patron was ad¬ 
miring this painting, Wu Tao-tzu pointed to a doorway on 
the side of a mountain, inviting the Emperor to enter and 
behold the marvels within. Wu Tao-tzh himself entered 
first, beckoning the Emperor to follow; but the door closed, 
and the painter was never seen again. A corresponding dis¬ 
appearance of the work of art, when perfection has been 
attained, is mythically expressed in other legends, such as 
those of painted dragons that flew from the walls on which 
they were painted, first told of the artist Chang Sfing Yu 
in the Liang Dynasty. 11 

Such is the perfection toward which art and artist tend, 
art becoming manifested life, and the artist passing beyond 
our ken. But to lay claim therefore to a state of liberty and 



THE THEORY OF ART IN ASIA 23 

superiority to discipline ( andcdra ) on behalf of the human 
artist, to idolize one who is still a man as something more 
than man, to glorify rebellion and independence, as in the 
modem deification of genius and tolerance of the vagaries 
of genius, is plainly preposterous, or as Muslims would say 
blasphemous, for who shall presume to say that he indeed 
knows Brahman, or truly and completely loves God? The 
ultimate liberty of spontaneity is indeed conceivable only 
as a workless manifestation in which art and artist are per¬ 
fected; but what thus lies beyond contingency is no longer 
“art,” and in the meantime the way to liberty has nothing 
whatever in common with any wilful rebellion or calculated 
originality; least of all has it anything to do with functional 
self-expression. Ascertained rules should be thought of as 
the vehicle assumed by spontaneity, in so far as sponta¬ 
neity is possible for us, rather than as any kind of bondage. 
Such rules are necessary to any being whose activity depends 
on will, as expressed in India with reference to the drama: 
“All the activities of the angels, whether at home in their 
own places, or abroad in the breaths of life, are intellectu¬ 
ally emanated; those of men are put forth by conscious 
effort; therefore it is that the works to be done by men are 
defined in detail,” Nafya Sastra, II, 5. As expressed by 
St Thomas (Sum. Theol ., I, Q. 59, A. 2), “there alone are 
essence and will identified where all good is contained 
within the essence of him who wills . . . this cannot be 
said of any creature.” In tending toward an ultimate co¬ 
incidence of discipline and will, the artist does indeed be- 



24 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 
come ever less and less conscious of rules, and for the 
virtuoso intuition and performance are already apparently 
simultaneous; but at every stage the artist will delight in 
rules, as the master of language delights in grammar, though 
he may speak without constant reference to the treatises 
on syntax. It is of the essence of art to bring back into 
order the multiplicity of Nature, and it is in this sense that 
he “prepares all creatures to return to God.” 

It should be hardly necessary to point out that art is by 
definition essentially conventional ( samketita ); for it is only 
by convention that nature can be made intelligible, and only 
by signs and symbols, rupa, pratlka, that communication 
is made possible. A good example of the way in which we 
take the conventionality of art for granted is afforded by 
the story of a famous master who was commissioned to 
paint a bamboo forest. With magnificent skill he painted 
entirely in red. The patron objected that this was un¬ 
natural. The painter enquired, “In what color should it 
have been painted?” and the patron replied, “In black, of 
course.” “And who,” said the artist, “ever saw a black¬ 
leaved bamboo? ” 22 

The whole problem of symbolism ( pratika , “symbol”) is 
discussed by Sankaricarya, Commentary on the Vedanta 
Sutras, I, i, 20. Endorsing the statement that “all who sing 
here to the harp, sing Him,” he points out that this Him 
refers to the highest Lord only, who is the ultimate theme 
even of worldly songs. And as to anthropomorphic expres¬ 
sions in scripture, “we reply that the highest Lord may, 



THE THEORY OF ART IN ASIA 2 $ 

when he pleases, assume a bodily shape formed of Maya, 
in order to gratify his devout worshippers”; but all this is 
merely analogical, as when we say that the Brahman abides 
here or there, which in reality abides only in its own glory 
(cf. ibid., I, 2, 29). The representation of the invisible by 
the visible is also discussed by Deussen, Philosophy of the 
Upanishads , pp. 99-101. For a discussion of “sign” and 
“symbol” see pp. 125-127. 

Conventionality has nothing to do with calculated sim¬ 
plification (as in modem designing), or with degeneration 
from representation (as often assumed by the historians of 
art). It is unfortunate indeed that the word conventional 
should have come to be used in a deprecatory sense with 
reference to decadent art. Decadent art is simply an art 
which is no longer felt or energized, but merely denotes, in 
which there exists no longer any real correspondence be¬ 
tween the formal and pictorial elements, its meaning as it 
were negated by the weakness or incongruity of the pictorial 
element; but it is often, as for example in late Hellenistic 
art, actually far less conventional than are the primitive or 
classic stages of the same sequence. True art, pure art, 
never enters into competition with the unattainable per¬ 
fection of the world, but relies exclusively on its own logic 
and its own criteria, which cannot be tested by standards 
of truth or goodness applicable in other fields of activity. 
If, for example, an icon is provided with numerous heads 
or arms, or combines anthropomorphic and theriomorphic 
elements, arithmetic and observation will assist us to de- 



26 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 
termine whether or not the iconography is correct (< dgamdr - 
thavisamvadi, Sdstramdna), but only our own response to 
its qualities of energy and characteristic order will enable 
us to judge it as a work of art. If Kfsna is depicted as the 
seducer of the milkmaids of Braja, it would be ridiculous to 
raise objections on moral grounds, as though a model on 
the plane of conduct had been presented; for here art, by 
a well understood convention, deals with the natural rela¬ 
tion of the soul to God (“all creation is female to God”), 
and if we cannot understand or will not accept the tradition, 
that is simply an announcement of our inability to pass 
aesthetic judgment in the given case. 

Some further considerations upon unequal quality and 
decadence in art may be submitted, by decadence “charac¬ 
teristic imperfection” being meant rather than the opposite 
of “progress.” Any lack of temporal perfection in a work 
of art is a betrayal of the imperfection of the artist, such per¬ 
fection as is possible to human work being a product of the 
will. It is obvious that the workman’s first consideration 
should have been the good of the work to be done, for it is 
only so that he can praise his theme; and as to whether the 
work is in this sense good, we ought to be guided by a proper 
and ruthless critical faculty. But it should not be over¬ 
looked that even in outwardly imperfect works, whether 
originally so or having become so through damage, the image 
may remain intact; for in the first case the image, which 
was not of the artist’s own invention but inherited, can still 
be recognized in its imperfect embodiment, and in the sec- 



THE THEORY OF ART IN ASIA 2J 

ond the form by which the art was moved must have been 
immanent in every part of it, and is thus present in what 
survives of it, and this is why such works may be adequate 
to evoke in a strong-minded spectator a true aesthetic ex¬ 
perience, such a one supplying by his own imaginative 
energy all that is lacking in the original production. More 
often, of course, what passes for an appreciation of decadent 
or damaged work is merely a sentimental pleasure based on 
associated ideas, vdsand qua nostalgia. 

There are two distinguishable modes of decadence in art, 
one corresponding to a diminished sensuality, the other 
reflecting, not an animal attachment to sensation, but a 
senescent refinement. It is essential to distinguish this at¬ 
tenuation or over-refinement of what was once a classical 
art from the austerity of primitive forms which may be 
less seductive, but express a high degree of intellectuality. 
Over-refinement and elaboration of apparatus in the arts 
are well illustrated in modern dramatic and concert produc¬ 
tion, and in the quality of trained voices and instruments 
such as the piano. All these means at the disposal of the 
artist are the means of his undoing, except in the rare cases 
where he can still by a real devotion to his theme make us 
forget them. Those accustomed to such comfortable arts 
as these are in real danger of rejecting less highly finished 
or less elaborate products, not at all on aesthetic grounds, 
but out of pure laziness and love of comfort. One thinks 
by contrast of the Bengal! Ydtrds that “without scenery, 
without the artistic display of costumes, could rouse emo- 



28 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 

tions which nowadays we scarcely experience,” or, on the 
other hand, of utterly sophisticated arts like the No plays 
of Japan, in which the means have been reduced to a mini¬ 
mum, and though they have been brought to that high 
pitch of perfection that the theme demands, are yet en¬ 
tirely devoid of any element of luxury. These points of view 
have been discussed by Rabindranath Tagore in connection 
with the rendition of Indian music. “Our master singers,” 
he says, “never take the least trouble to make their voice 
and manner attractive. . . . Those of the audience . . . 
whose senses have to be satisfied as well are held to be 
beneath the notice of any self-respecting artist,” while 
“those of the audience who are appreciative are content to 
perfect the song in their own mind by the force of their own 
feeling.” In other words, while the formal beauty is the 
essential in art, loveliness and convenience are, not indeed 
fortuitous, but in the proper sense of the word, accidents 
of art, happy or unhappy accidents as the case may be. 

We are now in a position to describe the peculiarities of 
Oriental art with greater precision. The Indian or Far 
Eastern icon, carved or painted, is neither a memory image 
nor an idealization, but a visual symbolism, ideal in the 
mathematical sense. The “anthropomorphic” icon is of 
of the same kind as a yantra, that is, a geometrical repre¬ 
sentation of a deity, or a mantra, that is, an auditory repre¬ 
sentation of a deity. The peculiarity of the icon depends 
immediately upon these conditions, and could not be other¬ 
wise explained, even were we unaware that in actual prac- 



THE THEORY OF ART IN ASIA 2g 

tice it is the mantra and not the eye’s intrinsic faculty that 
originates the image. Accordingly, the Indian icon fills the 
whole field of vision at once, all is equally clear and equally 
essential; the eye is not led to range from one point to an¬ 
other, as in empirical vision, nor to seek a concentration of 
meaning in one part more than in another, as in a more 
“theatrical” art. There is no feeling of texture or flesh, but 
only of stone, metal, or pigment, the object being an image 
in one or other of these materials, and not a deceptive 
replica (. savarqa ) of any objective cause of sensation. The 
parts of the icon are not organically related, for it is not 
contemplated that they should function biologically, but 
ideally related, being the required component parts of a 
given type of activity stated in terms of the visible and 
tangible medium. This does not mean that the various 
parts are not related, or that the whole is not a unity, 
but that the relation is mental rather than functional. 
These principles will apply as much to landscape as to 
iconography. 

In Western art the picture is generally conceived as seen in 
a frame or through a window, and so brought toward the 
spectator; but the Oriental image really exists only in our 
own mind and heart and is thence projected or reflected onto 
space. The Western presentation is designed as if seen from.a 
fixed point of view, and must be optically plausible; Chinese 
landscape is typically represented as seen from more than 
one point of view, or in any case from a conventional, not 
a “real,” point of view, and here it is not plausibility but 



30 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 
intelligibility that is essential. In painting generally there is 
relievo (i natdnnata , nimndnnata), that is to say modelling in 
abstract light, painting being thought of as a constricted 
mode of sculpture; but never before the European influence 
in the seventeenth century any use of cast shadows, chiaro¬ 
scuro, chaydtapa , “shade and shine.” Methods of represent¬ 
ing space in art will always correspond more or less to con¬ 
temporary habits of vision, and nothing more than this is 
required for art; perspective is nothing but the means em¬ 
ployed to convey to the spectator the idea of three-dimen¬ 
sional space, and among the different kinds of perspective 
that have been made use of, the one called “scientific” has 
no particular advantage from the aesthetic point of view. 
On this point, Asanga, Mahdydna Sutralarhkdra, XIII, 17, 
is illuminating: citre . . . natonnatarh ndsti ca , dfSyate 
atha ca, “there is no actual relief in a painting, and yet we 
see it there,” an observation which is repeated from the same 
point of view in the Lahkavatdra Sutra , Nanjio’s ed., p. 91. 23 
It would be thus as much beside the mark to conceive of 
a progress in art as revealed by a development in Raum- 
darstellung as to seek to establish a stylistic sequence on 
a supposed more or less close observation of Nature. Let 
us not forget that the mind is a part, and the most impor¬ 
tant part, of our knowledge of Nature, and that this point 
of view, though it may have been forgotten in Europe, has 
been continuously current in Asia for more than two thou¬ 
sand years. 

Where European art naturally depicts a moment of time, 



THE THEORY OF ART IN ASIA 31 

an arrested action or an effect of light, Oriental art repre¬ 
sents a continuous condition. In traditional European 
terms, we should express this by saying that modem Euro¬ 
pean art endeavors to represent things as they are in them¬ 
selves, Asiatic and Christian art to represent things more 
nearly as they are in God, or nearer to their source. As 
to what is meant by representing a continuous condition, 
for example, the Buddha attained Enlightenment countless 
ages since, his manifestation is still accessible, and will so 
remain; the Dance of Siva takes place, not merely in the 
Taraka forest, nor even at Cidambaram, but in the heart of 
the worshipper; the Krsna Lila is not an historical event, 
of which Nilakantha reminds us, but, using Christian phrase¬ 
ology, a “play played eternally before all creatures. ,, This 
point of view, which was by no means unknown to the 
European schoolmen and is still reflected in India's so-called 
lack of any historical sense, Islam and China being here 
nearer to the world than India, though not so enmeshed in 
the world as modern Europe, constitutes the a priori ex¬ 
planation of the Indian adherence to types and indifference 
to transient effects. One might say, not that transient ef¬ 
fects are meaningless, but that their value is not realized 
except to the degree that they are seen sub specie aeterni- 
tatis , that is formaliter. And where it is not the event but 
the type of activity that constitutes the theme, how could 
the East have been interested in cast shadows? Or how 
could the Sunyavadin, who may deny that any Buddha 
ever really existed, or that any doctrine was ever actually 



32 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 
taught, and so must be entirely indifferent as to the histo¬ 
ricity of the Buddha’s life, have been curious about the 
portraiture of Buddha? It would indeed be irrelevant to 
demand from any art a solution of problems of represen¬ 
tation altogether remote from contemporary interest. 

Little as it might have been foreseen, the concept of types 
prevails also in the portraiture of individuals, where the 
model is present ( pratyaksa) to the eye or memory. It is 
true that classical Indian portraits must have been recog¬ 
nizable, and even admirable, likenesses. We have already 
seen that sadrtya, conformity of sense and substance, is 
essential in painting, and it has been pointed out that dif¬ 
ferent, though closely related, terms, viz. sadfH and su - 
sadftt, are employed when the idea of an exact or speaking 
likeness is to be expressed. 24 The painted portrait ( pratikfti , 
dkrti) functioned primarily as a substitute for the living 
presence of the original. One of the oldest treatises, the 
Tanjur Citralaksana, refers the origin of painting in the 
world to this requirement, and yet actually treats only 
the physiognomical peculiarities (laksaya) of types. Even 
more instructive is a later case, occurring in one of the Vi - 
kramacaritra stories: here the King is so much attached to 
the Queen that he keeps her at his side, even in council, but 
this departure from custom and propriety is disapproved of 
by the courtiers, and the King consents to have a portrait 
painted, as a substitute for the Queen’s presence. The 
court painter is allowed to see the Queen; he recognizes 
that she is a padmint , that is, a “Lotus-lady,” one of the 



THE THEORY OF ART IN ASIA 33 

four types under which women are classed according to 
physiognomy and character by Hindu rhetoricians. He 
paints her accordingly padmini-laksana-yuktam, “with the 
characteristic marks of a Lotus-lady,” and yet the portrait 
is spoken of not merely as rupam , a figure, but even as 
svarupaniy “her intrinsic aspect.” We know also, both in 
China and in India, of ancestral portraits, but these were 
usually prepared after death, and so far as preserved have 
the character of effigies (Chinese ying-tu> “diagram of a 
shade”) rather than of speaking likenesses. In th ePratima- 
nataka , the hero, marvelling at the execution of the statues 
in an ancestral chapel, does not recognize them as those 
of his parents, and wonders if they are representations 
of deities. We even find a polemic against portraiture: 
“images of the angels are productive of good, and heaven¬ 
ward-leading, but those of men or other mortal beings lead 
not to heaven nor work weal,” Sukranitisara , IV, 4, 75 and 
76. Chinese ancestral portraits are not devoid of individual 
characterization, but this represents only a slight, not an 
essential, modification of general formulae; the books on 
portraiture ( fu shen y “depicting soul”) refer only to types 
of features, canons of proportion, suitable accessories, and 
varieties of brush stroke proper for the draperies; the 
essence of the subject must be portrayed, but there -is 
nothing said about anatomical accuracy. The painter Kuo 
Kung-ch’&i was praised for his rendering of very soul 
(<ching slim, 2133, 9819) and mind ( i ch'u y 5367, 3120) in a 
portrait; but there cannot be adduced from the whole of 



34 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 
Asia such a thing as a treatise on anatomy designed for 
use by artists. 

The first effect produced on a modem Western spectator 
by these scholastic qualities of Oriental art is one of monot¬ 
ony. In literature and plastic art, persons are not so much 
distinguished as individuals as by what they do, in which 
connection it may be remembered that orthodoxy, for the 
East, is determined by what a man does, and not by his 
beliefs. Again, the productions of any one period are char¬ 
acterized far more by what is common to them all than by 
the personal variations. Because of their exclusively pro¬ 
fessional character and formal control, and the total ab¬ 
sence of the conception of private property in ideas, the 
range of quality and theme that can be found in Oriental 
works of one and the same age or school is less than that 
which can be seen in European art at the present day, and 
besides this, identical themes and formulae have been ad¬ 
hered to during long periods. Where the modem student, 
accustomed to an infinite variety of choice in themes, and 
an infinite variety and tolerance of personal mannerisms, 
has neither accustomed himself to the idea of an unanimous 
style, nor to that of themes determined by general necessi¬ 
ties and unanimous demand, nor learned to distinguish 
nuances in the unfamiliar stylistic sequences, his impatience 
can hardly be wondered at; but this impatience, which is 
not a virtue, must be outgrown. Here is involved the whole 
question of the distinction between originality or novelty 
and intensity or energy; it should be enough to say that 



THE THEORY OF ART IN ASIA 35 

when there is realization, when the themes are felt and art 
lives, it is of no moment whether or not the themes are new 
or old. 

Life itself—the different ways in which the difficult prob¬ 
lems of human association have been solved—represents the 
ultimate and chief of the arts of Asia; and it must be stated 
once for all that the forms assumed by this life are by no 
means empirically determined, but designed as far as possi¬ 
ble according to a metaphysical tradition, on the one hand 
conformably to a divine order, and on the other with a view 
to facilitating the attainment by each individual of approxi¬ 
mate perfection in his kind, that is, permitting him, by an 
exact adjustment of opportunity to potentiality, to achieve 
such realization of his entire being as is possible to him. 
Even town-planning depends in the last analysis upon con¬ 
siderations of this kind. Neither the society nor the specific 
arts can be rationally enjoyed without a recognition of the 
metaphysical principles to which they are thus related, for 
things can be enjoyed only in proportion to their intelligi¬ 
bility, speaking, that is, humanly and not merely func¬ 
tionally. 

Oriental life is modelled on types of conduct sanctioned 
by tradition. For India, Rama and Sita represent ideals 
still potent, the svadharma of each caste is a mode of be¬ 
havior, good form being d la mode ; and until recently every 
Chinese accepted as a matter of course the concept of man¬ 
ners established by Confucius. The Japanese word for 
rudeness means “acting in an unexpected way.” Here, 



36 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 
then, life is designed like a garden, not allowed to run wild. 
All this formality, for a cultured spectator, is far more 
attractive than can be the variety of imperfection so freely 
displayed by the plain and blunt, or as he thinks, “more 
sincere,” European. This external conformity, whereby a 
man is lost in the crowd as true architecture seems to be 
a part of its native landscape, constitutes for the Oriental 
himself a privacy within which the individual character can 
flower unhampered. This is most of all true in the case of 
women, whom the East has so long sheltered from neces¬ 
sities of self-assertion; one may say that for women of t&e 
aristocratic classes in India or Japan there has existed no 
freedom whatever in the modem sense, yet these same 
women, molded by centuries of stylistic living, achieved 
an absolute perfection in their kind, and perhaps Asiatic art 
can show no higher achievement than this. In India, 
where the “tyranny of caste” strictly governs marriage, 
diet, and every detail of outward conduct, there exists and 
has always existed unrestricted freedom of thought as to 
modes of belief or thought; a breach of social etiquette may 
involve excommunication from society, but religious intol¬ 
erance is practically unknown, and it is a perfectly normal 
thing for different members of the same family to choose for 
themselves the particular deity of their personal devotion. 

It has been well said that civilization is style. An im¬ 
manent culture in this sense endows every individual with 
an outward grace, a typological perfection, such as only the 
rarest beings can achieve by their own effort, a kind of per- 



THE THEORY OF ART IN ASIA 37 

fection which does not belong to genius; whereas a democ¬ 
racy, which requires of every man to save his own “face” 
and soul, actually condemns each to an exhibition of his own 
irregularity and imperfection, and this implicit acceptance 
of formal imperfection only too easily passes over into an 
exhibitionism which makes a virtue of vanity and is com¬ 
placently described as self-expression. 

We have so far discussed the art of Asia in its theological 
aspect, that is with reference to the scholastic organization 
of thought in terms of types of activity, and the correspond¬ 
ing arts of symbolism and iconography, in which the ele¬ 
ments of form presented by Nature and redeemed by art 
are used as means of communication. The classical develop¬ 
ments of this kind of art belong mainly to the first millen¬ 
nium of the Christian era. Its later prolongations tend to 
decadence, the formal elements retaining their edifying 
value, in design and composition, but losing their vitality, or 
surviving only in folk art, where the intensity of an earlier 
time expressing a more conscious will is replaced by a simpler 
harmony of style prevailing throughout the whole man¬ 
made environment. Eighteenth-century Siam and Ceylon 
provide us with admirable examples of such a folk style 
based on classical tradition, this condition representing the 
antithesis of that now realized in the West, where in place of 
vocation as the general type of activity we find the types 
of individual genius on the one hand, and that of unskilled 
labor on the other. 

Another kind of art, sometimes called romantic or idealis- 



38 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 
tic, but better described as imagist 25 or mystical, where 
denotation and connotation cannot be divided, is typically 
developed throughout Asia in the second millennium. In 
this kind of art no distinction is felt between what a thing 
“is” and what it “signifies.” However, in thus drawing a 
distinction between symbolic and imagist art it must be 
very strongly emphasized that the two kinds of art are in- 
severably connected and related historically and aestheti¬ 
cally; for example, Kamakura Buddhist painting in the 
twelfth or thirteenth century is still iconographic, in Sung 
landscape and animal painting there is always an under¬ 
lying symbolism, and, on the other hand, Indian animal 
sculpture at Mamallapuram in the seventh century is al¬ 
ready romantic, humorous, and mystical. A more definite 
break between the two points of view is illustrated in the 
well-known story of the Zen priest Tan-hsia, who used a 
wooden image of the Buddha to make his fire — not how¬ 
ever, as iconoclast, but simply because he was cold. The 
two kinds of art are most closely connected by the philoso¬ 
phy and practice of Yoga; in other words, a self-identifica¬ 
tion with the theme is always prerequisite. But whereas 
the theological art is concerned with types of power, the 
mystical art is concerned with only one power. Its ultimate 
theme is that single and undivided principle which reveals 
itself in every form of life whenever the light of the mind so 
shines on anything that the secret of its inner life is realized, 
both as an end in itself unrelated to any human purpose, 
and as no other than the secret of one’s own innermost 



THE THEORY OF ART IN ASIA 39 

being. “When thou sees*; an eagle, thou seest a portion of 
genius”; “the heavens declare the glory of God”; “a 
mouse is miracle enough,” these are European analogies; or 
St Bernard’s Ligna et lapidts docebunt te y quod a magistris 
audire non posse. 

Here, then, the proximate theme may be any aspect of 
Nature whatsoever, not excluding human nature but 
“wherever the mind attaches itself,” every aspect of life 
having an equal value in a spiritual view. In theory this 
point of view could be applied in justification of the greatest 
possible variety of individual choice, and interpreted as a 
“liberation” of the artist from associated ideas. However, 
in the more practical economy of the great living traditions 
we find, as before, that certain restricted kinds or groups of 
themes are adhered to generation after generation in a given 
area, and that the technique is still controlled by most elabo¬ 
rate rules, and can only be acquired in long years of patient 
practice ( abhydsa ). Historical conditions and environment, 
an inheritance of older symbolisms, specific racial sensibili¬ 
ties, all these provide a better than private determination 
of the work to be done; for the artist or artisan, who “has 
his art which he is expected to practice,” this is a means to 
the conservation of energy ; for man generally, it secures a 
continued comprehensibility of art, its value as communi¬ 
cation. 

The outstanding aspects of the imagist or mystical art of 
Asia are the Ch’an or Zen 26 art of China and Japan, in 
which the theme is either landscape or plant or animal life; 



40 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 
Vaisnava painting, poetry, and music in India, where the 
theme is sexual love; and §ufl poetry and music in Persia, 
devoted to the praise of intoxication. 

The nature of Ch’an Zen is not easy to explain. Its 
sources are partly Indian, partly Taoist, its development 
both Chinese and Japanese. Chinese Buddhist art is like 
Indian in general aspect, differing only in style; Ch’an-Zen 
art provides us with a perfect example of that kind of real 
assimilation of new cultural ideas which results in a develop¬ 
ment formally unlike the original. This is altogether dif¬ 
ferent from that hybridization which results from “influ¬ 
ences” exerted by one art upon another; influences in this 
last sense, though historians of art attach great importance 
to them, are almost always manifested in unconscious 
parody, — one thinks of Hellenistic art in India, or chinoi- 
series in Europe, — and in any case belong to the history of 
taste rather than to the history of art. At the same time 
that we recognize Indian sources of Ch’an-Zen art, it is to 
be remembered that Zen is also deeply rooted in Taoism; 
it is sufficiently shown by the saying of Chuang Tzti, “The 
mind of the sage, being in repose, becomes the mirror of 
the universe, the speculum of all creation,” that China had 
always and independently been aware of the true nature of 
imaginative vision. 

The Ch’an-Zen discipline is one of activity and order; its 
doctrine the invalidity of doctrine, its end an illumination 
by immediate experience. Ch’an-Zen art, seeking realiza¬ 
tion of the divine being in man, proceeds by way of opening 



THE THEORY OF ART IN ASIA 4I 

his eyes to a like spiritual essence in the world of Nature 
external to himself; the scripture of Zen “is written with 
the characters of heaven, of man, of beasts, of demons, of 
hundreds of blades of grass, and of thousands of trees” (Do- 
gen), “every flower exhibits the image of Buddha” (Du- 
go). A good idea of Ch’en-Zen art can be obtained from the 
words of a twelfth-century Chinese critic, writing on animal 
painting: after alluding to the horse and bull as symbols 
of Heaven and Earth, he continues: “But tigers, leopards^ 
deer, wild swine, fawns, and hares — creatures that cannot 
be inured to the will of man — these the painter chooses for 
the sake of their skittish gambols and swift shy evasions, 
loves them as things that seek the desolation of great plains 
and wintry snows, as creatures that will not be haltered 
with a bridle, nor tethered by the foot. He would commit 
to brushwork the gallant splendor of their stride; this he 
would do and no more ” 27 But the Ch’an-Zen artist no more 
paints from Nature than the poet writes from Nature; he 
has been trained according to treatises on style so detailed 
and explicit that there would seem to be no room left for 
the operation of personality. A Japanese painter once said 
to me, “ I have had to concentrate on the bamboo for many, 
many years, still a certain technique for the rendering of 
the tips of bamboo leaves eludes me.” And yet immediacy 
or spontaneity has been more nearly perfectly attained in 
Ch’an-Zen art than anywhere else. Here there is no formal 
iconography, but an intuition that has to be expressed in an 
ink painting where no least stroke of the brush can be 



42 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 
erased or modified; the work is as irrevocable as life itself. 
There is no kind of art that comes nearer to “grasping the 
joy as it flies,” the winged life that is no longer life when we 
have taken thought to remember and describe it; no kind 
of art more studied in method, or less labored in effect. 
Every work of Ch’an-Zen art is unique, and in proportion to 
its perfection inscrutable. 

But Ch’an-Zen is by no means only a way to perfect ex¬ 
perience, it is also a way to the perfecting of character. 
Ch’an-Zen represents all and more than we now mean by the 
word “culture”: an active principle pervading every aspect 
of human life, becoming now the chivalry of the warrior, 
now the grace of the lover, now the habit of the craftsman. 
The latter point may be illustrated by Chuang Tzu’s story 
of the wheelwright who ventured to criticize a nobleman 
for reading the works of a dead sage. In excusing his temer¬ 
ity, he explained: “Your humble servant must regard the 
matter from the point of view of his own art. In making 
a wheel, if I proceed too gently, that is easy enough, but 
the work will not stand fast; if I proceed too violently, 
that is not only toilsome, but the parts will not fit well 
together. It is only when the movements of my hand are 
neither too gentle nor too violent that the idea in my mind 
can be realized. Still, I cannot explain this in words; there 
is a skill in it which I cannot teach my son, nor can he 
learn it from me.” The wheelwright pointed out, in other 
words, that perfection cannot be achieved by reading about 
it, but only in direct action. 



THE THEORY OF ART IN ASIA 43 

Thus Ch’an-Zen is by no means an asceticism divorced 
from life, though there are many great Ch’an-Zen monaster¬ 
ies; Ch’an-Zen art presents no exception to the general 
rule in Asia, that all works of art have definite and com¬ 
monly understood meanings, apart from any aesthetic per¬ 
fection of the work itself. The meanings of Ch’an-Zen 
themes are such as have sometimes been expressed in Euro¬ 
pean art by means of allegorical figures. Dragon and tiger, 
mist and mountain, horse and bull, are types of Heaven and 
Earth, spirit and matter; the gentle long-armed gibbon 
suggests benevolence, the peacock is symbolic of longevity, 
the lotus represents an immaculate purity. Let us con¬ 
sider the case of the pine tree and the morning glory, both 
favorite themes of Japanese art: “The morning glory blos¬ 
soms only for an hour, and yet it differs not at heart from 
the pine, which may endure for a thousand years.” What 
is to be understood here is not an obvious allegory of time 
and eternity, but that the pine no more takes thought of its 
thousand years than the morning glory of its passing hour; 
each fulfils its destiny and is content; and Matsunaga, the 
author of the poem, wished that his heart might be like 
theirs. If such associations add nothing directly to aesthetic 
quality, neither do they in any way detract from it. When at 
last Zen art found expression in scepticism, 

Granted this dewdrop world is but a dewdrop world, 

This granted, yet. . . 28 

there came into being the despised popular and secular 



44 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 
Ukiyoye 29 art of Japan. But here an artistic tradition had 
been so firmly established, the vision of the world so appro - 
fondi , that in a sphere corresponding with that of the modern 
picture postcard — Ukiyoye illustrated the theatre, the 
Yoshiwara , and the Aussichtspunkt — there still survived 
a purity and charm of conception that sufficed, however 
slight their essence, to win acceptance in Europe, long be¬ 
fore the existence of a more serious and classical art had 
been suspected. 

A mystical development took place in India somewhat 
later, and on different lines. In the anthropocentric Euro¬ 
pean view of life, the nude human form has always seemed 
to be peculiarly significant, but in Asia, where human life 
has been thought of as differing from that of other creatures, 
or even from that of the “inanimate” creation only in de¬ 
gree, not in kind, this has never been the case. On the 
other hand, in India, the conditions of human love, from the 
first meeting of eyes to ultimate self-oblivion, have seemed 
spiritually significant, and there has always been a free and 
direct use of sexual imagery in religious symbolism. On the 
one hand, physical union has seemed to present a self- 
evident image of spiritual unity; on the other, operative 
forces, as in modern scientific method, are conceived as 
male and female, positive and negative. It was thus natural 
enough that later Vaisnava mysticism, speaking always 
of devotion, bhakti , should do so in the same terms; the 
true and timeless relation of the soul to God could now 
only be expressed in impassioned epithalamia celebrating 



THE THEORY OF ART IN ASIA 45 

the nuptials of Radha and Kj*sna, milkmaid and herdsman, 
earthly Bride and heavenly Bridegroom. So there came into 
being songs and dances in which at one and the same time 
sensuality has spiritual significance, and spirituality physi¬ 
cal substance, and painting that depicts a transfigured 
world, where all men are heroic, all women beautiful and 
passionate and shy, beasts and even trees and rivers are 
aware of the presence of the Beloved — a world of imagina¬ 
tion and reality, seen with the eyes of Majnun . 30 If in the 
dance (“nautch”) the mutual relations of hero and heroine 
imitated by the players display an esoteric meaning , 31 this 
is not by arbitrary interpretation or as allegory, but by a 
mutual introsusception. If in painting and poetry the daily 
life of peasants seemed to reflect conditions ever present in 
the pastoral Heaven of the Divine Cowherd, this is not a 
sentimental or romantic symbolism, but born of the con¬ 
viction that “all the men and women of the world are His 
living forms” (Kabir), that reality is here and now tangibly 
and visibly accessible. Here the scent of the earth is ever 
present: “If he has no eyes, nor nose, nor mouth, how could 
he have stolen and eaten curd? Can we abandon our love 
of Kj-sna, to worship a figure painted on a wall?” (Sur 
Das.) Realities of experience, and neither a theory of design 
nor inspiration coming none knows whence, are the sources 
of this art; and those who cannot at least in fancy ( vdsandY 2 
experience the same emotions and sense their natural opera¬ 
tion cannot expect to be able to understand the art by any 
other and more analytical processes. For no art can be 



46 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 
judged until we place ourselves at the point of view of the 
artist; so only can the determination be known by which 
its design and execution are entirely controlled. 

A formal theory of art based on the facts as above out¬ 
lined has been enunciated in India in a considerable litera¬ 
ture on Rhetoric ( alarhkdra ). It is true that this theory is 
mainly developed in connection with poetry, drama, danc¬ 
ing, and music, but it is immediately applicable to art of 
all kinds, much of its terminology employs the concept of 
color, and we have evidence that the theory was also in fact 
applied to painting . 33 Accordingly, in what follows we have 
not hesitated to give an extended interpretation to terms 
primarily employed in connection with poetry, or rather 
literature ( kdvya ), considered as the type of art . 34 The justi¬ 
fication of art is then made with reference to use ( prayojana) 
or value (purusartha) y ° by pointing out that it subserves 
the Four Purposes of Life, viz. Right Action (dharmct), 
Pleasure ( kama ), Wealth ( arthc :), and Spiritual Freedom 
( moksa ). Of these, the first three represent the proximate, 
the last the ultimate, ends of life; the work of art is deter¬ 
mined ( prativihita ) in the same way, proximately with regard 
to immediate use, and ultimately with regard to aesthetic 
experience. Art is then defined as follows: Vakyam Rasat- 
makam Kavyam, that is, “Art is Expression Informed by 
Ideal Beauty.” 36 Mere narration (nirvaha, itihasa), bare 
utility, are not art, or are only art in a rudimentary sense. 
Nor has art as such a merely informative value confined 
to its explicit meaning (vyutpatti) : only the man of little 



THE THEORY OF ART IN ASIA 47 

wit (alpabuddhi) can fail to recognize that art is by nature 
a well-spring of delight {dnanda-nisyanda) , whatever may 
have been the occasion of its appearance. 37 On the other 
hand, there cannot be imagined an art without meaning or 
use. The doctrine of art for art’s sake is disposed of in a 
sentence quoted in the Sdhitya Darpana V, 1, Commentary: 
“All expressions ( vdkya ), human or revealed, are directed 
to an end beyond themselves ( kdrya-param , ‘another facti- 
bile')\ or if not so determined ( atatparatve ) are thereby 
comparable only to the utterances of a madman.” There¬ 
fore, “let the purpose (kftdrthatd) of skill ( vaidagdhya ) be 
attained,” Malatimadhava , I, 32 f. Again, the distinction 
of art (controlled workmanship, things well and truly made) 
from Nature (functional expression, sattva-bhdva) is made as 
follows: “the work {karma) of the two hands is an otherwise- 
determined {parastdt-pralivihita) element of natural being 
(bhicta-matra ),” Kausitaki Upanisad , III, 5. 

In this theory of art, the most important term is Rasa, 
rendered above “Ideal Beauty,” but meaning literally “tinc¬ 
ture” or essence, and generally translated in the present con¬ 
nection as “flavor”; aesthetic experience being described 
as the tasting of flavor {rasdsvddana) or simply as tasting 
(. svdda , dsvdda <), the taster as rasika , the work of art as rasa- 
vat** It should also be observed that the word rasa is used 
(1) relatively, in the plural, with reference to the various, 
usually eight or nine, emotional conditions which may con¬ 
stitute the burden of a given work, love {$rhgara-rasd) be¬ 
ing the most significant of these, and (2) absolutely, in the 



48 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 
singular, with reference to the interior act of tasting flavor 
unparticularized. In the latter sense, which alone need be 
considered here, the idea of an aesthetic beauty to be tasted, 
and knowable only in the activity of tasting, 39 is to be clearly 
distinguished from the relative beauties or lovelinesses of 
the separate parts of the work, or of the work itself con¬ 
sidered merely as a surface, the appreciation of all which 
is a matter of taste (ruci) or predilection. 40 The latter rela¬ 
tive beauties will appear in the theme and aesthetic sur¬ 
faces, in all that has to do with the proximate determina¬ 
tion of the work to be done, its ordering to use; the formal 
beauty will be sensed in vitality and unity, design and 
rhythm, in no way depending on the nature of the theme, 
or its component parts. It is indeed very explicitly pointed 
out that any theme whatever, “ lovely or unlovely, noble 
or vulgar, gracious or frightful, etc.,” may become the 
vehicle of rasa . 41 

The definition of aesthetic experience (rasdsvadana) given 
in the Sdhilya Darpana , III, 2-3, is of such authority and 
value as to demand translation in extenso; we offer first, 
a very literal version with brief comment, then a slightly 
smoother rendering avoiding interruptions. Thus, (1) “ Fla¬ 
vor ( rasah ) is tasted ( asvddyate ) by men having an innate 
knowledge of absolute values ( kaitcit-pramdtxbhih ), in exal¬ 
tation of the pure consciousness ( sattvddrekdt ), as self-lumi¬ 
nous ( svaprakdSah ), in the mode at once of ecstasy and 
intellect (dnanda-cin-mayah) , void of contact with things 
knowable (vedydntara-spar§a-§unyah) y twin brother to the 



THE THEORY OF ART IN ASIA 49 

tasting of Brahma (brahmdsvada-sahddarah) , whereof the 
life is a super-wordly lightning-flash (lokdttara-camatkdra- 
prdqah ), as intrinsic aspect (svdkdravat = svarupavat) , in 
indivisibility (abhinnatve) ”: and (2) “Pure aesthetic experi¬ 
ence is theirs in whom the knowledge of ideal beauty is in¬ 
nate; it is known intuitively, in intellectual ecstasy without 
accompaniment of ideation, at the highest level of conscious 
being; born of one mother with the vision of God, its life 
is as it were a flash of blinding light of transmundane ori¬ 
gin, impossible to analyze, and yet in the image of our very 
being.” 

Neither of the foregoing renderings embodies any foreign 
matter. On the other hand, only an extended series of alter¬ 
native renderings would suffice to develop the full reference 
of the original terms. Pramatf (from the same root as 
pramana , present also in English “metre”) is quis rationem 
artis intelligit ; here not as one instructed, but by nature. 
The notion of innate genius may be compared with Blake’s 
“Man is born like a garden ready planted and sown,” and 
“The knowledge of Ideal Beauty cannot be acquired, it is 
born with us.” But it must be understood that from the 
Indian point of view, genius is not a fortuitous manifesta¬ 
tion, but the necessary consequence of a rectification of the 
whole personality, accomplished in a previous condition of 
being; cf. the notion of an absolute prarndtpa natural to 
the Comprehensor, to the Buddha, see note 74, infra . The 
“ exaltation of saliva ” implies, of course, abstraction from 
extension, operation, local motion (rajas) , and from inde- 



50 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 
termination or inertia {tamos). Aesthetic experience is a 
transformation not merely of feeling (as suggested by the 
word aesthesis, per se), but equally of understanding; cf. 
the state of “Deep Sleep,” characterized by the expression 
prajndna-ghana-ananda-mayi , “a condensed understanding 
in the mode of ecstasy,” discussed below, p. 133 and note 89. 
The level of pure aesthetic experience is indeed that of 
the pure angelic understanding, proper to the Motionless 
Heaven, Brahmaloka. With “like a flash of lightning,” cf. 
Bfhaddranyaka Upanisad , II, 3, 6 and Kena Upanisad, 29, 
where the vision of Brahman is compared to a “sudden 
flash of lightning,” or “What flashes in the lightning.” 
The vision is our very Being, Ding an Sick, sv&kdra, and 
like our Being, beyond our individually limited grasp (gra- 
hana) or conception (. sarhkalpa ); “you cannot see the seer 
of seeing,” Bfhaddranyaka Upanisad, III, 4, 2. 42 

In any case, “It is the spectator’s own energy {utsdha) 
that is the cause of tasting, just as when children play 
with clay elephants”; the permanent mood {sthdyi-bhdva) is 
brought to life as rasa because of the spectator’s own capac¬ 
ity for tasting, “not by the character or actions of the hero 
to be imitated {anukdrya), nor by the deliberate ordering 
of the work to that end {tatparalvatah)” 43 Those devoid 
of the required capacity or energy are no better than the 
wood or masonry of the gallery. 44 Aesthetic experience is 
thus only accessible to those competent ( pramdtf , rasika, 
sahfdaya). Competence depends “on purity or singleness 
{sattva) of heart and on an inner character {antara-dharma) 



THE THEORY OF ART IN ASIA 51 

or habit of obedience ( anuHla ) tending to aversion of at¬ 
tention from external phenomena ; this character and habit, 
not to be acquired by mere learning, but either innate 
or cultivated, depends on an ideal sensibility ( vasana) and 
the faculty of self-identification ( yogyaid ) with the forms 
(bhavana) depicted (yarqamya) ” 45 Just as the original 
intuition arose from a self-identification of the artist with 
the appointed theme, so aesthetic experience, reproduction, 
arises from a self-identification of the spectator with the 
presented matter; criticism repeats the process of creation. 
An interesting case is that of the actor, or any artist, who 
must not be naturally moved by the passions he depicts, 
though he may obtain aesthetic experience from the spec¬ 
tacle of his own performance. 46 

Notwithstanding that aesthetic experience is thus de¬ 
clared to be an inscrutable and uncaused spiritual activity, 
that is virtually ever-present and potentially realizable, 
but not possible to be realized unless and until all affective 
and mental barriers have been resolved, all knots of the 
heart undone, it is necessarily admitted that the experience 
arises in relation to some specific representation. The 
elements of this representation, the work of art itself, can 
be and are discussed by the Hindu rhetoricians at great 
length, and provide the material and much of the terminol¬ 
ogy of analysis and criticism. For present purposes it will 
suffice to present these constituents of the work of art in a 
brief form; but it must not be forgotten that here only is 
to be found the tangible (grdhya) matter of the work of art, 



52 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 

all that can be explained and accounted for in it, and that 
this all includes precisely that a priori knowledge which 
the spectator must possess or come to possess before he can 
pretend to competence in the sense above defined. The 
elements of the work of art are, then: 

(1) Determinants ( vibhdva ), viz. the physical stimulants 
to aesthetic reproduction, particularly the theme and its 
parts, the indications of time and place, and other apparatus 
of representation — the whole factibile. The operation of 
the Determinants takes place by the operation of an ideal- 
sympathy (sadhdranya ), a self-identification with the 
imagined situation. 47 

(2) Consequents ( anubhava ), the specific and conven¬ 
tional means of “registering” (sucand) emotional states, in 
particular gestures (abhinaya). 

(3) Moods (bhava), the conscious emotional states as 
represented in art. These include thirty-three Fugitive or 
Transient ( vyabhicari) Moods such as joy, agitation, im¬ 
patience, etc., and eight or nine Permanent ( sthdyi) Moods, 
the Erotic, Heroic, etc., which in turn are the vehicles of 
the specific rasas or emotional colorings. In any work, one 
of the Permanent Moods must constitute a master motif to 
which all the others are subordinate; for “the extended 
development of a transient emotion becomes an inhibition 
of rasa” 48 or, as we should now express it, the work be¬ 
comes sentimental, embarrassing rather than moving. 

(4) The representation of involuntary physical reactions 
(sattva-bh&va) , for example fainting. 



THE THEORY OF ART IN ASIA 53 

All of these determinants and symbols are recognized 
collectively and indivisibly in aesthetic experience, the work 
of art being as such a unity; but they are recognized sep¬ 
arately in subsequent analysis. 

According to the related School of Manifestation ( Vyakti - 
vdda) the essential or soul of poetry is called dhvani , “the 
reverberation of meaning arising by suggestion (vyanjana) .” 49 
In grammar and logic, a word or other symbol is held to 
have two powers only, those of denotation ( abhidha ) and 
connotation (ilaksand ); for example gopdla is literally “ cow¬ 
herd,” but constantly signifies Kfsna. The rhetoricians 
assume for a word or symbol a third power, that of sug¬ 
gestion (vyanjana), the matter suggested, which we should 
call the real content of the work, being dhvani , with respect 
to either the theme ( vastu ), any metaphor or other orna¬ 
ment (alarhkdra), or, what is more essential, one of the 
specific rasas. In other words, abhidha , laksar^d, and 
vyanjana correspond to literal, allegorical, and anagogic 
significance. Dhvani , as overtone of meaning, is thus the 
immediate vehicle of single rasa and means to aesthetic ex¬ 
perience. 50 Included in dhvani is tdtparydrtha, the meaning 
conveyed by the whole sentence or formula, as distinct from 
the mere sum of meanings of its separate parts. The School 
of Manifestation is so called because the perception (pratiti) 
of rasa is thought of simply as the manifestation of an in¬ 
herent and already existing intuitive condition of the spirit, 
in the same sense that Enlightenment is virtually ever¬ 
present though not always realized. The pratiti of rasa , as 



54 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 
it were, breaks through the enclosing walls (varar^a, dvaraqa ) 
by which the soul, though predisposed by ideal sympathy 
(sadharariya ) and sensibility ( vdsand ), is still immured 51 
and restricted from shining forth in its true character as the 
taster of rasa in an aesthetic experience which is as aforesaid 
the very twin brother of the experience of the unity of 
Brahman. 

In the later and otherwise more synthetic scheme of the 
Sdhitya Darpaqa , the rasa and dhvani theories are not quite 
so closely linked, dhvani being now not so much the soul of 
all poetry as characteristic of the superior sort of poetry 
in which what is suggested outweighs what is literally 
expressed. 

For the sake of completeness there need only be men¬ 
tioned two earlier theories in which Ornament or Figures 
(i alarhkara ) and Style or Composition (riti) are regarded 
respectively as the essential elements in art. These theories, 
which have not held their own in India, may be compared 
to the minor European conceptions of art as dexterity, or 
as consisting merely of aesthetic surfaces which are signifi¬ 
cant only as sources of sensation. This last point of view 
can be maintained consistently in India only from the 
standpoint of the naive realism which underlies a strictly 
monastic prejudice against the world. 

It remains to be pointed out that the rasa and dhvani 
theories are essentially metaphysical and Ved&ntic in 
method and conclusion, though they are expressed not so 
much in terms of the pure Ved 4 nta of the Upani§ads as in 



THE THEORY OF ART IN ASIA 55 

those of a later Ved&nta combined with other systems, 
particularly the Yoga. The fully evolved Indian theory of 
beauty is in fact hardly to be dated before the tenth or 
eleventh century, though the doctrine of rasa is already 
clearly enunciated in Bharata’s Natya Sdstra , which may 
be anterior to the fifth century and itself derives from still 
older sources. 

In any case, the conception of the work of art as deter¬ 
mined outwardly to use and inwardly to a delight of the 
reason; the view of its operation as not intelligibly causal, 
but by way of a destruction of the mental and affective bar¬ 
riers behind which the natural manifestation of the spirit is 
concealed; the necessity that the soul should be already 
prepared for this emancipation by an inborn or acquired 
sensibility; the requirement of self-identification with the 
ultimate theme, on the part of both artist and spectator, as 
prerequisite to visualization in the first instance and repro¬ 
duction in the second; finally, the conception of ideal beauty 
as unconditioned by natural affections, indivisible, super- 
sensual, and indistinguishable from the gnosis of God— 
all these characteristics of the theory demonstrate its log¬ 
ical connection with the predominant trends of Indian 
thought, and its natural place in the whole body of Indian 
philosophy. 

Consequently, though it could not be argued that any 
aesthetic theory is explicitly set forth in the Upanisads, it 
will not surprise us to find that the ideas and terminology 
of the later aesthetic are there already recognizable. For 



56 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 
example, in the Bfhaddranyaka Upanisad, I, 4, 7, the world 
is said to be differentiated or known in plurality by, and 
only by, means of name and aspect, namarupa, idea and 
image; ibid., Ill, 2, 3 and 5, “Voice (vac) is an apprehender 
(,graha ); it is seized by the idea (i ndma ) as an over-appre- 
hender, then indeed by voice (vac) one utters thoughts 
( n&tnani ),” and similarly “Sight (caksu) is an apprehender; 
it is seized by aspect ( rupa) as an over-apprehender, then 
indeed by the eye (caksu) one sees things (rupdifi).” 62 
Further, ibid., Ill, 9, 20, “on the heart (hfdaya) are as¬ 
pects (rupdni) based,” and similarly in the case of speech. 
As to the heart, “it is the same as Prajapati, it is Brah¬ 
man,” ibid., V, 3, and “other than that Imperishable, there 
is none that (really) sees,” ibid., Ill, 8, ii. 63 Actual objects 
(rupdni) seen in space are really seen not as such, but only 
as colored areas, the concept of space being altogether 
mental and conventional. 64 

The Indian theory, in origins and formulation, seems at 
first sight to be sui generis. But merely because of the speci¬ 
fic idiomatic and mythical form in which it finds expres¬ 
sion, it need not be thought of as otherwise than universal. 
It does not in fact differ from what is implicit in the Far 
Eastern view of art, or on the other hand in any essentials 
from the Scholastic Christian point of view, or what is as¬ 
serted in the aphorisms of Blake; it does differ essentially 
from the modem non-intellectual interpretations of art as 
sensation. What are probably the most significant elements 
in the Asiatic theory are the views (1) that aesthetic ex- 



THE THEORY OF ART IN ASIA 57 

perience is an ecstasy in itself inscrutable, but in so far as 
it can be defined, a delight of the reason, and (2) that the 
work of art itself, which serves as the stimulus to the release 
of the spirit from all inhibitions of vision, can only come 
into being and have being as a thing ordered to specific 
ends. Heaven and Earth are united in the analogy ( sadfSya , 
etc.) of art, which is an ordering of sensation to intelligi¬ 
bility and tends toward an ultimate perfection in which 
the seer perceives all things imaged in himself. 




Chapter 11 


ME1STER ECKHART’S VIEW OF ART 




Chapter II 

MEISTER ECKHART’S VIEW OF ART 

Docti rationem artis intelligunt , indocti voluptatem. 

Quintilian, IX, 4. 

T HE Schoolmen composed no special treatise with the 
title 'Philosophy of Art/ . . . There is nevertheless 
a far-reaching theory of art to be found in their writings.” 55 
Amongst such there are none more universal, more pro¬ 
found, or more distinguished by vigor of statement and clar¬ 
ity of thought than those of Meister Eckhart, 66 whose 
Sermons might well be termed an Upanisad of Europe. 
Eckhart’s preeminence is not of the order of genius; what 
is remarkable in him is nothing in kind, nothing individual 
or curious, but only a great energy or will that allows him 
to resume and concentrate in one consistent demonstration 
the spiritual being of Europe at its highest tension. Toward 
his theme he is utterly devout, and his trained mental 
powers are the author of his style, but otherwise, in his own 
words spoken with reference to the painter of portraits, 
“it is not himself that it reveals to us” (37); "What I give 
out is in me . . . as the gift of God” (143). 

The real analogy between Eckhart’s modes of thought and 
those which have long been current in India should make it 
easy for the Ved&ntist or Mahayana Buddhist to under- 



62 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 
stand him, which would require a much greater effort on 
the part of a Protestant Christian or modem philosopher. 
In European readers, some knowledge of Scholastic thought 
and Christian theology must be taken for granted. Partly 
for the sake of Indian readers, and partly because the use 
of Oriental side by side with European technical terms can¬ 
not much longer be avoided by students of aesthetics or 
metaphysics, I have bracketed Sanskrit equivalents wher¬ 
ever they serve to explain or better define the meaning. 
For the rest, every word or passage enclosed by quotation 
marks is Eckhart’s. I have not thought it necessary to dis¬ 
tinguish his own words from those of the various doctors, 
masters, and heathen philosophers whom he sometimes 
quotes and endorses, this not being a study of Eckhart’s 
sources. I have tried to arrange the available material 
logically, and where it has been necessary to develop the 
idea, to do so strictly in harmony with Scholastic ideas in 
general and Eckhart’s phrases in particular, often using his 
own words even when this is not specifically indicated by 
the page references. 

Eckhart’s whole conception of human life in operation and 
attainment is aesthetic: it runs through all his thought 
that man is an artist in the analogy of the “exalted work¬ 
man,” and his idea of “sovran good” and “immutable de¬ 
light” is that of a perfected art. 67 Art is religion, religion art, 
not related, but the same. No one can study theology 
without perceiving this; for example, the Trinity is an 
“arrangement” of God, 68 “articulate speech” (369), “de- 



MEISTER ECKHART’S VIEW OF ART 63 

termined by formal notions” (268), “symmetry with su¬ 
preme lucidity ” (366). Eckhart is writing, not a treatise on 
the arts as such, though he is evidently quite familiar with 
them, but sermons on the art of knowing God. Ignorance 
is “lack of knowledge . . . brutish” (13). 

What is knowledge? Threefold: (1) of particulars and 
generals, sensible, empirical, literal, indicative, sarnvya- 
vahdrika-pratyaksa , (2) of universals, rational or intelligible, 
allegorical, conventional, paroksa, (3) of sameness, without 
image or likeness, transcendental, anagogic, aparoksa = 
paramarthika-pratyaksa (13, 32, 87-88, 166, 228, II, 183, 
etc.; cf. Chapter V). Of these the first two (avidya) are 
relative, the last ( vidyd ) immediate and absolute, only to 
be expressed in terms of negation. 

To clarify his meaning, Eckhart makes constant allusion 
to the practice of specific arts, to the art in the artist, and 
to the perfecting of art and artist. Understanding may be 
audibly or visibly perceived, in either case as an aesthetic 
process. For example, “I see the lilies in the field, their 
gaiety, their color, all their leaves” (143), just as any brute 
perceives them; this is simply the recognition and relish¬ 
ing of “creatures as creatures,” “as they are in themselves,” 
to be recognized and valued as to their uses. But “ my inner 
man relishes things not as creatures but as the gift of God” 
(143), that is, as intelligible images, here with a specifically 
edifying connotation. “And again, to my innermost man 
they savor not of God’s gift but of ever and aye. Even so 
do all creatures speak God ” (143), “lam come like the fra- 



64 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 
grance of a flower” (284); that is the overtone of meaning, 
suggestion, dhvani, unalloyed savoring, rasa. In all, these 
are the three aesthetic functions of denotation, connota¬ 
tion, and implication, corresponding to recognition, in¬ 
terpretation, and immediate understanding. 

The soul has two powerful faculties, intellect and will, 
expressed in vision and love, which can be exercised in fruit¬ 
ful operation, outwardly or inwardly (166). Where things 
exist as intelligible images, as means of understanding and 
communication, intellectually, in the imagination, there lies 
man’s way. It is here that things are known in unintelligi¬ 
ble multiplicity and must be realized in intelligible unity, 
here that the use of things is understood, and that renuncia¬ 
tion of all uses must be made: “to find nature herself all 
her likenesses have to be shattered and the further in the 
nearer the actual thing” (259), such renunciation and such 
shattering being of the essence of art, in which all things are 
seen alike without any sense of possession, not in their 
nature but in their being, quite disinterestedly. 6 * 

In outward operation, these powers of the soul, intellect 
and will, correspond to vocation, as with the artist (artifex), 
professor (doctor), or celebrant (priest), and to conduct as 
distinguished from specific skill. The artist is not a special 
kind of man, but every man is a special kind of artist. The 
vocations (“arranging this or that,” 16) are so many differ¬ 
ent disciplines; conduct (“comforting another,” 16) another 
discipline proper to all men alike. Every activity involves 
what we should now call an aesthetic process, a succession 



MEISTER ECKHART’S VIEW OF ART 65 

of problem, solution, and execution. Materials apart, who¬ 
ever acts, acts in the same way, will following the intellect, 
whether he makes a house, or studies mathematics, or per¬ 
forms an office, or does good works. 

Our modem system of thought has substituted for this 
division of labor a spiritual caste system which divides men 
into species. Those who have lost most by this are the art¬ 
ists, professionally speaking, on the one hand, and laymen 
generally on the other. The artist (meaning such as would 
still be so called) loses by his isolation and corresponding 
pride, and by the emasculation of his art, no longer con¬ 
ceived as intellectual, but only as emotional in motivation 
and significance; the workman (to whom the name of art¬ 
ist is now denied) loses in that he is not called, but forced 
to labor unintelligently, goods being valued above men. 
All alike have lost, in that art being now a luxury, no longer 
the normal type of all activity, all men are compelled to 
live in squalor and disorder and have become so inured to 
this that they are unaware of it. The only surviving artists 
in the Scholastic, Gothic sense, are scientists, surgeons, and 
engineers, the only ateliers, laboratories. 

Just because Eckhart’s treatment of aesthetics is not ad 
koCy but takes for granted the point of view of a school, not 
in any private sense his own, it has a special value; we-can 
have no doubt that it was actually in this fashion that cul¬ 
tured men in Paris and Cologne, in the twelfth and thir¬ 
teenth centuries, when Christian art was at its zenith, 
thought of art and the specific arts. These same men in 



66 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 
their collective capacity as the Church prescribed the themes 
of art and the more essential details of its iconography; the 
workman, sometimes a trained monk, more often a trained 
gildsman, added from the storehouse of tradition another 
element to form besides the skill of craft which he was ex¬ 
pected to practice in his vocation. Thus intellect and will 
worked in unanimity. Is not the determination of this art 
— that in it which alone is common to the mind and to the 
product, that is, its imagery, not its style, still less any indi¬ 
vidual mannerism — a thing that must be understood if we 
would understand Christian art at all? I sometimes wonder 
if we really want to understand it. For on the one hand, 
from the histories of art one would suppose that the very 
form by which the art is moved from within can be neg¬ 
lected, and that nothing matters in it but the facts of his¬ 
tory, accidents of provenance and influence, and problems of 
attribution — all those things with which the mediaeval 
workman was least of all concerned; and on the other hand, 
we have those who insist that the enjoyment of the work of 
art, admittedly its ultimate value (if we understand “enjoy¬ 
ment” rightly, which is the very problem of aesthetics, and 
cannot be assumed) demands no other preparatory discipline, 
being an unintelligible ecstasy (as may be granted), and 
can be taught (which is inadmissible) to those who aspire 
to the transcendent vision, but are only too ready to be 
persuaded that the mirror of the universe is the eye’s in¬ 
trinsic faculty (such readiness is “a trick the soul has, when 
indulging in comfortable intuitions of divinity,” 447). The 



MEISTER ECKHART’S VIEW OF ART 67 

study of art, from a historical point of view, may be harm¬ 
less in itself, yet no better than the satisfaction of a curi¬ 
osity; the enjoyment of works of art merely as a pleasure 
of the eye or ear may be harmless in itself (“that a dis¬ 
agreeable noise should be as grateful to the ear as the 
sweet tones of a lyre is a thing I never shall attain to,” 
II, 97), yet no more than an enhanced sensation. If this 
were all, aesthetic would be nothing more than a discussion 
of taste, and so indeed the experimental psychologists 
believe. 

To speak of art exclusively in terms of sensation is doing 
violence to the inner man, the knowing subject; to extract 
from Eckhart’s thought a theory of taste {ruci) would be 
doing violence to its unity. If I venture at all to extract 
from it a theory of art, this is not as an exercise in dialectics, 
but because it is required for the specific interpretation of 
Christian art, and because the Scholastic view is more 
than a great provincial school of thought; it represents a 
universal mode of thought, and this mode throws a light on 
the analogous theories that have prevailed in Asia, and 
should serve Western students as a means of approach to, 
and understanding of, Asiatic art. 

1 The doctrine of types, ideas, forms, or images is of fun¬ 
damental importance for the understanding of Eckhart’s 
references to art. More rarely, the words semblance, like¬ 
ness, symbol, effigy, pattern, and prototype are employed. 
Amongst all these, type and prototype, pattern, idea, 
and ideal are used only with reference to things known 



68 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 
and seen intellectually ( paroksa ), the others in the same 
sense or with reference to the image materially embodied 
( pratyaksa ). To begin with, what is an image in these two 
senses? An image “is anything known or bom” (258), or 
anything both known and bom or made. The Son, for ex¬ 
ample, is the Father’s “own image abiding in himself . . . 
his immanent form,” and at the same time “the exact like¬ 
ness, the perfect image of his Father” (258) in a distinct 
Person. In the same way all creatures “in their preexisting 
forms in God have been divine life for ever,” only their 
material embodiment “when Nature is working in time and 
space” (71) being by birth and as it were God’s handiwork: 
“these preexisting forms are the origin or principle of the 
creation of all creatures, and in this sense they are types 
and pertain to practical knowledge ” (253). They live in the 
“divine mind,” the “hoard” which “is God’s art” (461): 
“Intellect is the temple of God wherein he is shining in all 
his glory. Nowhere does God dwell more really than in 
this temple of his intellect’s nature” (2x2) (alaya-vijndna ), 
“quiddity or mode is the way into this temple” {ibid,.). 
And like God’s hoard “There is a power in the soul called 
mind ( vijndna , sarhkalpa ); it is her storehouse of incorpo¬ 
real forms and intellectual notions” (402); the ideas in this 
storehouse of the soul may seem either to be new or to be 
remembered (105), but in either case are as it were recol¬ 
lected (226, 295), for “all the words of his divine essence 
flow into the word in our mind in distinction of Person just 
as memory pours out treasure of images into the powers of 



MEISTER ECKHART’S VIEW OF ART 69 

the soul” (402). Another superficial distinction of ideas in 
kind can be made as between the ideas of natural species, 
as when one works with the “rose-form” (251) or the image 
of Conrad (128), and artificial ideas, arising “ theoretically, 
as the house of wood and stone is designed in the architect's 
practical mind, who makes the house as much like his ideal 
as he can ” (252), either kind being “in the practical power” 
as the ‘‘ idea of the work” (252) to be done, if work is to be 
done, as well as abiding in the mind as objects of under¬ 
standing and a priori means of rational communication. 
Either of these kinds of ideas is equally invention (< anuvitta ), 
a discovery amongst “the sum of all the forms conceived by 
man and which subsist in God himself, I having no property 
in them and no idea of ownership” (35, cf. 17); which 
point of view we all naturally endorse when we say that an 
idea has come to us, or that we have hit upon it, eureka , 
never that we have made it. At the best, we have prepared 
ourselves for it by emptying our conscience of all other 
creature images and fugitive emotions, accepting for the 
time being only the seal or imprint of this one thing. 
So the image is in the artist, not he in it; it is his whose 
image it is, not his who harbors it (52). When we find 
“just as the artist, inspired by his art, will carve in wood or 
paint on canvas or the wall” (II, 211), “art” means the 
idea of the theme, as it presents itself to him. The image 
in the object, in the artist’s mind, and in the graven image 
are the same, though in the artist and in his work only ac¬ 
cording to his powers, not in its full perfection. In the graven 



70 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 
image of anything it may be thought of not as introduced 
by the artist but as latent in the medium because of the 
appetite for form that matter has; for example, “when the 
artist makes a statue out of wood or stone he does not 
put the image in the wood, he chips away the wood which 
hides the form. He gives the wood nothing, he takes it 
away: carves it out where it is too thick, pares off over¬ 
lay, and then there appears what was hidden ” (II, 82) — 
an analogy of how God’s image is ever present in the 
ground of the soul, but concealed by veils and hindrances 

(II, 80- 

God’s and man’s ideas or types are thus not Platonic 
ideas external to intellect (in Essence there is no like¬ 
ness or image, but only Sameness, samatd), nor immutable 
or general, but types of activity, forces, principles of work 
or becoming, living and particular — “to call a tree a tree 
is not to name it, for all the species are confused ” (117), no 
two creatures being alike in their nature, for “every crea¬ 
ture makes innate denial; the one denies it is the other” 
(249). Ideas are as many in number as there have been or 
ever can be things in time, “there are as many types as 
there are grades of nature to be typified” (252, 253); they 
cannot be more in number than this, because God’s work is 
not by choice, there is nothing that he leaves undone, what 
he thinks is, what is is what he thinks, his creation is with¬ 
out means or succession. “Every nature emanates from 
its appropriate form” (477), but our conception of process 
and succession is merely “due to our gross senses” (365); 



MEISTER ECKHART’S VIEW OF ART 71 

from God’s point of view ideas are all known at once in 
perfection and in one form; from our temporal point of 
view ideas are free and variably becoming, or as we now 
say evolving. From any point of view, ideas or forms 
(1 ndtna ) are “living,” not merely existing like standards 
fixed and deposited for safe-keeping — ideas not merely of 
static shapes, but ideas of acts (16). 

“An icon in stone or on the wall, with no foundation to 
it (that is, materials apart, and) taken simply as form, is the 
same form as his whose form it is” (64). So then normally 
there will be nothing of the artist in the work except his 
skill: “the painter who has painted a good portrait therein 
shows his art; it is not himself that it reveals to us” (37). 
But if the painter paints his own portrait, as God does, 
then both his skill and his image will be in it, himself as he 
knows himself, but not his very self: “this reflects credit 
on the painter who embodies in it his dearest conception of 
his art and makes it the image of himself. The likeness of 
the portrait praises the author without words” (97). “If 
I paint my likeness on the wall, he who sees the likeness is 
not seeing me; but anyone who sees me sees my likeness 
and not my likeness merely but my child. If I really knew 
my soul, anyone who saw my conception of it would say it 
was my son, for I share therewith my energy and nature, and 
as here so it is in the Godhead. The Father understands 
hims elf perfectly clearly, so there appears to him his image, 
that is to say, his Son ” (408) (the portrait and the corporeal 
man are both the man’s conception of himself, they are 



72 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 
“alike” in form, however different in aspect flesh and paint 
must be). 

In this connection may be considered a difficult pas¬ 
sage occurring in the exegesis of Genesis I, 26, “Let us 
make man in our image and likeness.” Eckhart says, “Work 
comes from the outward and from the inner man, but the 
innermost man takes no part in it. In making a thing the 
very innermost self of a man comes into outwardness” 
(195), in which there seems to be some contradiction. The 
first is clear: the work as a substance in a given shape comes 
from the man's hands molding matter, and as form from 
the specific idea in him, as it is in his intellect, which does 
no work in molding matter, but only singles out the best it 
can according to its idiosyncrasy. Because the actual 
handiwork is done by the man's very body, it is only natural 
that there should be a trace of his physiognomy left in it, 
just as the axe which “brings about the workman's desired 
end” (II, 178) leaves its mark in the wood and could be 
identified thereby. 59 So then in touch and style the work 
somewhat reveals the man, that is as to the accidents of his 
being. That the very innermost self of a man also “comes 
into outwardness,” according to Eckhart's own analogy, as 
“When God made man the very innermost heart of the 
Godhead was concerned in his making” (195, 436), and yet 
“God's works enclose a mere nothing of God, wherefore 
they cannot disclose him” (87, cf. Bhagavad Gita, IX, 4 
and 5). Or again, “Form is a revelation of essence” (38), in 
which there is neither image nor likeness; essence is in all 



MEISTER ECKHART’S VIEW OF ART 73 

things, and though it “gets not,” yet “it moves movable 
things like creatures” (284). As Godhead to God, so is 
innermost man to workman, Godhead and innermost man 
being present in the work, one in being with it, but not 
operatively or intelligibly. In Eckhart’s own work we see 
the man possessed of his ideas, and wrestling with his means, 
the “intractable” (119) and untaught German speech of 
his day; but in the ideas at last so vigorously expressed 
there is a “mere nothing of the man” as he is in God. For 
man to be in his handiwork as God is in his creation it 
would have to be as immanent life, the thing made would 
have to be alive and possessed of free will. If we do some¬ 
times say that a work lives, this is only metaphorical, a sort 
of animism which projects our own living reactions into the 
thing as it is in itself. 

That there is no life in man’s handiwork underlies the 
Muhammadan doctors’ interdiction of representative art, 
the imitation of living forms being regarded as a blasphemy, 
inasmuch as the artist brings into being a pseudo-creation, 
as it were in mockery of God, who alone gives life. Never¬ 
theless, as we have seen and shall further demonstrate, 
Christian art is not a mimicry of natural species, nor merely 
a source of pleasurable sensations, but is a manner of 
speaking about God and Nature: it no more trespasses upon 
God’s dignity than when we speak of him or see of him or 
taste of him, using names or other images, 60 being only too 
well aware the while that “nothing true can be spoken of 
God” (8), “God is nameless” (246), “there is no knowing 



74 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 
him by likeness” (55), (who is nirdbhdsa, amurta ), “a por¬ 
trait of the highest seraph limned in black would be a better 
likeness far than God portrayed as highest seraph; that were 
a preeminent unlikeness” (46), and yet believing that there 
is nothing “more useful and salutary to the soul than ex¬ 
cursions in the science of the holy Trinity and unity” (392) 
in which excursions we are naturally compelled to make use 
of name and form, being “permitted to use the names his 
saints have called him by ” (70, cf. St Thomas, Sum. Theol., I, 
Q. 51, A. 3, “it is in no wise contrary to truth for intelligi¬ 
ble things to be set forth in Scripture under sensible figures, 
since it is not said for the purpose of maintaining that in¬ 
telligible things are sensible, but in order that properties 
of intelligible things may be understood according to sim¬ 
ilitude through sensible figures”). The demonstration of 
iconodasm is as follows: “they held their peace for fear 
of lying” (237); “Anyone content with what can be ex¬ 
pressed in words — God is a word, Heaven is a word — is 
aptly styled an unbeliever” (339). But this is a sort of 
ascetidsm or renunciation proper only to those who have 
a vision of God without means and have earned the right 
to say that all scripture is vain; otherwise, a denial of the 
soul’s powers, expressed in outward works, as a means to 
edification and enlightenment, is by no means excusable. 

Notwithstanding that man’s handiwork is without life, 
still the human maker is an analogy of the “exalted work¬ 
man” (376), the divine architect, all-maker (ViSvakarma). 
“Suppose some master of the arts. If he produces a work 



MEISTER ECKHART’S VIEW OF ART 75 

of art he none the less preserves his arts within himself: the 
arts are the artist in the artist” (that is, in the man so 
called), just as “Things flowed forth finite into time while 
abiding in eternity” where they are “God in God” (285). 
“The idea of the work exists in the worker’s practical mind 
as an object of his understanding, which regards it as ex¬ 
pressing his idea to which he forms the material work” 
(252), that is, not in his mind as a mode of understanding, 
but as a thing already and directly understood, for “I make 
a letter of the alphabet like the image of that letter in my 
mind, not like my mind itself” (235). Every least detail of 
the work will correspond to details of form in the artist’s 
mind: “no architect can carry in his head the plan of a whole 
house without the plans of all its details” (252). 

Again, “the form, idea, or semblance of a thing, a rose, 
for instance, is present in my soul, and must be for two 
reasons. One is because from the appearance of its mental 
form ( jndna-sattva-rupa ) I can paint the rose in corporal 
matter, so there must be an image of the rose-form in my 
soul. The second reason is because from the subjective 
rose-idea I recognize the objective rose although I do 
not copy it (that is, do not copy the rose in painting). 
Just as I can carry in my mind the notion of a house I 
never mean to build ” (252). “For the purpose of making a 
crock a man takes a handful of clay; that is the medium 
he works in. He gives it a form he has in him, nobler than 
his material” (68). And as to this form as it exists in the 
artist’s mind, “Another power in the soul is that wherewith 



76 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 
she thinks (dhi,dhyai). This power is able to picture in itself 
things which are not there, so that I can see things as well 
as with my eyes, or even better. I can see a rose in winter 
when there are no roses (cf. 116), therefore with this power 
the soul produces ( dkarsati) things from the non-existent 
(hfdaya-dkdSa) like God who creates things out of nothing 
(kha =xAos)” ( 2I2 > c f- 445)* I n an y case “to be properly ex¬ 
pressed a thing must proceed from within, moved by its 
form; it must come, not in from without, but out from 
within” (108). 

In other words, just as “the soul is the form of the body,” 
so the art in the artist is the form of the work: “the cutting 
of the wood is from the saw; but that it assumes at length 
the form of a bed is from the design of the art” (in the 
artist), “the form of the bed is not in the saw or the axe, 
but a certain movement toward that form,” St Thomas, 
Sum. Theol., I, Q. no. A. 2 and Q. 118, A. 1, quoting also 
Avicenna, “all forms which are in matter proceed from the 
concept of the intellect.” 

The arising of the image is not by an act of will whether 
human or divine, but of attention (dhdray,d) when the will 
is at rest; there can be nothing meritorious (17) in the pos¬ 
session of images, since an image “receives its being from 
the thing whose image it is, for it is a natural product . . . 
prior to the will, will following the image ” (51, cf. 17). The 
aesthetic process is as follows: what I say “springs up in 
me, then I pause in the idea, and thirdly I speak it out” 
(222), or again, “First when a word is conceived in my mind 



MEISTER ECKHART’S VIEW OF ART 77 

it is a subtle, intangible thing; it is a true word when it 
takes shape in my thought. Later, as spoken aloud by my 
mouth, it is but an outward expression of the interior 
word” (80), “the mind sees and formulates and the will 
wills and memory holds it fast” (16). As to this abiding 
intention, or pause in the idea, “my wish of today is my 
purpose of tomorrow, the idea of which is kept alive ( sthita) 
by my actual thinking {vibhdvayati) of it, just as, they said, 
God’s works are done” (238). As to the work, “Working 
and becoming are the same. When the carpenter stops 
working, the house will stop becoming. Still the axe and 
stop the growth” (163); “Man requires many instruments 
for'his external works; much preparation is needed ere he 
can bring them forth as he has imagined them” (5); the seek¬ 
ing intellect “spends perhaps a year or more in research on 
some natural fact, finding out what it is, only to work as 
long again stripping off what it is not” (17), but “angels 
. . . need less means for their works and have fewer 
images” (5). 

As we have seen, the aesthetic process is threefold, the 
arising of the idea in germ, its taking shape before the 
mind’s eye, and outward expression in work (80, 228). The 
first act is necessarily the effect of attention directed to a 
given object: the artist is commissioned, not to paint, but 
to paint something in particular, let us say a flower or an 
angel (deva) or other object. Eckhart takes the case of the 
host of angels, and though he does not refer to the third 
stage of actual execution, this would be an easy step. “A 



78 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 
master was once questioned by his pupil about the angelic 
order. He answered him and said, Go hence and withdraw 
into thyself until thou understandest: give thy whole self 
up to it, then look, refusing to see anything but what thou 
findest there. It will seem to thee at first as though thou 
art the angels with them and as thou dost surrender to 
their collective being thou shalt think thyself 61 the angels 
as a whole with the whole company of angels” (216). So 
far, the process is identical with the Indian imager’s 
dhyana-yoga: and had an actual picture of the angels been 
required, it might have been added dhyatvd kurydt, that is, 
“ Having thus seen and surrendered to the presented form, 
begin the work.” Had the painting been required to fill a 
given space, or had it been intended that the angels should 
stand in some particular relation to other figures in the 
picture, all this, being a part of the prescribed object, would 
have had its prototype in the perfected mental image. As 
to the picture itself, if one had been made, it is merely an 
arrangement of pigments, nor can my eye learn anything 
about the angels from its sensations of reflected light: only 
I can have some idea of them, and that not in or by sensa¬ 
tion, but by their image, the same that was in the artist’s 
mind, and now taken back from the picture into my mind, 
for “bodily hearing and sight are engineered in the mind” 
(93) and “If my soul knows an angel she knows him by 
some means and in an image, an image imageless, not in an 
image such as they are here” (112). “Before my eye can 
see the painting on the wall it must be filtered through the 



MEISTER ECKHART’S VIEW OF ART 79 

air and in a still more tenuous form borne into my phan¬ 
tasy to be assimilated by my understanding” (111). 

Thus the artists model is always a mental image. The 
eye (marhsa-caksu) is nothing but a mirror: it may be said 
to see an object, such as a rose or stone or work of art, by 
virtue of some substantial kinship between them (104, 105, 
116, 152, 212, 240); “it is a case of like to like” (258). But 
if I say I see, it is only as it were, for “If it were intellect, I 
should see nothing” (105). “I see” only indirectly and by 
means of the eye as instrument, which instrument serves me 
because of a corresponding soul power linked to it, but far 
removed from matter (104); “subtract the mind, and the 
eye is open to no purpose” (288). My eye sees flat, but I 
see in relief; this relief is not necessarily a fact, but an idea 
of relation, which would have validity for me even supposing 
a total unreality of the external world. The inwardly known 
aspect ( antarjneya-riipa ), relatively immaterial, is the means 
by which I recognize what the eye sees, the only means by 
which I can pretend to understand what the eye reports, 
or with which I can speak of it to others. “ I do not see the 
hand, the stone, itself; I see the image of the stone, but I 
do not see this image in a second image or by any other 
means; I see it without means and without image. This 
image is itself the means: image without image like motion 
without motion although causing motion and size which 
has no size though the principle of size” (114). “The soul 
knows only in effigy” (243), not anything in itself, but 
more nearly as things are in God, ideally. I can never see 



80 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 
what my eye sees (sensibly) nor hear what my ear hears as 
vibration, I can only know rationally, by means of an image. 
“We can see the sunlight where it falls upon a tree or any 
other object, but we fail to apprehend the sun itself” (72) 
except as an idea. There is nothing exotic in this point 
of view; it is an axiom of modem science, which knows 
matter only in mathematical formulae, not in sensation. 

From all this it will be understood how from the Scholastic 
point of view a naturalistic or visual art, made only accord¬ 
ing to the eyes (this means, made to yield sensations as 
nearly as possible identical with those evoked by the model 
itself), and only for the eyes, must be regarded not merely 
as irreligious or idolatrous (idolatry is the love of creatures 
as they are in themselves), but also irrational and indetermi¬ 
nate. For the only thing which can be truly likened to the 
natural species is its reflection in the mirror of the eye, 
which is a sensation, not an understanding (the eye, hav¬ 
ing no understanding of its own, remains incomprehensible 
to intellect, a case of unlike to unlike). Again, the material 
image, the work of art, is commensurable with natural 
species only as to substance (both are essence, but essence 
cannot be measured): fundamentally incommensurable, in 
difference of material and life. Nature and art are alike 
{sadrfya) only in idea, otherwise irreconcilable. 

Recognizability, whether of natural species or material 
image, has nothing to do with any fancied likeness between 
these two, but is by means of the incorporeal form or image 
(nama) which is in the object, in the artist, in the work of 



MEISTER ECKHART’S VIEW OF ART 8 1 

art, and finally in the spectator, having been brought into 
visibility as far as possible in the material image ( r&pa ) in 
another nature, but still not made of that nature. Just in 
so far as anything could be made like natural species, that 
is self-moving which is inconceivable, or as Muhammadans 
would say forbidden, it would not be art but Nature, or 
necromancy at the best; or could the artist, which is con¬ 
ceivable potentially, though it may be temporally impossi¬ 
ble, attain perfection, becoming one with God, he would 
share in God’s creation from time everlasting, natural 
species would be his image in time as they are God’s, noth¬ 
ing would remain but the ever-present world-picture as God 
sees it. There would be no occasion for works of art, the 
end of art having been accomplished. In the meantime, 
where we find ourselves, an art made as far as possible ac¬ 
cording to the eye’s intrinsic faculty (253) and merely for 
the eye can be thought of only as a superposition of illusion 
upon illusion, a willing substitution of the snake for the 
rope, Eckhart’s own metaphor of double illusion being that 
of a straight shaft seen in the water as if bent (II, 77). 

In what sense art is necessarily conventional or rational 
he expresses thus: “What the eye sees has to be conveyed 
to it (the soul) by means, in images” (in, cf. 82). The 
skilful painter can “do Conrad to the life” (128), but what 
is doing Conrad to the life? Not making something that 
could be mistaken for the man himself, but making “the 
very image of him ” (ibid.), that is, as far as lies in the paint¬ 
er’s power, his “express image” (253) as it exists reflected 



82 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 

in the mirror of God’s essence, “the exemplary element in 
him (Conrad) which is on a par with God,” “a matter of 
likeness of form” (157). “Will enjoys things as they are in 
themselves, whereas intellect enjoys them as they are in it. 
. . . The eye in itself is a better thing than the eye as 
painted on the wall. Nevertheless, I still maintain that in¬ 
tellect is higher than the will” (213). He means in that it 
sees things somewhat as God sees them, sub specie aeterni- 
tatis (47), at their source, impartially; for “Creatures all 
come into my mind and are rational in me. I alone prepare 
all creatures to return to God”; “I alone take all creatures 
out of their sense into my mind and make them one in me” 
(143); “Intellect (1 manas , prajnd) raises all things up into 
God” (86). “Creatures never rest till they have gotten 
into human nature; therein do they attain to their original 
form, God namely” (380), human nature having “nothing 
to do with time” (206). “The most trivial thing perceived 
in God, a flower for example as espied in God (that is, in 
its and His true and single aspect, svarupa), would be a 
thing more perfect than the universe” (206) as it is in itself. 
It is as artist, seeing rationally or formally, that man sees 
things in their perfection and eternal youth, as far as his 
idiosyncrasy permits, “as far as the recipient will allow” 
(212). 

Naturalism in art has nothing to do with subject-matter in 
itself. An image of God may be made repulsive in its sug¬ 
gestion of actuality; a painting of a flower may be like 
nothing on earth. Eckhart holds no brief for any one for- 



MEISTER ECKHART’S VIEW OF ART 83 

mula, as for hieratic art or art profane with respect to theme. 
“He who seeks God under settled forms lays hold of the 
form while missing the God concealed in it” (49), is really 
an idolater. Sacred subjects are no more valid images of 
God than are the forms of natural species: “Eight heavens 
are spoken of and nine choirs of angels . . . you must know 
that expressions of that sort, which conjure up pictures in 
the mind, merely serve as allurements to God” (328), and 
as “Augustine says, ‘All scripture is vain*” (69). Again 
and again Eckhart insists that all content (not all intent) is 
God, one should learn to see him anywhere and everywhere: 
“to whom God is dearer in one thing than another, that 
man is a barbarian, still in the wilds, a child” (419), “find¬ 
ing God in one way rather than another ... is not the 
best,” “we should be able to enjoy him in any guise and in 
any thing” (482, 483), “what e’er it be” (419), “I am come 
like the fragrance of a flower” (284), “any flea as it is in 
God is nobler than the highest of the angels in himself” 
(240). This is the perfected impartiality of art; the angelic 
(adhidaivata) point of view, wherein all things are loved 
alike, “in itself everything is lovable, and nothing hateful,” 
Dante, Convivio , IV, 1, 25. 

So much for the artist’s mode of understanding, intellec¬ 
tual or rational. The work of art, man’s “creature,” is by 
the same token, even more than by its substantial distinc¬ 
tion from the object, conventional; to be interpreted and 
understood not as a direct reflection of the world as the 
world is in itself, but as a symbol or group of symbols hav- 



84 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 
ing an ascertained rational significance and an even deeper 
content, not functioning only as means to recognition but 
as means to communication and to vision. Thus with refer¬ 
ence to the interpretation of scripture and myths in gen¬ 
eral, and the same holds good for any other kind of art, 
“the material things in them, they say, must be translated 
to a higher plane. ... All the stories taken from them 
have another, esoteric meaning. Our understanding of them 
is as totally unlike the thing as it is in itself and as it is in 
God as though it did not exist” (257), but there is more in 
the work of art than can be understood, “none so wise but 
when he tries to fathom them will find they are beyond his 
depth and discover more therein ” {ibid). Art is simultane¬ 
ously denotation, connotation, and suggestion; statement, 
implication, and content; literal, allegorical, and anagogic. 

If art is thus by nature rational, why is not every work 
of art immediately intelligible? Just because the artist sees 
only just so much and what of the express image his powers 
permit; man’s images are a specific selection from an inex¬ 
haustible sum of possibilities. “Words derive their power 
from the original Word” (99), such selections being differ¬ 
ently made in different ages, by different races, and to a 
less marked degree by different individuals. As constantly 
asserted by Scholastic philosophy, the thing known is in 
the knower according to the mode of the knower: therefore 
“All souls have not the same aptitude . . . vision ... is 
not enjoyed the same by all” (301). “Art amounts, in 
temporal things, to singling out the best” (461), 62 that is, 



MEISTER ECKHART’S VIEW OF ART 85 

the most essential from any given point of view, which may 
be yours or mine, or may have been that of the first or 
thirteenth century, or that of any other given environment 
and heritage. That is why in art, even when the same sub¬ 
ject has been dealt with, or the same natural species “imi¬ 
tated,” we find an unending variety of treatment, con¬ 
stituting what we call styles. Differences of spoken language 
are the most obvious example of this; but he greatly deludes 
himself who thinks that any of the arts is a universal 
language, or that the language of any art is by nature ono- 
matopoetic. The variety of styles, and what has often been 
called progress and decadence in art but is really the his¬ 
torical procession of the styles, have nothing to do with 
man’s varying and always very limited ability to mimic 
nature. Styles are idioms of knowledge and communica¬ 
tion. They suffice for communication in so far and for 
so long as they are understood by convention ( sarhkeia ); 
elsewhere or at another time, they must be learnt before 
the art can be deciphered, which requires “industry and 
patience,” “just as one learns to write” (10, 9), or as 
“calling requires the uses of discrimination” (II, 93). 

We have divined that style or idiom represents a particu¬ 
lar modality or partiality of vision; the lineaments {laksa- 
nas) of which modality are determined by the relation 
between the artist individually and his theme (cf. Sukrani - 
tisara, IV, 4, 159-160); and as this relation is unique and 
reflects the powers and limitations of the individual, the 
mode of pattern in his mind may be called his own. The 



86 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 
accidents of being by which an individuality is recognized 
may indeed be called a man’s own, man as he is in himself; 
“my looks are not my nature, they are accidents of nature” 
(94), “accidents are various” (253). In this sense every 
artist leaves in all his work something of himself, and “Sup¬ 
posing God had called in any angel to help in the making 
of the soul he must have put into the soul something of the 
angel, for never did an artist paint, carve an image or write 
the letters of the alphabet, but he must have copied the 
pattern in his mind” (II, 203), and not the pattern in the 
universal mind, individual intellect having “in no wise the 
perfection nor plenitude for it” (17). Style is not conven¬ 
tion as principle, though all styles and all art are conven¬ 
tional, or as Eckhart says “rational”: style is a particular 
body of convention as distinguished from other bodies. If 
then style is the man, as has been said with some measure 
of truth, this does not mean that style is in itself a virtue, 
or an occasion for pride. Touch and style are the accidents 
of art. As Chuang Tzii expresses it, the limits of things are 
their own limits in so far as they are things. In so far as art 
transcends style, we call it universal: Bach surpasses Beet¬ 
hoven. God has no style, his “idiosyncrasy is being” 
(206). 

In intellect, which, as Eckhart so often insists, is the sum¬ 
mit, head, or highest power of the soul, whereby it touches 
the consciousness of God, man and God are like, but in 
abiding intention ( kratu) and in working {karma) most 
unlike, for here enter in the elements of will and time. 



MEISTER ECKHART’S VIEW OF ART 87 

Man’s ideas live in his mind only for so long, even though 
it be all his life (238); but creatures have been alive in God 
for ever, and ever shall be, though in themselves alive only 
by birth at a given time (352, cf. PancavirhSa Brdhmay,a } 
VI, 9,18). And in the case of causes of becoming other than 
the first cause, such causes “can with safety quit the things 
they cause when these have gotten being of their own. When 
the house is in being its builder can depart and for the reason 
that it is not the builder alone that makes the house: the 
materials thereof he draws from Nature. But God provides 
creature with the whole of what it is, so he is bound to stay 
with it or it will promptly drop out of existence” (427), “as 
a picture is painted upon canvas, and it fades” (237); 
similarly “Augustine observes that the architect who 
builds a house therein displays his art; though it may 
fall to ruin the art within his soul neither ages nor de¬ 
cays” (129). 

With respect to his “staying with creatures to keep them 
in being” (427, cf. 261) Eckhart thinks of God as a mother 
(the creations both of God and man are in the nature of 
children begotten and conceived), and it will not be over¬ 
looked that in so far as man takes care of things that have 
been made and preserves them from decay, he is working 
temporally in the analogy of God’s maternal maintenance. 
All man’s working in creation, preservation, and destruction 
is a temporal analogy of God’s simultaneous expression, 
maintenance, and resolution, sfsti , sthiti, laya. But “yonder 
no work is done at all” (238); “if the carpenter were per- 



88 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 
feet at his work he would not need materials; he would no 
sooner think a house than, lo, it would be made,” as is the 
case “with works in God; he thinks them and behold they 
are” (238); or again, “a carpenter building a house will 
first erect it in his mind and, were the house enough sub¬ 
ject to his will, then, materials apart, the only difference 
between them would be that of begetter and suddenly be¬ 
gotten . . . (as) it is in God . . . one God, there being no 
distinction of outpouring ( abhisfsti ) and outpoured (abhi- 
sarga)” (72). 63 

Alike in man and God, the “art” (intuition-expression) 
is and remains wholly in the artist; but “think not it 
is with God as with a human carpenter, who works or 
works not as he chooses, who can do or leave undone at his 
good pleasure. It is not thus with God; but finding thee 
ready, he is obliged to act, to overflow into thee; just as the 
sun must needs burst forth when the air is bright, and is 
unable to contain itself” (23). The “being ready” is other¬ 
wise expressed as matter’s being “insatiable for form” (18); 
so God “must do, willy-nilly ” (162), according to his nature, 
without a why. In man this becomes what has been called 
the gratuitousness of art: “man ought not to work for any 
why, not for God nor for his glory nor for anything at all 
that is outride him, but only for that which is his being, 
his very life within him” (163, cf. Bjhadaranyaka Upattisad, 
IV, s, 6); “have no ulterior purpose in thy work” (149), 
“work as though no one existed, no one lived, no one had 
ever come upon the earth” (308); “All happiness to those 



MEISTER ECKHART'S VIEW OF ART 89 

who have listened to this sermon. Had there been no one 
here I must have preached it to the poor-box” (143). “God 
and God’s will are one, for if I am a man and if I mean to 
do real work entirely without or free from will ... I should 
do my works in such a way that they entered not into my 
will. ... I should do them simply at the will of God” 
(308), “Above all lay no claim to anything. Let go thyself, 
and let God act for thee” (308). The artist has some “ink¬ 
ling” (47) of God’s manner of working “willingly but not 
by will, naturally and not by nature” (225) when he has 
acquired mastery and the habit ( habitus , Slistatva) of his 
work and does not hesitate but “can go ahead without a 
qualm, not wondering, am I right or am I doing wrong? If 
the painter had to plan out every brush mark before he 
made his first he would not paint at all” (141). Still, 
“Heaven does more than the carpenter who builds a 
house” (11,209). 

“Inspired by his art” (II, 211), “as much like his ideal 
as he can” (252), and “working for work’s sake,” sound to 
modem ears like art for art’s sake. But “art” and “his 
ideal” have not here their modem sentimental connota¬ 
tions, they represent nothing but the artist’s understanding 
of his theme, the work to be done ( kftdrtha ); working for 
“the real intention of the work’s first cause” (252) is not 
working for the sake of the workmanship, as the modem 
doctrine implies; “working for work’s sake” means in 
freedom, without ulterior motive, easily (cf. Bhagavad Gita, 
passim). To work according to the “dearest conception of 



90 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 
his art” (97), that is with all the skill and care he can com¬ 
mand, is merely honest, and ‘‘By honest I mean doing one’s 
best at the moment” (II, 95), having “good grounds for 
thinking no one else could do the work as well” (II, 90), 
and standing for “perfection in temporal works” (II, 92), 
the “careful” being “those who let nothing hinder them in 
their work” (II, 90). 

The first cause of the work and the good of the work to 
be done are one and the same, “ the ultimate end ( prayojana) 
of the work is ever the real intention (arlha) of the work’s 
first cause” (252), “when the carpenter builds a house his 
first intention is a roof (that is, the idea of shelter), and that 
is (actually) the finish of the house” (196). No man being 
a rational being works for no end: “The builder hewing 
wood and stone because he wants to build a house 'gainst 
summer’s heat and winter’s chill is thinking first and 
last about the house, excepting for the house he would 
never hew a single stone or do a hand’s turn of the work” 

(II, 72). 

The good of the work is its immediate physical good, not 
its edifying purpose. Actual work requires a worldly wis¬ 
dom, industry, and cunning, not to be confused with vision, 
but matter of fact, and with due regard to the material (II, 
93): for instance, “A celebrant (of the mass) over-much 
intent on recollection is liable to make mistakes. The best 
way is to try and concentrate the mind before and after¬ 
wards, but when actually saying it to do so quite straight¬ 
forwardly” (II, 175). A work may be undertaken ad 



MEISTER ECKHART’S VIEW OF ART 91 

majorem gloriam Dei or to any more immediate end, but 
the end can only be enjoyed in the prospect or in completion 
of the work. In action the workman is nothing but a tool, 
and should use himself accordingly, concerned with the 
work and not with its results; he can and should be totally 
absorbed in the work, like the “ heathen philosopher who 
studied mathematics ... in pursuance of his art . . . too 
much absorbed to see or hear his enemy” (12). Working 
thus is not for the sake of or to display skill, but to serve 
and praise the first cause of the work, that is, the subject 
imaged in the artist's mind “without idea of ownership” 
(35). It is immaterial what the work may be, but it is es¬ 
sential that the artist should be wholly given to it, “it is 
all the same to him what he is loving” (II, 66), it is working 
for the love of God in any case, because the perfection of 
the work is “to prepare all creatures to return to God” 
(143) as “in their natural mode (they) are exemplified in 
divine essence” (253), and this will hold good even if the 
painter paints his own portrait, God's image in himself. 64 
He is no true workman but a vainglorious showman who 
would astonish by his skill; “any proper man ought to be 
ashamed for good people to know of this in him” (II, 51); 
having his art which he is expected to practice, he should 
take his artfulness and cunning for granted. If by reason 
of his skill he gets a good report in the world, that is to be 
taken as the “gift of God ” (143)? not as his due who should 
work “as though no one existed” (308). Similarly as to 
wages, the workman is indeed worthy of his hire, but if 



92 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 

he is “careful” for anything but the good of the work to 

be done, he is no workman but a “thrall and hireling” 

(149) • 

Working in the world “at some useful occupation” (22) 
is by no means any hindrance to the perfecting of the man, 
and though “praying is a better act than spinning” (II, 8) 
a man should relinquish “rapture” to engage in any activity 
that may be required of him by way of service (II, 14, etc.), 
and even that “without which I cannot get into God, is 
work, vocation or calling in time, which interferes not one 
whit with eternal salvation” (II, 93). “To be in the right 
state one of two things has to happen: either he must find 
God and learn to have him in his works, or else things and 
works must be abandoned altogether. But no one in this 
life can be without activities, human ones, and not a few 
at that, so man has to learn to find his God in everything” 
(II, 11; cf. Bhagavad Gita III, 33); even for the religious 
“active life bridges the gaps in the life of contemplation,” 
and, “Those who lead the contemplative life and do no out¬ 
ward works, are most mistaken and all on the wrong tack”; 
“No person can in this life reach the point at which he is 
excused from outward works” (425 cf. Bhagavad Gitd, III, 
16 and 25); therefore “‘work in all things’ and ‘fulfil thy 
destiny’” (165). Still more in the case of one “who knows 
nothing of the truth from within, if he woo it without (he) 
shall find it too within ” (440). In any case “ God’s purpose 
in the union (yoga ) of contemplation is fruitfulness in 
works” (16). 



MEISTER ECKHART’S VIEW OF ART 93 

The workman is naturally happy in his work, seeing the 
image in his mind becoming, in the analogy of God, whose 
vision of all creatures is the vision of himself in himself; 
this pleasure taken in the sight of matter in the act of re¬ 
ceiving form is, in the workman still at work, a form of aes¬ 
thetic experience. But in what this experience essentially 
consists, it will be more convenient to consider from the 
point of view of the spectator who sees the work completed 
in intention or in actuality, not in the process of becoming 
but as it were apart from duration, for “No activity is so 
perfect but it hinders recollection. The hearing of the mass 
permits of recollection more than the saying of it does” 
(ii, 174). 

So what is aesthetic experience, or, as Eckhart calls it, 
recollection, contemplation, illumination ( avabhasa ), the 
culminating point of vision, rapture, rest? In so far as it 
is accessible to man as a rumor (95) or foretaste (479), 
passing like a flash of lightning (255), it is the vision of the 
world-picture as God sees it, loving all creatures alike, not 
as of use, but as the image of himself in himself (360), each 
in its divine nature and in unity, as a conscious eye situated 
in a mirror (253, 384) might see all things in all their dimen¬ 
sions apart from time and space as the single object of its 
vision, not turning from one thing to another (12) but seeing 
without light, in a timeless image-bearing light, where 
“over all sensible things hangs the motionless haze of unity.” 
That is a seeing of things in their perfection, ever verdant, 
unaged and unaging (36): “To have all that has being and 



94 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 
is lustily to be desired and brings delight; to have it all 
at once and whole in the undivided soul and that in God, 
revealed in its perfection, in its flower, where it first burgeons 
forth in the ground of its existence . . . that is happiness” 
(82), a “peculiar wonder” (47), “neither in intellect nor 
will, ... as happiness and not as intellection” (200), not 
dialectically but as if one had the knowledge and the power 
to gather up all time in one eternal now (81), as God enjoys 
himself (142, 240). 

Again, it is compared to the seeing of a play, a play (lila) 
played eternally before all creatures, where player and audi¬ 
ence, sport and players, are the same, their nature proceed¬ 
ing in itself, in clear conception and delight (147, 148), or to 
an operation in which God and I are one, works wrought 
there being all living. This sharing of God’s vision of himself 
in his “work,” which in so far as we can have an “inkling” 
of it is what we mean by aesthetic experience, is likewise 
what we mean by Beauty as distinct from loveliness or 
liking, which have their drawbacks in their opposites. “ The 
supremely pure splendor of the impartible essence illumines 
all things at once.” According to Dionysius, Beauty is 
order, symmetry with supreme lucidity. In this sense “ the 
Godhead is the beauty of the three Persons” (366), “beauty 
with which the sun is nothing to compare” (399), “each 
Person radiant to the rest as to itself. This illumination is 
the perfection of beauty.” “All things tend toward their 
ultimate perfection ”(72). 

So much of pure aesthetic experience as is possible to 



MEISTER ECKHART’S VIEW OF ART 95 

anyone is his guarantee of ultimate perfection and of per¬ 
fect happiness. It is as artist-scholar that man prepares 
all things to return to God, in so far as he sees them intel¬ 
lectually ( paroksdt ) and not merely sensibly (pratyaksena ). 
This is from Eckhart’s point of view the “meaning” of art. 
“That is as far as I can understand it” (282). 




Chapter III 

REACTIONS TO ART IN INDIA 




Chapter III 

REACTIONS TO ART IN INDIA 

When music is too archaic or inaccessible to give us aesthetic data } more 
may be learned from the disposition of those who were pleased by it than 
from its recorded technical data . 

D. F. Tovey, in Encyclopaedia Britannica, s.v. Music . 

T HE purpose of the following notes is to bring together, 
mainly from the general, non-technical literature, a 
few passages in which the reaction of the public to works of 
art is reported, partly as a contribution to the vocabulary 
of criticism, but more with a view to showing how the art 
was actually regarded by those for whom it was made. The 
artist himself ( tilpin , karaka , kavi) is commonly described 
as “knowing his craft” ( tilpa-vitarada , etc.) and as “skil¬ 
ful” ( kutala ); nothing like a special sensibility or natural 
talent is mentioned, but we find that the moral virtues of 
ordinary men are expected in the artist, and for the rest 
he has his art which he is expected to practice. His atti¬ 
tude with respect to his commission is naturally expressed 
in Jataka, II, 254, as follows, “We musicians, O king, live 
by the practice of our art (sippam nissdya ); for remunera¬ 
tion, I will play,” but as numerous texts and inscriptions 
prove, the workman when moved by piety was ready to 
work gratuitously as an act of merit. In the latter case, 
artist and patron are one, the work being commanded by 



IOO TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 
the artist’s own devotional feeling. As to fame, and the 
purpose of the work, an illuminating couplet attributed to 
one of the successors of the Astacchap of Hindi literature 
tells us: 

Ours is true poetry, if so be it please great poets yet to come, 
Otherwise, its pretext is that it is a reminder of Ridha and 
Kj^na. 

The workman being a rational being, it is taken for granted 
that every work has a theme or subject ( vastu , kdrya, kftdr- 
tha, anukdrya, dlikhitavya, etc.) and a corresponding utility 
or meaning ( artha , arthatd, prayajana). 

The general word for understanding or apprehension is 
graham, “grasping,” for example, Visnudharmottara , III, 
41, 12; cf. the senses as “apprehenders” ( grahdft ) and ideas 
aS “over-apprehenders,” Bfhaddranyaka Upanisad, III, 2, 
and Pali gaham used with sip pa to denote “learning a 
craft.” An audience is praised as “appreciative of the 
merits (guna-grdhini) ” of a play, PriyadarSikd, I, 3. Ac¬ 
cording to the Abhinaya Darpam, “The audience shines like 
a wishing-tree, when the Vedas are its branches, Sdstras its 
flowers, and learned men the bees. . . . The Seven Limbs 
of the audience are men of learning, poets, elders, singers, 
buffoons, and those versed in history and mythology,” and 
the chief of the audience, the patron, must be a con¬ 
noisseur.* 6 Applause is ukkutthi in Jdlaka, II, 253 and 
367, more often the still current exclamation, sddhu, 
“well-done.” 



REACTIONS TO ART IN INDIA IOI 

In the Dutavdkya of Bhasa, 7, the picture (pata) of the 
Gambling Scene is called “ admirable ” {dar Saniya, cf. mod¬ 
em colloquial “easy to look at”); and, after a detailed 
description of the subject-matter represented, Duryodhana 
concludes, ibid., 13, “ 0 what richness of color (varriddhyata )! 
What a presentation of the moods ( bhdvopapannatd) ! What 
a skilful laying on of colors ( yuktalekhatd) \ How explicit 
the painting (suvyaktam alikhito) ! I am pleased.” 

As to these comments, varrjiddhya is stated to be what 
most interests “others” (itare jandh),™ that is, people in 
general, not masters ( dcdrya ) or connoisseurs (vicaksana, 
Visnudharmottara , III, 41, 11; see JAOS., LII, n, con¬ 
firmed by the TrisastiSaldkdpurusacaritra passage cited be¬ 
low) ; for the expression of bhdva and rasa in painting, see 
JAOS., LII, 15, n. s, and Basava Raja, Siva-Tattva-Ratnd - 
kara , VI, 2, 19; the exact significance of yuktalekhatd is 
less certain. Cf. the word as cited below. 

DarSaniya, “worth seeing,” occurs regularly in connec¬ 
tion with pictures, sculpture, and architecture. Cf. Ciila- 
varhsa, C, 251, manoharam dassaniyarh toranam ; ibid., 258, 
an image of the Buddha is dassaniyarh . . . cdrudassanam; 
and ibid., 262, pictures are dassaniyydpare earn cittakamme; 
analogous is the use of savar^iya (Sravaniya), “worth hear¬ 
ing,” and savaniyatararh, “very well worth hearing,” ibid., 
LXXXIX, 33, while the two terms are used together, ibid., 
35, with reference to songs and dances, which are dassana- 
ssavarja-ppiyam, “pleasing to see and hear.” Cf. Srotram 
sukhayati, “pleases the ear,” and dfstipritirh vidhatte, 



102 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 
“ pleases the eye,” with reference to natural beauties, 
PriyadarHkd , II, 4. A word very commonly applied to 
pictures is manorama , “pleasing the heart.” In the Divyd- 
vaddna, 361-362, Mara, at Upagupta’s request, manifests 
himself in the form of the Buddha, with all his specific linea¬ 
ments (i laksanddhyam) . Upagupta bows down to this rep¬ 
resentation, that is, as he explains, to him whose image it is. 
The aspect (rupa) assumed by Mara, as an actor assumes 
a part, is nayanakdntim dkftim, “ a representation delighting 
the eyes,” and nayanaSantikaram nardndm, “giving peace 
to the eye of man”; Upagupta is abhipramudita , pramudi- 
tamana, “overjoyed,” pramodyam utpannam , “delight 
overflows,” and he exclaims A ho, rupa-tobhd, kirn bahund, 
“In short, what beauty of aspect!” 

From a monastic point of view, usually but not exclu¬ 
sively Buddhist or Jaina, the arts are rejected altogether as 
merely a source of pleasant sensations; cf. vdsand in Maha- 
yana psychology as “nostalgia,” but in art an indispensable 
innate sensibility. As a single example of the monastic at¬ 
titude TrisastiSaldkdpurusacaritra , I, 1, 361, may be cited, 
where it is asserted that music ( sarhgita ) in no way serves 
for welfare (kuSala), but only infatuates by giving a mo¬ 
mentary pleasure {muhuria-sukha) . The fact is that what 
Hindus mean by the “pleasure of the eyes” may or may not 
be a disinterested pleasure, and this has always to be de¬ 
termined from the context; cf. the Scholastic id quod visum 
placet. 

In the Sakuntald (VI, 13-14, in Kale’s edition (K), ibid., 



REACTIONS TO ART IN INDIA I03 

VI, 15-16, in Pischel’s (P), the variants in both versions 
being here utilized), the King, looking at his own memory 
picture of Sakuntalfi, exclaims with reference to the sub¬ 
ject rather than the workmanship, “O, the beauty of the 
painting” (aho rupam alekhyasya ), and later makes a dis¬ 
tinction between what is “right” ( sddhu ) in the work, and 
what is “off ” or “out” (any at ha, not to be confused with 
ardhalikhita, “unfinished,” which occurs below); still, 
“something of Sakuntal&’s charm (lavanya) is caught 
( kimcid-anvita ) in the line ( rekha ).” The Vidusaka finds 
the line (rekha) full of tender sentiment ( bhava-madhura , 
P), and the “imitation of mood in the tender passages is 
noteworthy” ( madhur&vasthdna-darSaniyo bhavanupraveSah, 
K), alternatively “it seems to be the very rendering of 
reality” (sattvanupraveia-Sa' khaya, P); he exclaims, “In 
short” (kirn bahutid, P), “she makes me want to speak 
to her” (alapana-kautuhalam me janayati)\ he pretends 
that his eye actually stumbles (skhalati) over the hills and 
vales (nimn6nnata-pradeSesu). n Misrakesi remarks on 
the King’s skill with the “brush and in outline” (vartikd- 
rekhd-nipwiatd) , alternatively “in color and line” (voryui- 
rekhd). 

In the Pratijndyaugandhardyana of Bh&sa, III, 1, the 
court jester speaks of the skilful laying on of color (yukta - 
lekhatd) in a fresco, shown by the fact that when he rubs 
the painting it only grows the brighter (ujjvalaiara). 

In the Mdlavikdgnimitra, II, 2, a lack of correspondence 
between the beauty of the model and that represented in 



104 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 
the painting 6 * is spoken of as kdnti-visamvdda, and ascribed 
to imperfect concentration ( Sithila-samddhi ) on the part of 
the painter. In the PriyadarSikd, III, and Vikramdrvdtt, II 
(introductory stanza), imperfections of acting are similarly 
ascribed to the actor’s absent-mindedness ( Sunya-hrdayata). 

In the Pratimdndtaka of Bhasa, III, 5, Bharata, seeing 
the statues of his parents, whom he does not recognize, 
exclaims, “Ah, what sweetness in the workmanship of these 
stones {aho kriyd-mddhuryam pasananam) ! Ah, what feel¬ 
ing ( bhdva ) is embodied in these images {aho bhavagaiir 
dkrtinatn)\” He wonders what the figures represent, but 
“Anyhow, there is a great delight ( praharsa ) in my heart,” 
which delight is perhaps thought of not so much as aesthetic 
as due to a subconscious recognition of the statues as those 
of his parents. But pratnudarh praydti, said of the Self with 
respect to the pleasure felt at the spectacle of its own mani¬ 
festation as the world picture (jagaccitra, Sankarctcarya, 
Svatmanirupana, 95), implies a delight unquestionably dis¬ 
interested. 

In Bhavabhuti’s Uttara-Rdma-Caritra, I, 39, the sight of 
the paintings leaves a latent or persisting emotional impres¬ 
sion {bhdvand), not a mere memory, but a lingering senti¬ 
ment, in Sita’s mind; this may be compared with “I still 
seem to hear the music as I walk,” cited below, and Sa- 
kuntald, V, 8 f. (Pischel), where Duh§anta, overhearing the 
singing of his Queen Hamsavatf, soliloquizes, “What a 
passion-laden (rdga-parivdhiipi) song! . .. Why then am I 
so filled with yearning by hearing such a song, as though I 



REACTIONS TO ART IN INDIA I05 

were divided from a loved one? Howbeit, if after seeing 
lovely things, or hearing sweet words, a man is saddened 
as well as charmed, it may be because unconsciously he re¬ 
members loves heart-felt ere birth, survivals of a former 
disposition ( purvam-bhdva-sthirdtyi )”; the stage direction 
follows, “He registers (rupayati) perplexity occasioned by 
a thing forgotten.” 

In the case of portraits, the excellence of the likeness is 
naturally commented upon, for example, Svapnavdsavadattd , 
VI, 13, and Mrcchakatika, IV, 1, the words sadfH and susa- 
dfH (not sddfSya) being employed. In the Svapnavdsavadattd , 
loc. cit. 7 the Queen, looking at the picture of Vasavadatta, is 
“delighted and perplexed ” ( prahfstodvignam iva) 7 but this is 
because she thinks she recognizes the person represented; 
it is not an aesthetic effect. In the Malatimddhava y I, 33 
(9-10), the purpose of the portrait ( alekhya-prayojana) is 
said to be consolation in longing (utkantka-vinodana ). 

The different ways in which a painting may be regarded 
by spectators of various classes are stated in some detail 
in Hemacandra’s TrisastiSaldkdpurusacaritra , I, 1, 648 ff., 
where a painting on canvas ( pata ) is spread out ( vistdrya) 
with a practical purpose, viz. in the hope that some spectator 
will recognize it as a representation of the events of his own 
former life. Those versed in scripture ( dgamavit) praise the 
representation of the Nandlsvara heavens, because “it ac¬ 
cords with the purport of the scripture” (dgamarthavisam- 
vddi) ; the very pious (mahaSraddha) nod their heads and 
describe to one another the figures ( bitnbdni) of the saints 



106 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 
( Jina ); those expert in the practice of the arts ( kald-kauSala- 
Sdlin ) praise the purity of the outlines (rekha-Suddhi), as 
they examine them again and again with sideling glances; 
others talk of the colors, white, black, yellow, blue, and red, 
that make the painting look like a brilliant sunset. 

An appreciation of architectural beauty is frequently ex¬ 
pressed in general terms; there is, for instance, a moving 
description of the ruined city of Pojonnaruvk, of which the 
buildings “through decay and old age are like greybeards 
and unable to stand erect, becoming more and more bowed 
down from day to day,” Culavarhsa, LXXXVIII. In the 
same text, LXXVIII, 39, we find the phrase “creating out 
of brick and stone an elixir for the eyes” ( rasdyana ); cf. 
netr&mfla, of a picture, Avaddna Kalpalatd, p. vii. 

In the Guttila Jataka (No. 243) there is a competition 
between two viyd players, who show their art (sipparh 
dassesanti ) which the people see (passanti). At first, when 
both play equally well, the public is delighted (tuflho = 
tustha).** The competition then becomes one not so much 
in musical talent as in the performance of a stunt, the victor 
playing on a reduced number of strings, and finally only on 
the body of his instrument. The public cries out against 
the defeated competitor, saying, “You do not know the 
measure (pamdya — pramdya) of your capacity.” 

In the Vikramacaritra, III, 2 (HOS., 26,18 and 27, 15),” 
where there is a dancing competition between two apsarases, 
Vikram&ditya, who knows all the arts (sakala-kaldbkijna) 
and is especially a connoisseur (vicaksaya) of the science of 



REACTIONS TO ART IN INDIA I07 

the ensemble of musical arts (sarhgUa-vidyd) , acts as judge. 71 
He decides in favor of UrvasI because she fulfils the re¬ 
quirements of the Ndtya Sdstra, both as to her person and 
as to her ability; the latter is shown specifically in register¬ 
ing ( sucand ) the full meaning by means of language con¬ 
veyed in bodily movements, in the accurate rhythms of the 
feet, in the sensitive gestures ( abkinaya ) of the hands and 
their agreement with the permitted variations ( tadvi - 
kalpanuvrttau), in the constant displacement of one mood 
by another in the field of representation, and in her skilful 
blending of the passions (rdgabandha) . In short, “I pre¬ 
ferred UrvasI because I found her a danseuse of such a sort 
as is described in the Ndtya Sdstra .” 

In the PriyadarSikd, III, where there is a play within a 
play, the former raises the spectator’s interest to the highest 
degree, adhikataram kautuhalam vardhayati, which is mod¬ 
estly explained by the author as due to the merit of the 
subject. In the same act of the same work, the verb avahf , 
“to transport,” “enrapture,” is used with reference to the 
effects of a performance on the harp (vind) ; the King, 
too, evokes admiration or astonishment ( yismaya ) by his 
performance. 

In the Mfcchakatika , III, 2-5, Carudatta has attended a 
musical performance ( gdndharva ); he is reminiscent, and 
exclaims, “Ah, ah, well done ( sddhu )! Master Rebhila’s song 
was excellent (, susthu ).” Then, more technically, 72 speak¬ 
ing both as expert in the art and as rasika , “The sound was 
informed by the moods ( bhdva ), now passionate (rakta ), 



108 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 
now sweet (madhura) , now calm (same) , languishing ( [lalita) 
and ravishing too; it seemed like the lovely voice of my 
own hidden love. The low progressions (svara-samkrama) 
seated in the vibrating strings, the crescendo (tdra) of the 
scales (i varna) and modes {murcchana) , and their diminuendo 
(mfdu ) in the pauses — when passion is restrained, desire 
repeats its languishing {lalita) — and though the reality 
was ended with the song itself, I seem to hear it as I walk.” 
There is a similarly technical appreciation of a vind per¬ 
formance in Priyadartika , III, io. 

To sum up, it will be seen that everyone is thought of as 
making use of the work of art in his own way, the work of 
visual art, no less than a word, being a kama-dhenu , yielding 
to the spectator just what he seeks from it or is capable of 
understanding. Everyone is interested in the subject-matter 
or application of the work, as a matter of course. More 
specifically, we find that learned men, pundits, are con¬ 
cerned about the correctness of the iconography; the pious 
are interested in the representation of the holy themes as 
such; connoisseurs {vicaksaqa in the cited passages,elsewhere 
rasika, pramdtf, sahfdaya) are moved by the expression of 
bhdva and rasa , and like to express their appreciation in the 
technical terminology of rhetoric; masters of the art, fel¬ 
low artists, regard chiefly the drawing, and technical skill 
in general; ordinary laymen like the bright colors, or mar¬ 
vel at the artist's dexterity. 73 Those who are in love are 
chiefly interested in portraiture reflecting all the charms 
(k&nti, l&varyya) of the original. Rarely do we meet with 



REACTIONS TO ART IN INDIA IO 9 

any mention of originality or novelty. 74 We ought then, 
to appreciate Indian art from every point of view, to be 
equipped with learning, piety, sensibility, knowledge of 
technique, and simplicity: combining the qualities of the 
pandita, the bhakta, the rasika, the dcdrya, and the alpa- 
buddhi-jana. 




Chapter IV 

AESTHETIC OF THE SUKRANlTISARA 




Chapter IV 

AESTHETIC OF THE SUKRANITISARA 

T HE Sukranitisdra of Sukricarya is a mediaeval Indian 
treatise on statecraft and an encyclopaedic work on 
social organization considered from every point of view. In 
the passages dealing with the making of images are em¬ 
bodied some very definite statements of aesthetic princi¬ 
ples; and as these passages have been misunderstood and 
mistranslated, or at least inadequately translated, it seems 
desirable to present a fresh and complete version. The 
verses translated begin with Ch. IV, Sec. 4, verse 70, the 
numbering being that of Vidy£sagara’s text, with those of 
Sarkar’s translation in parentheses: 76 

“One should make use of (yojayet) the visual-formulae 
(1 dhydna) proper to the angels ( devatd) whose images are to 
be made (< aratnbhya ). It is for the successful accomplish¬ 
ment of this practice (yoga) of visual-formulation (dhydna) 
that the lineaments (laksarta) of images are prescribed. 
The human-imager (pratimdkdra) should be expert in this 
visual-contemplation, since thus, and in no other way, and 
verily not by direct observation (pratyaksa), (can the end 
be achieved).” 70, 71 (147-150). 

“Images made of sand (saikata), dough (paista), or 
painted (lekhya) , or of stucco (lepya), or terracotta (wfn- 



114 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 
maya), or wood ( vfksa ), or stone (pasaqa), or metal ( dhdtu ) 
are of relative durability in the same order.” 72 (151). 

“ Images made as directed, with all their members com¬ 
plete, are attractive and merit-yielding; those otherwise 
are destructive of life and wealth, and ever increase sorrow; 
one should make images of angels (deva), for these are 
productive of good, and heavenward-leading ( svargya ), but 
those of men or other (creatures) lead not to heaven nor 
are they auspicious. That image is said to be lovely (ratnya) 
which is of neither more nor less than the prescribed pro¬ 
portions ( mdna ). Images of the angels, even with linea¬ 
ments (laksaqa) imperfectly depicted, work weal to men, 
but never those of mortals, even though their lineaments 
(be accurately represented).” 73-76 (152-158). 

“ Images of the angels are of three sorts, pure ( sattvika , 
that is, as they are in themselves naturally), active {rdjasika, 
expansive, manifesting in ‘work’), and dark (j tdmasika , 
effectively as if limited by the inertia of matter and engaged 
in actual work). Those of Visnu and other angels should 
be employed and worshipped (yogya pujya) according to 
the necessities of the case. A sattvika image is one in a yoga- 
posture, self-supported, with hands exhibiting bounty and 
encouragement ( vardbhaya ), and worshipped by the premier 
angels and such like beings (devendrddi). A rdjasika image 
is one supported by a vehicle (' vdhana ), adorned with a 
variety of ornaments, with hands holding weapons and im¬ 
plements, and exhibiting bounty and encouragement. A 
tdmasika image is one of dread (ugra) aspect, engaged in 



AESTHETIC OF THE SUKRANTTISARA 115 
slaying demons by means of weapons and implements, and 
as if eager for combat.” 77-80 (159-166). 

“It is prescribed that the veins of the hands and feet 
should not be shown, nor should the ankle-bones be seen. 
Those parts of images are said to be really lovely (su$o- 
bhana) which are neither more nor less in proportion ( mdna) 
than the limbs of such images as have been made by ex¬ 
perts, and every member that is neither too thick nor too 
thin will be altogether pleasing (sarvamanorama) . Although 
hardly one in a hundred thousand is produced that is alto¬ 
gether pleasing in every member, still that which accords 
with canonical prescription ( Sastramdna ) is alone truly 
lovely (ramya), none other, to be sure! There are some to 
whom that which captivates their heart ( tat lagnath hfd ) is 
lovely; but for those who know, that which falls short 
of canonical proportion ( Sdstramdna) is not beautiful.” 
101-106 (209-215). 

“One should contrive for every member such grace 
(pdtava) as is appropriate.” 121 (256). 

“In the case of painted images, or those made of stucco, 
sand, terracotta, or dough, an omission of lineaments 
(laksaqa) will do no harm; one should beware of defects of 
proportion (mdna) only in the case of images of stone or 
metal.” 152, 153 (306, 309). 

“The lineaments (i laksaya) of images are known (smfia) 
from the natures (bhdva) of the worshipped and the wor¬ 
shipper (sevyasevakd). By the power of the intension 
(tapas) of the officiant (arcaka) whose heart is ever set 



Il6 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 
upon the Lord, the faults of an image immediately pass 
away.” 159, 160 (320-322). 

“There is no rule ( niyama ) for the thickness of the limbs 
of a child, they should be devised as may seem lovely.” 
185 ( 375 )- 

“The artist ( Silpi ) should ever conceive the beauty ( vapu) 
of the images (of the angels) as youthful itaruna ), rarely 
as childlike ( bala-sadfSa ), never as aged ( vrddha-sadrSd ).” 
201 (403, 404). 

“The King should not set up or keep in a temple a dis- 
proportioned or broken image; worn out images of the 
angels, and ruined temples, are to be carefully restored.” 
203 (407, 408). 

The following, from Section 7, refers only to figures of 
horses: “When a figure (rupa) of a horse is to be made, the 
model ( bimba ) should always be in view (viksya), and if one 
cannot be looked at ( adfstva ) the figure should not be made. 
The artist {Silpi) having first (agre) made his visual con¬ 
templation ( dhy&lva ) on the horse and attentive to its 
forms ( avayavdnatah ) should do his work, embodying all 
the proportions ( mdna ) of horses meet for splendor and 
divorced from ill-omen.” 73, 74 (145-147). It will be seen 
here, that in spite of the apparent demand for likeness to 
the horse in view, there is insistence on visualization and on 
adherence to ideal proportions. 

The portions of the text omitted above provide the de¬ 
tailed measurements proper to the various types of beings. 
It will be quite evident that Sukr&c&rya is propounding a 



AESTHETIC OF THE $UKRANITISARA 117 
purely scholastic and hieratic conception of what is lovely 
or beautiful, and nowhere admits the validity of individual 
taste. Just as Professor Masson-Oursel has pointed out , 76 
“ Indian art is aiming at something quite other than the 
copying of Nature. What we assume, quite superficially, 
to be the inspiration of an art for art’s sake, really proceeds 
from a religious scholasticism that implies a traditional 
classification of types established by convention. If here 
or there a relief or painting exhibits some feature drawn 
from life, it is only accidentally that the artist has, in spite 
of himself, transcribed something from actual Nature: and 
this is certainly, from the indigenous point of view, the least 
meritorious part of his work.” Those who wish to study 
the “development” of Indian art must emancipate them¬ 
selves entirely from the innate European tendency to use a 
supposedly greater or less degree of the observation of Na¬ 
ture as a measuring rod by which to trace stylistic sequences 
or recognize aesthetic merit. Indian art can only be studied 
as showing at different times a greater or less degree of con¬ 
sciousness, a greater or less energy; the criteria are degrees 
of vitality, unity, grace, and the like, never of illusion. In 
India, an art of primarily representative interest, that of 
portraiture, was practiced mainly by amateurs, and even 
so required a mental visualization only less formal than that 
of the hieratic work; in itself the portraiture had usually 
an erotic purpose or content, and in any case a merely 
personal and temporary value, not an ultimate spiritual 
significance . 77 




Chapter V 
PAROKSA 




Chapter V 


PAROK$A 

Which things also we speak , not in the words which man's wisdom 
teacheth, but which the Holy Ghost teacheth. 

Corinthians, I, 2, 13. 

T HE terms paroksa and pratyaksa are used in contrasted 
senses. The purely grammatical distinction of paroksa 
and pratyaksa need not detain us: a stanza referring to an 
Angel (1 deva ), if voiced in the third person, is said to be 
paroksa , “indirect,’' or if addressed immediately in the sec¬ 
ond person, pratyaksa , “direct,” Nirukta , VII, 1. What 
concerns us more is the distinction of the paroksa as proper 
to the Angels (ad'hidaivala), who are accordingly described 
as paroksa-priya , “fond of” the symbolic, from the praty¬ 
aksa as proper to man (mdnusa) as individual (adhydtma), 
who is evidently pratyaksa-priy a, “fond of” the obvious, 
though this is not explicitly stated. 

In Jaim. Up. Br., I, 20, Ait. Br., III, 33 and VIII, 30, 
S. Br VI, 1,1, 2 and 11 and XIV, 1 ,1,13, Bf. Up., IV, 2, 2, 
and Ait. Up., Ill, 14, examples are given as follows (the 
paroksa designations being followed in each case by the 
Pratyaksa designations printed in italics): antariksa, an¬ 
tary aksa; manusa, mddusa ; nyagrodha, nyagroha) Indra, 
indha, idandra ; Agni, agri ; asva, a$ru. To these may be 
added from passages cited below: Ahi Budhnya, Agni 



122 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 
Gdrhapatya ; Soma, nyagrodha ; and visvajit, vrata. The 
pratyaksa term stands for the paroksa referent; for example, 
“the lotus means the Waters, this Earth is a leaf thereof,” 
S. Br., VII, 4, i, 8, where lotus and leaf have physical, 
Waters (= Possibility) and Earth (= Ground) metaphysi¬ 
cal, referents. Evidently it is not necessary that the paroksa 
and pratyaksa terms should be sensibly distinct; the puskara 
which is spoken of as the birthplace of Agni or Vasistha, and 
which represents the Ground of all existence, is not the 
puskara of the botanist, though the words are the same. 
The actual lotus-leaf laid down upon the Fire Altar has no 
necessary meaning of its own, qua lotus-leaf; it is merely a 
datum with respect to which we can have only estimative or 
affective knowledge; it is the referent of puskara-parna , but 
impersonates the referent of the paroksa term pfthivi. The 
distinction is one of reference, which the student, guided by 
the context, or if necessary by the Commentator, is expected 
to understand; 78 and if he takes the reference literally, we 
say that his understanding is superficial. For the paroksa 
and pratyaksa references are not coincident: the former are 
names of assumed or otherwise known but not perceptible 
referents (cf. Sankar&carya on Ait . Up., Ill, 14); and the 
latter, names of sensibly experienced referents which are, 
or are regarded as, merely symbols of or suitable substi¬ 
tutes for the aforesaid unseen referents. It follows that 
the reference of the paroksa term is much wider than that of 
the pratyaksa term; viz., in that of the many conceivable 
signs of or substitutes for the operating but unseen referent 



PAROKSA 123 

the pratyaksa term specifies only one. It follows at the same 
time that the paroksa vocabulary will be much less numerous 
than the pratyaksa ; the Angels have fewer ideas, and use 
less means than men. 

The passage, Ait. Up., Ill, 14, already cited, may be 
quoted in full. In the previous verse it is said that the Self, 
individually conscious in the plurality of beings, beheld the 
Brahman immediately, that is, recognized its manifestation 
in the world (cf. Kena Up., 24-28), and “I have seen It 
(idarh dadarta ), he said.” Then follows, “Therefore his 
name is Idam-dra (‘It-seeing’), Idandra indeed is his name. 
Him that is Idandra, the Angels speak of (lit. ‘regard/ 
dcaksate) metaphysically ( paroksena) as Indra, for the meta¬ 
physical, indeed, is proper to the Angels.” Sankaracarya 
comments as follows: “Because the Supreme Self saw 
‘This/ the immanent Brahman, face to face directly ( sdk- 
sad aparoksdt ), immediately ( aparoksena ) as ‘This/ there¬ 
fore He (the Supreme Self) is called Idandra; God ( I&vara) 
is in the world (Joke) explicitly ( prasiddha ) by name Idandra. 
‘Him that is Idandra, Indra metaphysically’: that is, the 
knowers of Brahman speak of Him thus, with metaphysical- 
reference (paroksabhidhanena), for practical purposes (sam- 
vyavahdrikartha) in fear of taking (grahand) (in vain) His 
name who is worthy of all worship. ‘The metaphysical is 
proper to the Angels’: that is, they are wonted ( priya ) to 
metaphysical (paroksa) names, and it is thereby indeed that 
they are ‘Angels/ 79 Much more so in the case of God 
( Itoara ), who is the Angel of all Angels.” 



124 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 

Adhidaivata and adhydtma are contrasted in the same 
way as paroksa and pratyaksa: for example, Kena Up., 29- 
30, with reference to the vision of Brahman. Here “with 
respect to the Angels” (< adhidaivata ) the vision is compared 
to a flash of lightning; but “with respect to the incarnate 
Self” {adhydtma) the vision is a thing which, when the In¬ 
tellect ( manas ) is directed to and ponders intently on 
Brahman, becomes a concept ( samkalpa). The Kausitaki 
Upanisad, IV, 2, gives a fuller list of correspondences, be¬ 
ginning with “In the Supernal Sun the Great Principle” 
(that is, universally, adhidaivata ) and “In the Mirror the 
Counter-image” (that is, individually, adhydtma). 

The problem presents itself both in connection with the 
literature, and in connection with the ritual and plastic art, 
the performance of the ritual, or the iconographic represen¬ 
tation, securing “indirectly” (paroksena, paroksdt) practical 
effects by setting in motion the corresponding forces. Thus 
the officiant “indirectly by means of Ahi Budhnya” (that 
is, by incantation of the verse Rg Veda, VI, 50, 14) though 
“directly by means of Agni Garhapatya” (the household 
fire actually kindled) endows the sacrificer with fiery-energy 
{tejas), Ait. Br., Ill, 36; the Ksatriya who eats the shoots 
and fruits of the nyagrodha “indirectly” {paroksena) ob¬ 
tains the drinking of Soma — “he does not partake of Soma 
directly (pratyaksam ),” ibid., VII, 31. Again, in the Pah- 
cavimSa Brdhmana, XXII, 9, 4 and 3, “The ViSvajit (-rite) 
is, indirectly, the (Maha-)vrata; he by means thereof directly 
obtains food,” for “What presents itself directly to men 



PAROKSA 125 

presents itself indirectly (or metaphysically) to the Angels, 
and what presents itself indirectly to men presents itself 
directly to the Angels.” In this sense all the Vedic rituals are 
Mysterium und Mimus, Mysteries and Imitations: what an¬ 
thropologists describe empirically ( pratyaksena) as “sym¬ 
pathetic magic” is a metaphysical operation, an enchant¬ 
ment and a conjuration, not a religious, devotional service 
or “prayer.” 

In iconography, where again the terms are not of indi¬ 
vidual choice, but Sdstramana, smfta, etc., we have to do with 
a visual language of the same kind as the verbal. The lotus 
of iconography is not the lotus of sensible experience; it is 
paroksa, “not recognizable” to those who do not “under¬ 
stand art”; most of the accidents proper to the lotus of the 
botanist are omitted from the symbol, which is, moreover, of 
indefinite dimensions (again, “out of proportion” for those 
who do not “understand art,” the same who say with regard 
to Italian primitives, “That was before they knew anything 
about anatomy”), amatra , like the prthivi that is symbolized, 
not like the specifically dimensioned objects (mdtrah) seen 
by the eye’s intrinsic faculty (caksusd), Maitri Up ., VI, 6. 80 
In other words, the reference of the lotus of iconography is 
“angelic,” adhidaivata , that of the “lotus” of the botanist, 
“sensible,” pratyaksa . 

In saying “iconography,” we do not mean to distinguish 
iconography from art: 81 all art is “imagination,” that is, a 
presentation of images which correspond to references origi¬ 
nally in the mind of the artist, and not (even with the 



126 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 
“best,” or rather “worst” intentions) to any “natural,” 
pratyaksa model. For example, Ait . Br., VI, 27, “It is in 
imitation ( anukfti ) of the angelic (deva) works of art (tilpa) 
that any work of art (Hlpa) is arrived at (adhigam) here; 82 
for example, a day elephant, a brazen object, a garment, a 
golden object, and a mule-chariot are ‘works of art’; a 
(true) work of art is accomplished (adhigam) in him who 
comprehends this”; 83 and Sukranitisara , IV, 4, 70-71, 
where “the imager must be expert in vision ( dhydna ), and in 
no other way, certainly not in the presence of a model 
(pratyaksena) can the work be accomplished.” In distin¬ 
guishing thus a language of symbols from a language of signs 
I have in mind the distinctions of symbol and sign as drawn 
by Jung. 84 A symbolic expression is one that is held to be 
the best possible formula by which allusion may be made to 
a relatively unknown “thing,” which referent, however, is 
nevertheless recognized or postulated as “existing.” The 
use of any symbol, such as the figure “ vajra ” or the word 
“Brahman,” implies a conviction, and generally a conven¬ 
tional agreement resting on authority, that the relatively 
unknown, or it may be unknowable, referent cannot be any 
more dearly represented. A sign, on the other hand, is an 
analogous or abbreviated expression for a definitely known 
thing; every man knows or can be informed, by indication 
of an object, as to what the sign “means.” Thus wings are 
symbols when they “mean” angelic independence of local 
motion, but “signs” when they designate an aviator; the 
cross is a symbol when used (metaphysically) to represent 



PAROKSA 


127 

the structure of the Universe with respect to hierarchy and 
extension, but a sign when used (practically) to warn the 
motorist of a near-by crossroad. The use of the words wings 
or cross to designate relatively unknown, “occult,” or ab¬ 
stract referents is symbolic, paroksena ; their use to desig¬ 
nate known, visible or potentially visible, concrete referents 
is semiotic, pratyaksena . Or if we use blue pigment to 
“represent” blue eyes or blue sky, it is as a sign; but if we 
make the Virgin’s robe blue, then “blue” becomes the sym¬ 
bol of an idea, and the reference is no longer to the thing 
“sky” but to certain abstract qualities such as “infinity” 
which we have imputed to the “thing” we see overhead. In 
this particular case the sign and symbol are the same, viz. 
blue pigment, and, just as in the case of the sign or symbol 
puskara , lotus, the “meaning” must be understood in con¬ 
nection with the context. An understanding of this kind is 
all-important; for if we take the sign for a symbol, we shall 
be sentimentalizing our notion of blue eyes, and if we take 
the symbol for a sign, we are reducing “thought” to “recog¬ 
nition.” In the latter case, our tacit assumption can be 
only that the Virgin wears the sky just as we wear our 
bodies, which is tantamount to speaking of the Virgin as a 
“personification of the sky,” and to an identification of 
Mariolatry with the “worship of Nature.” 85 The reader 
may suppose that such a crude mistake is impossible, as it 
may be impossible for him who as an inheritor of the Chris¬ 
tian tradition knows better; nevertheless, it is this very 
mistake that he makes when, from a point of view sup- 



12 % TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 
posedly “scientific” but in fact merely “profane,” he 
speaks of Ionian philosophy as “naturalistic,” or of the 
religion of the Vedas as a “worship of natural forces.” 

We are now, in the first place, led to understand how it is 
that in certain cases ideas, especially metaphysical or theo¬ 
logical ideas (perhaps there are no others, “scientific” ideas 
being strictly speaking theological in kind) can be better 
communicated by visual than by verbal symbols (visual 
symbols will include, of course, the gestures or tones em¬ 
ployed in ritual, as well as the surfaces of factibilia ). The 
words “lotus,” “ puskar a,” for example, are the same how¬ 
ever employed, paroksat or pratyaksena , but the lotus of 
iconography can scarcely be confused with the lotus of the 
botanist; an art in which such a confusion becomes possible 
is no longer art, no longer iconography, but semiotic. It is 
true that in the decadence of art what should be symbols are 
replaced by what are merely signs, a formal by an informal 
referendum; and in such times of decadence it is even 
believed that the impulses of the “Primitives” were also 
descriptive; it is believed, as aforesaid, that the Vedic en¬ 
chantments (mantra) are descriptions of natural phenomena. 
It is just in this connection, in the second place, that we are 
led to understand how and why it is that “realistic” art 
must be regarded as “decadent,” that is to say, falling short 
of what is proper to the dignity of man as man, to whom not 
merely sensible, but also intelligible worlds are accessible. 
Granted that by restoring to the lotus all, or all we can, of 
those accidents that are proper to the lotus of the botanist, 



PAROKSA 129 

we produce an object apt to deceive an animal: what we 
have thus done is to make it clear that our reference is, and 
is only, to a natural species and not to an idea; our “ work of 
art” is no longer creative, “imitating” an exemplary form, 86 
but merely a succedaneum, more or less apt to titillate the 
senses. If bees have been deceived by painted flowers, why 
was not honey also provided? The more an image is “true 
to nature,” the more it lies. It lies in both senses, paroksa 
and pratyaksa: the portrait of the artist’s wife posing as the 
Mother of God is untrue in its implication of likeness (the 
being of the Mother of God is not in the human mode), and 
on the other hand, the portrait of the artist’s wife as such is 
untrue with respect to human affectibility, in that it cannot 
take the place of living flesh (“The eye in itself is a better 
thing than the eye as painted on the wall,” Eckhart). 
Hence the Sukranitisara , IV, 4, 76, speaks of portraiture as 
“unheavenly,” asvargya, and the doctors of Islam disparage 
representative art because it simulates the work of the 
Supreme Artist, and is yet devoid of life. 

Innumerable examples of the correspondence between 
what is known to the Angels in one way, to man in another 
could, of course, be accumulated from the Vedic literature. 
That these correspondences are thought of as real and neces¬ 
sary implies the notion of the analogical relationship of 
macrocosm and microcosm, such as is most explicitly as¬ 
serted in Ait . Br., VIII, 2, where each of the two worlds 
“this” and “that” is anurupam , “in the image of” the 
other. And if in fact the word paroksa is not found in the 



130 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 
Rg Veda, the notion of an angelic language distinct from 
that of man is there very clearly expressed in other ways. 
It will suffice to dte I, 164, 10, 37 and 45: “There on the 
pitch of heaven (dyu) they chant (mantf) a Wisdom (vdc) 
that is all-knowing (vihia-vid) but not-all-animating (avi$- 
vaminva, perhaps ‘all-disposing’)”; that is, in accord with 
Sayaiia, the Angels communicate with each other in a hidden 
(gupta) language, which embraces all things but does not 
extend to, or is not understood by, all (na sarva-vydpakam). 
Again, “When the First-born of the Law (sc. Agni, or the 
Sun) approached me, then got I a share of that Wisdom.” 
What is meant by “a” share appears in the verse 45, 
“Wisdom (vdc) has been measured out in four degrees 
(pada ), the comprehending Brahmana knows them: three 
kept close hid (guha nihitd) cause no motion (na ingayanti 
glossed by Sayana na cestante, ‘do not strive,’ or ‘make no 
gesture’); men speak only the fourth degree of Wisdom.” 
The mantra is quoted in Jaim. Up. Br., I, 7, where the three 
degrees are said to be the (three) Worlds; the notion being 
evidently the same as that of Maitri Up., VI, 6, where 
Prajdpati “utters” the Three Worlds which are his cosmic 
(lokavat) manifestation (tanu = rupa), these “utterances” 
(vydhftih, viz. Bhur, Bhuvas, Svar = Dante’s infima parta, 
ntezza, and cima del mondo) being the “names” or “forms” 
(ndma) of the Worlds. The triplicity of the utterance cor¬ 
responds to the triunity of the speaker, these Worlds being 
the spheres of Siva, Brahma, and Visnu, or Agni, Vayu (or 
Indra) and Aditya. 87 The three utterances are simple, but 



PAROKSA I3I 

exemplary; they confess all things, but do not specify them. 
These three parts of Wisdom (or “Speech”) are said to be 
“hidden” and to “make no gesture,” because, although the 
Worlds are moved by them, they do not move, but are only 
“thought” and immanent: “He thinks them, and behold 
they are” (Eckhart). 88 It is Man who by giving names to 
things ( nama-dheya , Rg Veda , X, 71, 1) contracts and iden¬ 
tifies 0 vi-dhd , vydkf , vi-kalp) things into variety in time and 
space, and so completes the creation in its kinds, as is also 
to be understood in Genesis, II, 19-20. By “Man,” not you 
and I individually, but Universal Man as Seer (fsi ) or 
Poetic Genius ( kavi ) is to be understood. No doctrine of 
solipsism is involved. 

That “men speak only the fourth degree of Wisdom” cor¬ 
responds to Rg Veda , X, 90, 4, “Only one fourth of Him is 
bom here,” that is to say, in time and space. Maitri Up., 
VII, 11 (8), and Mdniukya Up. make it clear that this one 
fourth corresponds to the three states (dvasatha) or levels 
( sthdna ) of being, known as “Waking,” “Dreaming,” and 
“Deep Sleep,” while the aforesaid three fourths correspond 
to that inscrutable ( anirukta , avdcya , etc.) level of “Non¬ 
duality” (of manifestation and non-manifestation, Apara- 
and Para-Brahman) which is spoken of as “Fourth” with 
respect to the three states of “Waking,” “Dreaming” and 
“Deep Sleep.” 

How then can we determine the paroksa level of reference 
more exactly? The “three quarters of Him,” the Fourth 
state, Parabrahman, Eckhart’s “Godhead,” is excluded 



132 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 
from the problem in that understanding there is neither 
thought nor spoken; on the other hand, the ■paroksa lan¬ 
guage is certainly not inaccessible to human beings, since the 
Vedic mantras and other traditional scriptures spoken in 
this language are accessible to any student. Our enquiry 
must start from the indications given that the level of 
reference is adhidaivata, “angelic,” as distinguished from 
adhydtma or mdnusa, “having reference to oneself,” and 
“human” or “mortal.” What is “angelic,” and what “hu¬ 
man”? In terms of Scholastic philosophy, “purely intel¬ 
ligible,” and “rational,” respectively, nor could any better 
answers be given in as brief a form. Angels, however, are of 
many hierarchies and orders: God himself is Mahadeva, the 
Supreme Angel, or Devadevanam-Dev&tideva, Angel of the 
Angels (cf. “Rex angelorum”), and on the other hand, even 
the powers of the individual soul may be spoken of as devah. 
In any case, “The kingdom of heaven is within you,” “All 
deities reside in the human breast” (Blake), where “within 
you” is antarbhdtasya khe, and “breast” is hfdaya ; cf. 
Jaim. Up. Br., I, 14, mayy etah sarvd devata . . . bhavanti, 
“all these Angels are in me.” “Human,” on the other hand, 
as is proved by the equivalence adhydtma = mdnusa , and 
by the correlation of “Human” understandingwith the three 
states of “Waking,” “Dreaming,” and “Deep Sleep” (and 
not merely with the first of these), has by no means merely a 
“corporeal” connotation but one involving all extensions 
and transpositions of individuality. The state of Deep Sleep, 
in particular, though super-individual, is still “human” in 



PAROKSA I33 

that a return from this condition to that of corporeality is 
always possible, by way of avatarava, “special incarnation,” 
or in the return from samadhi to worldly consciousness. It 
is perfectly clear therefore that the paroksa and pratyaksa 
understandings are not divided by an impassable wall (we 
have already seen that “this” and “that” are in the image 
of one another), but in their degrees represent a hierarchy of 
types of consciousness extending from animal to deity, and 
according to which one and the same individual may func¬ 
tion upon different occasions. We can only determine the 
“level of reference” absolutely if we confine our attention 
to the limiting conditions. 

If we ask in this sense at what level of awareness the 
metaphysical understanding {paroksa jndna) is all-sufficient, 
and specific reference superfluous, the answer can be found 
in Rg Veda I, 164, 10, divo prsthe , “on the back (that is, top) 
of heaven,” for it is there that the Angels communicate with 
one another in a purely paroksa fashion, such speaking being 
called a chanting (1 mantrayante , “they incant”), and there 
that the “utterance” of the “Angel of all the Angels”is 
primordially “heard.” That is in the Paradise of Brahma as 
described in Kausltaki Up I, 3 ff., beyond the Solar “gate¬ 
way of the worlds,” kept by Agni, the Angel of the Flaming 
Sword. That is in human {mdnusa) language called “Deep 
Sleep,” but angelically speaking, “Pure Intelligence {pra- 
jnd)”\ “it is a unified and mere understanding {ekibhutah 
prajndna-ghana ),” 89 Md^ukya Up., 5, and characterized 
by “the cessation of the consciousness of particulars,” Sar- 



134 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 
vopanisatsdra, 7. The Buddhist equivalents are Sukhavatl, 
Sambhogakaya; Christian, the Empyrean or Motionless 
Heaven, there is the “peace that passeth understanding,” 
“Come unto Me, and I will give you rest,” that rest being 
precisely our “Deep Sleep.” Needless to say that rest and 
sleep which can only be represented to the “Waking” level 
of reference as an idling and unconsciousness are on the 
level of “Deep Sleep” a preeminent and creative activity. 
“Dreaming” and “Deep Sleep” are not places, but con¬ 
ditions of being, “close kept in the empty chamber of the 
heart,” guhd nihilam, antarbhutasya khe, antarhfday&kaSe. 
There within us are the angelic “levels of purely intelligi¬ 
ble reference.” 

The text of Mdndukya Up., 5, continues, ananda-mayo hy 
ananda-bhuk, “in the modality of Ecstasy, enjoying Love.” 
Here ananda represents the transformation ( pardvrtti ) 90 of 
camal love, just as prajfid the transformation of carnal 
understanding; the Love is in Eckhart’s sense, “We desire a 
thing while as yet we do not possess it. When we have it, we 
love it, desire then falling away.” Heavenly being is thus at 
once intellectual and ecstatic. With this conception, and in 
connection with what has already been said with respect to 
levels of reference in art, may be dted the definition of 
aesthetic experience (1 rasdsvddana , ‘ ‘ tasting of the tincture ”) 
in theSdhitya Darpatta, III, 2-4,as dnanda-cin-maya,“ in the 
mode of ecstasy and intellect,” lokdttara-camatkdra-prdyak , 
“whereof the life is a supersensual flash,” vedydntara- 
sparSa-Sunyah, “without contact of aught else known,” 



PAROKSA 135 

brahtndsvada-sakddarah, “very twin of the tasting of 
Brahman,” and sacetasdm anubhavah pramdnam tatra keva- 
lam , “whereof the only evidence is that of intellectual men.” 

We have not thus far taken into consideration that 
praiyaksa (= aparoksa , saksdt) is of two very different kinds, 
with respect to which paroksa occupies a middle place. The 
praiyaksa so far considered is sathvyavahdrika , “worldly/’ 
or “practical,” proper to the human mode of being. But 
there is also a paramdrthika-pratyaksa (= aparoksa-saksdt) 
which transcends even angelic modes of understanding and 
communication. In one way or another, universally or 
specifically, “the Self ( atman ) knows everything. But where 
understanding (vijndna) is without duality ( advaita ), foot¬ 
loose of cause, effect, and operation, wordless, incomparable, 
and inexplicable . . . what is that? That does not belong 
to speech {tad avdcyam)” Maitri Up ., VI, 7. As it is said 
elsewhere, “This Brahman is silence.” Knowledge in this 
sense, neither of the senses nor the intellect, is spoken of as 
evident ( pratyaksa , saksdt) only analogically, with respect 
to its immediacy. It is aparoksa in both senses, as “self- 
evident,” and “non-symbolic.” That which is alien to 
all speech {<avdcya ), and transmundane ( avyavahdrika ), is 
alien equally to samvyavahdrika-pratyaksa and to paroksa 
understanding, both of which are in the domain of avidyd , 
where things are spoken of in likenesses. There, there 
are neither signs nor symbols, reference nor referent; 
“it” can only be realized immediately, beyond all levels 
of reference. 



136 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 

It may be observed that with respect to all three kinds of 
reference, human, angelic, and transcendental, the eye (aksa, 
caksu) is used as the symbol of perception by the senses (ac¬ 
tually or analogically), the ear with respect to intellectual 
reference, thought of as “ audition ” rather than as hearing, 
“by the ear” ( Srotrevid) in this sense being equivalent to 
paroksa , “not by the eye,” where “eye” stands for the ex¬ 
ternal senses. In the terminology under discussion, three 
different “eyes” are in question, viz. the carnal eye or eye’s 
intrinsic faculty {mamsa-caksu) , the angelic eye {divya- 
caksu ), and the eye of wisdom (jnana-caksu , etc.). “ Knowl¬ 
edge” accessible to the first two of these is a merely relative 
or false knowledge {avidya) ; only that of the last is a true 
knowledge ( vidyd ) in undifferentiated sameness. Angelic 
understanding, in that it embodies elements of multiplicity, 
remains “relative” ( avidya ), though at its highest level, 
being in unity, it is virtually absolute {vidyd). 

How then should the terms paroksa and pratyaksa be 
translated? Translators of the passages cited above have 
rendered paroksa as follows: 91 “mystic” or “esoteric” 
(Eggeling), “cryptic” (Hume and Caland), “mysterious” 
(Max Muller and Keith), “incognito” (S. Sitaram Sastri), 
“not recognizable,” “occult” (Oertel), “indirect” (Sarup). 
Le P. Dandoy renders “mediat,” in contrast to {para- 
marthika-) pratyaksa, “immediat.” 92 For the paired terms, 
paroksa and {vyavahdrika-) pratyaksa we have already em¬ 
ployed or now suggest: angelic, human; indirect, direct ; 
symbolic, semiotic; noumenal, phenomenal; universal, par- 



PAROKSA 


137 

ticular ; theoretical, practical ; abstract, concrete', intelligible, 
sensible ; metaphorical, literal. 

Amongst these terms, “indirect” and “direct” are ob¬ 
viously satisfactory with respect to the purely grammatical 
definitions, and in the other connection “direct” has 
the further advantage of corresponding to both senses of 
pratyaksa. “ Immediate ” is evidently satisfactory for para- 
mdrthika-pratyaksa , but “mediate” evidently unsatisfactory 
for paroksa , inasmuch as the Angels use less and not more 
means than men; sariivyamhdrika-pratyaksa is not “imme¬ 
diate” in the technical sense of this word, but merely “ sen¬ 
sibly perceptible” or rather “having a perceptible referent” 
For paroksa , terms implying incomprehensibility are cer¬ 
tainly to be avoided, 93 inasmuch as paroksa is precisely 
the “intelligible” as contrasted with the “sensible”; “ob¬ 
scure” and “mysterious” are thus excluded, but “secret” 
or “hidden” (Sayana’s “gupta”) are not incorrect. 94 “Mys¬ 
tic” is unfortunate as having a connotation distinct from, 
and “inferior” to, that of “metaphysical,” and also because 
“mystic” is often confused with “mysterious.” “Esoteric,” 
in relation to “exoteric,” represents a kind of distinction 
hardly proper to metaphysics. “Occult” is excellent, if it 
can be made evident that the meanings now associated with 
“occultism” are excluded. “Angelic” in relation to “hu¬ 
man” is correct in reference, but not a translation. We sug¬ 
gest as the most desirable renderings, for ( yyavahdrika -) 
pratyaksa , either “direct,” “evident,” “obvious,” or “semi¬ 
otic”; for paroksa } either “indirect,” “metaphysical,” 



138 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 
“occult,” “universal,” “abstract,” or “symbolic”; for para- 
mdrthika-pratyaksa (= aparoksa, sdksdt), “immediate.” 

One further point: in the often recurring expression 
paroksa-priyd iva devah, “priyd” must not be rendered “are 
fond of,” because the paroksa understanding is an angelic 
property, depending not on choice but on nature; it is no 
doubt true that the Angels “ love what is their own ” (that is, 
would not be other than they are), but we cannot imply 
that this “love” is an “affection” — it is their being, not an 
accident of being; 98 cf. Maitri Up., VI, 34, “What is one’s 
thought, that he becomes,” and similarly Dhamtnapada, I, 
1,2. The last consideration reminds us that in so far as man 
employs and understands angelic means of communication, 
the “language of birds,” he is of the angelic kind (“Intellect 
is the swiftest of birds,” mano javisthafn patayatsu antah, 
Rg Veda, VI, 9, 5); in so far as his communications and 
understanding are limited to “matters of fact,” he is not 
merely “a little” but a great deal “lower than the Angels.” 



Chapter VI 
ABHASA 




Chapter VI 


ABHASA 

yjBHASA, literally “shining back,” “reflection,” 
SA “semblance,” is predicated of the individual self 
(jiva) with respect to Brahman ( Vedanta Sutra , II, 3,50, §an- 
karAcarya explaining dbhdsa as “counter-image,” or “reflec¬ 
tion,” pratibimba). In theistic texts, such as those of north¬ 
ern Saivism, dbhdsa implies the world conceived as a the- 
ophany. The true Self “counter-sees itself” reflected in the 
possibilities of being (PancavirhSa Brahma^a, VII, 8, 1), as 
the world-picture (jagac-citra) painted by the Self on the 
canvas of the Self (SankarAcarya). 96 “He illumines ( bhasa- 
yati) these worlds. ... He gladdens ( ranjayati, 1 colors ’) 
these worlds” ( Maitri Upanisad , VI, 7); that is, “God 
made man in His own image”; bhdsa is Eckhart’s “image¬ 
bearing light”; cf. citra-bhdsa , Rg Veda , VI, 10, 3, sarupa 
jyoti , ibid., X, 55, 3, bha-rupa , Maitri Upanisad , VI, 4. 
Abkdsa , then, and citra, “art,” are fundamentally “image,” 
owing such reality as may be theirs to That whose image 
they reflect. 

In Silpa usage, as I have shown in JAOS. y XLVIII, 251, 
dbhdsa means “painting,” and not some mysterious and 
otherwise unknown material, as suggested by Acharya, 



I42 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 
Dictionary of Hindu Architecture, p. 63, and Mdnasdra, p. 71. 
I now offer in support of the same view the translation of a 
text not cited by Acharya, viz. the KdSyapaSilpa, Ch. L, 
Pratima-laksana, w. 1-7 (AnandcLsrSma Series, No. 95, 
p. 167): 

1. Hearken with singly-directed mind to the exposition 
of the characteristics of images, the immovable, the mov¬ 
able, and those both movable and immovable, which form 
a class of three. 97 

2. Those made of terracotta (mjnmayd) or laterite 
(Sdrkara ), of stucco ( sauyaja ), or painted (read dlekkyarh, 
cf. lekhyam in Sukranitisdra, IV, 4, 70), are the immova¬ 
ble; those made of stone, wood, mineral ( dhdtu , possibly 
jade), or gem, 

3. Are both immovable and movable; those of metal 
(loha) are the immovable. (Further) ardha-citra, citra, and 
citrdbhdsa form a class of three, 

4. (of which) ardha-citra (‘half-representation,’ high 
relief) is an image in which half the body is not seen (read 
ardhdngadarSaqam), citra (full round representation) is 
when the image is visible all round (sarudyavasamdfstam) , 98 

5. (And) dbhdsa (painting) is said with respect to an 
image on a canvas or wall (made to appear as if) in relief 
(1 nimnSnnate pate bhiltau). (Further), ardha-citra is done 
in plaster ( sudhd ), being half in the power of the other full- 
round representation (citra), 

6 . (And) dbhdsa (painting) is to be done with mineral 
colors (dhdtu), w and so also citrdrdha (= ardha-citra). But 



ABHASA 


H3 

paintings ( citrdbhdsa ) of the Angels are (also) of three kinds, 
best, middling, and good, 

7. (For example), a base ( pitha) of (plain) brick is good, 
a painted one ( dbhdsaka ) is better, and one of painted ter¬ 
racotta relief ( abhasardham mfnmayarh) is best. 

Another source not cited by Acharya is the Silparatna , 
XLVI, i-ii; here citra, ardha-citra , and citrdbhdsa are 
similarly distinguished, the first being sarvanga-dfSyakara - 
qarh, “having all its parts visible,” the second bhittyddau 
lagna-bhavendpy-ardham , “when half of its being is attached 
to a wall or the like surface,” and the third is referred to as 
a vilekhanam, “painting,” and further, as lekhyarh . . . 
ndnd-mrnanmtam , “painted with the use of many colors.” 
It is also stated that citra and citrdrdha may be done in 
clay or plaster, wood, stone, or metal. 

Abhdsa is used in Silpa texts also in another sense, 100 with 
reference to the unit of measurement proper to be employed 
in various kinds of buildings, the four different units speci¬ 
fied being jdti, the full cubit (hasta), chanda , three-quarter 
cubit, vikalpa (not defined), and abhdsa , half cubit. These 
units are employed respectively in building for Gods and 
Brahmans, Ksatriyas, Vaisyas, and Sudras. It is therefore 
clear that dbhdsa represents here the least in a series of 
modifications or transformations of a whole unit. This 
meaning is quite consistent with that of dbhdsa , “painting,” 
regarded as a modification of citra f “full-round representa¬ 
tion,” that of rasdbhdsa y “semblance of flavor” in Alam- 
kara terminology, vastrdbhdsa , “semblance of clothes” in 



144 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 
a painting (PancadaH, VI, 6), cid-abhdsa, “ reflection of 
absolute intelligence,” ibid., 7, and that of dbhdsa as 
“theophany.” 

Abhdsa-gata occurs in Vasubandhu, AbhidharmakoSa , V, 
34 (Poussin, p. 72), with the related meaning “in the field 
of objective experience,” dbhdsa being equivalent to visaya- 
rupatd, “sensible objectivity,” and abhdsa-gata to dftya, 
“empirically perceptible.” Dignaga uses ava-bhasate with 
reference to the seemingly objective character of an intel¬ 
lectual image (antarjneya-rupa ); ava-bhdsa can also be 
used for “illumination” as a spiritual experience. Bhdva- 
bhdsa is “semblance of existence.” The opposite of dbhdsa 
is nir-dbhdsa or an-dbhdsa , “imageless.” 101 

The word dbhdsa as “painting” involves some interest¬ 
ing considerations bearing on the psychological conception 
of the relation of painting to sculpture and relief, and on 
the idea of the third dimension in painting. Verse 5b, liter¬ 
ally translated above, implies, as does also the very word 
citrabhdsa , literally “ the shining forth or semblance of citra ,” 
that painting is thought of as a constricted mode of sculp¬ 
ture; relief, which may also be colored, logically occupying 
an intermediate place. The view that painting, although 
actually applied to plane surfaces, was nevertheless con¬ 
ventionally regarded as a kind of solid representation can 
be supported by additional literary evidences. For example, 
in Vinaya, IV, 61, a monk “raises” (vutthdpeti) a picture 
(i cittam ) on a cloth; and in Samyutta Nikdya , Comm., II, 5, 
a painter “raises up” (samutthdpeti) a shape (ruparri) on a 



abhAsa 


145 

wall surface by means of his brushes and colors. In the 
Mahaydna Sutrdlarhkara of Asanga, XIII, 17, we have 
citre . . . natdnnatam ndsti ca , dfSyate atha ca y “there is no 
actual relief in a painting, and yet we see it there,” and 
similarly in the Lahkdvatara Sutra , Nanjio’s ed., p. 91, a 
painted surface ( citrakfta-pradeSa ) is said to be seen in 
relief {nimndnnata) though actually flat (animnonnata). 
In more than one place we have the metaphor of the eyes 
stumbling ( skhalati ) over the elevations and depressions 
(:nimndnnata) represented in a picture, these hills and vales 
being either those of the luxuriant forms of women, or those 
of the landscape background (Sakuntald, VI, 13-14, and 
perhaps TrisastiSaldkapurusacaritra, I, 1, 360). And in 
verse 5a, translated above, nimnonnate in agreement with 
pate and bhittau is especially noteworthy, the canvas or wall 
being spoken of as “in relief,” though it is quite certain 
that a plane painted surface is all that is referred to. 

Natonnata and nimndnnata thus provide us with exact 
terms for the relievo, plastic modelling, or modelling in ab¬ 
stract light 102 which is actually seen in the* paintings of 
Ajanta, while for the process of “shading” by which the 
relief effect was created and sense of volume conveyed, we 
have the term vartana y and corresponding Pali vattana and 
ujjotana y “shading” and “adding high lights,” in a passage 
of the Atthasdlini , 103 Such relievo must not, of course, be 
confused with anything of the nature of “effect of light,” 
chiaroscuro, chdydtapa y l0i “shade and shine.” Relievo and 
chiaroscuro are indeed not merely independent, but actually 



I46 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 
contradictory notions, as was realized in Europe even as 
late as the time of Leonardo, who, though as a naturalist 
he had long studied the effects produced by direct sunlight 
and cast shadows, rightly maintained that these effects de¬ 
stroyed the representation of true relief or volume. 

The question of relief involves to some degree that of per¬ 
spective. Recent discussions of the problems of spatial 
representation in Far Eastern and Indian art 106 convey the 
impression that the authors are devoting much labor to 
what is really a rather artificial problem, posed for them 
by the unfamiliarity of the arts in question, this unfamiliar¬ 
ity persisting despite their good knowledge of the arts them¬ 
selves as they exist in countless extant and accessible 
examples. It is difficult to believe that problems of spatial 
representation were ever in Asia attacked as such, in the 
sense that they were wrestled with in Quattrocento Italy, 
that is to say from a scientific and visualistic rather than an 
aesthetic point of view. It is surely impossible to believe 
that there was ever a time when art was unintelligible to 
those for whom it was made, for in this case it must have 
been unintelligible also to those who made it — the “artist” 
not being, as at the present day he is, an isolated and pe¬ 
culiar person. To suppose that art was unintelligible, and 
that artists, in the goodness of their hearts, were trying to 
make it comprehensible either to themselves or others, 
is as if to suppose that speakers made sounds with a view 
to the subsequent formation of a valid means of communi¬ 
cation, or that carpenters began to build houses with a view 



ABHASA 


H 7 

to the appearance of architecture, whereas in fact speech is 
always adequate to the thing to be expressed, and there can 
no more be a progress in art than in metaphysics, but only a 
varying development of different aspects. 

All men, and even animals, are aware that objects stand 
apart from each other in space, up and down, sideways, and 
backwards; and if animals have not a word for “three 
dimensions,” they still know how to move in different 
directions, and have a sense of far and near. Space, then, 
has to be taken for granted as a primary datum of intelli¬ 
gence, and it is obvious that as soon as it became possible 
to make intelligible representations of objects, it must have 
been taken for granted by those who understood them that 
these were representations of objects existing in space. The 
question of perspective thus becomes a purely historical 
and descriptive problem; the definition of perspective re¬ 
duces itself to “means employed to indicate the existence 
or distribution of objects in space.” From the aesthetic 
point of view, no one variety of perspective can be regarded 
as superior to any other, and though we naturally prefer 
that kind of perspective which best corresponds to our own 
habits of vision and therefore requires least efiort of com¬ 
prehension, all that is really required is intelligibility. It is 
in fact perfectly possible to learn to read the perspective of 
an unfamiliar art as fluently as we read that of our own 
times, and in the same way without being actively conscious 
of the use of any particular mode of perspective. The 
question of optical plausibility therefore does not arise, 



I48 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 
since it always inheres in the kind of perspective to which we 
are or have become accustomed; if by optical plausibility 
we mean anything more than this, it can only be in connec¬ 
tion with a naively illusionistic view of art, as if we wished 
to paint a picture of the master that should be recognized 
by the dog. 

A discussion of the history of perspective in India, and 
of the related problem of continuous representation, would 
take us too far afield; but it may be remarked that while 
the necessities of iconography, so far as sdttmka represen¬ 
tations are involved, determine the predominance of fron- 
tality at all times, there is a representation of free move¬ 
ment from the earliest times, at Mohenjodaro, in Maurya 
terracottas, and even at Bharhut. 108 If we consider literary 
sources from the Gupta period onward we find a tabulated 
scheme of positions ( sthana ) ranging from the frontal (rju) 
through stages of profit perdu to strict profile ( bhitti-gata, 
“gone into the wall”) and mixed views, as well as a series 
of terms denoting various degrees of bending and torsion of 
the body. 107 The various positions are defined by reference 
to actually or ideally suspended threads, in terms of the 
distance between given points on the body and the threads 
themselves, and also in terms of ksaya-vrddhi, “loss and 
gain,” that is effectively foreshortening, the parts which in 
a given position are not seen being described as chdyd-gata, 
“gone into shadow.” All these are matters belonging to the 
history of technique rather than that of principle. 

As to the development, it may be added that while the 



ABHASA 


I49 

early sculpture in the round exhibits the strongest possible 
feeling for plastic volume, the early reliefs (ardha-citra) ap¬ 
proximate rather to painting ( citrdbhdsa) than to solid 
sculpture ( citra ), being, for example at Bharhut, closely 
compressed between the two planes of the wrought surface, 
though there are already exceptions to this at Bhaja. 108 
Then at Sand the relief is heightened, and the effect moves 
in the opposite direction from that of painting to that of 
round sculpture; this tendency continues throughout the 
Kusiina and later Andhra periods, and reaches its fullest 
development in the Gupta period, and subsequently per¬ 
sists, notwithstanding that the intrinsic quality of the vol¬ 
ume represented is no longer the same. Needless to say, 
early Chinese “ relief ” is still more like painting than is 
early Indian, being in fact only an engraving on stone, em¬ 
ploying perspective methods rather difficult to grasp, but in 
any case not in the nature of foreshortening as in sculp¬ 
ture; later, the raising of the relief in Chinese stone sculp¬ 
ture is a reflection of Indian methods. 

But the earliest Indian relief, notwithstanding its com¬ 
pression, has always the intention of solidity, and the earli¬ 
est Indian painting by its emphatic modelling demonstrates 
its close relation to the contemporary sculpture in the 
round, with its impressive volume and mass. A like volume 
found expression in the reliefs only gradually, which might 
perhaps be thought of as indicating a later origin of relief 
technique, and the historical precedence of full-round sculp¬ 
ture and painting. However this may be, in mediaeval 



150 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 
times the two tendencies crossed as it were in opposite direc¬ 
tions, the one maintaining in fact a high relief, the other 
representing a flattening of the mental image. When sculp¬ 
ture gradually lost its sense of plastic volume, painting was 
also actually flattened out; for example, the phrase nitnnon- 
nata-pala could hardly be applied to any painting of the 
Gujariltl or Rajput schools, where only vestiges of the old 
plastic shading survive. The flattening of the visual concept 
must be related to a corresponding psychological modifica¬ 
tion, and certainly not to any change in technical procedure 
undertaken for its own sake; for thought precedes stylistic 
expression in the work, and to seek for the causes of changes 
in the changes themselves would be a reductio ad absurdum 
of history. 109 

Psychological changes, manifested in attenuation of form, 
can only be thought of as representing a slackening of 
energy, a looser concentration, Sithila-samadhi. When one 
considers the impressive volumes of the earlier art, in which 
the form is as it were pressed outward from within by an 
indomitable will, one thinks also of those numerous pas¬ 
sages in literature where the hero is said to swell with anger, 
or of women’s bodies that expand in adolescence or in pas¬ 
sion, or of those pregnant trees whose pent-up flowering 
must be released by the touch of a lovely foot. With the 
passing of time all these energies were and must have been 
brought under greater control, softened and refined in ex¬ 
pression, the will no longer asserting, but now rather realiz¬ 
ing itself in an active quiescence. We feel this already in the 



ABHASA 


151 

relative serenity of Gupta sculpture and the sophisticated 
poesy of the classical drama; we could not imagine in the 
twelfth century such heroic forms as those of the figures of 
donors at Karli, or that of Friar Bala’s “Bodhisattva” at 
Sarnath. The impulsive and ruthless heroism of the past 
survives only in the tradition of Rajput chivalry. In gen¬ 
eral, the tendency is toward a more purely intellectual con¬ 
ception of experience. It is perhaps worth noting that a 
like development was also taking place in contemporary 
mediaeval Europe, as will be apparent if for example we 
compare St Thomas with Sankar^carya; in neither case 
can it be said that any outward disorder could interfere 
with the supremacy of intellect. 

It would be too easy to exaggerate the nature of the 
change, and very much mistaken to evaluate it only in terms 
of decadence. Stylistic sequences in thought and art are 
not in themselves pure loss or pure gain, decadence or prog¬ 
ress, but necessary and therefore acceptable developments 
of special aspects. When the will has been in some measure 
appeased, the intellect can the better exercise its power. 
If this change of direction at first involves a loss of animal 
perfection (immediacy of action), it is nevertheless a be¬ 
coming toward a higher spontaneity, in which the unity of 
the inner and outer life is to be restored, and there are even 
moments at the height of a development and in the lives 
of individuals when the balance seems to be restored and 
art transcends style. Apart from these questions of perfec¬ 
tion, it might well be argued that the flattening out of art, 



152 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 
implying as it does a more conventional symbolism than 
even that of modelling in abstract light, reflects a more 
intellectual mode of understanding, which does not require 
even a suggestion of modelling as an aid to reproduction; 
as in the case of the angels who have fewer ideas and use 
less means than men. 

In any case, one could not, if one would wish to, turn back 
the movement of time. To be other than we are would be 
for us the same as not to be; to wish that the art of any 
period had been other than it was is the same as to wish 
that it had never been. Every style is complete in itself, 
and to be justified accordingly, not to be judged by the 
standards of a former or any other age. 

With one voice which is wondrous 
He giveth utterance to thoughts innumerable, 

That are received by audiences of all sorts, 

Each understanding them in his own way. 110 



Chapter VII 

THE ORIGIN AND USE OF IMAGES 
IN INDIA 




Chapter VII 


THE ORIGIN AND USE OF IMAGES IN INDIA 

It may be said that images are to the Hindu worshipper what diagrams 
are to the geometrician. 

Rao, Elements of Hindu Iconography , II, 28. 

F EW of those who condemn idolatry, or make its sup¬ 
pression a purpose of missionary activity, have ever 
seriously envisaged the actual use of images, in historical 
or psychological perspective, or surmised a possible signifi¬ 
cance in the fact that the vast majority of men of all races, 
and in all ages, including the present, Protestants, Hebrews, 
and Musalmans being the chief exceptions, have made use 
of more or less anthropomorphic images as aids to devotion. 
For these reasons it may be not without value to offer an 
account of the use of images in India, as far as possible in 
terms of thought natural to those who actually make use 
of such images. This may at least conduce to a realization 
of the truth enunciated by an incarnate Indian deity, 
Kjrsna, that “the path men take from every side is Mine.” 

In explaining the use of images in India, where the 
method is regarded as edifying, it should not be inferred 
that Hindus or Buddhists are to be represented en masse as 
less superstitious than other peoples. We meet with all 
kinds of stories about images that speak, or bow, or weep; 



156 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 
images receive material offerings and services, which they 
are said to “enjoy”; we know that the real presence of the 
deity is invited in them for the purpose of receiving wor¬ 
ship; on the completion of an image, its eyes are “opened” 
by a special and elaborate ceremony. 111 Thus, it is clearly 
indicated that the image is to be regarded as if animated 
by the deity. 112 

Obviously, however, there is nothing peculiarly Indian 
here. Similar miracles have been reported of Christian 
images; even the Christian church, like an Indian temple, is 
a house dwelt in by God in a special sense, yet it is not re¬ 
garded as his prison, nor do its walls confine his omnipres¬ 
ence, whether in India or in Europe. 

Further, superstition, or realism, is inseparable from 
human nature, and it would be easy to show that this is 
always and everywhere the case. The mere existence of 
science does not defend us from it; the majority will always 
conceive of atoms and electrons as real things, which would 
be tangible if they were not so small, and will always believe 
that tangibility is a proof of existence; and are fully con¬ 
vinced that a being, originating at a given moment of time, 
may yet, as that same being, survive eternally in time. He 
who believes that phenomena of necessity stand for solid 
existing actualities, or that there can exist any empirical 
consciousness or individuality without a material (sub¬ 
stantial) basis, or that anything that has come into being 
can endure as such forever, is an idolater, a fetishist. Even 
if we should accept the popular Western view of Hinduism 



ORIGIN AND USE OF IMAGES IN INDIA 157 
as a polytheistic system, it could not be maintained that 
the Indian icon is an any sense a fetish. As pointed out by 
Guenon, “Dans lTnde, en particulier, une image symbolique 
representant Tun ou Pautre des ‘attributs divins/ et qui est 
appelee pratlka , n’est point une ‘idole/ car elle n’a jamais 
cte prise pour autre chose que ce qu’elle est reellement, un 
support de meditation et un moyen auxiliaire de realiza- 
tion ,, {Introduction d Vetude des doctrines hindoues y p. 209). 
A good illustration of this is to be found in the Divyavadana , 
Ch. XXVI, where Upagupta compels Mara, who as a yaksa 
has the power of assuming shapes at will, to exhibit himself 
in the shape of the Buddha. Upagupta bows down, and 
Mara, shocked at this apparent worship of himself, protests. 
Upagupta explains that he is not worshipping Mara, but 
the person represented — “just as people venerating earthen 
images of the undying angels, do not revere the clay as 
such, but the immortals represented therein. ,,n3 Here we 
have the case of an individual who has passed beyond in¬ 
dividuality, but is yet represented according to human 
needs by an image. The principle is even clearer in the 
case of the images of the angels; the image per se is neither 
God nor any angel, but merely an aspect or hypostasis 
{avasthd) of God, who is in the last analysis without like¬ 
ness {amurta), not determined by form ( arupa ), trans-fonn 
{para-rupa). His various forms or emanations are con¬ 
ceived by a process of symbolic filiation. To conceive of 
Hinduism as a polytheistic system is in itself a naivete of 
which only a Western student, inheriting Graeco-Roman 



158 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 
concepts of “paganism” could be capable; the Muham¬ 
madan view of Christianity as polytheism could be better 
justified than this. 

In fact, if we consider Indian religious philosophy as a 
whole, and regard the extent to which its highest concep¬ 
tions have passed as dogmas into the currency of daily life, 
we shall have to define Hindu civilization as one of the 
least superstitious the world has known. Maya is not pro¬ 
perly delusion, but strictly speaking creative power, sakti , 
the principle of manifestation; delusion, moha , is to conceive 
of appearances as things in themselves, and to be attached 
to them as such without regard to their procession. 

In the Bhagavad Gita , better known in India than the 
New Testament in Europe, we are taught of the Real, that 
“This neither dies nor is it born; he who regardeth This 
as a slayer, he who thinketh This is slain, are equally un¬ 
knowing.” Again and again, from the Upanisads to the 
most devotional theistic hymns the Godhead, ultimate 
reality, is spoken of as unlimited by any form, not to be de¬ 
scribed by any predicate, unknowable. Thus, in the Upan¬ 
isads, “He is, by that alone is He to be apprehended” (cf. 
“I am that I am”); in the words of the Saiva hymnist 
Manikka Va^agar, “He is passing the description of words, 
not comprehensible by the mind, not visible to the eye or 
other senses.” Similarly in later Buddhism, in the Vaj- 
rayana (Sunyavada) system, we find it categorically stated 
that the divinities, that is, the personal God or premier 
angel in all His forms, “are manifestations of the essential 



ORIGIN AND USE OF IMAGES IN INDIA 159 
nature of non-being”; the doctrine of the only reality of 
the Void (Behmen’s “Abyss”) is pushed to the point of 
an explicit denial of the existence of any Buddha or any 
Buddhist doctrine. 

Again, whereas we are apt to suppose that the religious 
significance of Christianity stands or falls with the actual 
historicity of Jesus, we find an Indian commentator (Nila- 
kantha) saying of the Krsna Lila, believed historical by 
most Hindus, that the narration is not the real point, that 
this is not an historical event, but is based upon eternal 
truths, on the actual relation of the soul to God, and that 
the events take place, not in the outer world, but in the 
heart of man. Here we are in a world inaccessible to higher 
criticism, neither of superstition on the one hand, nor of 
cynicism on the other. It has been more than once pointed 
out that the position of Christianity could well be strength¬ 
ened by a similar emancipation from the historical point of 
view, as was to a large extent actually the case with the 
Schoolmen. 

As for India, it is precisely in a world dominated by an 
idealistic concept of reality, and yet with the approval of 
the most profound thinkers, that there flourished what we 
are pleased to call idolatry. Manikka Vagagar, quoted 
above, constantly speaks of the attributes of God, refers to 
the legendary accounts of His actions, and takes for granted 
the use and service of images. In Vajrayana Buddhism, 
often though not quite correctly designated as nihilistic, the 
development of an elaborate pantheon, fully realized in 



l6o TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 
material imagery, reaches its zenith. Sank&racarya him¬ 
self, one of the most brilliant intellects the world has known, 
interpreter of the Upanisads and creator of the Vedanta 
system of pure monism accepted by a majority of all Hin¬ 
dus and analogous to the idealism of Kant, was a devout 
worshipper of images, a visitor to shrines, a singer of devo¬ 
tional hymns. 

True, in a famous prayer, he apologizes for visualizing in 
contemplation One who is not limited by any form, for 
praising in hymns One who is beyond the reach of words, 
and for visiting Him in sacred shrines, who is omnipresent. 
Actually, too, there exist some groups in Hinduism (the 
Sikhs, for example) who do not make use of images. But if 
even he who knew could not resist the impulse to love, — and 
love requires an object of adoration, and an object must be 
conceived in word or form, — how much greater must be the 
necessity of that majority for whom it is so much easier to 
worship than to know. Thus the philosopher perceives the 
inevitability of the use of imagery, verbal and visual, and 
sanctions the service of images. God Himself makes like 
' concession to our mortal nature, “ taking the forms imagined 
by His worshipers,” making Himself as we are that we may 
be as He is. 

The Hindu Isvara (Supreme God) is not a jealous God, 
because all gods are aspects of Him, imagined by His wor¬ 
shippers; in the words of Krsna: “ When any devotee seeks 
to worship any aspect with faith, it is none other than My¬ 
self that bestows that steadfast faith, and when by wor- 



ORIGIN AND USE OF IMAGES IN INDIA l6l 
shipping any aspect he wins what he desires, it is none other 
than Myself that grants his prayers. Howsoever men ap¬ 
proach Me, so do I welcome them, for the path men take 
from every side is Mine. ,, Those whose ideal is less high 
attain, indeed, of necessity to lesser heights; but no man 
can safely aspire to higher ideals than are pertinent to his 
spiritual age. In any case, his spiritual growth cannot be 
aided by a desecration of his ideals; he can be aided only 
by the fullest recognition of these ideals as retaining their 
validity in any scheme, however profound. This was the 
Hindu method; Indian religion adapts herself with infinite 
grace to every human need. The collective genius that 
made of Hinduism a continuity ranging from the contem¬ 
plation of the Absolute to the physical service of an image 
made of clay did not shrink from an ultimate acceptance 
of every aspect of God conceived by man, and of every 
ritual devised by his devotion. 

We have already suggested that the multiplicity of the 
forms of images, coinciding with the development of mono¬ 
theistic Hinduism, arises from various causes, all ultimately 
referable to the diversity of need of individuals and groups. 
In particular, this multiplicity is due historically to the in¬ 
clusion of all pre-existing forms, all local forms, in a greater 
theological synthesis, where they are interpreted as modes 
or emanations ( vyuha ) of the supreme Isvara; and subse¬ 
quently, to the further growth of theological speculation. 
In the words of Yaska, “We see actually that because of 
the greatness of God, the one principle of life is praised in 



l6l TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 
various ways. Other angels are the individual members of a 
unique Self” ( Nirukta , VII, 4): cf. Ruysbroeck, Adornment 
. . . , Ch. XXV, “ because of His incomprehensible nobility 
and sublimity, which we cannot rightly name nor wholly 
express, we give Him all these names.” 

Iconolatry, however, was not left to be regarded as an 
ignorant or useless practice fit only for spiritual children; 
even the greatest, as we have seen, visited temples, and wor¬ 
shipped images, and certainly these greatest thinkers did 
not do so blindly or unconsciously. A human necessity was 
recognized, the nature of the necessity was understood, its 
psychology systematically analyzed, the various phases of 
image worship, mental and material, were defined, and the 
variety of forms explained by the doctrines of emanation 
and of gracious condescension. 

In the first place, then, the forms of images are not arbi¬ 
trary. Their ultimate elements may be of popular origin 
rather than priestly invention, but the method is adopted 
and further developed within the sphere of intellectual ortho¬ 
doxy. Each conception is of human origin, notwithstanding 
that the natural tendency of man to realism leads to a belief 
in actually existent heavens where the Angel appears as he 
is represented. In the words of Sukr&carya, “the character¬ 
istics of images are determined by the relation that subsists 
between the adorer and the adored”; in those cited by 
Gopalabhatta from an unknown source, the present spiritual 
activity of the worshiper, and the actual existence of a 
traditional iconography, are reconciled as follows — 



ORIGIN AND USE OF IMAGES IN INDIA 163 
“ Though it is the devotion ( bhakti) of the devotee that 
causes the manifestation of the image of the Blessed One 
(Bhagavata), in this matter (of iconography) the procedure 
of the ancient sages should be followed.” 114 

The whole problem of symbolism ( pratika , “symbol”) is 
discussed by Sankaracarya, Commentary on the Vedanta 
Sutras, I, 1, 20. Endorsing the statement that “all who 
sing here to the harp, sing Him,” he points out that this 
“Him” refers to the highest Lord only, who is the ultimate 
theme even of worldly songs. And as to anthropomorphic 
expressions in scripture, “we reply that the highest Lord 
may, when he pleases, assume a bodily shape formed of 
Maya, in order to gratify his devout worshipers”; but all 
this is merely analogical, as when we say that the Brahman 
abides here or there, which in reality abides only in its 
own glory (cf. ibid., I, 2, 29). The representation of the 
invisible by the visible is also discussed by Deussen, Phi¬ 
losophy of the Upanishads , pp. 99-101. Cf. also the discus¬ 
sion of paroksa in Ch. V. 

Parenthetically, we may remark that stylistic sequences 
(change of aesthetic form without change of basic shape) 
are a revealing record of changes in the nature of religious 
experience; in Europe, for example, the difference between 
a thirteenth-century and a modern Madonna betrays the 
passage from passionate conviction to facile sentimentality. 
Of this, however, the worshiper is altogether unaware; from 
the standpoint of edification, the value of an image does not 
depend on its aesthetic qualities. A recognition of the sig- 



164 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 
nificance of stylistic changes, in successive periods, impor¬ 
tant as it may be for us as students of art, is actually 
apparent only in disinterested retrospect; the theologian, 
proposing means of edification, has been concerned only 
with the forms of images. Stylistic changes correspond to 
linguistic changes: we all speak the language of our own 
time without question or analysis. 

Let us consider now the processes actually involved in the 
making of images. Long anterior to the oldest surviving 
images of the supreme deities we meet with descriptions of 
the gods as having limbs, garments, weapons or other attri¬ 
butes; such descriptions are to be found even in the Vedic 
lauds and myths. Now in theistic Hinduism, where the 
method of Yoga is employed, that is, focused attention 
leading to the realization of identity of consciousness with 
the object considered, whether or not this object be God, 
these descriptions, now called dhyana mantrams or trance 
formulae, or alternatively, sadhanas , means, provide the 
germ from which the form of the deity is to be visualized. 
For example, “I worship our gentle lady Bhuvanesvarl, like 
the risen sun, lovely, victorious, destroying defects in prayer, 
with a shining crown on her head, three-eyed and with 
swinging earrings adorned with diverse gems, as a lotus-lady, 
abounding in treasure, making the gestures of charity and 
giving assurance. Such is the dhyanam of Bhuvanesvarl 
(a form of Devi). To the form thus conceived imagined 
flowers and other offerings are to be made. Such interior 
worship of a mantra-body or correspondingly imagined form 



ORIGIN AND USE OF IMAGES IN INDIA 165 
is called subtle (. suksma ), in contradistinction to the ex¬ 
terior worship of a material image, which is termed gross 
(sthula ), though merely in a descriptive, not a deprecatory, 
sense. 

Further contrasted with both these modes of worship is 
that called para-rupa 9 “ trans-form,’’ in which the worship 
is paid directly to the deity as he is in himself. This last 
mode no doubt corresponds to the ambition of the icono¬ 
clast, but such gnosis is in fact only possible, and therefore 
only permissible, to the perfected Yogin and veritable jivan- 
mukta y who is so far as he himself is concerned set free from 
all name and aspect, whatever may be the outward appear¬ 
ance he presents. Had the iconoclast in fact attained to 
such perfection as this, he could not have been an iconoclast. 

In any case it must be realized, in connection with the 
gross or subtle modes of worship, that the end is only to be 
attained by an identification of the worshiper’s conscious¬ 
ness with the form under which the deity is conceived: 
nddevo devarh yajet f “only as the angel can one worship the 
angel,” and so devo bhutvd devarh yajet , “to worship the 
Angel become the Angel.” Only when the dhydnam is thus 
realized in full samddhi (the consummation of Yoga, which 
commences with focused attention) is the worship achieved. 
Thus, for example, with regard to the form of Nataraja, 
representing Siva’s cosmic dance, in the words of Tiru- 
mular, 

The dancing foot, the sound of the tinkling bells, 

The songs that are sung, and the various steps, 



l66 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 

The forms assumed by our Master as He dances, 

Discover these in your own heart, so shall your bonds be broken. 

When, on the other hand, a material image is to be pro¬ 
duced for purposes of worship in a temple or elsewhere, this 
as a technical procedure must be undertaken by a profes¬ 
sional craftsman, who may be variously designated tilpin , 
“craftsman,” yogin , “yogi,” sadhaka , “adept,” or simply 
rupakdra or pratitndkdra y “imager.” Such a craftsman goes 
through the whole process of self-purification and worship, 
mental visualization and identification of consciousness with 
the form evoked, and then only translates the form into 
stone or metal. Thus the trance formulae become the pre¬ 
scriptions by which the craftsman works, and as such they 
are commonly included in the Silpa Sdstras , the technical 
literature of craftsmanship. These books in turn provide 
invaluable data for the modem student of iconography. 

Technical production is thus bound up with the psycho¬ 
logical method known as yoga. In other words the artist 
does not resort to models but uses a mental construction, 
and this condition sufficiently explains the cerebral char¬ 
acter of the art, which everyone will have remarked for 
himself. In the words of the encyclopaedist Sukr&carya, 
“One should set up in temples the images of angels who are 
the objects of his devotion, by mental vision of their attri¬ 
butes; it is for the full achievement of this yoga-vision that 
the proper lineaments of images are prescribed; therefore 
the mortal imager should resort to trance-vision, for thus 
and no otherwise, and surely not by direct perception, is the 



ORIGIN AND USE OF IMAGES IN INDIA 167 
end to be attained” (translated also above, p.114, in slight¬ 
ly different words). 

The proper characteristics of images are further eluci¬ 
dated in the Silpa Sdstras by a series of canons known as 
tdlamana or pramdr^a, in which are prescribed the ideal pro¬ 
portions proper to the various deities, whether conceived as 
Kings of the World, or otherwise. These proportions are 
expressed in terms of a basic unit, just as we speak of a 
figure having so many “heads”; but the corresponding 
Indian measure is that of the “face,” from the hair on the 
forehead to the chin, and the different canons are therefore 
designated Ten-face, Nine-face, and so on down to the Five- 
face canon suitable for minor deities of dwarfish character. 
These ideal proportions correspond to the character of the 
aspect of the angel to be represented, and complete the ex¬ 
position of this character otherwise set forth by means of 
facial expression, attributes, costume, or gesture. And as 
Sukracarya says further (see also more literal versions above, 
Ch. IV), “Only an image made in accordance with the canon 
can be called beautiful; some may think that beautiful 
which corresponds to their own fancy, but that not in ac¬ 
cordance with the canon is unlovely to the discerning eye.” 
And again, “Even the misshapen image of an angel is to be 
preferred to that of a man, however attractive the latter 
may be”; because the representations of the angels are 
means to spiritual ends, not so those which are only like¬ 
nesses of human individuals. “When the consciousness is 
brought to rest in the form (ndtna, “name,” “idea”), and 



l68 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 
sees only the form, then, inasmuch as it rests in the 
form, aspectual perception is dispensed with and only the 
reference remains; one reaches then the world-without- 
aspectual-perception, and with further practice attains to 
liberation from all hindrances, becoming adept.” 115 Here, 
in another language than our own, are contrasted ideal and 
realistic art: the one a means to the attainment of fuller 
consciousness, the other merely a means to pleasure. So too 
might the anatomical limitations of Giotto be defended as 
against the human charm of Raphael. 

It should be further understood that images differ greatly 
in the degree of their anthropomorphism. Some are merely 
symbols, as when the Bodhi tree is used to represent the 
Buddha at the time of the Enlightenment, or when only the 
feet of the Lord are represented as objects of worship. A 
very important iconographic type is that of the yanira , used 
especially in the Sakta systems; here we have to do with a 
purely geometrical form, often for instance composed of 
interlocking triangles, representing the male and female, 
static and kinetic aspects of the Two-in-One. Further, 
images in the round may be avyakta , non-manifest, like a 
lingam ; or vyaktdvyakta , partially manifest, as in the case of 
a mukha-lingam ; or vyakta , fully manifest in “anthromor- 
phic” or partly theriomorphic types. 116 In the last analysis 
all these are equally ideal, symbolic forms. 

In the actual use of a material image, it should always be 
remembered that it must be prepared for worship by a cere¬ 
mony of invocation ( dvahana ); and if intended only for 



ORIGIN AND USE OF IMAGES IN INDIA 1 69 
temporary use, subsequently desecrated by a formula of dis¬ 
missal (visarjana). When not in pujd , that is before con¬ 
secration or after desecration, the image has no more sacro¬ 
sanct character than any other material object. It should 
not be supposed that the deity, by invocation and dismissal, 
is made to come or go, for omnipresence does not move; 
these ceremonies are really projections of the worshipper’s 
own mental attitude toward the image. By invocation he 
announces to himself his intention of using the image as a 
means of communion with the Angel; by dismissal he an¬ 
nounces that his service has been completed, and that he 
no longer regards the image as a link between himself and 
the deity. 

It is only by a change of viewpoint, psychologically equiv¬ 
alent to such a formal desecration, that the worshipper, who 
naturally regards the icon as a devotional utility, comes to 
regard it as a mere work of art to be sensationally regarded 
as such. Conversely, the modern aesthetician and Kunst- 
historiker, who is interested only in aesthetic surfaces and 
sensations, fails to conceive of the work as the necessary 
product of a given determination, that is, as having purpose 
and utility. Of these two, the worshipper, for whom the 
object was made, is nearer to the root of the matter than 
the aesthetician who endeavors to isolate beauty from 
function. 117 




Notes 




Notes 


1 (page 5). “ A mental concept ( citta-sanna ) arises in the mind 
of the painter, that such and such a shape (rupd) must be made in 
such and such a way. . . . All the various arts ( sippa ) in the 
world are produced by the mind,” Atthasdlini , PTS. ed., p. 64; see 
“An Early Passage on Indian Painting,” Eastern Art , III (1931), 
and cf. note 43. 

2 (page 6). “Attracting form” is discussed in JAOS., LII, 16, 
n. 8. Skr. kr? (the root in d-kar§ati) has the same dual signifi¬ 
cance which is found in English “draw,” as (1) to drag, drag to¬ 
ward or together, attract, and (2) delineate, draw up, compose, 
put in due form. English draw corresponds to G. tragen f to bear, 
and Skr. dhr (dhar) to bear, bear in mind, support, conceive, hold 
fast or firm, etc. While kr§ is to “draw” in either sense, a-kr$ can 
be accurately rendered to “draw up ” or “pro-duce.” Cf. “fetch” 
(of the imagination), and “fetch” as an apparition. A remark¬ 
able use of English “ draw ” in our sense is to be found in Bohme’s 
Mysterium Pansophicum y IV, 2 (which I can only cite in Earle’s 
version), in connection with the formative aspect of the creative 
will (of God), as follows: “the desire is a stem attraction. . . . 
And it draws magically, viz. its own desiring into a substance” 
(cf. Skr. dhar-ma , as “substance”). 

3 (P&8 e d). Upani$ads, passim . Rabindranath Tagore retains 
the same phraseology in his song Ami chini go chini, where it is 
“in the immanent space of the heart” that he hears “now and 
again ” the song of BideSinI, the stranger lady who is ideal beauty 
— hfdi mdjhe dkdhe sunecchi tomdri gdn. Where and what is this 
space in the heart? In the Chdndogya Upani§ad, VIII, 14 (also 
VIII, 1, 1) dkd&a is called “the revealer of name and aspect,” 
and identified with Brahman, the Imperishable, the Self. This 



174 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 

is “that mysterious nothing out of which the soul is made . . . 
which nothing is at large in the almighty power of the Father” 
(Eckhart). This ideal space is the principle wherein all the possi¬ 
bilities of being can be realized (Chandogya Upani§ad, VIII, i, 
1-3). The antarhfdaya-aka$a y “space in the heart,” is the to¬ 
tality of this ideal space at the innermost core of our being, 
where only the full content of life can be experienced in the 
immediately experienced; that consent, from the point of view of 
aesthetics, is “Beauty,” from the point of view of epistemology 
“Truth” (cf. “Nirvana is the transcendental knowledge of the 
sameness of all principles,” Saddharma Pundarlka , Kern’s text, 
p. 133), and from the standpoint of ethics “Perfection.” Thus 
while Beauty may be equated with Perfection and Truth abso¬ 
lutely ( rasa . . . brahmdsvada-sahddara , Sdhitya Darpar^a , III, 
1-2), loveliness is merely a good, ugliness merely an evil. Beauty 
is invisible and indivisible, only to be known as Deity is known, 
in the heart; art is an utterance of Beauty, science an utterance of 
Truth, ethics an utterance of Perfection in terms of light and 
shade, thesis and antithesis, good and evil. Error consists prima¬ 
rily in the attachment of absolute values to either of these rela¬ 
tive factors, which are only means of apprehension, and not ends 
in themselves. 

4 (P a i e <*)• Brhadaravyaka ZJpani§ad y IV, 2, 3, with respect to 
the consent of essence and nature. 

5 (page 6 ). “Contained in the Lotus of the Heart are Heaven 
and Earth . . . both what is ours here and now, and what is not 
yet ours "Chandogya Upani§ad , VIII, 1, 1-3; “the Heart is the 
same as Praj&pati, it is Brahman, it is all,” Brhadaranyaka Upa - 
ni$ad y ,V, 3; cf. Rg Veda , IV, 58, n and VI, 9, 6. 

6 (page 6 ). The foregoing summary is based on a Sanskrit text 
cited by A. Foucher, Ulconographie bouddhique de I’lnde, II 
(1905), 8-i 1; B. Bhattacharya, The Indian Buddhist Iconog¬ 
raphy (1924), 169 ff., and Buddhist Esoterism , 1932, Ch. XI; 



NOTES I75 

and the Bfhaddrar^yaka Upani$ad, I, 4, 10. Cf. also the Sukra- 
nitisdra, IV, 4, 70-71, above, p. 113. 

It will be observed that imagination (the power of having 
mental images) is here deliberately exercised. The vaguer im¬ 
plications of inspiration, enthusiasm, intoxication, are lacking. 
Needless to say, imagination may take form either as vision or as 
audition; what has been said above with reference to visual art 
applies equally to the case of literature, whether scripture or 
belles lettres. The Vedas, and all their accessory literatures and 
sciences, for example, are contained in the Word (vac, dharma, 
orh), which having been uttered (nihkvasita, vydhrti) is then 
heard ( Sruti ) by the Prophets (r?i), that audition depending not 
on “inspiration,” but upon attention. Valmlki, before he begins 
dictation, first visualizes in Yoga the entire Ramdyana, the char¬ 
acters “ presenting themselves to his vision living and moving as 
though in real life”; and the work being thus completed before 
the practical activity is begun, the dictation is then so rapid that 
none but the four-handed Ganesa, using all his hands, can take it 
down. Similarly, when the Bodhisattva attains Enlightenment, 
becoming Buddha, the Dharma presents itself to him in its en¬ 
tirety, ready to be taught, not merely as an idea to be sub¬ 
sequently developed. Similar conceptions of the operation of 
imagination are to be found already in the Rg Veda, where 
for example wisdom (vac) is spoken of as “seen” or “heard” 
(X, 71, 4), ideas are “hewn out” \/tak§) “in the heart” (hrd) 
(X, 71, 8), and thought is formulated (yjdhi, cf. y/dhyai , e.g. 
in dhyana) as a carpenter shapes wood (III, 38, 1; cf. X, 51, 
9-10, and Sayana on these passages). 

The Indian formulation is idiomatic, but the process de¬ 
scribed is universal. The Scholastic parallels are very close; cf. 
Eckhart, “What I say springs up in me, then I pause in the idea, 
and thirdly I speak it out,” again when he speaks of the carpenter 
who “first erects the house in his mind,” or explains in what 
manner the Angels may be visualized (see above , p. 78). Cf. 
also Dante, when he says “ I am one that when Love inspires me, 



176 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 

pay heed; and in what way He dictates within me, that I speak 
out to you” {P ur gator io,XXIII, 53-54) and requires of his hearer 
to “hold the image like a firm rock” ( Paradiso , XIII, 2-3, and 
it needs not to say that the author in the first place must have 
“held the image” thus); above all when he says “He who would 
paint a figure, if he cannot be it, cannot draw it” ( Convivio , 
Canzone III, 53-54), glossed “No painter can portray any 
figure, if he have not first of all made himself such as the figure 
ought to be” (< Convivio , IV, 10, 106, p. 309 of the Oxford text); 
again when he speaks of “figures as I have them in conception” 
{Paradiso, XVIII, 85); until finally the “high fantasy falls 
short of power” to depict the Deity as he is in himself {Paradiso, 
XXXIII, 142), as also in India dhydna falls short of samadhi , 
failing to visualize the Brahman in any likeness, who is with¬ 
out likeness {amurta, nirabhdsa) — te contemplans totum deficit. 

Chuang Tzu (Giles, p. 240) gives an excellent account of the 
working of Yoga (though not so-called) in connection with the 
carpenter making a wooden stand for musical instruments, who, 
when asked, “What mystery is there in your art?” replies, “No 
mystery, your Highness, and yet there is something. When I am 
about to make such a stand ... I first reduce my mind to abso¬ 
lute quiescence. ... I become oblivious of any reward to be 
gained ... of any fame to be acquired . . . unconscious of my 
physical frame. Then, with no thought of the Court present to 
my mind, my skill becomes concentrated, and all disturbing ele¬ 
ments from without are gone. I enter some mountain forest. I 
search for a suitable tree. It contains the form required, which is 
afterwards elaborated. I see the stand in my mind’s eye, and 
then set to work.” 

And as to habit (habitus, tao as “way”): “Let me take an 
illustration,” said the wheelwright, “from my own trade. In 
making a wheel, if you work too slowly, you can’t make it firm; 
if you work too fast, the spokes won’t fit in. You must go neither 
too slowly nor too fast. There must be coordination of mind and 
hand. Words cannot explain what it is, but there is some mys- 



NOTES 


177 

terious art herein. I cannot teach it to my son; nor can he learn 
it from me. Consequently, though seventy years of age, I am still 
making wheels in my old age” (ibid., p. 271). Similarly with the 
sword maker: “Is it your skill, Sir, or have you a way?” “It is 
concentration. ... If a thing was not a sword, I did not notice it. 
I availed myself of whatever energy I did not use in other direc¬ 
tions in order to secure greater efficiency in the direction re¬ 
quired” (ibid., p. 290). 

7 (P a 8 e 7)* Dante’s theory of art is discussed by Julius Schlos- 
ser, Die Kunstliteratur (Vienna, 1924), pp. 66-77. Dante’s con¬ 
ception derives from Aristotle, St Thomas, and the troubadours, 
and is still essentially scholastic. In the De Monarchia he speaks 
of art as threefold, (1) as idea in the mind, (2) as technique in the 
tool (means), and (3) as potentiality in the material. In Para - 
diso, I, 127, he speaks of the sorda (tdmasika) quality in the ma¬ 
terial, which seems to resist the intention of the artist, recalling 
Eckhart’s carpenter, who building a house “will first erect it in 
his mind and, were the house enough subject to his will, then, 
materials apart, the only difference between them would be that 
of begetter and suddenly begotten.” Needless to say, Dante’s 
artista includes those whom we now call artisans; see, for example, 
Paradiso , XVI, 49. 

Dante in asserting the necessary identification of the artist 
with his theme (chi pinge figura . . ., as cited above) is still at one 
with the East and with Eckhart, as when the latter says, “On 
giving my whole mind to the subject of the angels ... it seemed 
to me that I was all the angels,” and “the painter who has 
painted a good portrait therein shows his art; it is not himself 
that it reveals to us.” But Leonardo is already far removed from 
this point of view when he declares more than once, il pittore 
pinge se stesso, “ the painter paints himself,” “himself” not being 
the painter’s essence, but the accidents of his being, his physi¬ 
ognomy, which come out in the painting just as a man is some¬ 
what revealed in his handwriting. This inevitable reflection 



178 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 

of the physical man in his handiwork is indeed also recognized 
in India, for example, Lekhakasya ca yad rupam citre bhavati 
tad(rup)yam , “ the painter’s own shape comes out in the picture” 
(cited from a Purdna, Rupam 27/28, p. 99); but this is precisely 
why the painter himself must be a normal man, since otherwise 
his peculiarity might be reflected in his art. From the Scholastic 
and Indian point of view, any such reflection of the person of the 
artist in his work must be regarded as a defect; whereas in later 
European art, the trace of the artist’s individual peculiarities 
coming to be regarded as a virtue in the art, and flattering the 
artist’s pride, the way to aesthetic exhibitionism and the substi¬ 
tution of the player (“star”) for the play were prepared. In the 
same way the history of artists has replaced the history of art. 

8 (page 9). See my History of Indian and Indonesian Art, p. 125; 
also, Mahdvamsa, XVIII, 24, XXVII, 10-20, and XXX, n, and 
Jataka, No. 489. For example, “vehicles” or “thrones,” Skr. 
vakana, asana , which are living principles alike from the Chris¬ 
tian and Hindu points of view (St Thomas, Sum. Theol ., I, Q. 
108, A. 5-7; Garuda, Hamsa and Nandi as the seats or vehicles of 
Vi§nu, Brahma, and Siva); weapons or powers, Angels from the 
Christian, Devatas from the Hindu point of view (St Thomas, 
ibid., Brhad Devata , I, 74 and LV, 143); or the palaces and 
chariots ( vimdna, ratha) of the Angels, imitated in their earthly 
shrines. 

In Mhb ., XII, 285, 148, Siva is called sarva-hilpa-pravartaka , 
“instigator of all arts,” and ibid., XIII, 18, 2 f., he imparts kald - 
jfidna, “the understanding of accomplishments,” to Garga. Ob¬ 
serve that “Sanskrit” ( samskfta ) is deva-ndgari, “the language 
of the heavenly city,” analogous to deva-Hlpdni, the “angelic 
works of art” for which see above, pp. 8, 126. 

With Aitareya Brdhmar^a, VI, 27, cited in the text, cf. Aitareya 
Aranyaka , III, 2, 6, where “Prajapati, the Year, after emanat¬ 
ing offspring, was disintegrated ( viyasrahsata ); he reintegrated 
himself (dtmdnam samadadhayat) by means of the metres ( chan - 



NOTES 


179 

dobhir)” and Jaimimya Upani§ad Br&hmana, III, n, where 
initiation is called a metrical transformation (dik$ate . . . 
chanddhsy eva abhisambhavati). In these passages the spiritual 
significance of rhythm in art is plainly asserted. Conversely 
they are also of interest in connection with the problem of the 
origins of art, all rhythm corresponding in the last analysis to 
cosmic rhythms; cf. Jaimimya Upani§ad Brdhmana, I, 35, 7, 
“the Year is endless: its two ends are Winter and Spring. After 
( anu ) this it is that the two ends of a village are united; after 
this that the two ends of a necklet meet ”; ibid. I, 2, the Gdyatra- 
saman “should be sung according to the course ( vartman ) of the 
Spirit and the Waters,” and Jeremias, Der Kosmos von Sumer , 
1932, p. 4, “Eine grosse Leistung Herman Wirths beruht darin, 
dass er in der Lehre vom Wege Gottes nach dem aonischen 
Lauf nicht nur die Wurzel der Symbolik gesehen hat — das war 
nidit neu — sondern auch die Wurzel der Sprache und Schrift.” 

9 (P a g e 9)‘ The Indian words kala , bilpa both have the same 
broad significance that the word “art” once enjoyed in Europe; 
cf. New Oxford Dictionary, s.v. Art. I, “Skill in doing anything 
as the result of knowledge and practice,” and II, “Anything 
wherein skill may be attained or displayed.” A distinction is, 
however, to be made between the silpas , or vocational arts, and 
the kalas , or avocational arts (accomplishments). It is not con¬ 
ceived that a silpa can be acquired without training under a mas¬ 
ter ( acarya ), or be practiced otherwise than as an hereditary pro¬ 
fession. There are various lists of silpas , generally eighteen in 
number, and always including architecture and painting. In the 
Tri$a§ti&aldkdpuru§acaritra , I, 2, 950 ff. (Gaekwar’s Oriental 
Series, LI, 152), there is a list of “ Five Arts (Hlpa),” viz. those of 
the potter, architect, painter, weaver, and barber, each with its 
human raison d'etre (hetu) . For the sixty-four kolas see A. Venka- 
tasubbiah, The Raids (Inaug. Diss., Bern, Madras, 1911) (add to 
Bibliography L. D. Barnett, Antagada Dasao f p. 30); and A. 
Venkatasubbiah, and E. Muller, “The Kalas,” JRAS. (1914). 



180 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 

There is a classification of the vocational arts ( sippa) as ele¬ 
vated or respectable (ukkattha) and lesser or vulgar {him) in the 
Vimya , IV, 6 f. There is also a distinction generally made in the 
dramatic bdstras between a high or cultivated ( mdrga ) and a 
popular or folk (deH) style of dancing, the former embodying 
rasa , bhdva , vyafijand, etc., the latter consisting only of rhythmic 
movement, and being regarded (whether rightly or wrongly) as 
devoid of aesthetic content. 

Thus it is hardly possible, except with the connotation “more 
or less expressive or significant,” to speak of a distinction of arts 
according to their psychological quality or more or less honor¬ 
able application; the distinctions that are made are rather with 
reference to the social status of the artist than with reference to 
the art itself, no professional artist having a high social status as 
such. Thus music and calligraphy are the highest arts in China 
because every gentleman and official is supposed to be pro¬ 
ficient in them, while the painter, at least until the Sung period, 
was always regarded qua artisan, not qua gentleman. The sculp¬ 
tor, though his work served the highest ends of worship, was 
thought of only as an expert mason; and if in India he sometimes 
claimed a higher respect, this was not as artist in the modern 
sense, but because in setting up images he also exercised priestly 
functions, cf. Mimdmsd Nydya Prakdsa , paragraphs 98, 229 
(in Edgerton’s edition, New Haven, 1929, pp. 78,130). Although 
the drama and dancing belong to the most highly developed 
and sophisticated arts of Asia, the status of the professional 
actor has been generally no higher in Asia than it was in Europe 
in the time of Shakespeare. 

It is generally true that a concept of vocation has always and 
everywhere prevailed in Asia, and that the practice of any art is 
foreordained by birth. There are, nevertheless, exceptions to all 
these generalizations, even to the extent that any art may be 
practiced gratuitously by an amateur as an avocation; for ex¬ 
ample, at the present day in Java some of the most expert actors 
are members of royal families, and the daughters of princes are 



NOTES 


181 


accomplished dancers, and this was at one time also permissible 
in India. Standards in such cases are as high for the amateur as 
for the professional, but only the latter receives his social designa¬ 
tion from his work. Here again it appears clearly that no kind of 
art is thought of as high or low, noble or ignoble in itself, only 
persons being considered of high or low rank according to their 
natal status in an established social hierarchy. 

10 (page io). Natya Sdstra, I, 113 and 112 (Gaekwar’s Oriental 
Series). 

11 (page io). Sdhitya Darpana , VI, 2, and Daharupa , I, 7, IV, 47. 

12 (page 16). For Hsieh Ho see note 19. 

13 ( page 16). For Seami’s writings see A. Waley, The No Plays 
of Japan (1921), Introduction. Seami says, Yugaku no tnichi wa 
issai monomane ari , ‘‘The arts of music and dancing consist en¬ 
tirely in imitation.” That this does not mean imitation or nat¬ 
uralism of such sort as might, in the case of painting, be based 
on photographs of galloping horses is well shown in the following 
story about a particular performance: 

In the No play Tahusa f the action of a player in the part of a 
reaper from Shinano was criticized by a spectator from Shinano 
as not corresponding to the actual usage of reapers in that dis¬ 
trict, that is, as not true to Nature. In the next performance the 
action was “corrected”; but the performance was a failure, for 
“it startled the eyes.” 

14 (page 12). The “ Six Limbs ” are given in Yasodhara’s twelfth- 
or thirteenth-century commentary on the Kama Sutra , Benares 
ed. (1929), p. 30, as follows: 

“ Rupa-bhedahj pramdqdni , bhdva-ldvarTiya-yojanam 
Sddr&yarh , varnika-bhahga, iti citrarh §adahgakarh” 

“Differentiation of types, canons of proportion, embodiment of 
sentiment and charm, correspondence of formal and pictorial ele- 



182 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 

ments, preparation (lit. “breaking,” “analysis”) of pigments, 
these are the six limbs of painting.” For a more subjective inter¬ 
pretation see A. N. Tagore, Sadanga , ou les Six Canons de la 
Peinture hindoue (Paris, 1922). 

The “Eight Limbs” of the Samardhganasutradhdra (see 
JAOS.j LII, 16, n. 8) are apparently vartikd (the crayon), 
bhumibandhana , (? preparation of the ground), rekhd-karmdni 
(outline work), lak^ar^a (characteristic lineaments of the types), 
kar$a-karma (production, perhaps « varna-karma, coloring), 
vartana-karma (shading, that is, indication of plastic modelling, 
relievo), lekha-karaqa (? corrections), and dvika-karma (? final 
outlines). 

1 5 (pag e J 4 )- See De, Sanskrit Poetics , II, 46-47. Sound and 
meaning ( rutdrtha ) as “letter and spirit” are discussed from an¬ 
other point of view, that of the inadequacy of words, in the 
Lahkdvatara Sutra (Suzuki, Studies in the Lahkdvatdra Sutra 
(1930), pp. 108,113, 434, and see note 43). Sound is the physical 
fact, words are merely an indication, a hint, a pointing out the 
way — “do not fall into the error of thinking that the full mean¬ 
ing is contained in the letter”; meaning is a manner of inner 
perception, only to be divined by an activity of the intellect 
( prajnd , buddhi) in distinction from all associated ideas (vasana). 
The relation of this view to the dhvani theory of suggestion dis¬ 
cussed below will be evident. But although words or other 
images are necessarily incomplete means of statement and com¬ 
munication, the given symbol may be perfect in the sense that it 
could not have been better found, just as the reflection of the 
moon in still water may be called perfect, though the moon is not 
in it otherwise than as an image. Just as the reflection is not sub¬ 
stantially a doublet of the moon, so the work of art cannot be a 
doublet ( savarqa ) of its subject, though it may be according to 
the workman's skill a perfect embodiment of the mental image 
present to his consciousness. The image whether in the mind or 
in the work is only a means to knowledge, not in itself knowledge. 



NOTES 


183 

Art in the artist is the indivisible identity of form and concept, 
formal and pictorial elements in his mind; art in the work is the 
embodiment of this identity in a given material. What is meant 
in either case by the 4 ‘concomitance” ( sdhitya , sadrkya) of sound 
and sense, pictorial and formal elements, may be inferred from 
Raghuvarhka , I, 1, where Parvatl and Siva are spoken of as two- 
in-one, “commingled like a sound and its meaning,” vagar- 
thdv iva sampfktau; cf. Bhamaha, I, 16, habddrthau sahitau 
kdvyarh , “literature is the unity of sound and sense.” Sound and 
sense, pictorial and formal elements, are the body of art, but 
these intelligible elements are not the soul (dtman) or ultimate 
content of art, as will appear later according to the theories of 
rasa and dhvani ; and that is why according to Zen doctrine 
(and St Augustine) all scripture, in its finite sense, is vain. 

The similar term sdrupyaj “co-aspectuality,” is used in con¬ 
nection with the theory of empirical ( pratyak§a) perception, 
where it is asserted (see Dasgupta, History of Indian Philosophy , 
I, 151 f., and Stcherbatsky, Buddhist Logic , II, 12 f. — my views 
agreeing with Stcherbatsky’s rather than with those of de la 
Vallee Poussin in Melanges chinois el bouddhiques , p. 415) that 
knowledge of an object presented to the senses consists in a co¬ 
ordination {sdrupya « sadrSya) between the form assumed by 
the perceiving consciousness and the aspect presented by the 
object. The definition of sdrupya cited by Stcherbatsky, loc. cit. f 
I, 2I 3> 55 2 > an d 555> viz. atyanta-vilak§ar)dndm sdlak^a^yam , 
“similarity of things extremely dissimilar,” corresponds exactly 
to the Nyaya-Vaise^ika definition of sadfSya cited in our text, 
implying likeness by analogy. In any case, the terms ( sddfSya , 
sdrupya , sdhitya , taddkdrata , anukfti , anurupa, etc.) refer, not 
to likeness between things (symbol and referent, picture and 
model, to wit), but to a correspondence between ideas and 
things. This correspondence tends toward identity at higher 
levels of reference, but attains this identity only in the Absolute, 
experienced “like a flash of lightning” as sddharanya and sdyujya 
in the consummation ( samadhi) of contemplation (dhyana). 



184 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 

That sddftya does not mean “visual resemblance” is further 
seen in the fact that sadftya is precisely that kind of “likeness” 
or “analogy” which is involved in metaphor ( upacdra ); cf. 
Sdhitya Darpana, II, 10, “Metaphor ( upacdra ) consists in the 
suppression of what implies a difference of sense between two 
terms which are quite distinct from one another, viz. by means 
of an overplus of correspondence (sddfSya) which brings them 
together.” Classical examples of metaphor are gaur bdhikah , 
“a bdhika (peasant) is an ox,” and agnir mdnavakah , “the pupil 
is a fire.” 

Corresponding to sadxtya , sdrupya , taddkdratd , taddtmya , etc., 
are sddhdrar^ya (see note 47) and sdyujya y the consummation 
of Yoga in Identity. It will be seen that these terms are at 
the same time exact equivalents of the Scholastic adaequatio , 
and knowledge being an adaequatio rei et intellectus; “The 
knower,” in the words of Eckhart (I, 394) “being that which 
is known.” 

Hsuan Tsang translates sddrhya by cWou (2508), implying the 
notion of reciprocity. But it cannot be said that any Chinese 
terms actually used in aesthetics represent an exact equivalent of 
sddfsya; and if one wished to coin such a technical term, ying 
(13294) cWou might be suggested. 


16 (page 14). Sdhitya Darpana , III, 19 and 20a, and Daharupa , 
IV, 52; cf. Regnaud, La RhHorique sanskrite , p. 296. The actor 
may enjoy aesthetic experience ( dsvdda ) as the spectator of his 
own performance, not qua performer; cf. Sankar&carya, &ata§loki 9 
7, “Or does the actor, playing a woman’s part (strive§adhari) 
pant for a husband, imagining himself a woman?” 


17 (page is), Pramdqa, from root ma, present also in English 
“measure,” “mete,” “metre,” etc. On pramdna as principle see 
Masson-Oursel, Une Connexion , etc., and Esquisse , etc., pp. 256, 
288. Thought of not as principle, but as ascertained standard, 



NOTES 


185 

pramdriLa can also be used in the plural, as “canon of proportion”; 
see note 14. It is essential to understand that even as “author¬ 
ity” pramdr^a must not be thought of as a measure possibly con¬ 
tradictory to experience; on the contrary, “correct” knowledge 
requires a coincidence, consonantia , of “theory” and “fact”; cf. 
note 15 as to sadfsya and sahitya, and Woodroffe, Garland of 
Letters , p. 266. Only pramana conceived as an attribute or 
name of “God” or “Buddha” as “witness” ( sdk$in ) can be 
called absolute; cf. Vasubandhu, Abhidharmako§a y VIII, 40 
(Poussin, 222-225). 

For Siam, cf. “The form (outline) of an object is judged by the 
standard of drong (proper forms in proper proportions) in accord¬ 
ance with baab or example — referring to teachings of dchdriya 
parampard }) (pupillary succession), P. C. Jinavaravamsa, 
“Notes on Siamese Arts and Crafts,” Ceylon National Review 
(July, 1907). An interesting analogy is presented by Zend afs- 
man , generally “metre,” but used in Yasna , XIX, as criterion or 
norm, with reference to right thought, right word, and right deed 
( humatem , hukhtem , huarestem). 

18 (page 18). For Ching Hao see Waley, Introduction , etc., p. 169, 
and Siren, A History of Early Chinese Painting (Index, s.v.). 
I may say that the text of the present work was completed and 
sent to press long before the appearance of Professor Siren’s 
admirable work in 1933; Siren’s book is probably the best ac¬ 
count of Chinese aesthetics so far made available in a Euro¬ 
pean language. 

The two classes of painting here mentioned, viz. shin and 
miao, are the first two in the traditional threefold classification, 
San p’ing] see p. 18. Ching Hao has also two other classes, the 
Amazing (1 ch’i , 991) and the Clever or Skilful ( cKiao , 1411); the 
latter of these corresponds to the Accomplished (ning, 8184) in 
the San p 9 ing . Cf. “This picture is clever (ch’iao) in composi¬ 
tion and technique, but deficient in idea-movement ( i ch’ii f 5367, 
3120).” 



186 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 

19 (page ip). With Chinese shin, divine or spontaneous, com¬ 
pare also the remarks in notes 21 and 64, and Chuang Tzti on the 
Divine Man, Giles, Chuang TzU, p. 151. SMn-daiva, “angelic.” 

Pratibhd , “illumination,” is the usual designation of the poetic 
faculty. As to the nature of this faculty there is some difference 
of view. Some regard it as natural ( naisargikt ) or spontaneous 
( sahajd ), or even supersensual ( lokottard ), making it one with the 
principle of form ( prajnd ) or with genius ( takti ), and thus equiva¬ 
lent to Chinese i (5536), except that the Indian “genius” is not 
thought of in the European and Chinese way as functioning in 
rebellion against or apart from tradition. To sum up the views 
which are here and there expressed with varying degrees of em¬ 
phasis in one direction or the other, one may say that the true 
artist is both born and made, both theoretically and practically 
equipped, by genius ( hakti), imagination or vision (pratibhd), 
scholarship (vyutpatti), concentration (samadhi), and practice 
( abkydsa ). This is practically the view of the Kdvyamimdrhsd. 
For the whole problem see De, Sanskrit Poetics, pp. 53,369. 

20 (page ip). The most elaborate discussion is by Petrucci. 
Enclycopidie , etc., pp. 7 ff., where the versions of Giles, Hirth, 
and Taki are also cited. Petrucci introduces into his interpre¬ 
tation a number of metaphysical ideas which are significant 
in themselves, but hardly justified by the text. My versions 
are based on Far Eastern sources kindly communicated by my 
friend and colleague Kojiro Tomita. The problems are also 
fully discussed in Sir6n, A History of Early Chinese Painting 

(1933)- 

A connection of Hsieh Ho’s Six Canons with Yalodhara’s Six 
Limbs (see note 14) has often been suggested. The difference of 
eight centuries in date does not exclude the possibility of deriva¬ 
tion, for the Six Limbs represents nothing but a late list of ideas 
which were already current in India in the time of Hsieh Ho, and 
even as it stands may be a direct citation from older sources. 
However, it seems to me unnecessary to postulate any direct con- 



NOTES 187 

nection, and better to note simply the extent to which the 
Chinese and Indian ideas actually correspond . 

In the first canon, the word ch’i, spirit, means from the Taoist 
point of view life as it proceeds from Heaven and Earth, the two 
modalities of the Tao, and even when understood as by Mencius 
in the sense of “passion-nature” or “fiery nature” represents the 
principle of life, as desire, the will to life. The word ch’i is also to 
be used with literal accuracy as the proper Chinese rendering of 
the third member of the Christian Trinity. The Indian equiva¬ 
lent is prdr^a, spiration, life, identified either directly with Brah¬ 
man, or manifested as the Wind by which the Waters are stirred, 
so that his reflection which is the world-picture appears in them. 
Ch'i is accordingly “ form ” in the sense that “ the soul is the form 
of the body”; or in the sense of desire or will to life, ch’i is repre¬ 
sented by Indian kdma (Eros). Again, the idea yiin, of operation 
or reverberation, is strictly comparable to what is meant by the 
dkvani of Indian rhetoricians (see note 49), it being only as it were 
by an echoing in the heart of the hearer that the full meaning of a 
word (or any other symbol) can be realized. The canon asserts 
that the ultimate theme of all art is the universal energy of the 
spirit, and for this point of view also many Indian parallels can be 
found, for example in the words of Kablr (Bolpur, ed., I, 68) by 
“He is the true master ( sadguru , or from the present point of 
view, true artist) who makes you perceive the Supreme Self 
(paramdtman) wherever the mind attaches itself.” More theo¬ 
logically expressed, “Whatever may be apprehended by the 
mind, whatever may be perceived by the senses, whatever may 
be discerned by the intellect, all is but a form of Thee” (Vi§nu 
Pur&ria, I. 4). Sankar&c&rya likewise asserts that art is a the- 
ophany ( dbhdsa ) when he says that Brahman is the theme equally 
of sacred and secular songs (Commentary on the Brahma Sutra , I, 
1, 20). Less metaphysically, in the Viwudharmottara , XLIII, 
39, it is asserted that he is a true painter who can represent the 
sleeping as possessed of life or sentience (cetand), the dead as 
devoid of it. 



1 88 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 

The second canon asserts that the vehicle of expression (as de¬ 
fined in the first canon) is the brush stroke or line, and it is self- 
evident that the brush stroke or line is in itself the most abstract 
and intelligible part of the work, since an outline, boundary, or 
limiting plane does not correspond to anything seen in Nature 
but represents an interpretation of what we see; in other words, 
line is not representative, but symbolic. The same is implied by 
Indian authorities when they remind us that it is the line ( rekkd ) 
that interests the master, while the public cares most about 
color (see p. ioi and note 73). The third and fourth canons, 
taken by themselves, point out that the pictorial or representa¬ 
tive elements in a work of art are those of shape (mass or area), 
and color, and this too becomes self-evident if we reflect that 
what the eye sees in Nature is nothing but a patchwork of colors, 
as was recognized early in the development of Indian psychology 
(see note 54); colored areas, being thus the primary data of sense 
impression, become in the work of art the primary means of re¬ 
cognition; and because the attempt at recognition is the first, 
animal, reaction of the naive spectator, it has been observed that 
color is what interests the public (see p. 101 and notes 66 and 73). 

Further, if we take the first and second pairs of canons to¬ 
gether (as we are bound to do, because we must assume the con¬ 
sistency of the series) and assume the general Chinese and Indian 
principle of the conformity of a thing to its inner nature (for ex¬ 
ample, Mfcchakaifika , IX, 16, na hy dkftih susadfSam vijahdti 
vfttam, “ Outer-form by no means contradicts a like inward- 
disposition”; Kumdrasambhava, v. 36, pdpavfttaye na rUpatn, 
“beauty goes not with evil nature” — Mallin&tha cites yatrd 
kftis tatra gundh, “as are the forms, so are the virtues,” and na 
surupdh pdpasamdcdrd bhavanti, “the fair do not act sinfully”; 
DaSakumdracarita , Mitragupta’s adventure, seyam dkftir na vya- 
bhicarati Silam, “Such is her person; the character must cor¬ 
respond”), what we have is tantamount to an assertion that the 
natural unity of a painting inheres in the conformity of its signifi¬ 
cance and its presentation, and this consent is precisely what we 



NOTES 


189 

have already recognized (p. 13 and note 15) as consonantia, 
sadxtya,) etc. We have seen also that the same necessity is fre¬ 
quently enunciated in Chinese dicta on painting, and have sug¬ 
gested (note 15) that if a term should have to be coined, ying 
(13294) ch’ou (2508) might be suitable. 

The fifth canon perhaps asserts only the necessity of placing 
the parts of a painting in their natural logical relation, or may be 
taken in connection with what has been said about composition, 
above , p. 20. 

The last canon is not immediately equivalent to any one of the 
Six Limbs, but does correspond to what is met with throughout 
the theory and practice of art in India, ch'uan being equivalent 
to kdstramdna f naydt, vidhivat , sippdnurupena , etc. For example, 
it is “ because of traditional authority ( ndyat ) regarding them, 
displayed in treatises ( kdstrarupatd) compiled by learned men of 
modern times, that the arts (kola), etc., are even today current 
( vartate ),” Tri§atfi§aldkdpuru§acaritra } I, 2, 972, the reference 
being to the preservation of the Five Arts and their subdivisions, 
alluded to in note 9. 

21 (page 22). The visible ( drsya , vi$aya ) universe may be re¬ 
garded as a real theophany, shining forth, abhdsa , of God (cf. 
Chatterji, Kashmir Shaivism (1914), pp. 53-61, and Eckhart’s 
“ image-bearing light”), real to the extent that we perceive its ulti¬ 
mate significance, paramdrtha. More empirically expressed, God 
is the creator, nirmdtya-kdraka , of the world-picture, jagaccitra , 
of which the beauty, ramarfiyatd, is the same as that which in art is 
the source of disinterested pleasure, id quod visum placet , dr§ ti- 
pritirh vidhatte. Sankar&carya himself uses the same simile, as 
follows: “On the vast canvas of the Self, the picture of the mani¬ 
fold worlds is painted by the Self itself, and that Supreme Self 
itself seeing but itself, enjoys great delight ( pramudarh praydti) ” 
(SvdtmaniruparjLa, 95). The world-picture is not here considered 
from the point of view of the practical activity as made up of 
lovely and unlovely parts, but as seen in contemplation, as an 



I9O TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 

aesthetic experience. For God is without motive or ends to be 
attained ( Bhagavad Gitd , III, 22); his art is without means and 
not really a making or becoming, but rather a self-illumined 
(svaprak&Sa), reflected modality ( dbhdsa ), or play (lild), in which 
the gratuitous character of art attains its ultimate perfection. 
God is not visible in essence, but only as it were in regard, in the 
sensual world, according to the manner of our vision, which vision 
when perfected returns all creatures to their source, seeing them 
as He does. 

This conception of God as the supreme artist, as representing 
the perfection toward which human art tends, has played an im¬ 
portant part in both European and Asiatic aesthetics and theol¬ 
ogy. In Europe the idea has been current from the neo-Platonists 
onward, and was expressed with particular clarity by St Thomas 
and by Eckhart. These ideas are expressed in Chinese thought 
not merely by the term shin applied to art conceived as an un¬ 
willed manifestation, but also in the Taoist myths of the disap¬ 
pearance of the artist, and the coming to life of works of art, 
referred to in the text. These are in fact the inevitable conse¬ 
quences of perfection, that the artist becoming as God is no 
longer seen, and at the same time shares in the everlasting Now 
of God’s timeless productivity. In Chinese Taoist tradition the 
attainment of perfection through art, as it were by Silpa-yoga , 
has received a specific mythical expression; but the idea of the 
necessary disappearance ( nivfUa , “involution,” abhisambhava, 
“re-becoming”) of the perfected being, however perfection 
may have been realized, naturally finds its place in all meta¬ 
physical systems. For example, dhtUvd tarlram akrtarh kftdtmd 
brahma-lokam abhisambhavdmi , “Having shaken off the body 
(substance), as a self made (-perfect) I am conformed to the un¬ 
made world of Brahma,” Chdndogya Upani§ad, VIII, 13, where 
total realization is implied, involving a transformation even with 
respect to the intelligible plane. The notion recurs, of course, 
in the Veddnta Sutras ; cf. Ren6 Guenon, Uhomme et son Devenir 
selon It Vedanta , pp. 194,195. The disappearance or merging of 



NOTES 


I 9 I 

the poet-saint Manikka V 5 ,gagar in the image of Siva ( Tiruvd- 
tavurar Pur ana, VII, 28-29) affords a case in point. Cf. in the 
Hebrew tradition, Moses, Enoch, and Elias, the last of these ap¬ 
pearing also in the Muhammadan tradition as having drunk of 
the Water of Life. 

The equivalent in Christianity is the Ascension; cf. Eckhart: 
“ We may reasonably suppose that when the time came for John 
to go, God caused to befall him what was due to happen on the 
day of judgment. . . . We may take it that his body, which was 
destined to perish here on earth, was disintegrated in the air, so 
that there entered into God only the being of his body, which 
would have accompanied the soul at the last day.” The rationale 
of the disappearance proceeds immediately from the distinction 
of the sensible from the intelligible spheres of manifestation, 
Kamadhatu or Kamaloka, and Rupadhatu or Rilpaloka (see 
note 74). The Silpa-sthdna-kauSala , or operative facility of the 
practical intellect, functions only on the sensible plane, where 
“work” is to be done; intellectual creation (nirmdtya), function¬ 
ing on both planes, (1) on the sensible plane is embodied by hu¬ 
man will in a work of art, which “lives” and has “movement” 
only metaphorically, and (2) on the intelligible plane is imme¬ 
diately manifested as formal life. In any case, that art may be 
thought of as a “way” is most of all apparent in the fact that 
aesthetic perception is essentially disinterested. 

22 ( page 24). Recognition is not dependent on verisimilitude, 
but is by convention; the realistic spectator reverses the “imita¬ 
tive” procedure of the artist who has given form to natural 
shape, by interpreting the manufactured image ( rupa ) as though 
it were the thing itself present to the eye ( pratyak§a ) (Bhartrhari, 
Vakyapadiya, III, 7, 5). 

23 (page jo). In the Lankdvaidra Sutra , loc . cit., the unreality of 
appearances is illustrated by various similes, among them that of 
painted surfaces (citrakfta-pradeSd) which are seen as if in relief 
( nimndnnatd ), although really flat ( animndnnatd ). 



I92 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 

24 ( page 32). Svapnavasavadatta , VI, 13, and Mfcchaka^ika , 
IV, o, 3. So also in Mfcchakatika , IX, 16, susadfta is “true re¬ 
semblance.” Cf. vrddhisadfSa, “old-looking,” in Sukramtisdra, 
IV, 4, 201, and sadr$a 9 “the like” ( = “etc.”), in Vasubandhu’s 
AbhidharmakoSa , IX (Poussin, p. 275). For “exact likeness” we 
have also taddnuruvarh (-rupatn) in Haribhadra’s AvaSyaka 
Ttkd y II, 8 , 2 and 3, and pratyaksam in the Karpuramanjariy 1 , 30. 

In the Vi^udharmottara, III, 41, 2, sddfSya is a noun, and 
kincilloka-sddrSya must be taken to mean “in which there is a 
similitude only partially connected with the material world”; 
in any case nothing like an injunction to realism could be thought 
of, for the satya painting in question has clearly to do with the 
angelic sphere, and pramdna as well as sddrSya are required in it. 
My version in JAOS ., HI, 13, needs correction accordingly; cf. 
my “Painter’s Art in Ancient India; Ajant-a,” in Journ. Indian 
Society of Oriental Art , I, 26, n. 2. 

25 (page 38). “ Imagist ” might perhaps be suitably rendered by 
adhyavdsana, “introsusceptive,” Sdhitya Darpana, II, 8-9. 

Indian parallels to Zen are naturally not lacking; for example, 
in J&taka, no. 460, the evanescence of the morning dew suffices to 
enlightenment, and analogous to the story of Tan Hsia is that of 
the Tamil poetess and devotee, Auwai, who when she was re¬ 
buked for sitting with her feet outstretched towards the image in 
a temple, an act of formal disrespect, admitted her fault, but 
added, “If you will point out to me in what direction God is not 
to be found, I will there stretch out my feet.” There are likewise 
abundant parallels in European tradition, for example in the 
Gospels, and in Eckhart and Blake. 

26 {page jp). Chinese ch'an (348), Japanese zen » Sanskrit 
dhydna f Pali jhdna. 

27 {page 41). Version by Waley, italics mine. 



NOTES 


193 

28 ( page 43). A Japanese hokku; in poems of this kind the hearer 
is expected to complete the thought in his own mind; cf. the 
Chinese phrase “ to give spiritual form (shin) to the very part 
left undelineated,” and what has been said above as to the literal 
inadequacy but practical efficiency of words (note 15), and be¬ 
low on the spectator’s own effort (note 43). 

29 (page 44). Ukiyoye means “pictures of the fleeting world”; 
the Japanese print is its typical product, but there are also paint¬ 
ings of the same kind. 

30 (page 43). An allusion to the Persian §ufl story of Laila and 
Majnun. When it was objected to Majnun that Laila was not so 
beautiful as he pretended, he answered, “To see the beauty of 
Laila requires the eyes of Majnun.” 

31 (page 43). Tiruvenkata’s admirable preface to the Telugu 
edition (1887) of the Ahhinaya Darpana (see Coomaraswamy 
and Duggirala, The Mirror of Gesture , Cambridge, Massa¬ 
chusetts, 1917) may well be quoted here. Tiruvenkata first 
alludes to the neglect of the art and science of the mimetic dance 
(nautch) in modern times, which neglect had been mainly the 
result of European and puritanical influences, though he does not 
say as much, and then proceeds to a reassertion of the normal 
Hindu point of view: 

“ It is known to everyone that in these days our people not 
merely neglect this lore as though it were of a common sort, but 
go so far as to declare it to be an art that is only suited for the 
entertainment of the vulgar, unworthy of cultivated men, and 
fit to be practiced only by play-actors. But it is like the Union- 
Science (yoga-Sastra) which is the means of attaining spiritual 
freedom (ntok§a) ; and the reason why it has come to be regarded 
in such a fashion is that it is by movements of the body (ahgi- 
kdbhinaya) that the lineaments and interplay of the hero and 
heroine, etc., are clearly exhibited, so as to direct men in the way 
of righteousness, and to reveal an esoteric meaning, obtaining 



194 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 

the appreciation of connoisseurs and those who are learned in the 
lore of gesture. But if we understand this science with finer in¬ 
sight, it will be evident that it has come into being to set forth 
the sport and pastime of Sri Krishna, who is the progenitor of 
every world, and the patron deity of the flavor of love (Srhgdra- 
rasa ); so that by clearly expressing the flavor, and enabling 
men to taste thereof, it gives them the wisdom of Brahma, 
whereby they may understand how every business is unstable; 
from which understanding arises aversion to such business, and 
therefrom arise the highest virtues of peace and patience, and 
thence again may be won the Bliss of Brahma. 

“It has been declared by Brahma and others that the mutual 
relations of hero and heroine, in their esoteric meaning, partake 
of the nature of the relation of master and disciple, mutual 
service and mutual understanding; and therefore the Bharata 
S&stra, which is a means to the achievement of the Four Ends of 
Human Life, Virtue, Wealth, Pleasure, and Spiritual Freedom, 
— and is a most exalted science, practiced even by the gods, — 
should also be practiced by ourselves. ,, 

32 {page 45). Sdhitya Darpana, III, 9. Vdsand, as “affect-ion,” 
“perfuming,” is the latent memory of past experience, and con¬ 
sequent present sensibility. Alike from the aesthetic and gen¬ 
erally human point of view, vasana may be considered a neces¬ 
sary evil. Regarded as an affective aptitude, a liability to direct 
sympathy for, or prejudice on behalf of, ourselves or others, it 
represents a hindrance equally to enlightenment in general and 
to aesthetic experience in particular; but as the necessary basis 
for such ideal and disinterested sympathy as we feel at the spec¬ 
tacle of joy and sorrow represented in art, it is prerequisite to 
aesthetic experience. Cf. note 47. 

The ideal character of poetic sensibility, that is to say the dis¬ 
interested nature of aesthetic contemplation, is constantly in¬ 
sisted upon in the Alamk&ra literature. It is pointed out, for 
example, in the Sdhitya Darpana , III, 5 and 6, that even in the 



NOTES I95 

case of works of art of which the themes are in themselves dis¬ 
tressing, no pain is felt by the spectator, but only delight, to 
which those who take intelligent delight in art bear unanimous 
witness. 

33 ( P a &c 4 &)- For rasa, etc., theories applied to painting or 
sculpture, see JAOS., HI, 15, n. 5, and Basava Raja, Siva Tattva 
Ratndkara (ed. Madras, 1927), VI, 2, 19. 

34 (P a Z e 46)- Kavya, specifically poetry (prose or verse), also 
embraces the general idea of “art”; essential meanings present 
in the root ku include “ wisdom ” and “ skill.” One may compare 
Blake’s use of “Poetic Genius” as equivalent to “Imagination” 
in the broadest sense of the word, and to the analogy of Greek 
irolriais, denoting to the making of anything, for example, 
“creatures” or a ship. 

35 (P a t e 46 )- For example in the Malatimddhava, I, 33, 9-10, 
where the purpose of a portrait ( dlekhya-prayojana ) is consolation 
in longing (tUkartfhdvinodana), or PriyadarHkd , I, 3, where the 
play has “desired fruit,” vdnchita-phala. 

36 {page46). Sdhitya Darpana, I, 3. Cf. “As to the fact that the 
soul of poetry is flavor, and the like, there exists no difference of 
opinion”— Vyaktiviveka; and “All poetry lives by rasa” — 
Abhinavagupta. 

37 {P a Z e 47 )' Meaning or utility is the indispensable motive of 
all art, but from the Indian point of view that is not art which 
does not also subserve the ultimate end of aesthetic experience, 
which is not so, or is so only to the most limited degree, in cases 
of bare efficacy, bare descriptive statement, or even “ illustrative 
poetry,” citrakdvya . For example, a piece of corrugated iron 
may keep out the rain, and may be called art inasmuch as it is a 
product of knowledge and technical skill, but it is scarcely a roof, 
architecturally speaking; in science, mere illustration and classi¬ 
fication are scarcely art, but an elegant mathematical equation, 



I96 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 

or any well-designed tool such as a telescope, is art. Any use of 
words or application of intelligence is art of a sort, but bare state¬ 
ment and efficacy are the crudest kind of art, not “ primitive,” but 
elementary, inasmuch as they are not far removed from func¬ 
tional exclamation. It is here if anywhere that a distinction of 
degree can be drawn between “ fine ” and “ servile ” art. But it is 
beneath the dignity of man to maintain his existence on a level of 
bare utility and functional necessity, and, as has been well said 
by Ruskin, “industry without art is brutality.” 

38 ( page 47). To call a work of art rasavat, or ideally beautiful, is 
not strictly legitimate, but simply a manner of speaking and by 
projection, imputation, or inference ( anumdna ) or figuratively 
(upacdra) ; for it is constantly insisted that rasa is not an objec¬ 
tive quality present in the work of art or any of its parts. Cf. 
Mukherjee, Essai , etc., p. 66; De, Sanskrit Poetics , II, 205, and 
note 43, below. 

39 (P a Z e 4 $)' Sdhitya Darpana, III, 206, ff. 

40 ( page 48). Mdlavikdgnimitra, I, 4, bhinna-rucer janasya , 
“people of divers tastes.” 

“What Aesthetic, which implies thought and concept of art, 
can have to do with pure taste without concept is difficult to 
say,” Croce, “The Breviary of Aesthetic,” in Rice Institute 
Pamphlet, II (1915), 305. 

41 ( page 48 ). DaSarupa , IV, 90. The opposite view, that art 
(especially drama, music, painting, and sumptuary arts) is noth¬ 
ing but a luxury, a tickling of the senses, is maintained only from 
a monastic, puritanical, and really naively materialistic view, 
mainly in early Buddhist and Jaina works, to a more limited ex¬ 
tent in the Dharma Sdstras, and in modern times as a result of 
European influence; cf. note 31. Amongst Buddhist and Jaina 
texts might be cited Brahma-Jala Suita, 1,1,13 \ Visuddhi Magga, 
38; and Aydrdrhga Sutta, II, lect. 13. 



NOTES 


I 97 

42 ( page 50). Cf. Maritain, Introduction to Philosophy , p. 263, 
n. 1: “the word aesthetics is derived etymologically from (the 
Greek word for) sensibility (aiovdhvofjLai = feel), whereas art, 
and beauty also, are matters of the intellect, quite as much as of 
feeling. ,, Were this more generally realized, much sentimentality 
in current thinking about art might be avoided. 

43 ( page 50). Datarupa, IV, 47, 50. Cf. Lahkdvatdra Sutra , II, 
117, 118. Range na vidhyate citrarh na bhumau na ca bhdjane . . . 
tattvarh hy ak§aravarjitam , “the (real) picture is not in the color, 
nor in the surface, nor in the surroundings (but in the mind) . . . 
the principle transcends the letter.” In this passage bhajana 
may be the painter’s saucer of color, as means or material cause 
of the work, but more abstractly considered as “receptacle” 
means the environment of the work of art, or even the physical 
world; cf. the cosmos as bhdjana , “receptacle,” Vasubandhu, 
AbhigLharmakoSa , III, 44 (Poussin, p. 182 f.). 

Cf. Confucius, Analects , XVII, xi, “Are bells and drums all 
that is meant by music?”; and Walt Whitman, 

All music is what wakes in you when you are reminded of it 
by the instruments, 

It is not in the violins and the cornets . . . nor the score of 
the baritone singer, 

It is nearer and further than they. 

44 (PH e 5 °)- Dharmadatta, cited in Sdhitya Darpana, III, 9a, 
commentary. 

45 (P a 8 e 5 1 )- Sdhitya Darpaqa, III, 2 and 3, and commentary; 
Dkvanydlocana, Nirnaya Sagara ed., p. n. 

46 ( page 51). DaSarUpa , IV, 51; Sdhitya Darpana, III, 19--20. 

47 (P a f> e 5 2 )* Sddhdranya is analogous to empathy, EinfUhlung ; 
vdsand (“perfuming”) is innate or acquired sensibility, an emo¬ 
tional tendency which, though it may be developed as senti¬ 
mentality, is nevertheless essential to the possibility of sadhd - 
raryya as ideal sympathy. Sddhdranya is another aspect of that 



I98 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 

“consent” which we have already recognized as sddfsya , sdhitya , 
sdrUpya, taddkarata. 

To continue what has been said in note 32: aesthetic sympathy 
is ideal, without any ethical element; that is to say, it is felt 
equally with respect to good and evil, pleasure or pain, as repre¬ 
sented. An ethical sympathy may indeed be legitimately felt 
with regard to such a hero as Rama represented as a model of 
conduct in a poem, play, or painting, but such sympathy belongs 
to the proximate value of art in relation to dharma , not to aes¬ 
thetic appreciation ( asvdda), wherein the spectator sees as if with 
the eye of God, who “ regards neither the good nor the evil works 
of anyone” ( Bhagavad Gita , V, 15), but “makes his sun to shine 
alike upon the just and the unjust,” for “the vision of God tran¬ 
scends virtues,” Eckhart, I, 273. The impartiality of aesthetic 
reproduction, the fact that art as such is related rather to law 
than to equity, is well brought out in the NdtyaSdstra , 1,112 ff.; 
see translation in the Mirror of Gesture , p. 2. 

48 (page 52). DaSarupa , IV, 45. 

49 (P a i e 53)' Dhvani is literally “sound,” especially sound like 
that of thunder or a drum, hence “resonance” or “overtone” of 
meaning. A striking analogy can be found in the first canon of 
Hsieh Ho as written with the character yiin (13843), that the 
essential in art is “ the reverberation {yiin) of the spirit in the 
forms of life,” the idea of sound ing rather than of mere sound 
being present both in dhvani and in yiin (13843). Significant 
synonyms of vyatijand , lit. “ revealing,” are dhvanana, “echoing,” 
and gamana , “ motion.” As to the latter, it may be observed that 
when anything is spoken of as represented in an image, it is said 
to be citragata , “gone into representation”; cf. Eckhart, “to be 
properly expressed, a thing must proceed from within, moved by 
its form,” and Leonardo, “That drawing is best which best ex¬ 
presses the passion that animates the figure.” Vyaftjand , how¬ 
ever, viz. in Buddhist usage, means only the “letter” as op¬ 
posed to the “spirit” or “meaning” {aUha - ortha). The later 



NOTES I99 

sense endows the “letter” with a suggestive significance beyond 
the literal. 

50 ( page 53). See Dhvanikara, Dhvanydlokalocana (“The Eye of 
Perception of Content”), cited by Mukherjee, Essai , etc., pp. 

85-90. 

51 (page 54). From the* point of view of the Lahkdvatdra Sutra , 
the two chief hindrances are klesdvaraqa (sensual attachment) 
and jneydvarana (mental or systematic hindrances), one might 
say affections and prejudices. Cf. Blake, “man has closed him¬ 
self up. ... If the doors of perception were cleansed, all things 
would appear as they are, Infinite.” It must be borne in mind 
that from the Indian point of view enlightenment and perfection 
are always virtually present, that is, not to be acquired by any 
means but only to be revealed when the mirror of the soul is 
cleansed from dust. This is a metaphor particularly applicable 
in the aesthetic field; aesthetic contemplation cannot be taught; 
all that can be done is to break down the barriers that stand in 
the way of realization. 

52 (page 56). A clear distinction is here drawn between the func¬ 
tional means of perception as they are in themselves (for example, 
the eye’s intrinsic faculty), and their use determined by intelli¬ 
gence; voice (vac - vi§aya Sabda) in this passage is to be distin¬ 
guished from speech (vac) in the Brhadarar^yaka Upani§ad , IV, 1, 
where speech is identified with discrimination or pure intellect 
(prajnd ), and in Chandogya Upani$ad , VII, 2, where speech 
“makes known” name. 

“Name and aspect” (ndma-r&pa) are the fundamental conven¬ 
tions (respectively intelligible and sensible) by which phenomena 
are knowable (discriminated). Thus in the Satapatha Brdhtnana, 
XI, 2,3, name and aspect are treated as the two manifestations of 
the Brahman, whereby He is known in the contingent universe, 
“aspect being intellect, inasmuch as it is by intellect that one 
seizes aspect,” and “name being speech, inasmuch as it is by 



200 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 


speech that one seizes name,” and these two are not distinguish¬ 
able in nature, for “ whatever is name is indeed aspect.” The last 
passage really asserts the identity in principle of all arts; cf. Eck- 
hart, “form is a revelation of essence” (380) and “the soul 
knows only in effigy.” Further, “As far as there are name and 
aspect, so far indeed extends this world ” (S. Br., ibid.). Cf. Kau - 
§itaki Upani§ad , 1 ,3, where Manas! and Cak§u§I, “Intelligence” 
and “Perception,” are personified as the consorts of Brahma and 
immediate causes of the phenomenal universe. But in Brahman, 
called Spectator or Overseer ( paridra§tf), name and aspect as 
human modes of perception and representation are transcended 
(PraSna Upani§ad, VI, 5). There are in fact three modes of 
vision, that of the functional fleshly eye (mdrhsa-cak§u ), the an¬ 
gelic eye (divya-cak$u f the intellect), and the eye of transcendent 
wisdom ( prajnd-cak$u , gnosis), respectively functional, all-seeing, 
and seeing in simultaneity. The last is the third eye of Siva, 
which destroys, or rather trans-forms, appearance by its non¬ 
perception of duality. So, in the last analysis, “It is not aspects 
that one should seek to understand, but the Seer (dra${f) of 
aspects” ( Kau§itaki Upani§ad , III, 8): “seeing Whom, nought 
else remains to be seen, yad df§tvd ndpararh dfSyam” (San- 
kar&carya, Atmabodha , 55). He who thus attains the world of 
Brahman becomes a “Seer without duality ( dra§ta advaitah), this 
is man’s highest path, his highest bliss, etc.” (Bfhaddraqyaka 
Upani§ad , IV, 3, 32). 

It should be noticed once for all that, just as in English, so in 
Sanskrit very many words, for example vac , rupa, are neces¬ 
sarily used in two senses, empirical and ideal, or even in three 
senses, literal, ideal, and transcendental. Rupa , however, when 
correlated with ndma , has always to be rendered by “aspect” 
rather than by “form”; it is really ndma , “name,” or “idea,” 
that is the determining principle or “form” of the species. Thus 
with respect to man, ndma-rUpa is “soul and body”; the soul 
being the “ form ” of the body. To render nama-rupa by “ name 
and form” is tautological. 



NOTES 


201 


For the distinction of speech from sound cf. Chuang Tzti: 
“Speech is not mere breath. It is differentiated by meaning” 
(Giles, Chuang Tzti, 1889, p. 16). 

53 (P a f> e 5 ^)• Ibid., IV, 1,7, the heart ( hfdaya ) is said to be the 
support of all things, the highest Brahman; cf. note 3. The heart 
is thus a synonym for the centre and entirety of being. This has 
to be borne in mind in connection also with the term sahfdaya , 
“having heart,” equivalent to rasika and pramdtf. 

54 (P a & e 5d). Atthasdlini, p. 317; Woodward, Gradual Sayings , I, 
159, n. 2; Keith, Buddhist Philosophy , p. 169. 

55 (P a Z e di)* Mari tain, Art and Scholasticism , p. 1. 

56 ( page 61 ). Meister Eckhart was born in Saxony or Thuringia 
about 1260. He became a professor in Paris, and later held 
very high clerical positions in Bohemia and Germany. He was 
suspected of heresy, and condemned in 1329, two years after 
his death. He taught not in Latin but in the vernacular, 
and has been called the father of the German language. St 
Thomas had died (1274) while he was still a youth; Tauler and 
Ruysbroeck were his contemporaries, and had probably heard 
him preach. The materials cited in the present essay are derived 
from Meister Eckhart , translated by C. de B. Evans from Franz 
Pfeiffer’s collected German edition of 1857, in two volumes, Lon¬ 
don, 1924 and 1931; the page references are to the first volume 
unless otherwise staled. 

Eckhart presents an astonishingly close parallel to Indian 
modes of thought; some whole passages and many single sen¬ 
tences read like a direct translation from Sanskrit. See from this 
point of view R. Otto, Mysticism East and West (New York, 
1931), and my New Approach to the Vedas (London, 1934). 

It is not of course suggested that any Indian elements what¬ 
ever are actually present in Eckhart’s writing, though there are 
some Oriental factors in the European tradition, derived from 
neo-Platonic and Arabic sources. But what is proved by the 



202 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 

analogies is not the influence of one system of thought upon an¬ 
other, but the coherence of the metaphysical tradition in the 
world and at all times. 

57 (PW e & 2 )' this respect, Eckhart’s nearest and natural de¬ 
scendant is Blake; for example, Jesus and his Disciples were all 
Artists; Praise is the Practice of Art; Israel delivered from Egypt 
is Art delivered from Nature and Imitation; The Eternal Body 
of Man is the Imagination; The gods of Greece and Egypt were 
Mathematical Diagrams; Eternity is in love with the productions 
of time; Man has no Body distinct from his Soul; If the doors of 
perception were cleansed, all things would appear to man as they 
are, infinite; In Eternity All is Vision. 

58 (page 62). Cf. tridhd , sarhhita in the Upani?ads, for example 
Brhaddrariyaka Up ., I, 2,3 and Taittiriya Up., 1 ,3,1-3. 

59 (P a i e fy)- All ritual, offices, and sacraments (pujd, yajna , 
sarhskdra) are art. For transubstantiation see Eckhart, 87, 477: 
“ the sacrament nourishes like any other food. But it has none of 
the nature of bread ” (477), just as with other works of art, which 
may please any sense, but are to be taken in another sense, alle¬ 
gorical or anagogic. The Catholic view is that though a man may 
be drawn to any work of art (such as scripture) causa voluptatis , 
he may well proceed rationem artis inteUigere . Cf. Lankdvatdra 
Sutra , II, 118, 119, where a painting is said to be produced in 
colors “for the sake of attracting (kar$ana) spectators,” though 
the very picture is not in the colors (range na citram ), but sub¬ 
sists as the art in the artist, and by the spectator’s own effort 
again as art in him. 

60 (page 72). Leonardo’s il pittore pingt se stesso , perhaps the 
first enunciation of the principle on which depends the validity 
of the modem game of attribution. 

61 (page 78). This point of view still survives in Dante’s Chi 
pinge figura , si non pud esser lei , non la pud porre . 



NOTES 


203 

6 a (page 84). Deliberate conventionalizing, calculated search for 
the abstract or so-called ideal, as in the modem practice of de¬ 
signing, and in archaism, is a different activity, not a “ singling 
out the best” I can , but what I like best. 

63 {page 88). “The heathen philosopher Aristotle says, ‘Were 
there no house nor plac,e and no materials it would be all one 
being, one matter, which being divided is like another souP” 
(II, 290). 

St Thomas {Sum. Theol. } III, Q. 23, A. 3): “the form of a 
house already built is like the mental word of the builder in its 
specific form, but not in intelligibility, because the material form 
of a house is not intelligible, as it was in the mind of the builder.” 

64 {page 91). Human nature as it is in God “does not appear in 
the looking-glass image . . . only just the features are seen in the 
mirror” (51), the features being the accidents of being, not the 
man as he is. Cf. the Chinese phrase for portraiture, fu shin , 
“portraying the divine image in a man.” 

The history of portraiture in Europe provides an interesting 
and rather unhappy contrast to the Chinese and Indian notions 
of fu shin, “portraying soul,” and sva-rUpa , “intrinsic aspect.” 
In what follows, quotations are from Jitta-Zadoks, Ancestral 
Portraiture in Rome (Amsterdam, 1932), pp. 87, 92 f. The tend¬ 
ency to realism and the use of death masks are “two coordinate 
consequences of one and the same mentality. .. . This mentality 
will bring about as well portraits of extreme realism (so-called 
verism) as the practice of making moulds on the actual features” 
of the living model. Now, tomb effigies came into use about 
1200: “These statues first represented the deceased not as he 
actually appeared after death but as he hoped and trusted to be 
on the day of Judgment. This ... is apparent in the pure and 
happy expression of all the equally youthful and equally beauti¬ 
ful faces which have lost every trace of individuality. But to¬ 
wards the end of the XHIth century ... interest turned from 
the heavenly Future to the worldly Present. Not'how the dead 



204 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 

would perhaps appear one day but how they had actually been in 
life was considered important. More or less likeness was now 
wanted. ... As the last consequence of this demand for exact 
likeness the death mask, taken from the actual features, made its 
appearance . . . rationalism and realism appearing at the same 
time. . . . The death mask . . . really did help the artist to draw 
near to Nature and this it achieved by teaching him the con¬ 
struction of the face ... (at last) ... the head is constructed 
from within and is created by the artist as by Nature herself.” 
The history of post-Renaissance European art thus takes on the 
aspect of a reanimation of the corpses in a charnel house (cf. 
Speculum , April, 1933, PI. XI), rather than that of a Resurrec¬ 
tion of the Dead in a more glorious form. One begins to see why 
Sukr&c&rya could speak of portraiture as asvargya. “ Portraiture 
belongs to civilisations that fear death” (Kramrisch, Indian 
Sculpture j p. 134). 

With respect to the representation of the deceased, not as they 
may have looked in real life but as they “ hoped and trusted to be 
on the day of Judgment,” compare (1) the Indian, and more 
typically Cambodian and Javanese, practice of representing de¬ 
ceased ancestors in the form of the deity to whom they had been 
devoted, and (2) in the Saddharma Purjidartka the resurrection of 
past Buddhas and Bodhisattvas in glorified bodies — icono- 
graphic representations always reproducing the “exemplary ele¬ 
ments” or lineaments (lak§an,a) of these glorified bodies, rather 
than any of those individual accidents by which the man might 
have been recognized at the time of his earthly ministry. 

65 {page 100). For the full context see Coomaraswamy and Dug- 
girala, The Mirror of Gesture , pp. 14, 15. 

66 {page 101 ). It is possible, therefore, that in making varnAdhya 
Duryodhana’s first exclamation some sarcasm is intended. 

67 {page 103). Cf. Tri$a§tiSaldkdpuru§acaritra f 1,1,360, where a 
man whose eyes are fastened to the (? painted) forms of beautiful 
women, etc., is said to stumble {skhalati) 9 as if the border of his 



NOTES 


205 

garment had been caught on a hedge. Cf. “ there is no actual re¬ 
lief in a painting, and yet we see it there,” citre . . . natdnnatam 
ndsti ca , dfSyate atha ca, Mahay ana SHtrdlarhkdra , XIII, 17; cf. 
Lahkdvatdra Sutra and see note 23. 

In the Sakuntald, the “hills and vales” may be either those of 
the bodies of beautiful women represented in the picture, mm- 
ndnnata having this application in Mdlatimddhava, IV, 10, or 
those of the landscape background, pradeta having this sense in 
th e&akuntald itself, infra , VI, 19, and perhaps also in Lahkdva- 
tdra Sutra , p. 91. 

68 ( page 104). Viz. rupa-Sobhd, as in Divydvadana , p. 361. 

69 ( page 106). Similarly in the case of the dancing competition, 
Vikramacaritra, HOS., XXVII, 15, the two apsarases first dance 
together and the assembly of the gods is delighted, nrtyarh 
df^tvd sarhto$am agamat. 

70 ( page 106). The text here, vv. 4, 5, and 6, is almost identical 
with Mdlavikdgnimitra, II, 3, 6, and 8. 

71 (page 107). “Judgment” is vivadanirnaya. In the Mdlavikd¬ 
gnimitra, the King as connoisseur is vi$e§ajna , as judge, praSnika. 

72 ( page 107). Ryder, in HOS., IX, 44, renders admirably the 
substance of Carudatta’s remarks, but with a European nuance 
and avoiding all the technicalities. The Mfcchakatika passage is 
anticipated in a briefer form in Bhasa’s Daridra-Cdrudatta , II, 2. 

73 (P a Z e *08). It is constantly brought out that craftsman and 
critic attach principal importance to the drawing, by which the 
moods are expressed, but that what the public cares about is 
color. As Binyon has observed, “ The painting of Asia is through¬ 
out its main tradition an art of line.” 

74 (P a S e ioq). The nearest to anything of this kind in connection 
with the formative arts occurs in Jdtaka, VI, 332, where the 
Bodhisattva employs a master-architect ( mahd-vaddhaki ) to 
build a hall such as he requires. 



206 transformation of nature in art 

The master-architect does not grasp the Great Being’s idea 
( mahdsaUa-ciUam na ganhaii ), and when corrected explains that 
he can work only according to the tradition of the craft (sipp- 
dnurUpena), and knows no other way (anftatha najdndmiti). The 
Bodhisattva himself then lays out the plan “as if ViSvakarma 
himself had done it.” Even so, the form of the hall is determined 
entirely by the use to which it is to be put; the Bodhisattva’s 
plan is not a personal whim or a piece of self-expression, it is 
simply that he knows better than the architect all that is present 
to the mind of the divine craftsman, the “All-maker.” 

This supernatural virtuosity (kauSala) of the Bodhisattva is 
described in the Lolita Vistara, Ch. XII: it is a command of the 
arts not acquired by study, naca ... yogyd kftd ... SilpakauSalam 
(Lefmann’s ed., p. 156, 1 . 1). Cf. the Mahdydna StUrdlarhkdra of 
Asanga, VII, 6, where the sage ( dhiragata , “who has become a 
seer”) is said to exhibit a threefold ntrmtfna, “manifestation” 
or “facility,” the first of these being displayed in the field of 
art (Silpakarma-sthdna ). 

More fully in Vasubandhu’s AbhidharmakoSa, II, 71-72 (Pous¬ 
sin, p. 320), virtuosity ( kauSala) in art (Ulpa-sthdna) and the 
power of mental creation are two of the four mental activities 
exhibited by a perfected being on the sensible plane of mani¬ 
festation ( Kdtnadhdtu, Kdtnaloka ). Of these two, the Silpa- 
sthdna-kautala , or facility of the practical or operable intellect, 
is naturally absent on the intelligible plane of manifestation 
( Rapadhdtu, Rupaloka ), while both, of course, are absent on the 
supersensual super-rational plane of non-manifestation (Dhar- 
madhdtu, Artlpyaloka). . . . The same idea is expressed in an¬ 
other way by the attribution of an absolute pramdya to the 
perfected being, all other pramdqas being merely as to what is 
correct under certain circumstances; see note 17. 

There are some minor references to originality in poetry. Thus, 
R&ja$ekhara, K&vyatnitn&rhs&, XI (see De, Sanskrit Poetics , II, 
373), discussing plagiarism (karaqa, “theft”) at some length, 
says that the great poet (mahdkavi) depicts something new 



NOTES 


207 

(nutana) in meaning and expression as well as what is old; and 
flagrant stealing ( parihararja ) is called unpoetical or inartistic, 
akavitvaddyi. An example occurs in the KarpUratnanjari , III, 31, 
where the King compliments the heroine on her verses, remark¬ 
ing on her seizure ( damsar^a ) of new motifs (nava-vastu), varied 
vocabulary (ukti-vicitratoa), and sense of beauty (ramaniyatd) 
and on the flow of rasa.* 

75 ( PW e 11 The printed text is that cited by Pandit Jiba- 
nanda Vidyasagara (Calcutta, 2nd ed., 1890). The only com¬ 
plete translation is that of Benoy Kumar Sarkar, The Sukraniti 
(Allahabad, 1914, Sacred Books of the Hindus , Vol. XII). An 
introduction to this translation, by Dr. (Sir) Brajendranath 
Seal, entitled The Positive Background of Hindu Sociology , forms 
vols. XVI and XXV in the same series. 

76 ( page 1 if). Masson-Oursel, “Une Connexion dans FEsth6- 
tique et la Philosophic de lTnde,” Rev. des Arts Asiatiques, II, 
(1923), and H. Zimmer, Kunstform und Yoga itn indischen Kult - 
bild (Berlin, 1926). 

77 (PH eIJ 7 )' A. K. Coomaraswamy, “Nagara Painting,” Rupam 
37,40 (1929), and Vi^nudharmottara, III, 41, JAOS ., LII (1932). 

78 (page 122). In English, we often distinguish parok$a terms 
by capitals; for example, in distinguishing Self from self, both 
represented in Skr. Atman , or when we distinguish Cross as sym¬ 
bol from such crosses as are represented in the letter x. 

79 (P a Z e 12 3)' yasmdd devdh , Sankar&carya on Ail. Up ., Ill, 
14; more freely translated, “for, indeed, just what the Angels 
are is Pure Intelligences.” 

80 (page 125). Cf. Brhaddr. Up., I, 4,17, “Verily by perception 
(caksusd) He comes into possession of his human (manuka) pos¬ 
sessions (vitta).” 

81 (page 125). Iconography (pratimdkaraiia) as art in being is 
to be distinguished from iconography (r&pa-bheda) as a science, 
useful or necessary to the artist or student. 



208 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 

82 (page 126 ). Anukfti is “imitation” in the sense Ars imitatur 
naturam in sua operations, which does not mean imitatur entem 
naturatam, our environment. 

The same notion is implicit in many passages of the Rg Veda ; 
for example, V, 2, n, where the artistry of the incantation 
(mantra , cf. mantrayanti with reference to angelic intercommuni¬ 
cation, ibid., I, 164, 10) is compared to that of a carpenter or 
weaver. 

83 ( page 126). A point of view equating “criticism” and “re¬ 
production” may be represented here, as it is certainly in later 
Indian aesthetic. 

84 ( page 126). Psychological Types , p. 601. 

85 (page I2j). “Nature” here in the popular sense of ens natu- 
rata, phenomenal environment. The “ worship of Nature ” in this 
sense implies “pantheism.” Needless to say that “Nature,” in¬ 
terpreted at a higher level of reference, viz. as natura naturans 
(« prakfti, mayd, etc.), and “Nature” as the “Mother of the 
Son of God” have both the same reference (it is by Her that He 
takes on human nature). “To find nature herself” (in this 
sense) “all her likenesses must be shattered” (Eckhart). That 
iconoclasm may be accomplished in two different ways, respec¬ 
tively parok$at and pratyak§eria : in the first case, intellectually, 
by making the proper references, in the second case, brutally, by 
a literal “destruction of idols.” 

86 (page I2 q). His intrinsic manifestation (svarupa) is the mani¬ 
festation of very different things (viivarupa). 

87 (page 1 jo). When the Lord ( iSvara ) is spoken of in His 
unitary aspect, the Spoken Word is single. 

88 (page 131). Inasmuch as Wisdom is measured out into parts, 
it cannot be argued that “close hidden” means only in potentia, 
in the Godhead, Para-Brahman, solus ante principium , purna 
apravartin , where things are not even “thought” under the con- 



NOTES 209 

tingent aspect of distinction. “ Hidden,” etc., is tantamount to 
in principle >. 

89 (page 133). Ghana, from ghan, to strike, hinder, etc., has a 
primary sense of “ dense mass,” implying a condensation of mul¬ 
tiple factors without extension in space. Hence “mere” or 
“essential”: or prajndna-ghana might be more freely rendered 
as “exemplary understanding.” 

90 ( page 134). Cf. my “Paravrtti = Transformation, regener¬ 
ation, Anagogy,” in Festschrift Ernst Winternitz , 1933. 

91 (page 136). In what follows, the pratyak$a notions are again 
distinguished by italics. 

92 (page 136). G. Dandoy, S. J., UOntologie du Vedanta (Paris, 
1932), p. 125. 

In Bfhaddr. Up., Ill, 4, 2, Hume renders sdk§at aparok§a 
(equivalent to paramdrthika pratyak§a) by “present and not 
beyond our ken.” But the meaning is “immediately,” not as 
thus implied, “objectively.” “Not beyond our ken” belies the 
sense; the Brahman, who is the Self in us and all things (as is 
emphasized in the text itself) cannot be an object of knowledge. 

Suzuki, Lahkdvatara Sutra, p. xxvi, renders (paramdrthika -) 
pratyak$a by “intuitive penetration.” 

Stcherbatsky, Buddhist Logic, II, 284, translating a passage 
from Vacaspatimitra in which the presumed identity of an object 
known in the past and in the present is under discussion, renders 
parok^a, qualifying the previous cognition, as “transcends the 
ken,” and aparok$a, qualifying the present cognition as “does 
not transcend the ken,” and this in the given context seems to 
be quite legitimate. Again, ibid., p. 333, n. 1, “objects are di¬ 
vided into (1) evident facts (pratyak$a), (2) inferred facts 
(parok$a) of whom (sic) we have formerly had some experience, 
(3) very much concealed facts (atyanta-parok$a - $in-tu-lkog-pa) 
which are either transcendental, unimaginable entities, or else 
facts never experienced, but nevertheless not unimaginable.” 



210 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 

M&nasa~pratyak$a is “attention” (Stcherbatsky, loc. cit., 
II, 328, n. 2). 

Muir, Sanskrit Texts, IV, 22, renders parok§a “esoterically.” 
“Paradoxical,” “enigmatic,” or “mysterious” would be satis¬ 
factory renderings only if taken in their strictly technical senses. 

93 (page 137). We do not think of the technical language of a 
special science as “obscure,” or even as “cryptic” or “esoteric,” 
merely because as laymen we may not understand it. Though 
metaphysics is not a special science, the analogy holds good. 

94 (P a ge 137 ). Guhya (“hidden”) is often the equivalent of 
parok§a: e.g. in Rg Veda , V, 5,10, “ Where-e’er it be, O Vanaspati 
(Agni), that thou knowest the hidden (guhya) names of the 
Angels, there transmit our offerings.” 

95 (P a E e I 3$)' See note 79; and cf. padmapriya , characterising 
Srl-Lak§ml, Srisukta , 25, where again-/>nyd implies not “choice” 
but “nature.” 

96 (page 141). A very beautiful description of the creation as re¬ 
flection is found in Pahcavimia Brahmana , VII, 8, 1, as follows: 
“The Waters (representing the principle of substance) being 
ripe unto conception (lit. ‘in their season ’), Vayu (that is, the 
Wind, as physical symbol of spiration, prdr^a) moved over their 
surface. Wherefrom came into being a lovely (vama) thing (that 
is, the world-picture), there in the Waters Mitra-Varuna beheld- 
themselves-refiected (paryapaSyat)” So Genesis, I, 2, The Spirit 
of God moved over the waters, and St Thomas, Summ. Theol ., 
I, 74, “ the Spirit of the Lord signifies the Holy Ghost, Who is 
said to move over the water — that is to say, over what Augustine 
holds to mean formless matter ... it is fittingly implied that the 
Spirit moved over that which was incomplete and unfinished, 
since that movement is not one of place, but of preeminent 
power.” 

The “waters” here and elsewhere in tradition represent the 
totality of the possibilities of being, which from the standpoint of 



NOTES 211 

existence are in themselves nothing (chaos); this “nothing” being 
“at large” in the First Cause, as explained in note 3. Hence “ex 
nihilo fit.” For the waters in symbolic representation see my 
Yak§as , II, and in significance, Guenon, Symbolisme de la Croix , 
Ch. XXIV. 

97 ( PW e x 4 2 )* With reference, of course, to the three kinds of 
icons, (1) dhruva or yoga bera or mula vigraha, permanently estab¬ 
lished in a shrine, (2) bhoga murti or utsava vigraha, carried in 
processions, and (3) dhyana bera , mental images used in private 
devotions. 

98 (page 142 ). The Suprabheddgama describes citra as sarvd- 
vayava-sampurna-dr$yarh, and ardha-citra as ardhavdyava-sani- 
dxtyam, respectively “fully visible in all its parts” and “visible 
as to a half of its parts.” 

99 (P a S e J 4 2 )- Here evidently dhdtu-raga, mineral color, as in 
Meghaduta , p. 102, where the Commentary has sindUrddi , “ver¬ 
milion, etc.,” not dhatu, in verse 2 above, as a mineral or some 
metal other than loha , nor dhdtu, metal, in Sukranitisara , IV, 4, 
72 and 153. 

100 ( page 143). Acharya, Dictionary of Hindu Architecture , 
pp. 63, 65, item 5 (out of place); Mdnasdra , pp. 48, 49. 

101 (page 144). We find also pramdr}dbhdsa } “fallacious proof,” 
hetvdbhdsa , “logical fallacy,” pratyak§dbhdsa f “misleading ap¬ 
pearance,” parok§dbhdsa f “pseudo-symbolism”; and pratibhdsa , 
“mental reflex” (Stcherbatsky, Buddhist Logic, II, 6, n. 2, iden¬ 
tifies pratibhdsa with nirbhdsa, dbhdsa, and pratibimbana). 

102 (page 145 ). See notes 23, 67. 

103 (page 145). See Eastern Art , III (1931), 218, 219. 

104 (page 145), “Shade and shine,” chdydtapa, is taken from 
Kaiha Upani§ad , III, 1, and VI, 5, where there is no reference to 



212 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 

any work of art; it occurs also in the Atthasdlini, p. 317, in 
connection with the discussion of rupdyatana, “locus of form” 
defined as “colored appearance”; “it shines ( nibbhdti ), hence 
appearance.” 

Chaydtapa occurs also in Vasubandhu, AbhidharmakoSa , III, 
39. In all these passages the term bears rather the general mean¬ 
ing “pairs of opposites” than the literal meaning “light and 
shade”; it is nevertheless actually the immediate equivalent of 
“chiaroscuro.” 

105 {page 146). B. March, “ Linear Perspective in Chinese Paint¬ 
ing,” Eastern Art , III (1931); L. Bachhofer, “Der Raumdarstel- 
lung in der chinesischen Malerei, etc.” Milnchner Jahrbuch fiir 
Bildenden Kunst, VIII (1931); L. Bachhofer, “Fnihindische His- 
torienreliefs,” Ostasiatische Zeitscher. N. F., VIII (1932), 18; 
A. Ippel, Indische Kunst und Triumphalbild (Leipzig, 1929). 
The most valuable discussion of this kind is H. Zimmer’s “Some 
Aspects of Time in Indian Art,” Journ. Indian Society of Oriental 

Art, I (1933). 30 - 51 * 

106 {page 148). SirJ.H. Marshall, Mohenjodaro (London, 1931), 
pi. XI; ASL AR. (1917-18), pt. 1, pi. XVI; and Illustrated Lon¬ 
don News (March 24,1928); Cunningham, The Stupa of Bharhut , 
1879, and M.F.A . Bulletin 175. Cf. G. Gombaz, “La Loi de 
Frontalite dans la Sculpture Indienne,” Revue des Arts Asia- 
tiques , VII, 105. 

107 {page 148) Sthdnas are defined in the V i^udharmottara , III, 
39; Silparatna, Ch. LXIV; Basava Raja, Siva Tattva Ratndkara , 
VI, 2, 55 ff. See also the general literature on Indian iconog¬ 
raphy, for example, T. A. C. Rao, Elements of Hindu Iconog¬ 
raphy (Madras, 1914-15). The first five sthdnas range from (1) 
frontal or full face to (5) exact profile, intermediate positions 
being represented by 2,3,4. A table of the terms as given in the 
three sources cited follows: 



NOTES 


213 


Viffludharmottara Silparatna 

1. Rju, Rjvdgata Rju 

2. AnrjUy Tiryak Ardharju 

3. Sacikfta Sdcika , Sdcigata 

4. Ardhavilocana , Dvyardhdk§i 

Adhyardhdk§a 

5. Pdrtvagata , Chdyd- PdrSvagata , Bkittika f 

gata, Bhittika Bhittigata 

6. Pardvrtta, Ganda- 

pardvrtta 

7. Pr?tagata 

8. Parivrtta 

9. Samdnata 

108 (£age 149)- See my History of Indian and Indonesian Art 
(1927), pp. 25-27 and fig. 27. 

109 /50). Style is here the datum, appearance, or author¬ 
ity to be investigated. “ Those that attempt by means of a (given) 
authority (that is, from internal evidence) to understand the con¬ 
sciousness ( bodham) which (itself) produced the authority (pra - 
bodhayantam tnanarh) are such great beings as would burn fire it¬ 
self by means of fuel,” Sankar&carya, Svdtmanirupana , 46. 

no (page 152). From the Sarvadharma-pravftti-nirdeSa Sutra } 
cited by Suzuki, Outlines of Mahayana Buddhism , p. 381. 

in (page 156). See my Mediaeval Sinhalese Art (1908), 
PP* 70 - 75 * 

112 (page 156). Cf. Pope, G. U., The Tiruvdcagam (Oxford, 
1900), p. xxxv. 

11 3 (pH e 1 57 )• Cf. the Hermeneia of Athos, § 445, cited by 
Fichtner, Wandmalereien der Athoskloster (1931), p. 15: “All 
honor that we pay the image, we refer to the Archetype, namely 
Him whose image it is. . . . In no wise honor we the colors or 


Siva-Tattva - 
Ratndkara 
Rju, Sammukha 
Ardharju 
Sdci 

Nyardharju 

Bhittika 



214 TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE IN ART 

the art, but the archetype in Christ, who is in Heaven. For as 
Basilius says, the honoring of an image passes over to its proto¬ 
type.” Cf. note 43. 

114 (page 163). “It is for the advantage (artha) of the worship¬ 
pers ( updsaka ) (and not by any intrinsic necessity) that the 
Brahman — whose nature is intelligence (< tin-may a) > beside 
whom there is no other, who is impartite and incorporeal — is 
aspectually conceived ( rupa-kalpana ),” Ramdpani§ad, text cited 
by Bhattacharya, Indian Images , p. xvii. That is to say the 
image, as in the case of any other “arrangement of God,” has 
a merely logical, not an absolute validity. “ Worship ” ( updsana ) 
has been defined as an “intellectual operation ( mdnasa-vyapara ) 
with respect to the Brahman with attributed-qualities ( saguna ).” 

115 (page 168). Verses cited in the TrirhSikd of Vasubandhu; 
see Bibliothbque de V£.cole des Hantes ftiudes , fasc. 245,1925, and 
Levi, “Materiaux pour l’fitude du Systeme Vijnaptimatra,” 
ibid., fasc. 260 (Paris, 1932), p. 119. 

116 (page 168). The stage of partial manifestation is compared 
to that of the “blooming” of a painting. The term “bloom” or 
“blossom” (unmil) is used to describe the “coming out” of a 
painting as the colors are gradually applied (Mahe§var&nanda, 
Mahdrthamanjari , p. 44, and my “Further References to Indian 
Painting,” Artibus Asiae , p. 127, 1930-1932, item 102). 

117 (page i 6 q ). Cf. my “Hindu Sculpture,” in the league, 
vol. V, no. 3 (New York, 1933). 



Sanskrit Glossary 




Sanskrit Glossary 

dbhdsa , “back shining,” semblance, reflection; modality (any¬ 
thing regarded as a mode or part of a whole, as painting of 
sculpture); objectivity; theophany. 
abhidha , denotation; reference. 

abhinaya , aesthetic apparatus, means of “registering” ( sucand ); 
especially conventional gestures employed in the dramatic 
dance {fiftya). 

abhi-sambhava , re-becoming, transformation. 

abhydsa y practice, training. 

dcdrya y a master, one expert in his art. 

adhidaivata , from the angelic point of view; parok§a. 

adhydtma y from the individual point of view; pratyak§a. 

adhyavasdna y introsusceptive, imagist. 

dgama , scripture ( Sruti ). 

dgama-artha-avisarhvddi y not contradicting the sense of scripture, 
orthodox, canonical. 

dhdrya , gotten, acquired, added, adventitious, not innate. 
Ahdrya-abhinaya y costume as part of the apparatus of art; 
-$obha y loveliness resulting from adornment. 
dkar§aria y attracting, producing; intuition; from dkr§. 
dkd$a y ether, firmament; immanent space, indefinitely dimen¬ 
sioned, subjective space. 
d-kfti y image, likeness, outward appearance. 
alarhkdra , ornaments, figures, tropes, associated ideas or images; 
rhetoric. 

a-laukika y not belonging to contingent worlds, supersensuous. 

Same as lokdttara. 
alekhya y painting. 

a-mdtra, of indefinite measure, undetermined. 
ananda-cin-maya, compounded of delight and reason (charac¬ 
terising rasdsvddana 9 aesthetic experience). 



218 SANSKRIT GLOSSARY 

antar-jfieya, known subjectively. 

anu-bh&va, means of registration (sdcand) in a work of art; parts 
or elements of the actual work of art; the physical stimuli to 
aesthetic reproduction. Cf. obhinaya. 
anu-kdra, same as anu-karana. 

anu-karaqa , “making after,” “making in accordance with,” 
imitation; anukfti , anukdra. 
anu-kdrya , the theme “imitated,” the model. 
anu-krti, made in accordance with, “imitation.” 
anu-mdna , inference, deduction, supposition, imputation. 
anu-rUpa f like the model, true to nature; analogous. 
anu-Hla> devoted application, obedience. 

anvita , “caught,” conveyed, rendered in a work of art; con¬ 
trasted with anyathd , “off,” or “missed.” 
anyathd, “out,” “off,” false (in a work of art). 
a-parok§a , not indirect, not symbolic; immediate. 
ardha-citra , “half-art,” relief (as distinguished from full round 
sculpture on the one hand and painting on the other). 
ardha-likhita, “half-painted,” unfinished (distinct from anyathd , 
imperfect, unsuccessful). 

artha , meaning, end, interest, use, advantage, motive, purpose, 
value, determination; just cause or raison d’itre of a work; 
“intenzion delFarte.” Cf. puru$drtha. 
arthatva , condition of possessing meaning, etc. 
dsvdda, tasting (of rasa) ; aesthetic experience. 
dtman, self, Self; Universal Man, Brahman. 
aupadeHka , acquired by instruction; one who has acquired the 
appearance of imagination by instruction. 
ava-sth&na , condition, emotional situation. 
avayava , the separate parts of an organism. 
avayava-dnata t attentive to the actual shapes of an object; realis¬ 
tic, “true to Nature.” 

a~vidy&, non-knowing, relative, empirical, sensible and rational 
knowledge of plurality. 



SANSKRIT GLOSSARY 


219 


bdhya , external, objective, empirical. 
bhdy to shine forth, appear; in prati-bhd. 
bhakti , devotion, self-abandonment in love; also used as equiva¬ 
lent to lak^arydy connotation; and as a synonym of dhvani , 
content. 

bhds, to shine forth; in dbhdsa , etc. 

bhdva 9 nature; emotion*, sentiment, or mood, as represented in a 
work of art; the vehicle of rasa . 
bhavana , “what has come to be,” shape, appearance, Nature. 
bhdvandy origination, production, imagination; persistent image, 
emotional impression surviving in conscious or unconscious 
memory. 

bhogay fruition, aesthetic appreciation; asvdda. 
bhiiy to be, become; in bhdva , bhiltay etc. 

bhuta-matrdy elements of phenomenal being, shape; pictorial 
{extra) factor in art. 

bimba 9 model, subject (presentation, semblance, as contrasted 
with prati-bimba y re-presentation, re-semblance). 
buddhiy pure intellect, “ the habit of first principles,” prajfid. 

camat-kdra, amazement. 
cdrUy lovely. 
cetandy sentience, life. 
chandas, rhythm. 

chdydtapa , shadow and sunlight, chiaroscuro; pairs of opposites. 
cit (cid-y tin-), mind, intelligence, reason. 
extra 9 representative art (sculpture, relief, painting); picture, pic¬ 
torial. 

citrdbhdsa , “semblance of art,” “reflex of sculpture,” painting; 
dbhd$a } dlekhya . 

citra-gata , represented (in a work of art). 
citra-kdvyay pictorial or illustrative poetry, the lowest sort, or 
not poetry at all; cf. “verses for pictures.” 
citrdrdhGy same as ardha-citra. 



220 SANSKRIT GLOSSARY 

citta-vrtti , fluctuations of the mind, “fugitive emotions and crea¬ 
ture images.” 

damsana , grasp (the artist’s apprehension of the theme). 
dartanlya , worth looking at, good; quod visum placet ; that which 
dr§ti-prUirh vidhatte . 
darSita , shown, exhibited, displayed. 
deti, popular, folk (style); contrasted with mdrga, “high.” 
deva, devatd , angel. 

dharar^a, exclusive attention to a presented idea. 
dharma , conduct, morality, law, virtue, function, character, 
principle, habit, thing. 
dhdtUy ore; color. 

dhvanana, echoing, synonym of vyanjand; cf. dhvani. 
dhvaniy sound, sounding; overtone of meaning, resonance of 
sense, content (as distinguished from intent); Chinese yiin 

(13843)- 

dhyaiy to meditate upon, be intent upon, practice abstract con¬ 
templation, visualize. Corresponds to Vedic dhi. 
dhydna y undistracted attention, first stage in Yoga praxis; 
visualization, contemplation of a mental image; Chinese 
ch’an y Japanese zen. 

dhydna-yoga f visual contemplative union, realization of formal 
identity with an inwardly known image. 
divya y daivata , angelic. 
do$a } any specific fault in a work of art. 

dfhy to see, look, consider, see intuitively; in dr by a, sadrbya, 
sadrbiy dratfr, etc. 

drtfddvaitay one who sees without duality, who sees in identity. 

dr§ti-priti, delight of the eyes. 

dfbya , visible, the phenomenal universe. 

gamana , motion, movement. 

grahdy seizer, apprehender, sense-instrument. 

grahaqa, “seizing,” comprehension, understanding of anything. 

grdhya , seizable, able to be comprehended. 



SANSKRIT GLOSSARY 221 

guha , gupta , guhya , hidden, occult, unseen; transcendental, 
gwna, any specific merit in a work of art. Also factor, quality or 
qualification in the phenomenal universe, viz. sattva-guria, 
purity, rajo-guria, action, expansion, continuation, and tamo- 
guna, inertia, resistance. 

haraqa, plagiarism. 
har$a, delight. 

hrd , hfdaya , heart, the entire being (sensible and intelligent); 
soul; Self, Brahman. 

itihdsa , narrative, history. 

jagac-citra, world picture, vision of the Universe apart from time. 
jiva, jivdtman, individual, self, soul. 

jivan-mukta , one who has attained spiritual freedom, but is still 
manifest in human form. 

kaildsa-bhdvand , made after the heavenly pattern. 
kald , art, any art or accomplishment depending on skill. Art as 
avocation. The bahya-kalds (external arts, or practical arts) 
are usually listed as sixty-four in number, some being identi¬ 
cal with the vocational Silpas ; there are also sixty-four kdma - 
or abhyantara , “arts of love,” or “intimate arts.” 
kdma, pleasure of any kind, specific or natural pleasure, espe¬ 
cially in love. 

kdnti , loveliness (of the subject, esp. in a portrait). 
kdraka , maker, creator. 

kdrarjxi, act, action, cause; formal gesture or position in dancing. 
karma , making (with reference to man’s handiwork, factibile ); 
also conduct (with reference to man’s deeds, agibile ); office, 
celebration, ritual. 
kdrya , to be mad e, factibile. 
kdrayitf, creative. 

kauSala, skill, expertness, virtuosity, facility; when as in Bud¬ 
dhist usage there is a moral coloring, the idea of “conven¬ 
ience” is also present. 



222 SANSKRIT GLOSSARY 

kaiMhala, interest in, appreciation of, a work of art. 
kavi y in the Vedas, Poetic Genius (personified) a designation of 
the Sun, as “revealer”; later, “poet,” artist. 
kavifoa, artistry; -d&yin, artistic. 

kdvya, poetry (prose or verse); “literature” as distinct from iruti 
and itihdsa, idstras , etc. By extension, “art” as an abstract 
concept. Kavitva-ddyin, “artistic.” 
kdvya-Sarira, the body of poetry (consisting of sound, sense and 
ornaments); the work of art as a physical entity, as distin¬ 
guished from its soul, or content, atman . 
kr, to do, make; in karma y katana, kdrya , etc. 
kr§, to attract, draw, delineate, display; in dkar§ana, etc. 
krta, made, well and truly made. 
kftdrlha, purpose or end of the work to be done. 
kha, space; dkdSa. 

kratv-artha, the good of the work to be done. 

lak§ana, characteristic lineament, iconographic requirement, 
sign, symbol, attribute. 
lak$and, connotation. 

Idvanya, “salt,” charm, “it” (in a feminine subject). 
laya, rest, cessation, resolution. 
likhy to draw, paint; in dlekhya, etc. 
lildy play, unmotivated manifestation. 

loka , world, sphere, universe; the conditioned world, including 
heaven, in part. 

loka-vfUa, “local motions,” phenomena; “Nature” (ens natu- 
rata). 

lokdttara , supersensual (rather than “supernatural”). 

tndy to measure; in mdna( i), pramdna, nirtndna, pratimd , nirtnd , 
mdlrd. 

mddhurya , sweetness, equanimity, grace, facility. 
mdna (i), (from root md), measure, canon of proportion. 



SANSKRIT GLOSSARY 223 

f ndna (2), (from root man), pride, egoism, ideology. Cf. “men¬ 
tal” (rational) as used by Blake. 
manas , intellect, mind, reason; divyacak$u ( Ch&ndogya Up ., 
VIII, 12, s). 

manohara , delighting the mind or heart; affective, seductive. 
mantra , incantation, enchantment (e.g., verses of the Rg Veda , 
and canonical prescriptions of the Silpa Sdstras , known as 
dhy&na mantras), 
manuka, human. 

mdrga , high (style): same as riZi. Contrasted or “stylistic” or 
“sophisticated” with deH, “folk,” “naive.” 
mdtrd , measure, dimension, principle. 
mdyd, creative power; magic; natura naturans. 
mok§a, liberation, spiritual freedom, realization (not “attain¬ 
ment”) of perfection. 

miirta , formal, in a likeness; contrasted with a-mUrta , imageleso, 
transcending form. 
murti, form, image, likeness. 

naisargika, innate, natural; sahaja. 

ndma, name, idea, form; means of conventional discrimination. 
ndma-rupa, name and aspect, words and images, the means of 
conventional discrimination, that by which the contingent 
universe is known. 

natdnnata , relief, relievo, in a painting. 

ndya t traditional authority, prescription. 

netrdmfta , elixir of the eyes, that which delights the eye. 

nimndnnata , same as natdnnata . 

nirtnd, with citram , to paint; with ko$am , to compose, write. 
nirmdr^a, making, creating, manifestation. 
nirmdna-kdraka, maker, creator; God. 
nirvdha, bare statement of fact, narration. 
niyama , ascertained rule. 

nftya , dramatic dance, art-dance, nautch; dance giving expres¬ 
sion to rasa and bhdva. 



SANSKRIT GLOSSARY 


224 

padmini, “lotus lady,” one of the four types of women. 
paramdrtha, ultimate significance; essence, Brahman, dtman . 
pdramdrthika, with respect to ultimate significance, transcenden¬ 
tal, absolute. 

par&vftti, transformation, transubstantiation, anagogy. 

pari -, prefix * />er. 

pari-dratfr, over-seer, witness, God. 

pari-hararj,a, flagrant plagiarism. 

canvas, painting. 
pradeSa, landscape, area. 
pra-har§a, great delight. 
pra-hr?ta, delighted (by a work of art). 

prajnd, discrimination, wisdom, pure intellect, First Principle, 
Brahman. 

prajnd-mdtrd, elements of intelligence or discrimination; formal 
elements in art. 

prajndna-ghana , exemplary understanding. 
pramdria , as principle, ideal symmetry, aesthetic conscience, 
“correction du savoir faire”; as canon, same as mdna. 
pramdtr, judge, critic, one possessed of a subjective criterion, or 
aesthetic standard ( pramdqa ). 
pra-muda, delight, great delight; same as prahar%a . 
prdy,a , spiration, life-breath, pneunta; Chinese ch’i ; life as pro¬ 
cession, emanation. In the plural, the distinct life breaths in 
the individual species. 
prati-, a prefix: toward, against, counter-. 
prati-bhd, vision, imagination, poetic faculty. 
pratubimba , representation; -vat, qua representation. 
pratika, symbol. 
prati-kfti, portrait; dkfti, dkara. 
pratimd, image, likeness; - kdraka, imager. 
prattti, self-intelligibility, clear intuition or manifestation (of 
rasa). 

prati-vihita, determined (V dha ). 

pratyak§a, “before the eye,” evident, objective, perceptible; em- 



SANSKRIT GLOSSARY 225 

pineal observation; like the model, true to Nature; semiotic. 
Cf. parok§a. 

prayojana , use, application, purpose, intent, theme; cf. artha. 
pujd , office, ritual; pUjya , to be worshipped. 
puru§a y person, personality. Distinguished from jiva y individual. 
puru§drtha , value, the meaning or purpose of life; the Four Ends 
of Life, viz. dharma , artha , kdma , mok§a . The advantage to 
be derived from the accomplished work, as distinguished 
from kratvartha, the good of the work to be done. 

ramarjdyatd , beauty in a work of art, especially as seen in disin¬ 
terested contemplation. 
ratnya , lovely, truly lovely, beautiful. 
rahga y color. 

rasa , flavor, savor, quintessence; the substance of aesthetic 
experience, knowable only in the activity of tasting, rasdsva - 
dana. 

rasdsvadana , tasting of rasa , aesthetic experience. 
rasdtmaka , having raja as its soul. 

rasavat , possessing raja, said of a work of art, by imputation or 
projection. 

rasdyana , elixir for the eyes, said of a work of art as good to see. 
rasika , one competent to the tasting of raja, true critic. 
rekhd , line, outline, drawing. 
rekha-Suddhi, purity of line. 
riti, style, diction, composition, manner. 
ruciy taste, preference (not to be confused with raja). 
rupa y shape, natural shape, semblance, color, loveliness; image, 
effigy, likeness; symbol, ideal form; means of conventional 
discrimination (see nama-rupa). (Cf. vi-rHpa y having two 
forms, various, altered, deformed, ugly; and a-r«^a, not 
formed, transcendental.) 
rupa-kdra y imager (maker of images). 
rupa-sobhd y represented beauty. 
rupya, beautiful, shapely; formal. 



226 


SANSKRIT GLOSSARY 


rutdrtha , sound and sense. 

Sabda, sound, word: Logos. 
tabddrtha , same as rutdrtha . 

sddhana , any means employed in worship; a canonical prescrip¬ 
tion, dhydna mantra . 

sd-dharaqya , “having a common support”; ideal sympathy, dis¬ 
interested or Mitfiihlung. 

sddhUy what is good or right in a work of art (opposite of an - 
yathd); as an exclamation, “Well done.” 
sa-dr$a , sa-dfH , like in appearance, sensibly resembling. 
sd-dr$ya y concomitance of formal and pictorial elements, con¬ 
formity, consonantia : Chinese cA’ow (2508), “answering to,” 
“in response.” 

sahaja , innate, connatural; spontaneous, spontaneity; “willingly 
but not from will, naturally but not from nature.” Con¬ 
trasted with aupadeHka , and dhdrya . 
sd-hitya , concomitance of sound and sense, word and meaning: 
consonantia. 

sa-hfdaya, “having a heart,” imaginatively or spiritually gifted; 
rasika . 

sdk§aty present to the eye, pratyak§a. 
takti, power, genius. 

sdlak§ya f having like features, similarity, common denotation. 
samkalpa } concept, conception, imagining, mental formulation. 
sarhketay convention. 
sarhketitay conventional. 

samskfy to con-struct, integrate; samskfla, the arti-ficial, con¬ 
structed, integrated language, Sanskrit. 
samto§a f satisfaction (derived from a work of art). 
sarhvddiy agreeing with, conformable to the model or prescription. 
samvyavahdrika f worldly, practical. 
sdrasvata } inspired by or worthy of Sarasvatl. 
farfra, body, substance: the material body of a work of art, as 
composed of sounds, tangible forms, etc.; the tangible em¬ 
bodiment of intuition-expression. 



SANSKRIT GLOSSARY 22J 

sdrUpya , co-aspectuality, con-formation, coordination, corre¬ 
spondence; cf. sddftya. 

Sdstra , a scripture or treatise written by a sage; traditional au¬ 
thority ( smrti ) as distinguished from revelation (iruti). 
$dstra-mdna> canonical, according to traditional authority. 
sat ( sad-) } true, real. 

sattva f purity, simplicity Equality of essence, being in itself; the 
first of the three gurjLas. 

sattva-bhdva , any natural expression of emotion, as represented in 
art. 

satya f true, real, essential; sacred, hieratic (painting). 
sa-varrj,a, double, substitute. 

Silpa (Pali sippa) art, any art or work of art, the practice of art, 
skill of art, art as vocation, taught by a master ( dcdrya ). 
Silpa-jivin , one who lives by his art, a professional. Cf. kald. 
Sithtta , slack, not intense; with - satnddhi , imperfect concentration 
of the artist (in medicine, post coitum lassitude). 

$li$tatoa, habitus, wont, facility, knack. 

smrti , “remembered”; tradition, authority, cf. Sdstra. Also 
“memory,” but in a bad sense, as nostalgia, or sentimen¬ 
tality, not “recollection.” 

Sravaniya , worth listening to, good (of music, etc.). 

Srng&ra, the erotic, most important of the separate rasas. 
trvJti , heard, audition, “revelation,” immediate authority, scrip¬ 
ture; the Vedas. 
sthana y station, field; pose. 

sthdyiy established, stable, permanent. With - bhdva, permanent 
mood, constant motif of a work of art. 
sthUla, gross (material, as opposed to mental). 
sHcand , registering (as in cinema parlance). 
sHk9ma f subtle (mental, as opposed to physical). 
su-krta, well and truly made (of the world, as God’s art) ; per¬ 
fect. See list, n. 107. 

sutfhu, excellent (in praise of a work of art). 
sva, self, own. 



228 


SANSKRIT GLOSSARY 


sva-bhdva, own-being, essential nature, inwardness. 
sva-dharma , vocation, calling, specific function. 
sva-prakd&a , self-illuminated, self-manifesting ( rasa , or Brah¬ 
man), limpid. 

sva-r&pa, own form, very form; intrinsic aspect; svdkdra. 

tad-akdrata , con-formation, coordination. 
tad-anurupa, according to the model, like, true to nature. 
tad-dtmya , having the same self as. 
tat lagnafn hfd } the seductive, intriguing. 
tad-rupya , of like form, like. 
tak§, to hew (wood; or, metaphorically, thought). 
tala , tdla-mdna , measure, canon of proportion. 
tdtparya-artha , meaning or significance of the whole phrase or 
work of art, as distinct from that of its separate parts or ele¬ 
ments. 

unmil , to bloom (said of a painting while being colored). 
upacdra , metaphor, analogy. 
updsaka , worshipper. 
updsana , worship. 

utsaha y << effort ,, ; the spiritual energy exerted in aesthetic repro¬ 
duction. 

vac {vak- y vag-), voice (as function); speech (as discrimination, 
exterior word); interior word, Logos; wisdom. 
vaidagdhya f skill. 
vakya } word, phrase; expression. 

vdrar^ay wall, barrier, enclosure; hindrance (e. g. prejudice, in¬ 
terest, appetite). 

vartyiy color, sound; scale, palette. 

varriatytyay to be depicted or expressed; praiseworthy (theme). 
varqikd-bhangay distribution of color. 

vartandy Pali vattana, shading, that is, plastic modelling, in paint¬ 
ing. 

vartikd , brush. 



SANSKRIT GLOSSARY 


229 

vdsand, latent memory of past experience, hence the potentiality 
of impartial sensibility, fancy, Einfuhlung. In the bad sense, 
emotional associations and attachments; power of habit. 
vastu , theme, subject. 

vi-bhdvdy physical stimulant to aesthetic reproduction; the parts 
of the work of art, aesthetic surfaces. 
vicitra , variegated, rorfiantic. 

vidyd t gnosis, un-knowing, the immediate knowledge (realiza¬ 
tion) of unity, absolute truth; * prajnd, jndna. 
vikalpa, rational knowledge. 
vilekhana , same as alekhya, painting. 
visarhvddi , not agreeing (with the model or prescription). 
vi$e§a-jna, of varied knowledge, connoisseur. 
vivdda-nirnaya , judgment, discrimination. 
vyabhicdri , fugitive, transient (with - bhdva , transient mood or 
emotion, as contrasted with sthayi-bhdva). 
vyakfti, utterance, Spoken Word. 

vyangydrtha , suggested meaning, content, significance (as dis¬ 
tinguished from denotation and connotation). 
vyanjand , suggestive power of an expression. 
vyavahdrika , worldly, empirical, sensational. 
vyutpatti, explicit meaning, conceptual part of art; scholarship. 

yajna, sacrificial office. 

yantra, “device,” “machine”; geometrical representation of a 
deity. 

yoga , lit. “union,” “yoking”; skill in action ( Bhagavad Gitd } 
II, S o). 

yogyd f application, study, practice. 

yuj (in yoga, prayojana , etc.), to yoke, apply, exert, control. 
yuktdy yoked, joined to, embodying, united, at-oned. 
yuktiy skill, accomplishment, acquired facility. 




List of Chinese Characters 




List of Chinese Characters 


ch'an (Giles, 348), Sanskrit dhyana , Japanese zen . 
cfang (Giles, 720), used by Hsiian Tsang to render pratnana. 
ch’i (Giles, 991), extraordinary, marvellous, surprising. 
ch’i (Giles, 1064), spirit, spiration, breath, life. Sanskrit prdna y 
Greek pneuma , Arabic ruh. The procession of ch’i is from 
Heaven and Earth, the primary modalities of the First 
Principle (Tao), hence ch’i is rightly used to render “Holy 
Ghost.” 

ch’iao (Giles, 1411), clever, skilful, artful. 
chih (Giles, 1783), to know, knowledge; conscience. 
ch’ou (Giles, 2508), reciprocity; used by Hsiian Tsang to render 
sadrSya. 

ch’uan (Giles, 2740), handed down, transmitted; tradition. 
“What he gets by his mind (shin) he transmits by his hand” 
(said of the painter). 
fu (Giles, 3632), to lay on color. 

hsin (Giles, 4562), heart, mind, spirit. Cf. Sanskrit hfdaya. 
hsing (Giles, 4617), natural shape; objective; represented shape. 
Skr. rupa . 

i (Giles, 5536), supersensual perfection of the sage; genius; spon¬ 
taneity. Cf. shen and Skr. iakti sahaja. 
i (Giles, 5367), idea, mind, intuition, meaning, end. Contrasted 
with hsing. Cf. Sanskrit artha , ndma y and pramdr^a. 
i ch’ii (Giles, 5367,3120) operation of the mind; movement of the 
idea; significance, thought. Dante’s “intenzion dell’ arte,” 
Paradiso , 1,127. 

Hang (Giles, 7015), measure, standard. (Sanskrit pratndqa?) 

* The numbers of the characters are those of Giles’s Chinese-English 
Dictionary , where they can easily be found, and the shades of meaning 
considered. 



234 LIST OF CHINESE CHARACTERS 

tniao (Giles, 7857), profound, mysterious, wonderful. 
ning (Giles, 8184), ability, skill, accomplishment, virtuosity. 
Same as ch’iao. 

san p’in (Giles, 9552, 9273), The three kinds of painting, sMn } 
miaoy ning. 

shin (Giles, 9819), angel, angelic, divine spirit, soul, God; Skr. 
deva. “The inscrutable operation of Yin and Yang is called 
shin”: “to paint a portrait ( fu shin)”: “to give expression 
{shin) to the very part left undelineated.” Ching (2133) shin , 
“very soul,” “true self.” 

ssv (Giles, 10289), likeness, resemblance, imitation. 
wu (Giles, 12777), object, Nature; vi§aya-rHpatd. 
yiln (Giles, 13817), operation, revolution; Pacioli’s movimenti. 
yiin (Giles, 13843), resonance, reverberation, content. Cf. San¬ 
skrit dhvani. 



Bibliography 




Bibliography 


i. European Languages 

Acharya, P. K. Dictionary of Hindu Architecture. Oxford, n.d. 1 

- A Summary of the Mdnasdra. Leiden, 1918. 1 

- Indian Architecture according to the M anas dr a-& ilpaSastra . 

Oxford, n.d. 1 

Anand, M. R. The Hindu View of Art. London, 1933. 
Anesaki, M. Buddhist Art in Its Relation to Buddhist Ideals . 
Boston, 1911; 2nd ed., 1915. 

Aravamuthan, T. G. Portrait Sculpture in South India. London, 
i?3*- 

Asanga. Mahdydna StUrdlarhkdra. Translated by Sylvain L6vi. 
Paris, 1911. 

Bachhofer, L. “ Die Raumdarstellung in der chinesischen Ma- 
lerei,” Miinchner Jahrhuch fiir hildenden Kunst , VIII, 1931. 

-“Friihindische Historienreliefs, ,, Ostas. Zeitschrift , N. F., 

VIII, 1932. 

Banerjea, J. N. Pratimdlak§anam. Edited and translated, 
Calcutta, 193 2. 1 

Barnett, L. D. The Lord's Song (Bkagavad Gitd ) 1 Temple 
Classics. 

- Antaga 4 a Dasdo. London, 1907. 

Bhattacharya, B. C. Indian Images. Calcutta, 1921. 
Bhattacharyya, B. Buddhist Iconography. Oxford, 1924. 

- Buddhist Esoterism. Oxford, 1932. (Ch. XI.) 

Binyon, L. Painting in the Far East , 3rd ed. London, 1923. 

- The Flight of the Dragon (various editions). 

Boas, F. Primitive Art. Oslo, 1927. 


1 Stipe Sdstras. 



238 BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Bohme, J. Mysterium Pansophicum. Translated by J. R. Earle. 
New York, 1920. 

Bose, N. K. Canons of Orissan Architecture . Calcutta, 1933. 1 
Bose, P.* N. Principles of Indian Silpatdstra. Punjab Oriental 
Series, XI. Lahore, 1926. 

- Pratimd-Mdna-Lak$arjam. Punjab Oriental Series, XVIII. 

Lahore, 1929. 

Chatterji, J. C. Kashmir Shaivism. 1914. 

Coomaraswamy, A. K. “Teaching of Drawing in Ceylon,” 
Ceylon National Review , December, 1906 (also in Mediaeval 
Sinhalese Art y Broad Campden, 1908). 

- Mediaeval Sinhalese Art. Broad Campden, 1908. 

- The Indian Craftsman. London, 1909. 

-“That Beauty is a State,” Burlington Magazine , April, 

I 9 I 5 - 

- Rajput Painting. Oxford, 1916. 

- The Dance of Siva. New York, 1918. 

?■- Citra-lak$ana (Silparatna , Ch. 64). Sir Ashutosh Mukerjee 

Memorial Volume. Patna, 1926-28. 

^-“Nagara Painting,” Rupam , Nos. 37, 40, 1929. 

"-“An Early Passage on Indian Painting,” Eastern Arty III, 

I 93 i- 

>«-“One Hundred References to Indian Painting,” Artihus 

Asiae , 1930-32, pp. 41-57, and “Further References,” pp. 
126-129. 

-“Introduction to the Art of Eastern Asia,” Open Court , 

March, 1932 (partly identical with the present text). 

-Visnudharmottara (III), 41, JAOS ., LII, 1932. 1 

-“The Technique and Theory of Indian Painting,” Techni¬ 
cal Studies in the Field of the Fine Arts , III, 1934. 

-“Hindu Sculpture,” the league , V. New York, 1933. 

- Elements of Buddhist Symbolism. Cambridge, 1934.* 

- A New Approach to the Vedas. London, 1934. 2 

1 Silpa Sdstras. 


* In Press. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


*39 

Coomaraswamy, A. K. “Mediaeval Aesthetic. I. Dionysius 
the Pseudo-Areopagite, and Ulrich Engelberti of Strasburg,” 
Art Bulletin, March, 1935. 

Coomaraswamy, A. K., and Duggirala, G. K. The Mirror of 
Gesture. Cambridge, 1917. 

Croce, B. “The Breviary of Aesthetic,” Rice Institute Pam - 
phlet, 11, 1915. 

Dandoy, J., VOntologie du Veddnta. Paris, 1932. 

Das Gupta. History of Indian Philosophy. Cambridge, Eng., 
1922, 1932. 

De, Sushil K. Sanskrit Poetics, 2 vols. London, 1923, 1925. 
Deussen, P. Philosophy of the Upanishads. Edinburgh, 1906. 
Dutt, M. N. Dissertation on Painting. Calcutta, 1922. 1 
Dvorak, M. Kunstgeschichte als Geistesgeschichte, Studien zur 
abendlandischen Kunstentwicklung. Munchen, 1924. 
Edgerton, F. Vikrama’s Adventures. Translation of the Vikra- 
macarita. Harvard Oriental Series, XXXVI. Cambridge, 
1926. 

Evans, C. de B. Meister Eckhart. London, 1924. 
Fonseka,L.de. On the Truth of Decorative Art. London, 1913. 
Fox-Strangways. The Music of Hindustan. Oxford, 1914. 
Foucher, A. VIconographie bouddhique de VInde. Paris, 1900, 

1905- 

Giles, H. A. Chuang Tzu. London, 1889. 

Gill, E. Art-Nonsense. London, 1929. 

Gombaz, G. “La Loi de Frontalit6 dans le Sculpture in- 
dienne,” Revue des Arts asiatiques, VII, 1931-32. 

Groslier, G. “Notes sur la Psychologie de l 1 Artisan cambod- 
gien,” Arts et Archiologie khmbrs, I. 

-“Le Fin d\m Art,” Revue des Arts asiatiques, V. 

GuisNON, R. VHomme et son Devenir selon le Vedanta / Paris, 

- Introduction gtntrale h V Etude des Doctrines kindoues . 

Paris, 1932. 

1 Not seen by the author. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


240 

Guenon, R. La Symbolisme de la Croix. Paris, 1931. 

Havell, E. B. Ideals of Indian Art. London, 1911. 

Hearn, L. Japan , an Interpretation. New York, 1905. 
Hemacandra. Tri§a§li$oldkapuru§acaritra. Translated by H. 

M. Johnson, I. Baroda, 1931. 

Hirn, Yrjo. The Origins of Art. London, 1900. 

Hume, R. E. The Thirteen Principal Upanishads y 2nd ed. 
Oxford, 1931. 

Ippel, A. Indische Kunst und Triumphalhild. Leipzig, 1929. 
Jacovleff, A., and Tchou-Kia-Kien. The Chinese Theatre. 
London, 1922. 

Jinavaravamsa, P. C. “ Notes on Siamese Arts and Crafts,” 
Ceylon National Review f No. 4, July, 1907. 

Jitta-Zadoks. Ancestral Portraiture in Rome. Amsterdam, 
1932. 

Jung, C. G. Psychological Types. London, 1926. 

Kakuzo, O. The Ideals of the East. New York, 1904. 

- The Book of Tea. New York, 1906. 

Keith, A.B. History of Sanskrit Literature. Oxford, 1928. 

- Aitareya and Kausitaki Brahman as. Harvard Oriental 

Series, XXV, 1920. 

- Buddhist Philosophy. Oxford, 1923. 

Kramrisch, S. TheVishnudharmottara, 2nded. Calcutta, 1928. 1 

-“ Landschaft, Tier, und geometrisches Muster in der indischen 

Kunst.” Josef Strzygowski Festschrift . Klagenfurt, 1932. 
- Indian Sculpture. Calcutta, 1933. 

Lalou, M. VIconographie des Ltojfes peints (paf,a) dans le Mari - 
juMmulakalpa. Buddhica, VI. Paris, 1930. 

Laufer, B. Dokumente der indischen Kunst: /, Das Citralak§ar^a. 
Leipzig, 1913. 1 

Lelyveld, Th. B van. La Danse dans le TMdtre javanais. 
Paris, 1931. 

Lfvi, S. Mat&riaux pour V&tude du SysUme VijfLaptimatra. 
Paris, 1932. 

1 Silpa-Sdstra. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 2 4 I 

March, B. “Linear Perspective in Chinese Painting,” Eastern 
Arty III, 1931. 

Maritain, J. Art and Scholasticism. London, 1930. 

- Introduction to Philosophy. London, 1932. 

Marshall, Sir J. H. Mohenjodaro. London, 1931. 

Masson-Oursel. Esquisse d'une Histoire de la Philosophic in- 
dienne y esp. pp. 156, 288. Paris, 1923. 

-“Une Connexion dans Tfisthetique et la Philosophic de 

l’lnde,” Rev. des Arts asiatiques , II, 1925 (transl. in Rupam , 
27/28, 1926). 

- , Wilman-Grabowska, H. de, and Stem, P., Linde antique 

et la Civilisation indienne. Paris, 1933. (Pt. IV, La vie 
esthetique.) 

Meerwarth, A. “Les Kathakalis du Malabar.” Journal Asia- 
tique, Paris, CCIX, Oct.-Dec., 1926. 

Mukerji, S. C. Le Rasa , Essai sur VEsthetique indienne . Paris, 
1928. 

Oldenberg, H. “Vedic Words for ‘Beautiful 9 and ‘Beauty’ 
and the Vedic Sense of the Beautiful,” Rupam y No. 32, 1928. 

Petrucci, R. Encyclopedic de la Peinture chinoise. Paris, 1918. 

- La Philosophic de la Nature dans VArt d’Extreme-Orient. 

Paris, n.d. 

Poduval, R. V. The Art of Kathdkali. Trivandrum, 1933. 

Pope, G. U. The Tiruvaqagam. Oxford, 1900. 

RamRaz. Essay on the Architecture of the Hindus. London, 1834. 

Rao, T. A. G. Elements of Hindu Iconography. Madras, 1914, 
1916. 1 

- Tdlamdna or Iconometry. Memoirs of the Archaeological 

Survey of India, III. Calcutta, 1920. 

Regnaud, P. La Rhitorique sanskrite. faris, 1884. 

Sarkar, B. K. The Sukraniti. Sacred Books of the Hindus, 
XII. Allahabad, 1914. 

Saunaka. Bfhad Devoid. Translated by A. A. Macdonell. Har¬ 
vard Oriental Series, VI. Cambridge, 1904. 

1 Silpa-Sdstra. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


242 

Schlosser, J. Die Kunstliteratur . Vienna, 1924. 

Siren, O. A History of Early Chinese Painting . London, 1933. 
Stcherbatsky, Th. Buddhist Logic. Leningrad, 1930, 1932. 
Strzygowski, J. Asiatische Miniaturmalerei, im Anschluss an 
Wesen und Werden der Mogulmalerei. Klagenfurt, 1933. 
Suzuki, D. T. Essays in Zen Buddhism. London, 1927- 

- Outlines of Mahayana Buddhism. London, 1907. 

- The Lahkdvatara Sutra . London, 1932. 

Tagore, A., VAlpona. Paris, 1921. 

- Art et Anatomie hindoue. Paris, 1921. 

- Sadanga. Paris, 1922. 

Tagore, R. Poems of Kabir (various editions). 

Taki, S. Three Essays in Oriental Painting. London, 1910. 

- Japanese Fine Arts. Tokio, 1931. 

Thomas Aquinas, St. Summa Theologica. 

Vasubandhu. A bhidharmakota. Translated by L. de la Vall6e 
Poussin. Louvain, 1923-1931. 

Venkata, Rao, M. A. “Aesthetics in India,” Aryan Path, TV, 
715-720, 1933. 

Venkatassubbiah, A. The Kolas. Madras, 1911. 
Venkatasubbiah, A., and Miller, E. The Kalas, JRAS., 1914. 
Visvanatha. Sdhitya Darpana. Translated as The Mirror of 
Composition , by Premadasa Mitra. Calcutta, 1875. 

Waley, A. The Nd Plays of Japan. London, 1921. 

-? Zen Buddhism in its Relation to Art. London, 1922. 

- An Introduction to the Study of Chinese Painting . London, 

1923* 

- The Tale of Genji, 6 vols. London, 1925-33. 

Woodroffe, Sir J. The Garland of Letters. London, 1922. 

-“Psychology of Hindu Religious Ritual,” Indian Art and 

Letters, 1 ,1925. 

-“The Indian Magna Mater,” ibid., II, 1926. 

Wulf, M. de. Eludes historiques sur VEsthetique de St. Thomas 
d'Aquin. Lowen, 1896. 1 
1 Not seen by the author. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 243 

Zimmer, H. Kunstform und Yoga im indischen Kultbild. Berlin, 
1926. 

-“Some Aspects of Time in Indian Art,” Journ. Indian So¬ 
ciety of Oriental Art , I, 1933, pp. 30-51. 

2. Sanskrit Works 

Aitareya Brdhmaryx . Ed. SamaSramf, Bibliotheca Indica, Cal¬ 
cutta, 1895, 1896. 

Asanga, Mahdydna Sutrdlamkdra. Ed. Sylvain Levi, Paris, 1925. 

Basava Raja, Siva Tattva Ratndkara. Ed. B. R. Rao and P. S. 
Sastriar, Madras, 1927. (See Kalolla VI, Tarahga 2.) 

Bhagavad Gita. Various editions. 

Bharata, Nfyya Sdstra. Ed. M. Ramakrishna Kavi, Gaekwar’s 
Oriental Series, XXXVI (Vol. I), Baroda, 1926. 

Bhasa, Dutavdkya . Ganapati Sastri’s ed., Trivandrum, 1925. 

- Pratimdndtaka. Paranjape’s ed., Poona, 1927. 

- Pratijndyaugandharayana . Ganapati Sastri’s ed., Trivan¬ 
drum, 1920. 

- Svapnavdsavadatta. Ganapati Sastri’s ed., Trivandrum, 

1926. 

Bhavabhuti, Uttar a-Rdma-carita. Belvalkar’s ed., Poona, 1921. 

Bhojadeva, Samardhganasutradhara. Ed. T. Ganapati Sastri, 
Gaekwar’s Oriental Series, XXV, Baroda, 1924. 1 

- Yukti-Kalpataru . Candra Sastri’s ed., Calcutta, 1917. 1 

Bfhad Devatd. Ed. Macdonell, Harvard Oriental Series, V, Cam¬ 
bridge, 1904. 

,J 2 itralak$aria* (1) See Laufer, in Bibliography 1, above. (2) Ch. 
64 of the SUparatna , q.v . 1 

Dandin, DaSakumdracarita. Ed. Wilson, London, 1846. 

Dhanamjaya, Datarupa . Text and translation, ed. Haas; New 
York, 1912. 

Divydvaddna . Ed. Cowell, E. B., and Neil, R. A., Cambridge, 
Eng., 1888. 

1 Silpa Sdstras. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


244 

Harga, Priyadartikd. Ed. and tr. by Nariman and Ogden, Co¬ 
lumbia University Indo-Iranian Series, X, New York, 1923. 

Hemacandra, Tri$a§ti$aldkdpuru§acaritra (AdiSvaracaritra ). 

Bhavnagar, 1905. 

Jaiminiya Upani§ad Brdhmana. Ed. and tr. Oertel, JAOS ., 
XVI, New Haven, 1894. 

Kalidasa, Sakuntald. (1) Pischel’s ed., Harvard Oriental Series, 
XVI, Cambridge, 1922, (2) Kale’s ed. (AbhijMm-Sakuntalam ), 
Bombay, 1913. 

- VikramdrvaU. Kale’s 6th ed., Bombay, 1922. 

- Kumdrasambhava. Kale’s 5th ed., Bombay, 1923. 

- Malavikdgnimitra . Paranjape’s ed., Poona, 1918. 

- RaghuvarhSa. Nandargikar’s 3rd ed., Bombay, 1897. 

Kama Sutra. Kashi Sanskrit Series, XXIX, Benares, 1929 (with 
YaSodhara’s commentary). 

KdSyapaSilpam. Anand&srama Skr. Series, XCV, 1926. 1 

Lalita Vistara. Ed. Lefmann, Halle, 1902. 

Lahkdvatdra Sutra. Nanjo’s ed. Tokyo, 1923. 

Mayamuni, Mayamata. Ed. T. Ganapati Sastri, Trivandrum 
Skr. Series, LXV, Trivandrum, 1919. 1 

PaftcavirhSa Brdhmana. Ved&ntavagina’s ed., Bibliotheca Indica, 
Calcutta, 1870, 1874. 

Prak&S&nanda, SiddhdntamuktdvaU. Reprint from The Pandit . 
Benares, 1898. 

Pratiind-Mdna~Lak§ar3am. Ed. P. N. Bose, Punjab Oriental 
Series, XVIII, Lahore, 1929. 1 

R&jaSekhara, KarpUramanjan. Ed. and tr. by Konow and 
Lanman, Harvard Oriental Series, IV, Cambridge, 1901. 

- Kdvyamimdrhsd. Gaekwar’s Oriental Series, Baroda, 1924. 

Rg Veda Samhitd. Ed. Max Muller. London, 1849-1874.0 

Saddharma Pur) 4 arika. Kern and Nanjio’s ed., Bibliotheca 
Buddhica, St. Petersburg, 1912. 

SddhanamdXd. Ed. B. Bhattacharyya, Gaekwar’s Oriental Series, 
XXVI, XLI, Baroda, 1925,1928. 1 
1 Silpa Sdstras. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 245 

Sankar&c&rya: Svdtmanirupana ; SataSloki. Minor Works of 
Shankaracharya. Ed. H. R. Bhagavat, Poona, 1925. 

- Braktnas&tra-bhd§ya . Ed. Pansikar, 2nd ed., Bombay, 1927. 

Satapatka Brahmana. Ed. SamasramI, Bibliotheca Indica, Cal¬ 
cutta, 1907-1911. 

-Sri Kumara, Silparatna . Ed. T. Ganapati Sastri, Trivandrum 
Skr. Series, LXXV/XCVIII, Trivandrum, 1922, 1929. 1 
Stidraka, Mrcchakaftka. Parab’s 5th ed., Bombay, 1922. 
Sukr&carya, &ukranltisara. Vidyasagara’s ed., Calcutta, 1890. 
Upani§ads . Various editions. 

Vasubandhu, TrirhHka. Ed. Sylvain Levi, Paris, 1925. 

- VirhSatikd. Ed. Sylvain Levi, Paris, 1925. 

Viffludharmottara. Ed. Pandit MadhavaprasSd, Bombay, 1911. 
ViSvanatha, Sahitya Darpana. Kane’s ed., Bombay, 1923. 
Y^ska, Nighantu and Nirukta. Ed. Sarup, Lahore, 1927. 

3. Pali and Prakrit 

Aydrarhga Sutta. Ed. Jacobi, Pali Text Soc., London, 1882. 
Buddhagho§a, Atthasdlini. Ed. E. Muller, Pali Text Soc., Lon¬ 
don, 1897. 

Culavarhsa. Ed. Geiger, Pali Text Soc., London, 1925, 1927. 
Jdtaka. Ed. Fausboll, London, 1877-1896. 

Mahdvarhsa, Ed. Geiger, Pali Text Soc., London, 1908. 
Vibhanga . Ed. Mrs. Rhys Davids, Pali Text Soc., London, 1904. 

4. Chinese 

Ytt Shao-Tsung (ed.). Hua Fa Yao Lu (an anthology of Chi¬ 
nese criticism).. Shanghai, ca . 1930. 2 

1 Supa Sdstras. 

* Not seen by the author. 




Other Dover art books! 


BROWN DECADES by Lewis Mumford. Now classic study of the arts in America 
from 1865 to 1895 resurrects the "buried renaissance" of American art. Sullivan, 
Richardson, Root, Roebling, Marsh, Homer, Eakins, Ryder, many others are exam¬ 
ined. 2nd revised edition. Bibliography, index. 12 illustrations. 280pp. 5Vt x 8. 

T199 Clothbound $3.50 
T200 Pa per bound $1.65 


STICKS A STONES by Lewis Mumford. Enlarged edition of this famous classic on 
American architecture, art, etc. Medieval tradition in New England villages; Renais¬ 
sance influences; Jefferson's classicism; Mechanicsvilles of Poe's time; Brown Dec¬ 
ades, modern machine age, etc. Discussions of Richardson, Sullivan, Wright, others. 
21 illustrations. 246pp. 5 3 /t x 8. T201 Clothbound $3.00 

T202 Pa per bound $1.50 


THE BOOK OF SIGNS by Rudolf Koch. New unabridged edition, only $11 (On the 
out-of-print market up to $201) Symbols from ancient manuscripts, medieval cathe¬ 
drals, coins, catacombs, Byzantium, Rome, Saracen Syria. 14 different categories: 
cross, monograms, astrological, chemical, runes, etc. Translated by Vyvyan Holland. 
Set in Koch's own "magere Deutsch" type. 493 illustrations. 104pp. 6V« x 9'/«. 
Sewn binding. T162 Paperbound $1 .OO 

ON THE LAWS OF JAPANESE PAINTING by Henry Bowie. Based on 9 years 
study-experience in Late Kano art in Japan, this remains the best guide to the 
spirit, techniques, craftsmanship of Japanese painting. Control of brush, manufac¬ 
ture of ink, use of dots for moods, outlines; analysis of the psychological-philosoph¬ 
ical principles underlying Japanese art—best possible substitute for lessons from a 
great Japanese master. Index. 220 illustrations. 66 plates, xv 117pp. 6V« x 9V*. 

T30 Paperbound $1.95 


THREE CLASSICS OF ITALIAN CALLIGRAPHY by Oscar Ogg. Full exact reproduc¬ 
tion of 3 most famous Italian Renaissance calligraphic books: Arrighi's OPERINA, 
Tagliente's LO PRESENTE LIBRO, Palatino's LIBRO NUOVO. Papal chancery hand 
is the basic hand, but scores of alphabets, scrolls, cartouches, borders in the most 
varied styles. Historical introduction by Oscar Ogg. Bibliography by A. F. Johnson. 
245 full-page plates. 282pp. 6Vs x 9 Vm. T211 Clothbound $3.95 

T212 Paperbound $1.95 


LETTIRING A ALPHABETS by Albert Cavanagh. Unabridged reproduction of 
LETTERING by a famous American letterer. Full discussion, analysis, illustration of 
89 basic hand-lettering styles. Technical details, analysis of 37 lettered specimens. 
Alphabets may be reproduced without permission! 89 alphabets, 72 examples, 
illustrations. 121pp. 9*4 x 8. T52 Clothbound $3.00 

T53 Paperbound $1.00 

THE HUMAN FIGURE IN MOTION by Eadweard Muybridge. Largest selection 
published from original Muybridge platesl 196 full-sized plates, over 500 action 
strips, 4789 photographs of mostly undraped men, women, children in 163 different 
types of action: running, leaping, climbing, etc. Photographs taken in time-interval 
series, as many as 62 per action, at speeds up to 1/6000th of a second. Original 
sizel Historical introduction, bibliography. 411pp. 4789 photographs. 7V$ x 10*4. 
Deluxe editionl Weight 4 lbs.! T204 Clothbound $10.00 




AN ALPHABET SOURCE BOOK by Oscar Ogg. Handlettered source alphabets 
representing all important styles; treasury of historical materiall Chapters on use of 
peris, inks, crayons, pencils, drawing papers. Roman capitals, square capitals, rustic 
capitals, straight pen uncials, Irish semi-uncials, round Gothics, pointed Gothics, 
built-up capitals, etc. 98 full page plates 199pp. 9x12. T210 Clothbound $4.95 

THE SENSE OF BEAUTY by George Santayana. A sensitive study of “why, when 
and how beauty appears," with discussion of what elements in us make us sensible 
to beauty. Aesthetics, form, color, symmetry, relation of utility to beauty, etc. “The 
most satisfactory definition of beauty I have yet discovered," W. D. Teague, 
DESIGN THIS DAY. 284pp. 5 3 /. x 8. T237 Clothbound $2.8S 

T238 Paperbound $1.00 

PRINCIPLES OF ART HISTORY by Heinrich Wolfflin. Objective criteria to answer 
questions such as difference between baroque and classic; what causes our different 
emotional reaction to Rembrandt and Durer. Analysis of 64 major artists in terms of 
5 opposed dynamisms. 150 illustrations. 254pp. 5’/s x 9’A. T276 Paperbound $1.9S 

AN ATLAS OF ANATOMY FOR ARTISTS by Fritz Schider. 85 new plates added 
to this standard art classic. Answers to your anatomic questions given by da Vinci, 
Goya, Rubens, Michelangelo, others. Also added: Nancy Bayley photos of growing 
children, 176 Muybridge photos of action. Articulation of bones, insertion of 
muscles, proportions; muscle cross-sections, etc. Printed from new plates. 163 full- 
page plates. New bibliography of 72 anatomy books, evaluated. Deluxe editionl 
192pp. 7V% x 10V.. T241 Clothbound $6.00 

AN ATLAS OF ANIMAL ANATOMY FOR ARTISTS by Ellenberger, Baum, Dittrich. 
288 life-like illustrations of animals furnish you with a clear easy-to-follow method 
of increasing your skill! Enlarged, revised with 25 new plates from Stubbs, Strauss- 
Durckheim, Cuvier, etc. Monkeys, seals, hares, bats, dogs, horses, cows, lions, etc. 
Most animals shown 3 ways: externals, surface features; musculature; skeletons. 
Special dissecting cross-sections for heads, paws, etc. New introduction by L. S. 
Brown, American Mus. of Nat. Hist. Evaluated bibliography. 288 illustrations. 153pp. 
11Ve x 9. Deluxe editionl T82 Clothbound $6.00 


PRIMITIVE ART by Franz Boas. This exhaustive and authoritative book covers all 
primitive art: ceramics, leatherwork, stone, metal, textiles, wood from Asia, Africa, 
Americas, Australia, Oceania. Full discussion of such topics as theories of primitive 
art, conscious vs. unconscious levels of patterning, creation and interpretation of 
symbols, origin of style, literature, music, dance. "The soundest, most penetrating, 
and probably most comprehensive work," AMERICAN ANTHROPOLOGIST. 950 illus¬ 
trations. 376pp. 5 3 /« x 8. Sewn binding. T25 Paperbound $1.95 

FOUNDATIONS OF MODERN ART, A. Ozenfant. A most stimulating artist's appre¬ 
ciation of all forms of human creativity, from painting to science, writing to religion. 
It endeavors to isolate great universal that have underlain all art from paleolithic 
to most modern times. It is not a history, or a treatise on aesthetics, but a limitless 
store of insights expressed in aphorism. “A central contribution," Lewis Mumford. 
Enlarged edition. 226 illustrations. 368pp. 6'/« x 9'/». T214 Clothbound $6.00 

T215 Paperbound $1.95 


Available at your dealer or vr - ‘e Dover Publications, Inc,, 
Dept. DA, 920 Broadway, N< »• fork 10, New York, 
food catalog of Dover Books on art. 




