STUDIES IN PHILOSOPHY 


By 


KRISHNACHANDRA BHATTACHARYYA 


VoL, II. 


Edited by 


GOPINATH BHATTACHARYYA 
Jadavpur University 


PROGRESSIVE PUBLISHERS 


37, COLLEGE STREET :: CALCUTTA-12 


ALLRIGHTS RESERVED 
First Impression 


May, 1958. 


0) 
STATE CONTRA e, 
WEST BENGAL 
CALCUTTA 
19-9 61 


Published by S. K. Basu of Progressive Publishers, 37 College Street, 
Calcutta-12 and Printed by B. K. Sen at The Modern India Press, 
7 Wellington Square, Calcutta-13. 


EDITOR’S PREFACE 


The second volume of Studies in Philosophy is now presented 
after about twenty months since the issue of the First volume. For 
this inordinate delay the Editor alone is responsible. The Publisher 
tried his level best to expedite the publication, but owing to a number 
of circumstances which were beyond the control of the Editor, it was not 
found possible to bring it out at an earlier date. 

This volume contains the fourteen tracts mentioned in the Pre- 
face to Vol. I, but in a slightly varied order. As in the case of the 
other volume, the order is not a chronological one. 

In (1) The Subject as Freedom, the author works out his con- 
ception of Spiritual Psychology and the theory of the subject as free- 
dom, and attempts to trace out the progressive stages of cognitional 
freedom. In (2) The Concept of Philosophy we have an analysis of the 
nature of philosophy and the conception of Philosophy as sym- 
bolic thinking not amounting to knowledge. (3) The Concept of the 
Absolute and its Alternative Forms elaborates the doctrine of the trinal 
absolute. (4) In Knowledge and Truth, we have an analysis of the 
distinctive level of consciousness occupied by theory of knowledge and 
of the theory of the mutual implication of knowledge and truth. (5) 
Fact and Thought of Fact attempts to give a definition of fact without 
assuming any fact and seeks to establish the position that fact does 
not admit of an impersonal definition. (6) In Correction of Error as 
a Logical Process, the author develops the Advaita theory of illusion 
and emphasises that correction is an epistemic function without any 
unitary logical content and that falsity has no reference to the time- 
position of a cognition. In (7) The False and the Subjective, the 
author elaborates the thesis that the false and the subjective imply one 
another. In (8) Some Aspects of Negation, the author presents a non- 
subjectivistic interpretation of the position that ‘truth is manifold’ and 
tries to establish that there are radically different types of logic based 
on incommensurable views of negation. (9) Place of the Indefinite in 
Logic lays down the thesis that the indefinite is not merely a subjec- 
tive entity and that logic should find a place for the absolute indefinite. 
(10) In Definition of Relation as a Category of Existence, an attempt 
has been made to formulate a definition of ‘relation’ in purely objec- 
tive terms as against the subjectivistic interpretation of Green and 


vi EDITOR’S PREFACE 


others. In (11) Objective Interpretation of the Percept and Image, 
an attempt has been made to translate the subjective terms ‘perceived’ 
and ‘un-perceived’ into objective terms. (12) In Reality of the Future, 
the author develops the thesis that the reality of the future expected on 
a known ground cannot be said to be an object of knowledge and that 
the future is real only to will and to faith. (13) The Concept of 
Value gives an analysis of the concept of value in its different forms, 
and establishes the position that value is absolute and that speakability 
of value as information is a necessary illusion. (14)The Studies in 
Kant gives us a speculative interpretation of a number of Kantian 
themes. As with the other constructive interpretations contained in 
Vol. I, we have here also quite a large number of improvisations. 

In the Introduction to this volume, the Editor has made an attempt 
(o analyse the major philosophical doctrines of Krishnachandra Bhatta- 
charyya. The analysis has been done, as far as possible, in the author’s 
own words. This is for two reasons: first, the Editor was not sure 
that he had got at the exact logic of Krishnachandra’s writings in a 
large number of places; secondly, and this is to some extent connected 
with the first, he felt that his own language was far less effective and 
elegant than that of the author, even when the latter’s manner of pre- 
sentation was quite thoroughly severe. 

The Editor regrets that he has not been able to capture the inspira- 
tion or the insight that saturates almost all the writings of his father. 
It is because of this that he has all along felt that it was presumptuous- 
ness on his part to have undertaken this editorial work. 

The Editor feels that he would be failing in gratitude if he did 
not emphasise that all the credit for this publication belongs to his 
friend, Sri Sushil Kumar Basu of Progressive Publishers. The under- 
taking would never have been completed but for his unfailing generosity, 
constant encouragement and spirit of dedication. 


The Editor. 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Vol. II. 
PAGE 
EDITOR’S PREFACE V 
ABBREVIATIONS X 
EDITOR’S INTRODUCTION TO VOL, II. xi 
1. THE SUBJECT AS FREEDOM 
PREFACE 
ANALYSIS 5 
TEXT : CH. I. THE NOTION OF SUBJECTIVITY 19 
CH. II, PSYCHIC FACT 34 
CH. IN. BODILY SUBJECTIVITY 
(THE BODY AS PERCEIVED AND FELT) 50 
CH. IV. BODILY SUBJECTIVITY (CONTD.) 
(KNOWLEDGE OF ABSENCE AS A PRESENT 
FACT) 55 
CH. V. PSYCHIC SUBJECTIVITY 
(THE IMAGE) 62 
CH. VI. PSYCHIC SUBJECTIVITY (CONTD.) 
(THOUGHT) 69 
CH. VH. SPIRITUAL SUBJECTIVITY 
(FEELING) 13 
CH. VIN. SPIRITUAL SUBJECTIVITY (CONTD.) 
(INTROSPECTION ) 80 
CH. IX. SPIRITUAL SUBJECTIVITY (CONTD.) 
(BEYOND INTROSPECTION) 84 
CH. xX. THE SUBJECT AS FREEDOM 88 
2. THE CONCEPT OF PHILOSOPHY 
ANALYSIS 95 


TEXT 100 


Vill TABLE OF CONTENTS 


3. THE CONCEPT OF THE ABSOLUTE AND ITS 
ALTERNATIVE FORMS 


ANALYSIS 
TEXT 


4, KNOWLEDGE AND TRUTH 
ANALYSIS ) 
TEXT 


5. FACT AND THOUGHT OF FACT 
ANALYSIS 
TEXT 


6. CORRECTION OF ERROR AS A LOGICAL PROCESS 
ANALYSIS 
TEXT 


7, THE FALSE AND THE SUBJECTIVE 
ANALYSIS 
TEXT 


8. SOME ASPECTS OF NEGATION 
ANALYSIS 
TEXT 


9, PLACE OF THE INDEFINITE IN LOGIC 
ANALYSIS 
TEXT 


10. THE DEFINITION OF RELATION AS A CATEGORY 
OF EXISTENCE 


ANALYSIS 
TEXT 
11. OBJECTIVE INTERPRETATION OF PERCEPT 
AND IMAGE 


ANALYSIS 
TEXT 


PAGE 


121 
125 


147 
151 


167 
169 


181 
183 


193 
195 


205 
207 


22t 
225 


243 
245 


261 
263 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


12. REALITY OF THE FUTURE 


ANALYSIS 
TEXT 


13. THE CONCEPT OF VALUE 


ANALYSIS 
TEXT 


14. STUDIES IN KANT 


TEXT : CH, 
CH. 
CH. 
CH. 
CH. 
CH. 


CH. 


ANALYSIS 


APPENDIX 


I. 
Il. 
Hi. 
IV. 
V. 
Vi. 


VII. 


IDEA OF TRANSCENDENTAL PHILOSOPHY 
MIND AS PHENOMENON 

SENSE AND SENSATION 

SPACE, TIME, AND CAUSALITY 
CAUSALITY 


JUDGMENTS OF FACT, VALUE AND 
OUGHT-TO-BE 


FREEDOM AND MORALITY 


27\ 
273 


281 
285 


301 
307 
312 
317 
324 


332 
340 


350 
359 


ABBREVIATIONS 


The Concept of the Absolute and its Alternative 


Forms. 
The Concept of Philosophy. 
The Concept of Value. 
Correction of Error as a Logical Process. 
The Definition of Relation as a Category of Existence. 
The False and the Subjective. 
Fact and Thought of Fact. 
Knowledge and Truth. 
Objective Interpretation of Percept and Image. 
Place of the Indefinite in Logic. 
Reality of the Future. 
Some Aspects of Negation. 
Studies in Kant. 
The Subject as Freedom. 
Critique of Pure Reason. 
Critique of Practical Reason. 
Critique of Judgment. . 


EDITOR’S INTRODUCTION TO VOL. II. 


The published writings of Krishnachandra Bhattacharyya date 
from the year 1908, but his characteristic philosophical position as- 
sumes definite shape in the writings during the years 1928-1936. The 
publications of this period outnumber and far outweigh those that 
fall during the previous twenty years. Of the twentyone tracts 
published in these two volumes, as many as fourteen belong to this 
later period, the other seven covering the previous years. The earlier 
writings are not indeed entirely unrelated to the subsequent ones. 
Some of the salient positions elaborated in the author’s later and 
maturer thinking are to be found adumbrated therein. 

For the purpose of this Introduction, it would be convenient to 
present the author’s philosophical position under the following heads: 

I. The nature of Philosophy. 
II. Theory of knowledge. 
III. The theory of the subject and grades of cognitional 
freedom. 
IV. The theory of the trinal absolute. 


IL. THE NATURE OF PHILOSOPHY. 
a, The Concept of Philosophy. 


The nature of Philosophy is elaborated in ‘The Concept of Philo- 
sophy’, published in 1936. Philosophy is there taken to be an ex- 
pression of theoretic consciousness which, at its minimum, is the 
understanding of a speakable. But since what is spoken must be in 
the first instance believed, theoretic consciousness always involves 
belief in something as known. Philosophy is theoretic thinking. It is 
not, however, literal thinking. Literal thinking can be expressed as 
genuine judgments, but philosophical thinking cannot be so expressed. 
A genuine judgment is that in which the predicate either amplifies or 
explicates the meaning of the subject that is already believed. In 
philosophy, however, we do not have judgment of this genuine brand. 
What we have is pseudo-judgments, that is to say, statements which 
are ‘self-evident elaborations of the self-evident’. The content of 
philosophical thought is necessarily speakable; it 1s yet independent of 
the spoken belief of an individual mind. It is in the sense of poss- 
essing this kind of independence that a philosophical content has been 


xii EDITOR’S INTRODUCTION 


described as ‘self-evident’! Again, the elaboration of this self-evident 
as we have,it in philosophy is itself self-evident. To explain. A be- 
lieved content that has necessary reference to the speaking of it is not 
spoken of as information or, in other words, as a judgment in the pro- 
per sense of the term. In a judgment proper, the subject never pre- 
supposes the predicate. But in the apparent judgments that constitute 
the body of philosophy, the subject is understood as presupposing the 
predicate. Philosophy is, in this sense, a kind of self-evident ela- 
boration of the self-evident. , 

It has been said that the contents of philosophical thinking are 
speakable, but they are not literally thinkable. Now, if a content is 
literally thinkable in a judgment, the belief in it is actual knowledge. 
If it is only symbolically thinkable, it should not be said to be known 
but to be only believed as known. In philosophy, the content is 
spoken as at least partially symbolised. Philosophy cannot, there- 
fore, be regarded as a body of knowledge. It is concerned only with 
contents that are not actually known but are believed as demanding to 
be known without being literally thought. Philosophy is thus sys- 
tematic symbolism. 

Philosophy is the elaboration of different kinds of spiritual expe- 
riences. The abstractions of high-grade metaphysics are based on 
spiritual experience and derive their whole value from the experiences 
which they symbolise. No metaphysical concept is entirely intelli- 
gible without reference to the spirit. 


b, The organon of Philosophy. 


According to the author, the organon of philosophy is ‘reflection’ 
which is a sort of subjective activity yielding immediate knowledge. 
This insight-yielding activity has been described as a sort of ‘experi- 
mentation with the knowing activity’? It is an introspective exercise 
that ‘can be specifically regulated’. Logical reason is its accessory. 
Inference does not enable us to reach philosophical beliefs, though it 
has value as an instrument of exposition. Metaphysical reasoning is 
only the systematic exposition of symbolic concepts. The elaborate 
parade of deductive proof in metaphysics is just a ‘make-believe.’ 


c. The scope of Philosophy. 


Philosophy is a form of theoretic consciousness involving the 
understanding of a speakable. Theoretic consciousness is of four 


1 


sPed) 
OK. Cle TH. 
VCP. 29, 


EDITOR’S INTRODUCTION Xili 


grades : (a) empirical thought which involves reference to an object 
perceived or imagined to be perceived; (b) pure objective thought 
which has reference to an object but not necessarily to°a perceived 
‘abject; (c) spiritual thought which has no reference to an object 
and is subjective; and (d) transcendental thought which has reference 
neither to the subject nor to the object. Philosophy is based on the 
last three kinds of thinking. 

It has been said that philosophy is the elaboration of the self- 
evident or that which is independent of the spoken belief of any 
mind. Now this self-evident may be spoken in the objective, in the 
subjective and in the transcendental attitudes. Pure objective think- 
ing is concerned with the self-evident in the objective attitude and its 
content may be called the ‘self-subsistent.’ Subjective or spiritual 
thinking is concerned with the self-evident in the subjective attitude 
and its content is the ‘real’. Transcendental thinking is concerned 
with the self-evident in the transcendental attitude and its content is 
the ‘truth’ or the absolute. 

These self-evidents are all speakables. The objective self-evident 
is spoken as ‘the relation of A and B is’ whete the ‘is’ means an ob- 
jective content that is self-subsistent or existing apart from relations. 
Here the objective attitude is retained in its fulness. The subjective 
self-evident is spoken as ‘I am’ where ‘am’ means reality or something 
that is subjectively ‘enjoyed’. Here the objective attitude is explicitly 
dropped and the content is spoken as though it were objectively con- 
templated. The transcendental self-evident is spoken as ‘the absolute 
self is’. Here the self-evident is not even literally spoken as in the 
above two cases. Still it is not meaningless and it symbolises ‘truth’ 
i.e., what is belived and is not literally speakable. 

In the author’s view, the self-subsistent object demands to be 
known in absorbed contemplation; the real ‘I’ demands to be known 
in the unobjective attitude of ‘enjoyment’; the transcendental ‘truth’ 
demands to be reached in speechless realisation. It is to be noted 
here that the precise nature of this ‘demand’ is not explicated by the 
author. 


d. The branches of Philosophy. 

Corresponding to the three attitudes and the threefold nature 
of the philosophic content, there are fundamentally three grades of 
philosophy, viz., the philosophy of the object, the philosophy of the 
subject and the philosophy of truth. Under ‘philosophy of the object’ 
the author places metaphysics and logic. Empirical psychology and 


Xiv EDITOR’S INTRODUCTION 


axiology, it may be presumed, will also come under the same rubric 
The ‘philosophy of the subject’ or philosophy in the subjective atti 
tude covers épistemology in the current sense and also in the author’ 
special sense of the term. The ‘philosophy of truth’ is a distinctive 
discipline quite other than either metaphysics or epistemology. The 
author's Transcendental or Spiritual psychology appears to be a 
blanket term for the last two grades of philosophy. 


€. Philosophy of the object. 


In his CP the author takes ‘fact’ to be that in which the refer- 
ence to the subject or the speaking function is not necessary. This 
fact is dealt with in science. The object that has necessary reference 
to the subject is called by him the ‘self-subsistent’ and is taken to be 
what is dealt with in philosophy. ‘Objectivity’ which is common to 
these two objects is itself no fact, being only the self-subsistent form 
that is elaborated in logic. The spoken fact and the spoken self- 
subsistent agree in having certain unavoidable speech-created forms. 
Logic presents a system of these unavoidable forms. The concept of 
the object is first reached by contrast with the subject as the self- 
evident content of spiritual consciousness. The object is thus under- 
stood as self-subsistent before fact is understood as object. Since the 
object is apprehended before the form, logic may be said to pre- 
suppose metaphysics. And since metaphysics presents alternative 
theories in connection with the object, there may conceivably be al- 
ternative systems of logic. Logic is thus no science but only a 
branch of objective philosophy. The pure object whose forms are 
discussed in logic is the metaphysical object. Logic and metaphysics 
are thus the two basal branches of the philosophy of the object. It 
is to be noted here that metaphysics involves the objective attitude and 
there is no metaphysics of the subject. 


{. Metaphysics and Science. 


Metaphysics has been characterised as philosophy of the object 
and is taken to be based on the thought of the pure object. This 
raises two questions: (a) what is this pure object; and (b) is there 
any discipline which is concerned with the non-pure object. It ap- 
pears that, according to the author, the ‘pure object’ is the self-sub- 
sistent object i.e. to say, the object as object considered apart from 
its usability. It 1s to be noted that there is a dualism in the author’s 
conception of the ‘self-subsistent’. The self-subsistent has two fea- 
tures—one extrinsic and the other intrinsic. Extrinsically, it is that 

SSRI SS R28: 


EDITOR’S INTRODUCTION xXV 


which is believed to exist without being knowable or usable. Intrin- 
sically, it is that which has necessary reference to the subject. Per 
contra, the non-pure object would be that which is believed to be 
necessarily knowable and usable and which has no reference to the 
subject. It is the task of the first grade of philosophy to view the 
object as self-subsistent i.e., not as necessarily knowable and usable. 
In science, however, the object is just what is known and though it 
may be unknown, there is no question of its being unknowable. 
Science has no interest in formulating the concept of the self-subsis- 
tent object and it implicitly believes in the necessary knowability or 
usability of the object. Philosophy questions this implicit belief and 
offers a speculative theory of the object. Science may be said to 
be ‘predatory’ in so far as it believes that the object exists only to 
be used or exploited and the concept of the self-subsistent object is 
taken by the author to be the first corrective that philosophy offers of 
the predatory outlook of the scientific intellect. The attitude of philo- 
sophy is thus contemplative or aesthetic while that of science is 
frankly utilitarian. As a sort of corollary, the author believes that 
many problems which are usually regarded as philosophical are . 
wrongly taken to be so. He lists three such main problems in his 
CP :—(a) the problem of piecing together the results of the sciences 
into a world-view, (b) the problem that is connected with the 
so-called philosophy of Evolution, and (c) the problems concerning 
the formulation of the postulates or the structural concept of science. 


g. Philosophy of truth, 

The contrast of logic with metaphysics suggests the distinction 
between the self-subsistent and the real. The forms of thinking dis- 
cussed in logic are a kind of entity that must be said to be believed 
in, but they are believed in as not real and yet as not nothing. The 
suggested distinction between self-subsistence and reality is verified 
in the ‘enjoying’ consciousness of a content. The content of this 
‘enjoying’ understanding is understood neither as fact nor as the 
self-subsistent object. It is understood as what object is not, as the 
speaking subjectivity, as ‘I’. The study of all contents enjoye@yin ex- 
plicit reference to the subject ‘I’ may be called ‘philosophy of the 
spirit’. 

h. Philosophy of truth. 


There is, according to the author, a theoretic consciousness of ‘I 
am nought’. But the denial of ‘I’ is possible because we already be- 


XVi EDITOR’S INTRODUCTION 


lieve that the absolute is. The absolute is a positively believed entity 
that is only negatively understood as what the subject ‘I’ is not. It 
is an entity that cannot be understood as it is believed and is speak~ 
able only by way of symbolism. The positive character of the abso- 
lute is expressible only by the negation of ‘I’ and, as such, is not liter- 
ally expressible at all. If then it is said that the absolute is, the ‘is’ 
means not reality but ‘truth’. Reality is enjoyed but truth is not. The 
consciousness of truth as what is believed in but not understood either 
in the objective or subjective attitude and as a speakable in a non- 
literal or symbolic way is transcendental consciousness. Truth is 
belived as independent of speaking i.e., as self-revealing. ‘Truth’ 
then is absolute. But the absolute is not to be equated to truth. It 
may be ‘truth’ as in Advaita-Vedanta; it may be what truth is not 
or the absolute ‘freedom’ beyond being as in the so-called nihilistic 
Buddhism; it may again be ‘value’, or the indetermination oif truth or 
freedom as in Hegel. The study of this triple absolute belongs to the 
transcendental grade of philosophy. 


IJ. THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 


a. The concept of ‘knowledge’. 


In presenting the author’s theory of knowledge it is desirable to 
start with a clarification of what he means by the term ‘knowledge’. 
It is well-known that the word has been used in a wide variety of 
senses. But, whatever the variety, it is generally not in dispute that 
knowledge is a kind of awareness. In one usage it is identified with 
awareness as such. But our author does not accept this usage and 
has often contrasted knowledge to mere awareness. Awareness is of 
two fundamentally opposed types—, awareness in the objective attitude 
and awareness in the subjective attitude. The former is primarily 
exemplified by the awareness of physical objects, where what one is 
aware of is distinguished from the subject that has the awareness. The 
latter is primarily illustrated by one’s awareness of oneself and of 
one’s “jgowing’, where what one is aware of is not so distinguished. 
Following this difference in attitudes, we may have studies in the ob- 
jective attitude and those in the subjective attitude. Theories of know- 
ledge and metaphysics of the subject are usually regarded as coming 
under the former class. Our author, however, deviates from this 
prevailing view and holds that any study about knowing and the 
subject must be carried on in the subjective attitude .Not merely that: 


EDITOR’S INTRODUCTION XVii 


he speaks of a ‘cultivation’! of the subjective attitude and the inter- 
pretation of objects from the subjective attitude. He goes even fur- 
ther and appears to hold that awareness in the subjective attitude is 
far more authentic than the other kind of awareness. The subjective 
attitude, in his view, yields the self-evidencing truth. 

Of the two types of awareness, it is the one in the objective atti- 
tude that the author primarily takes to be what is signified by the 
term ‘knowledge’. Not that the other type of awareness is altogether 
denied that appellation. The awareness of the subject—which is an 
awareness in the subjective attitude—is taken to be a case of know- 
ledge. The awareness of the knowing ‘function’ and other functions 
of freedom like feeling, willing etc. is definitely not knowledge. But 
though knowledge is chiefly awareness in the objective attitude, it is 
not co-extensive with objective awareness. It is only one species of 
the latter, there being other kinds, as for example, thought, feeling, 
imagination, memory etc. Objective knowledge is distinguished from 
these latter varieties in having intuition (in the Kantian sense) as one 
of its elements.2 The author here appears to accept the Kantian 
convention that intuition and thought are the two necessary elements 
of what properly should be termed ‘knowledge’. He further draws a 
distinction between knowledge and belief. Knowledge involves be- 
lief, to be sure; but as distinct from mere belief, it involves the 
distinctness of the believed object from the belief.* There is finally 
the distinction, presumably on the scope of validity, between know- 
ledge on the one hand and illusion and imagination on the other. 
Thus it appears that the word ‘knowledge’ in the author’s usage stands 
primarily (and not exclusively) for a valid and certain awareness in 
the objective attitude, having intuition for one of its factors and in- 
volving the distinction of the object known from the knowledge it- 
self. Primarily, because the author is quite categorical that one’s 
awareness of oneself is an instance of knowledge, even though 
it is neither objective awareness nor intuitional in character. 
One thing is not clear however, and that is whether the 
author would agree to describe what he calls ‘knowledge’ as a 
state or as a ‘function’. That would perhaps depend on whether he 
would like to designate awareness itself as a ‘state’ or a ‘function’. 
If knowledge were to be regarded as a ‘state’, it would have to 
be regarded as a sort of precipitate of the ‘knowing’-function. If, 


XViil EDITOR’S INTRODUCTION 


however, it were to be described as a ‘function’, it would be just the 
function of ‘knowing’ itself. There is not surely a knowledge-func- 
tion over and above the knowing-function. Certain trends in the 
author’s mode of thinking would seem to favour the assumption that, 
according to him, knowledge and knowing-function are one and the 
same thing. But the editor is not at all sure on the point. 

About the nature of knowing or ‘to know’, the author is quite 
explicit. Knowing is a function and not a passive state of the sub- 
ject, as many would have it. ‘Function’ appears to be a sort of acti- 
vity. To know is to act or to do something. But it is activity 
neither in a physical nor in the volitional way. It appears to be 
sui generis and the author says that it is activity only in a symbo- 
lical sense. 

Knowing activity is a ‘free reference of the subject to the object’. 
It represents, according to the author, a positive mode of freedom 
of the subject to relate to object without getting related to it.1 The 
freedom of .the subject lies precisely in the fact that it is known by 
itself and that in relating to the object, it does not get related to 
the latter. That the subject has really such freedom is, as it appears, 
a matter of immediate certainty to the author. It might be sug- 
gested that the position is paradoxical, for if A relates to B (freely, 
it may be) it cannot but get related to B. It does not appear, 
however, that to the author this presents any paradox. To him it is 
not self-evident that the function of relating precipitates the state of 
relatedness, especially when it is free functioning. It is rather the 
case that the subject has an immediate feeling of relating itself to 
the object without having a feeling of getting related to it. 


b. The object of knowledge. The theory of psychic fact. 


Knowledge is primarily of a definite object and is to be distin- 
guished from the awareness of the indefinite. The author is positive 
that the indefinite is as much an object as the definite and is exempli- 
fied by such entities as the aesthetic object, alternation, the image as 
being formed, the ‘fringe’ of a psychic fact etc. 

Knowledge or cognition in the objective attitude is either of the 
physical fact or of the psychic fact. The author accepts the ordinary 
view of the physical fact, but as to the nature of the latter, he deviates 
widely from the usual view of the matter. In the ordinary and pre- 
vailing view, a psychic fact is a purely mental occurrence. It is just 
anything that happens in the mind, and, if immediately accessible, it 

“SF. 13: 


EDITOR’S INTRODUCTION xix 


is accessible only to introspection. In the author’s account, however, 
a psychical fact is never a pure mental event. It is not a ‘pure’ men- 
tal entity, because it is always an aspect of the non-mental object. 
Not that it is itself non-mental, as advocated by the Behaviourist. 
Neither is it any ‘experience-unity of subject and object’ as we have 
it in Ward. 

It has been said that the psychic fact is an aspect of the non- 
mental object. This requires clarification. The object has certain 
‘modes of relatedness’ to the subject, e.g., knownness, feltness etc. This 
relatedness viewed as a character of the object is, according to our 
author, the so-called psychic fact.'_ Knownness or relatedness is ‘a float- 
ing adjective like beauty’? A psychic fact constituted by this re- 
latedness is a character of the physical object and exists, like the 
object, even apart from introspection. 

Two negative criteria are laid down in this connection :— (i) 
what does not involve ‘knowledge’ of object is no psychic fact;? (ii) 
what introspection does not reveal is no psychic fact. It follows 
from the above that the following kinds of awareness, among others, 
do not come within the author’s definition of a psychic fact :— 

(i) the awareness of the imaginary, 

(ii) the awareness of the illusory, 

(iii) the introspective state or process, 

(iv) objectless feeling, 

(v) belief in the past fear of some illusory object. 
These are placed in a separate category and designated as ‘non-psy- 
chic fringe of a psychic fact’. It is to be noted that though they are 
non-psychic, they are not for that reason physical entities. It is un- 
fortunate, however, that the author has not given us any hints as 
to the precise status which he ascribes to these fringe-entities. 


c. Presentation. 


Psychic fact is essentially ‘presentation’ as embodying belief. It 
is thus not imaginary or non-factual. It is not, however, completely 
accomplished as fact but only to be accomplished." It is not com- 
pletely accomplished as fact in the sense that it is not isolated or freed 
from the object. 

It is necessary to explain what the author means by the term 
‘presentation’. Knowledge involves belief but, as distinguished from 
mere belief, it involves the awareness of the distinction of the object 


bei oe CRE “Ol: 28. 
nee: * SF. 40. 


XX EDITOR’S INTRODUCTION 


believed from the belief.1 This distinction is something more than 
the object itself and is what the author calls ‘presentation’ of the ob- 
ject.* Presentation as a psychic fact and object as a non-psychic 
entity are mixed up with each other in a peculiar way. The object 
is given as distinct from the presentation. The latter, however, is not 
given as distinct from the former: it is only abstracted or distin- 
guished from the object in introspection. It is to be noted that it is 
in non-perceptual knowledge only that the object appears distinct 
from its presentation and not in perceptual knowledge. In perception, 
again, the presentation is not Known as distinct from the object but 
it is believed and symbolised as what should be distinct.® 

Presentation is not necessarily perceptual. In addition to ex- 
ternal perception, we have presentation in the following modes: (i) 
feeling of the body from within; (ii) immediate apprehension of 
absence; (iii) memory of an object as past; (iv) imagination of the 
object as formed or becoming formed to be a perceptible object; (v) 
inference of the perceptible object as involving the unperceivable 
character of necessity etc. 

Perceptual knowledge is, to the author, the actual standard of 
knowledge. The other modes of presentation imply it and involve 
a belief in something not yet known but which may be known in some 
ideal mode of realisations Perception not only lends cognitive 
character to the other modes of presentation: it prevents them from 
reaching their ideal completion.° Contrasted to perception, the other 
modes are knowledge of certain adjectival facts or floating adjectives. 
They are not known as substantive though they are wanted to be so 
known. 


d. Belief, thought and feeling. 


It has been said that the author does not take the word ‘know- 
ledge’ to mean any and every awareness. Knowledge is only one kind 
and is contrasted to certain other kinds of which belief, thought and 
feeling are the most frequently mentioned. It is necessary to distin- 
guish these different kinds. Belief is the awareness of a fact as fact. 
Thought is a presentation that does not exclude belief in the object. 
Its object is presented as unpicturable meaning. Thought is a com- 
pleted product and is about a definite object. It is ‘complete’ in the 
sense of being dissociated from the forming or ideal timing that 


EDITOR’S INTRODUCTION xxi 


characterises the image. Thought is a form of theoretic conscious- 
ness which involves the understanding of a speakable. It is either 
literal or symbolic. Literal thought appears to be identified with ‘em- 
pirical thought’. The latter is explained as consciousness of a content 
involving reference to an object that is perceived or imagined to be 
perceived.! Symbolic thought is other than this literal thought and is of 
three kinds, the nature and object of which have already been explained 
in connection with the author’s conception of philosophy. 

By ‘feeling’ the author appears primarily to mean the intuition of 
of the Intuitionists—i.e. an awareness that is non-sensuous, immediate 
and completely certain. But far from agreeing with the Intuitionist 
in taking this feeling to be a superior type of ‘knowledge’ he does not 
regard it as ‘knowledge’ at all. In knowledge, there is almost always 
reference to an object, while feeling is explicitly unobjective. It is a 
positive subjective fact without any reference to any objective fact? 
and is typically exemplified by the feeling of the body from within or 
of freedom. It is an awareness in which there is no conscious refer- 
ence to the object even in the way of dissociation from it.* It is not 
denied that feeling has any content whatsoever. It has indeed one, 
but this content is unthought and unmeant and appears to introspec- 
tion as only distinct in itself and not as distinct from feeling. A psy- 
chic fact like thought is distinguished in introspection from its object 
and is accordingly believed to exist also outside introspection. But 
as feeling is not thus distinguished from its content, it cannot be be- 
lieved to exist outside introspection as a merely conscious fact. 

In feeling there is the positive consciousness of detachment from 
meaning. ‘Feeling is the knowledge of the purely unknown as such, the 
unknown that is not even meant’.* It is only symbolised as knowledge 
of the unknown. It is to be noted that as the unknown here is the 
unmeant, the preposition ‘of? in the phrase ‘knowledge of the un- 
known’ has no meaning and is used as a mere exigency of language. 


e. Theory of introspection. 

It is necessary at this stage to advert to the author’s theory of 
introspection. Introspection is usually taken to be internal percep- 
tion or the non-inferential awareness of a mental fact, and so far as 
its character of immediacy is concerned, it is placed on a par with 
the sense-perception of the physical object. According to the author, 

“GP. 8) 

* SF. 101. 
* Ibid. 
“SF. 106. 


XXxli EDITOR’S INTRODUCTION 


however, introspection is a process of abstracting from the object of 
its character of ‘relatedness to the subject’. The author agrees that 
a psychic fact is what is introspected. He does not agree, however, 
that the psychic is a purely mental fact. He holds that it is a charac- 
ter of the physical object, like knownness feltness etc., and that in- 
trospection consists in the distinguishing of knownness etc. as an abs- 
traction from the object.1 The author deviates from the ordinary 
view of introspection on another important point. In the ordinary 
view, perceptual states no less than the non-perceptual ones are ac- 
cessible to introspection: in the author’s view, there is no direct 
introspection into perceptual knowledge?, and the knowledge that we 
have of perceptual presentations is obtained through our introspec- 
tion into non-perceptual presentations. 

This introspection is called ‘psychological’ introspection and is 
to be differentiated from ‘spiritual’ introspection which consists in dis- 
tinguishing the functions of knowing etc. as other than the character 
of knownness etc.2 A function like ‘knowing’ represents a mode of free- 
dom from the psychic fact of knownness, and to the author, the con- 
sciousness of modes of freedom like knowing is as direct as that of 
a psychic fact like knownness. 

In the above account which is found in SF, the author appears 
to recognise psychological introspection in the objective attitude as a 
variety of introspection. In CP, however, he withdraws this recog- 
nition and confines the term ‘introspection’ only to what he calls ‘spiri- 
tual introspection’ which is there identified with the ‘enjoying under- 
standing’ of the subject or the ‘I’. Here ‘introspection’ is awareness in 
the subjective attitude, and the author is quite definite that ‘introspec- 
tion proper is a form of theoretic consciousness that implies an ab- 
juration of the objective attitude’. 

Spiritual introspection is speaking in the first person—either ac- 
tually or ideally—and involves the explicit consciousness of being 
what is spoken. In KT, the author speaks of ‘epistemological’ intros- 
pection, i.e., a species of introspection which is at the basis of epis- 

temology, especially of the Kantian type. The particular method by 
which Kant passed from the logical forms to the apriori functions is, 
according to the author, a self-evident process in self-consciousness 
and, as such, should be taken as a kind of introspection which is 
quite other than internal perception or psychological introspection in 
the usual sense of the term. Epistemological introspection is possible 


“S17: ele VE 
"SF. 34; 36. ACR Se. 


EDITOR’S INTRODUCTION xxiii 


only in the subjective attitude and appears thus to be a variant of 
spiritual introspection. The so-called psychological introspection in 
the objective attitude is either not introspection proper of is only a 
degeneration of spiritual introspection.! 


jf. The concept of ‘Truth’. 


The author has used the term ‘truth’ in at least two quite distinct 
senses. In one usage the term means that which is self-justifying or 
self-revealing (viz. the absolute) and has ‘real’ for its antithetic term.? 
In the other usage, it stands for true or valid cognition and is con- 
trasted to error.? The author holds that the doctrine of truth and 
error should belong to a discipline other than logic or epistemology. 

In connection with ‘truth’, it is held that knowledge and 
truth have to be defined in terms of each other, the former as what 
alone is true and the latter as what alone is known.‘ Three conse- 
quences follow from this : There is, in the first place, no such thing 
as false knowledge. Since knowing is known only as the implicate of 
the awareness of truth, to know an object is to know it as implicitly 
true. Truth cannot be taken simply as additional confirmation of 
what already is known indifferently. The second consequence is that 
there is no knowledge of objects as merely distinct and not otherwise 
related to one another. The known content must be explicitly co- 
herent and not merely co-existent with other known contents. The 
third consequence is that interpretations of knowing in terms of feel- 
ing or willing do not amount to knowledge. 


g. Analysis of error. 

The author has devoted more attention to the problem of error 
than to that of truth. The first analysis is found in his Vedantic 
tracts where we have explicitly the Satnkarite analysis of perceptual 
error or illlusion. The second analysis—largely independent—is 
to be found in his CELP. The problem recurs also in SF and FS. 

In analysing the phenomenon of illusion the author deals chiefly 
with the following problems :—(i) the stages constituting an illusion 
and its correction; (ii) the nature and status of the content that is 
corrected and (iii) the precise nature of the corrective process. The 
analysis, it is to be noted, is fundamentally on the lines of the Advaita- 
Vedanta school, though the author has always something of his own 
to say on a number of important points. 


*C.P. 32-33. 
*C.P. 39. 

* Ker. 

* Ibid. 8. 


XXiV EDITOR’S INTRODUCTION 


In the first analysis, the stock Vedantic example of mistaking a 
tope for a snake is analysed in three stages :—(a) The snake is pre- 
sented and«believed to be real. (b) The belief is corrected by the: 
perception of the rope as rope. The objective snake of the first stage 
now loses its objectivity and persists only as a possible object. The 
past percept as a subjective fact is, however, not yet questioned. (c) 
The snake is contemplated not only as non-existent now but as non- 
existent even when it appeared to be perceived. That snake is no 
possible object and there is a doubt even about the past perception of 
it is a subjective fact. That snake is thus shorn of its objective reality 
in the second stage and of its reality either as objective or as subjec- 
tive in the third stage. It is still given to us as a positive unthinkable 
and in absolute mockery of all thinking. 

In the second analysis, the author makes out the following points. 
(i) The correction is an epistemic function without any unitary logi- 
cal content. It cannot be adequately expressed by any single sentence: ' 
like ‘this that I believed as this snake is not snake’. It has to be ex- 
pressed in two sentences. There is no unitary logical form to express 
correction. (ii) Falsity has no reference to the time-position of a 
cognition at all and what is taken as false cannot be specified in purely 
objective terms. (iii) Taking the disbelief implied in correction to be 
adequately expressed in the form ‘this snake is not’, the this in it would 
not mean a perceived substrate or the snake-character. This, here, 
is not even a believed substrate but only an imagined specification of 
an imagined snake. This in ‘this snake’ stands for no fact at all. The 
disbelief is absolute and is not capable of being expressed as a nega- 
tive judgment. It cannot, again, be said that ‘what this was believed 
to be was not presented, nor that it was presented as this’. ‘I cannot 
now describe in objective terms what I then believed, nor can I say 
that there was only the subjective fact of contentless belief. I believed 
in a content that was neither fact nor absolute nought’. 

So much for the author’s analysis of error. He has also some- 
thing to say about the relation between the false and the subjective. 
According to him, the consciousness of the false and the consciousness 
of the subjective imply one another. The false is what is corrected 
and disbelieved. The content said to be disbelieved cannot be ex- 
pressed except as ‘what was believed’. Correction has thus to be. 
taken as a form of reflective consciousness. Again, the consciousness. 
of the subjective is consciousness of a belief. There is no conscious- 
ness of a subjectivity that is not consciousness of a content referred’ 
to fact. Now the consciousness of belief is the consciousness of hav- 


EDITOR’S INTRODUCTION XXV 


ing the belief as past for present rejection or re-affirmation and is 
never a mere non-committal consciousness of the content as merely 
subsistent. : 


Ill. THEORY OF THE SUBJECT AND GRADES OF COGNITIONAL 
FREEDOM. 


a. Theory of the Subject. 

The subject or the self is conceived after Advaita-Vedanta as 
consciousness and is interpreted as free-function or freedom. This, 
according to the author, is Kant’s view also. But while to Kant this 
self is only thinkable and is never knowable, to Krishnachandra it is 
never literally thinkable though it is knowable. It is not, however, 
ordinarily known in itself, though the possibility of its knowledge will 
have to be admitted. 

That the self is not literally thinkable follows from the author's 
definition of ‘thought’ which, in his view, must mean or refer to some 
object. Since the subject is other than the object and the object is 
just what is meant, the subject cannot be a meant something. That 
the subject cannot be anything meant follows also from the author's 
conception of ‘meaning*. A word is taken to mean something when 
the speaker and the hearer could use the word to understand the self- 
same entity. But the word ‘I’ cannot be so used. As used it has a 
uniquely singular reference. 

Though the subject is not the object, it is somehow found blend- 
ed with the latter. The object is given in various stages and corres- 
pondingly there are various grades of subjectivity. Spiritual realisation 
is the realisation of these different grades as dissociated from the 
object. 

The subject as consciousness is not, as has just been stated, 
realised in its purity in common consciousness. It is, however, recog- 
nised to be present throughout the different stages of objectivity. In 
his The Subject as freedom, the author makes an attempt to trace out 
in detail these different grades of subjectivity. What follows here is 
largely a summary, practically in the author’s own words, of his 
general position as developed in this treatise. 


hb. Grades of cognitional freedom. 

There are three broad stages of subjectivity :—(A) the bodily, 
(B) the psychical and (C) the spiritual. 

(A) The subject is primarily intended by the word ‘I’ and as 
the body is identified with the ‘I’ it is permissible to speak of the: 


r 


XXvVI EDITOR’S INTRODUCTION 


‘bodily subject’. The bodily stage has three substages :—(i) the 
body as externally perceived, (ii) the body as internally felt and 
(iii) the absence of object known as a present fact. In the bodily 
‘or sub-psychic stage, the body as observed and felt is the subject in 
relation to the environment. (i) Though the body represents a stage 
of being of the subject, yet one’s own body, even as a perceived 
‘object, has a unique singularity. The objectivity of other perceived 
objects is constituted by their space-position relatively to the perci- 
pient’s body. It is not, however, so with the percipient’s own body 
which is in this sense dissociated from the external world. A person’s 
own body is uniquely different from other perceived objects and has 
no place in the objective world that he conceives to be presentable 
to him. Even if the subject is taken as nothing but one’s own per- 
ceived body, it involves knowledge of something that cannot be under- 
stood in terms of the perceptible object in the merely objectivistic 
attitude. (ii) There is the awareness of the body from within in the 
‘feeling of the body’. The felt body cannot be distinguished from the 
perceived body though the latter is distinguished from the former. 
The felt body is, in this sense, potentially dissociated from the per- 
ceived body. It is, again, imperfectly dissociated from the perceived 
object and the latter is fully distinguished from the former. The feel- 
ing of detachment from the object is the feeling of freedom and the 
first hint of this freedom is reached in the feeling of the body. 
(iii) There is such a thing as a sense-conditioned cognition of an ab- 
sent object, or of the absence of an object. It is not ordinary perception 
and is yet undissociated from it. It is a kind of imaginative percep- 
tion conditioned by conscious non-perception of that which is cog- 
nised. The subject that imaginatively perceives the absence of an 
object is, like the felt body, not consciously dissociated from the per- 
ceived body; but the subject that knows absence through conscious 
non-perception is consciously dissociated from it. Conscious non- 
perception is thus a transitional stage between body-feeling and 
imagination with which the psychical stage begins. 

(B) The psychical stage has four substages :—(i) image, (ii) 
idea-image, (iii) pictorial idea and (iv) non-pictorial idea. The 
image of the object whose absence is known in conscious non-percep- 
tion marks the transition to the psychic stage. The image appears as 
a substantive something from which the object is distinct. The psy- 
chic stage begins when attention is shifted from the objective fact of 
absence to the image. As attended to, (i) the image appears as 
imaging or the forming of a form, the process and the product being 


EDITOR’S INTRODUCTION = XXxvii 


presented at once. The consciousness of the form as evident in the 
forming process and as a product that does not yet come in time 
after it is (ii) the idea as undissociated from the image. A later 
stage is (iii) the idea as dissociated from the image; it is pictorial thought 
which wants to be imaged and is definite so far as it is imaged. (iv) 
Non-pictorial thought comes next. It is thought that is definite in itself 
and has properly no image, though an image may serve as its symbol. 
These grades of image and thought are the grades of presentation 
which is explicitly felt to be dissociated from the object. Such dis- 
sociated presentation is known in introspection to have no space-posi- 
tion and is at least not known to have time-position. The 
image. still appears, however, as though it has spatial form 
and to be forming as though it were a temporal process. Some trace 
of this quasi-temporal process may persist in thought, but thought as 
a non-pictorial meaning is felt to be free from it and to be eternally 
complete. Still such meaning appears as though it were object. Its 
presentational character is explicitly indicated by the consciousness of 
the absence of accomplished meaning in the phenomenon of trying to 
think, This may be taken as pointing to the positive freedom from 
objective meaning such as characterises non-presentational or spiri- 
tual subjectivity. 

(C) Spiritual subjectivity has three substages :—(i) feeling, 
(ii) introspection and (iii) beyond introspection. 

(i) Feeling. —The introspective awareness of meaning as distinct 
from the image is awareness of the explicitly unobjective. Feeling is 
also explicitly unobjective. The consciousness of the merely un- 
known as distinct from what is known as object that is also unknown 
is ‘feeling’. It is purely subjective in the sense that there is no cons- 
cious reference to object even in the way of dissociation from it. In 
introspection into feeling, the distinction of feeling from its presenta- 
tive content is appreciated as definitely not known but only felt and 
symbolised. With this awareness of meaning as the symbol of feel- 
ing, the objective reference lapses altogether. 

Feeling is the positive consciousness of detachment from mean- 
ing. It is the awareness of a content as unmeant. But as it is non- 
denial of a possible meaning, it is not without the persisting will to 
objectification. When a feeling has purged itself of this will, there is 
the awareness not merely of the unmeant but of the unmeanable as 
well. This is exemplified from the analysis of the experience of the 
illusory. The content there is the ‘indescribable’. Two stages of feel- 
ing can thus be distinguished : the lower stage where there is free- 


XXxVviii EDITOR’S INTRODUCTION 


dom from actual thought and the higher stage where there is freedom 
from possible thought. 

The feeling of not having a feeling is itself a feeling : it is the 
feeling of a feeling. We are aware of the un-meanable in two stages, 
as the meant unmeanable and as the mere function of meaning. The 
knowledge implied in the former is of a contradiction while that im- 
plied in the latter is not of anything: it is merely knowing. The 
feeling of feeling is the former kind of awareness, while the latter is 
just introspection which is the pure knowing function and is a com- 
plete detachment from felt being. 

(ii) Introspection.—Introspection into feeling implies the pos- 
sible detachment from the being of feeling. This possible detachment 
from all distinct being is introspective awareness. The self is taken 
by Kant as the thinking function and also as an accomplished mean- 
ing. But in the author’s view, the self is identified with the function 
of introspection and detached from thinking and feeling. It is the 
first person ‘I’ which is neither meanable nor unmeanable. The word 
‘TY has a meaning-function but not a meaning. It is the expression of 
introspection or the I-function. The meaning function of the word 
‘l’ is to the speaker his actual introspection, but the understanding of 
the word by the hearer is indicative of a form of consciousness subt- 
ler than introspection. It is the awareness of a possible introspec- 
tion. 

(iii) Beyond introspection.—Actual introspection is unrealised 
knowledge because it is actually only self-evidencing to another and 
not self-evident to itself. One’s own self should be self-evident and 
should be intuited by oneself even as it is intuited by another. The 
self should be at once self-evidencing and self-evident, but as a matter 
of fact the self is self-evidencing and evident to another. The other 
self is to the self-evidencing self a possible introspector whose intui- 
tion of the latter is a possible intuition to the latter. The awareness 
of these possibles in oneself indicates the nécessity of a spiritual dis- 
cipline of realisation of the self already implied by introspection. 

Introspection into the awareness of a possible subjective state is 
a possible or imaginary introspection. It is half-dissociated from the 
actually introspective self. Complete dissociation from this actual 
awareness is reached when the content of it is a subjective state that 
is illusory. There are actually illusions about the subjective just as 
there are illusions about the objective. 

Ordinarily, introspection is the awareness of a subjective fact as 
owing its facthood to itself and is, in this sense, its appropriator. But 


EDITOR’S INTRODUCTION ° XXIX 


there are experiences where one gets the hint of an introspection that 
is not appropriative. This kind of introspection would be self-intui- 
tion. The possibility of a silent self-enjoying ‘I’ is inteltigible only 
because we are aware of certain subjective modes previously appro- 
priated as utterly unappropriable and as appearing only as though 
they are distinct. The absolute intuitable self is only understood if 
the non-being of distinction is understood. This non-being is finally 
understood in the awareness of subjective illusion which is the ex- 
plicit awareness creating a distinction that is no fact at all. 


c. The Subject as Freedom. 


It is in introspection that we are aware of the demand for the 
consummation of the freedom that is felt in every grade of subjecti- 
vity in respect of the object presented to it. The introspective sub- 
ject is free from possible objectivity and is thus freedom itself. But 
it knows itself not as itself but as a distinct subject that is only pos- 
sibly identical with itself. It is thus aware of a demand to know this 
subject as actually itself. This demand is for the intuition of the sub- 
ject as absolute freedom. The subject is understood as freedom that is 
real. The idea of realising the subject arises only because we are 
identified with the body while we are introspectively aware of ourselves 
as not objective and yet as definitely positive. We do not know our- 
selves as dissociated from the object, yet we are aware of a possible 
dissociation or freedom. Actual freedom from the object is known in 
some measure in bodily subjectivity. In higher stages, there is only the 
feeling of it. The higher the stage of subjectivity, the less is the free- 
dom felt to be achieved though the more assured is the faith in its 
achievability. In the introspective stage, the feeling of achieved free- 
dom lapses altogether, but the faith in its achievability is completely 
assured. 


IV. THEORY OF THE TRINAL ABSOLUTE. 


Although the term ‘absolute’ in the sense of the unconditioned or 
the non-relative occurs frequently in the earlier writings of Krishna- 
chandra, a distinctive theory of the absolute is to be found only in two 
of his later writings, viz., ‘The Concept of the Absolute and its Alterna- 
tive Forms’ and ‘The Concept of Philosophy’. The present account is 
based chiefly on the former. In CAAF, the absolute is defined as 
‘what is free from the implicational dualism of content and conscious- 
ness’. The definition requires to be clarified. Consciousness is always 
the consciousness of a content and we are reflectively aware of the 


XXX EDITOR’S INTRODUCTION 


content as distinct from and in necessary reference to consciousness. 
This peculiar relation between content and consciousness is described 
as ‘implicational dualism’. An entity that is free from such dualism 
would be an entity that is distinct but not in necessary reference to 
consciousness. Such an entity seems to be what the writer designates. 
as the absolute. Now, as consciousness is of three kinds—knowing, 
feeling and willing—the implicatory distinction is also threefold. There- 
are, again, three ways in which freedom from this distinction can be 
understood : (a) the content may be freed from its reference to cons- 
ciousness and we have truth—the absolute for knowing; (b) conscious-- 
ness may be freed from the content and we have freedom of the will— 
the absolute for willing; (c) the implicational relation of content and 
consciousness may be freed from their distinction as a unity and we 
have value—the absolute for feeling. In the case of knowing, the 
absolute would be a content that has to be understood as what need 
not be the content of any knowing, i.e., as utterly unrelated to knowing. 
In the case of willing, the reality of willing has to be understood as the 
negation of being or of an emergent distinct. In the case of feeling, 
the being of value has to be understood as a being from which known 
being is distinct; it is to entertain an indifference of being and non- 
being. All the three—unrelatedness, negation of the emergent and’ 
the indifference of being and non-being—are unmeaning modes of ne- 
gation to reflection. But to admit the absolute in any form is to admit 
a negation that is unintelligible to the logic of the understanding. 

The absolute has to be formulated in a triple way. It is meaning- 
less to assert, however, that there are three absolutes or one absolute, 
for the absolute is not a Known content and it is only about anything 
known that the question ‘one or many’ has any meaning. There is no 
Sense, again, in speaking of the absolute as the unity of truth, freedom 
and value. 

It will be seen that the absolute of Krishnachandra’s conception 
is not the same as the overpersonal reality that is enjoyed in religion. 
It means what the subject ‘I’ is not. It is a positively believed entity 
that is only negatively understood. It is an entity that cannot be 
understood as it is believed and is speakable only by way of symbolism. 

The absolute as transcending the enjoyed reality of religion is 
positive being (truth) or positive non-being (freedom) or their posi- 
tive indetermination (value). In the author’s opinion, the absolute 
is conceived as truth in Advaita-Vedanta, as freedom in Buddhist nihi- 
lism’ and as value in Hegel. 

The absolute, it has been said, has to be formulated in a triple 


EDITOR’S INTRODUCTION XXX? 


way as truth, freedom and value. Each is absolute, but what are here 
understood as three are only their verbal symbols : they themselves are: 
undersood together but not as together. 

The author describes the mutual relation between truth, value and’ 
freedom as ‘alternation’, and employing the term, ‘reality’ to mean 
freedom, he offers the following explanation. “.. . it appears meaning- 
less to speak of truth as value, of value as real or of reality as true; 
while we can significantly speak of value as not false, of reality as not 
valueless or of truth as not unreal, although we cannot positively assert 
value to be truth, reality to be value and truth to be reality... .. In one 
direction their identity and difference are alike meaningless and in 
another direction their identity is intelligible though not assertable. 
Truth is unrelated to value, value to reality and reality to truth; while 
value may be truth, reality value and truth reality. The absolute may 
be regarded in this sense as an alternation of truth, value and reality”. 
For further clarification of this relation, the reader is referred to sections 
44 to 47 of CAAF. 

It appears that ‘alternation’ in the present context is not merely 
epistemic, and truth, freedom and value are not just alternative descrip- 
tions of the absolute. ‘Alternation’ in the author’s view appears to be 
constitutive of the absolute. But if, as the author holds, it is meaning- 
less to assert that the absolute is one or many, it is difficult to see how 
the absolute can be asserted to be of the nature of an ‘alternation’ in 
the ordinary sense of either-or, or in any other extraordinary sense that 
can be conceived. 

The above is a quite imperfect and inadequate report of the major 
aspects of the philosophy of Krishnachandra Bhattacharyya. It will be 
seen that though it is possible to recognise traces of Vedantic or Kan- 
tian influence here and there, the philosophy as a whole is remarkably 
Original. There are undeniably obscure points which the editor would 
have liked to clarify if he could. But despite this occasional obscu- 
rity, in going through these studies there is the ineradicable feeling that 
one is in the presence of an extra-ordinarily powerful and wonderfully: 
inventive mind. 


THE SUBJECT AS FREEDOM 


PREFACE 


This book is a revised and slightly amplified form of the lectures 


delivered by the author at the Indian Institute of Philosophy, Amalner 
in 1929, 


The subject or subjectivity is conceived here after Vedanta as 
conscious freedom or felt detachment from the object. The general 
standpoint in its orientation to modern thought is indicated in the two 
introductory sections. The stages of freedom from objectivity as ela- 
borated in the rest of the book may be taken to constitute a rough 
sketch of transcendental psychology, conceived as the legitimate subs 
titute for the so-called metaphysic of the soul. 


STAFE CENTRAL LIBRARY 
WEST BENGAL —~ 


CALCUTTA: 


ANALYSIS 


CHAPTER I 


THE NoTION OF SUBJECTIVITY (SEC. 1—24) 


(1) The ‘object’ is what is meant by the ‘subject’, and the subject 
is other than the object. The subject cannot, therefore, be a meant. 
entity, yet it cannot be denied that there is someawareness of the 
subject. This awareness must then be something other than meaning- 
awareness. (2-3) (i) A word is said to mean an entity or produce a 
meaning-awareness when the speaker of the word and its hearer could 
use that word to understand the self-same entity. The word ‘I’ cannot 
be so used. It cannot then be said to mean anything. Yet it is un- 
doubtedly understood by the hearer. This understanding is thus pro- 
duced through the word but not through the meaning of the word. (ii) 
Again, the communicating act of the speaker is never a part of what 
is meant by a word. But when a person uses the word ‘I’, it is not his 
self only but the self as speaking or expressing itself that is understood. 
His self-consciousness is not merely expressed but is also incarnated 
in the word. (4) The term ‘I’, as used has a uniquely singular 
reference, but as understood it is general. It is thus unlike a term 
meaning an objective content which has the same reference to the 
hearer as to the speaker. What is meant by ‘this’ is not what is con- 
veyed by ‘I’, though the latter may be indicated by ‘this’. (5-8) The 
object is meant by ‘this’ and the subject is indicated by the three per- - 
sonal pronouns. There are six possible equations of ‘this’ with the 
three personal pronouns. But of these six possibles, three (viz., ‘this is 
I’ ‘this is you’ and ‘he is this’) are not believed, and the three that are 
believed (viz., ‘I am this’, ‘you are this’, and ‘this is he’) represent a felt 
but not a known content. None of the six equations is thus logically in- 
telligible. (9) The object is known as distinct from the subject while 
the subject is known in itself. The subject is not known as related to 
the object : it is at best dissociated from the object with which it was 
identified. (10) The subject understood as the unique speaker of 
‘T and the object that is meant as distinct from the subject are the 
two things that are known. But the object is not known with the 
same assurance as the subject. The unreality of an object or that 


6 THE SUBJECT AS FREEDOM 


which is meant is perfectly intelligible : it is meaningless, however, to 
speak of the unreality of the subject. But the subject as a known 
fact is always a spoken fact unlike the object which may be known 
without being named. 

(11) There is properly no metaphysic of the subject. The 
awareness of the subject is midway between mystic intuition and the 
consciousness of a meaning. The exposition of it is, accordingly, 
midway between mysticism and metaphysic. As, however, the 
subject is communicable by speech, it cannot be taken as falling out- 
side philosophical enquiry. (12) The attitude of metaphysics is ob- 
jective. It seeks to know reality as distinct from the knowing of it. 
Knowing is not known as a distinct fact, being only distinct through 
the self-conscious act of distinguishing it. To realise that the dis- 
tinctness of knowing is entirely through the distinguishing of it is to 
realise knowing as a self-evidencing fact. (13) There is nevertheless 
the belief in the facthood of knowing as a ‘function’ i.e., as a positive 
something which can be literally expressed only in the negative way 
as what the known object is not. The awareness of this unmeant 
something involves, however, a higher certitude than the belief in 
the meant object. The knowing ‘function’ is only as the free reference 
of the subject to the object. (14) This felt reference is the positive 
freedom of the subject having different felt modes—like knowing, 
feeling or being—which can be symbolised by objective meanings. (15) 
In speaking of its function, the subject believes in it neither as 
meant nor as unmeant but as being constructed as fact by being 
spoken. The speaking creation of a system of subjective functions 
constitutes a study other than metaphysics and Epistemology. 

(16) This new study may be called Spiritual or Transcendental 
Psychology which elaborates the believed facthood of the subjective 
functions into a system of symbolisms. The symbolism is the form 
of the non-theoretic or spiritually practical mode of escaping the 
objective knowing attitude and of cultivating a subjective attitude. 
Spiritual psychology symbolises the subjective attitude by the objec- 
tive attitude from which it seeks to be freed. (17) The distinguishing 
of ‘knownness’ as an abstraction from the known object is psycholo- 
gical introspection and the consciousness of the subjective functions 
of ‘knowing’ etc., as other than this abstraction may be called spiritual 
introspection. These functions represent the modes of freedom from 
the corresponding psychological abstractions, and the philosophical 
study of these functions may be called Spiritual psychology. (18-19) 
‘The metaphysical problem—what it is in the object that determines its 


ANALYSIS 7 


known appearance—is only a problem in meaning and is outside the 
scope of spiritual psychology. The business of such a Psychology is 
two-fold : (a) to interpret Empirical psychological in terms: of the felt 
and believed freedom of the subject from objectivity; (b) to elaborate 
modes of freedom that have no reference to object at all and thus 
to assign a place to spiritual mysticism. (20) Kant’s Critical philosophy 
may be taken as a disguised form of Spiritual psychology as thus con- 
ceived. But the Kantian epistemology does not abandon the objective 
procedure of metaphysics and the sciences, and it thus misleads so far 
as it presents the function as an objective meaning and does not re- 
cognise that it is believed without being meant. (21) The persisting 
objective attitude of Kant explains his disbelief in the possibility of a 
spiritual discipline of the theoretic reason through which self-know- 
ledge may be attained. 

(22) According to Kant, the self can only be thought and not 
known. The view presented here is that the subject is known though 
neither thought nor intuited. The subject is known by itself and 
believed as relating to the object, the modes of relating being the modes 
of freedom from objectivity. (23) Spiritual progress means the reali- 
sation of the subject as free. According to some, this realisation 
involves a specific activity of the subject. There is a demand for 
some kind of activity of the subject towards itself. There is the de- 
mand that the subjective function of knowing which is only believed 
and not known as fact has to be known as the self-evidencing reality 
of the subject itself. This would be the supreme method of cognitive 
inwardising. (24) The possibility of such a method has to be exhi- 
bited in spiritual psychology. The steps involved in the method 
should correspond to a gradation of subjective functions or modes of 
freedom from the object. The stages of freedom are in the following 
order : (a) Bodily subjectivity; (b) Presentational subjectivity; (c) 
Non-presentational or Spiritual subjectivity. Each of these stages would 
comprise substages. The elaboration of these stages of freedom in 
Spiritual psychology would suggest the possibility of a consecutive 
method of realising the subject as absolute freedom. 


CHAPTER II 
PsycHic Fact (sec. 25-56) 


(25) Psychological introspection is the process of abstraction 
from the object of its modes of relatedness to the subject. This re- 
Jatedness viewed as a character of the object is the so-called psychic 


8 THE SUBJECT AS FREEDOM 


fact. ‘Knownness’ as one such psychic fact is a floating adjective like 
beauty and is an abstraction of the second degree. (26-30) Psychic 
fact is a cHaracter of the object and is bound up with object-cognition. 
(a) What does not involve knowledge of object is no psychic fact. 
(b) Again, what introspection does not reveal is no psychic fact. The 
consciousness of the imaginary is not revealed in introspection : it is 
not, therefore, a psychic fact. The feeling of an object that is believed 
. to be illusory cannot also be asserted to be a psychic fact. (31-32) 
A mode of consciousness like the above is only a fringe of some psychic 
fact. The fringe may epistemologically be primary or secondary in 
respect of the psychic fact but it never stands by itself. 

(33) A psychic fact involves not merely the belief in an objective 
fact but also the knowledge of it. Knowledge as distinct from mere 
belief involves the awareness of the distinction of the object believed 
from the belief. This distinction is just what is called ‘presentation’ of 
the object in which while the object is given distinct from the presenta- 
tion, the presentation is only abstracted from the object. (34-37) 
Perceptual knowledge and perceptual illusion represent two extreme 
cases of this relation between presentation and object; and interme- 
diate between perceptual knowledge and perceptual illusion are the 
other forms of knowledge involving a conscious distinction of the 
known object from its presentation. The distinctness of the object 
from the presentation does not, however, mean the distinctness of the 
presentation from its object. | 

(38) There are different grades of non-perceptual knowledge 
implying different modes of presentation, e.g., the knowledge of the 
body from within, the immediate apprehension of absence, memory, 
constructive imagination and inference. (39) Perception as the actual 
standard of knowledge not only lends the cognitive character to the 
other modes of apprehension but also prevents them from reaching 
their ideal completion. The objects of the non-perceptual modes of 
knowledge are adjectival characters of the perceptually knowable ob- 
ject. They are, however, necessarily symbolised as substantive by 
objective metaphors. 

(40-41) In perceptual knowledge, though the presentation is not 
known as distinct from the object, yet it is believed or symbolised as 
what should be distinct. The psychic fact or the presentation is thus 
not accomplished as fact but only to be accomplished as such. As 
such the presentation may be said to be known as unknown and as 
to be known as object. (42) The complete accomplishment of psychic 
facthood is conceivable as implying presentation that is wholly turned 


ANALYSIS 9 


into known object. It would mean the conscious objectivity of what 
in presentation is more than the sense-given object or the metaphysical. 
(43) The Kantian objection that the appearance of objectivity of the 
metaphysical element is only illusory cannot be accepted. The ap- 
pearance is incomplete but not illusory and the demand to know it is 
quite legitimate. (44-45) To take the metaphysical as merely illusory 
is to assume the object to be alone knowable and to be incapable of 
being Known freely. It is to deny the facthood of the constructive 
function by which the perceivable object comes to be for the subject. 
(46) The distinction of the object that is non-perceptually known 
from its knownness is just its character of being unknown. The known 
object is thus a problem to all knowledge other than the perceptual 
one. Non-perceptual knowledge is knowledge of the object as pheno- 
menal with belief in a reality constituting it. 

(47-49) To know the phenomenon is not not to know the reality 
but to know it as unknown. The knowledge of the unknown as such 
is the pre-condition as much of moral or aesthetic realisation as of 
cognitive realisation. (50) The knowledge of the unknown is what 
starts the actual problem of realisation whether in the cognitive or in 
the non-cognitive direction. The non-cognitive mode does not de- 
mand the belief that it is the only mode and that the cognitive mode 
implies a fanatical conceit or a theosophic illusion. Any denial of 
the cognitive mode would argue the impossibility of the non-cognitive 
modes as well. (51-52) To Kant, the metaphysical reality is only 
thought and is not really knowable. We agree that the introspective 
awareness of the metaphysical in the presentation is not knowledge of 
knowing but is only imagination of knowing the metaphysical. 
There is no question of turning this imagined knowing into actual 
knowing by sense-perception. It can be actualised, if at all, by the 
conereting activity of imagination itself. In this cognitive realisation, 
the metaphysical would have to be known as that of which the object ~ 
is a free efflux and the empirical would have to be known not by being 
given but by the self-shining, substantively existent cognition of it. 

(53-54) Psychic fact ordinarily appears as more concrete than 
objective fact only in promise and not in actuality. It does not, how- 
ever, appear as co-ordinate with objective fact : it is what should be 
more real but is actually less real. The psychic is more concrete than 
the object in the sense that it can freely put forth the lesser reality. 
Nature is to the Psyche a magic or playful appearance. (55-56) The 
ordinary view of the psychic as co-ordinate with the object, the Hege- 
lian view of it as comprehending the object as a real element and the 


10 THE SUBJECT AS FREEDOM 


‘theory of an experience-unity of subject and object have to be defi- 
nitely rejected. The duality of psychic fact and objective fact is not 
again securéd any better by making a distinction between the ‘enjoy- 
ing’ and the ‘contemplative’ modes of knowing. The duality is not 
known but is only a symbolism for the felt dissociation of the psychic 
fact from the object. 


CHAPTER III 


BopiLy SUBJECTIVITY (SEC. 57-66) 
THE BODY AS PERCEIVED AND FELT 


(57) Perceptual knowledge is not directly the object of intros- 
pection and is not a psychic fact. There is, however, an awareness of 
the ‘subject’ even in this sub-psychic stage. The body as observed 
and felt is here the subject in relation to the environment. (58) Though 
the body represents a stage of being of the subject, yet one’s own 
‘body, even as a perceived object, has a unique singularity. The ob- 
jectivity of other perceived objects is constituted by their space-posi- 
tion relatively to the percipient’s body. It is not, however, so in the 
‘ease of the percipient’s own body which is in this sense dissociated 
from the external world. (59) One’s own body is uniquely different 
from other perceived objects and has no place in the objective world 
that he conceives to be presentable to him as a solipsistic observer. 
Even if the subject is taken as nothing but one’s own perceived body, 
it involves knowledge of something that cannot be understood in terms 
of the perceptible object in the merely objectivistic attitude. It im- 
plies the mystic awareness of dissociation from the object in which 
subjectivity consists. 

(60-62) One’s own body is not only perceived from outside : one 
is sensuously aware of it also from within in the ‘feeling of the body’. 
This body-awareness is indeed sensuous, but it can hardly be called 
‘sense-perception’. The felt body cannot be distinguished from the per- 
ceived body though the latter is distinguished from the former. (63) 
The relation between the felt body and the perceived body is similar 
to the relation of presentation and its object in non-perceptual know- 
ledge. There is, however, the difference that introspection into such 
knowledge is possible because the presentation is felt to be dissociated 
from the object, while there is no introspection into body-feeling, as 
we are not aware of it as dissociated from the perceived body. Body- 
feeling may, accordingly, be regarded as not psychic fact but the 


ANALYSIS 1 


potentiality of it. (64-65) The relations of body-feeling to (i) psy- 
chic fact, (ii) introspection of psychic fact, (iii) perceived body and 
to (iv) perceived object may here be considered. (i) The felt body is 
only half-distinguished from psychic fact and the latter is only poten- 
tially dissociated from the felt body. (ii) In introspection into psy- 
chic fact, this potential dissociation becomes imperfectly actual and the 
felt body begins to get resolved into a bodiless psychic feeling. (iii) The 
felt body is potentially dissociated from the perceived body because the 
latter is only half-distinguished from the former. (iv) The felt body 
is imperfectly dissociated from the perceived object and the latter is 
fully distinguished from the former. 

(66) The feeling of detachment from the object is the feeling of 
freedom and the first hint of this freedom is reached in the feeling 
of the body. This first given feeling is what all freedom of higher 
grade involves. Subjectivity apart from spiritual discipline is rooted 
in body-feeling. The realisation of freedom from the felt body is the 
pre-condition of all distinctive spiritual activity. 


CHAPTER IV 


Bopi_Ly SuUBJEcTiviry (Contd.) (sec. 67-79) 


KNOWLEDGE OF ABSENCE AS A PRESENT FACT 


(67-68) Like the feeling of the body, the perception of absence 
as a present fact is a fringe of object-perception. In both, again, 
there is a feeling of detachment. The feeling of the body is a de- 
tachment from the perceived object other than the perceived body. 
The direct knowledge of the present absence of an object is a de- 
tachment both from the perceived object and the perceived body but 
not from the felt body. (69) The sense-conditioned cognition of ab- 
sence is not ordinary perception and is yet undissociated from it. The 
cognition is a fringe either of the perception of the locus or of the 
perception of the body and is in either case undissociated from the 
feeling of the body. 

(70) Two cases of a direct cognition of absence in a locus may 
be distinguished : (a) one of the absence of an object and (b) the 
other of an object as being absent. Neither cognition need imply 
the other, yet each may develop into the other cognition. The two 
are, therefore, distinct; and each as primary may involve the other as 
secondary. (71) In (a), the perceived locus of absence is imagined 


12 THE SUBJECT AS FREEDOM 


in the very perception of it as without the absence, and the absence 
is thus only a floating adjective that is felt to be dissociated from the 
locus, There is a suggestion of the absence being outside the space 
where the locus stands and of its being nowhere though it is believed 
to be objective fact. The suggestion is not actual imagination of 
positionless objective fact but ofily the feeling of detachment from 
objective space. This sort of perception of absence may be called 
aesthetic or imaginative perception. (72) In (b), the knowledge of 
the fact of a particular object as absent is present with the conscious 
imagination of the object as found being distinct from it as absent. It 
thus implies the feeling of the present fact being outside objective space 
altogether. Such knowledge may also be called imaginative perception. 
(73-74) The primary cognition of absence may be followed by the 
secondary cognition of the absent; and the primary cognition of the 
absent may be followed by the secondly cognition of absence. The 
secondary cognition in each case is not imaginative perception and 
has to be recognised as a new mode of knowledge called conscious 
non-perception. 

(77) The relation of these two modes of cognition, viz., ima- 
ginative perception and conscious non-perception, with the ap- 
prehension of the body is remarkable. The primary is related to the 
perception of the body as the secondary is related to the feeling of 
the body. (78) The relation of the perceived body in imaginative per- 
ception and of the felt body in conscious non-preception to the 
known absence is like the relation of the perceived body to the felt 
body. (79) Conscious non-perception is a transitional stage between 
body-feeling and imagination with which psychic fact begins. It is 
free from space but not from the present. It is the distinguishing. 
of the present from the detached presentation and is the immediate 
pre-condition of the felt detachment of the presentation from the 
present. Starting with object-perception as the actual standard of 
knowledge, the first clear hint of the subjective fact would be realised 
in the knowledge of absence through conscious non-perception. 


CHAPTER V 
Psycuic Susyectivity (sec. 80-93) 


THE IMAGE 


(80-81) It cannot be denied that the image appears presented 
as a substantive something from which the object is distinct. It 


ANALYSIS 13 


cannot also be denied that the image is a fact in a sense in which the 
object is not. The nature of facthood appears to change with different 
grades of fact. (82) (a) The facthood of the perceived object is 
constituted by position relatively to the percipient’s body. (b) The lack 
of this relative perceived position is what constitutes the facthood of 
one’s perceived body. (83) (c) Interiority or felt space constitutes 
the facthood of the felt body. (84) (d) Perceived absence as a fact 
is on a level with the felt body though its position is on the level of 
the perceived body. (85) (e) Absence that is known by conscious 
non-perception is not known as with position, though it cannot be 
said to be known as without position. 

. (86) The image has to be compared to absence. While absence 
as in (e) is not known with position, the image is known to be with- 
out position. Again, absence is known as now, while the image is 
not known as now. The image has thus no space-position and it 
cannot be asserted to have a time-position. (87) In the perception of 
the object, in the perception of one’s own body and in imaginative 
perception of absence, the image involved is not felt to be dissocia- 
ted from the percept. In the knowledge of absence through cons- 
cious non-perception, the image of the absent object is felt to be 
dissociated from the felt body but not from the present absence. But 
in imagination as a free psychic fact even the present absence ts dis- 
tinguished from the image. (88-89) The image proper is not known 
to be in time and is not felt dissociated from the present absence 
though it is potentially dissociated. The potential dissociation of the 
image from the now is realised in thought. (90) The image appears 
as a ghostly object. Its awareness is bound up with the perceiving 
attitude and is not introspective. (91) The distinguishing the object 
from the presentation is a phase of object-knowledge. The presenta- 
tion as thus distinguished from is an indefinite quasi-object, and ex- 
cept in its lowest phase an image is felt also as not in time. In the 
thought of an objective fact, however, the meaning which is the pre- 
sentation is not only not referred to time, its existence in time iS 
meaningless. 

(92) When the image is introspectively attended to, it changes 
its character and appears as imagining, as being formed though not 
as unformed, as functional without ceasing to be substantive. (93) 
The forming or the incomplete character of the image is not like the 
incomplete character of a perceived object. The incompleteness of 
a percept is in reference to a fuller percept: the image, however, 1s 
incomplete in itself. The image under introspection is a standing 


14 THE SUBJECT AS FREEDOM 


process where the forming is not chronologically prior to the form 
and yet appears distinct from the form which is its interpretation. The 
consciousttess of the finished form that interprets the forming is called 
the idea which as dissociated from the image would be the next 
psychic stage. 


CHAPTER VI 
Psycuic SuBjecTivity (Contd.) (sec. 94-100) 


THOUGHT 


(94-95) The idea of an object that cannot be defined or con- 
creted into image is thought proper that is definite in itself and is fixed 
in the mind by the images it may call up. It is other than pictorial 
thought which lies between the definite form and the definite intelli- 
gible and its object is definitely presented as unpicturable meaning. 
(96) The image implies a belief in its possible objectivity but thought 
involves a complete detachment from objectivity, though it is still 
about the object. (97) Non-pictorial thought which is definite 
independently of the image may be sought to be metaphorically or 
symbolically indicated by the image. Thought in its higher grade is 
detained in the mind by the word and not by its figurative representa- 
tion. (98) Thought as distinct from the forming image under intros- 
pection is a completed product. It is complete as dissociated alto- 
gether from time and is in this sense eternal. Still it is about the object 
and as such should be called a presentation. (99-100) Thought is 
attained meaning and that it is a presentation comes out if it is con- 
trasted to possible meaning which is exemplified in our consciousness of: 
trying to think. This trying to think is beyond thought or meaning 
and is beyond all presentation. 


CHAPTER VII 


SPIRITUAL SuBJEcTiviTy (sEc. 101-111) 


FEELING 


(101) The introspective awareness of meaning as distinct from 
the image is awareness of the explicitly unobjective. Feeling is also 
explicitly unobjective. It is not, however, merely negative but positive 
as subjective fact without any reference to objective fact. The cons- 
ciousness of the merely unknown as distinct from what is known as 


ANALYSIS 15: 


object that is also unknown is feeling. It is purely subjective in the 
sense that there is no conscious reference to object even in the way 
of dissociation from it. Feeling, again, involves belief in the unmeant 
as a distinct content. (102) In the awareness of thought, the content 
of thought appears distinct from thought, but in the awareness of 
feeling, the unthought content of feeling appears as only distinct in 
itself and not as distinct from feeling. Again, while thought or other 
psychic fact is believed to exist outside introspection, feeling is never 
outside introspection as a merely conscious fact. 

(103) Introspection into feeling is an awareness of the feeling 
as apparently distinct from the awareness. But while introspection 
into psychic fact is a distinguishing of the fact which appeared undis- 
tinguished from itself, that into feeling is an identifying of the feeling 
which appeared to be outside introspection. Feeling is bound up with 
thought and imagination and is the awareness of their detachment as 
presentation from their objects. In introspection into feeling, the 
distinction of feeling from its presentative content is appreciated as 
definitely not known but only felt and symbolised. With this aware- 
ness of meaning as the symbol of feeling, the objective reference lapses 
altogether. Feeling as detached from meaning is awareness of the mean- 
ing as its symbolism and may be taken as implicitly introspective. (104) 
If feeling represents the complete dissociation from objectivity, willing 
means the free identification with objectivity. Willing starts as the 
free or playful expression of feeling. The freedom from thought is as 
much a progress as a regress, as much a willing as a feeling. With the 
cancellation of the objective attitude, there is the consciousness of 
being free, of being unrestricted by the object, whether for withdrawal 
from it in feeling or for conquest over it in willing. (105) Knowing 
means freedom both from blindness and from error. The freedom 
implied in knowledge means the outgoing of the positive attitude of 
not knowing, of conscious entertainment of the unknown—which is. 
feeling—and of conscious projection of objectivity—which is willing. 

(106-107) Feeling is the positive consciousness of detachment 
from meaning. It is the awareness of a content as unmeant. But as 
it is non-denial of a possible meaning, it is not without the persisting 
will to objectification. When a feeling has purged itself of this will, 
we have the awareness not merely of the unmeant but of the unmean- 
able. This is exemplified from the analysis of the experience of the 
illusory. The content there is the ‘indescribable.’ (108) Two stages 
of feeling can thus be distinguished: the lower stage where there is 
freedom from actual thought and the higher stage where there is. 


i6 THE SUBJECT AS FREEDOM 


freedom from possible thought. The lower grade is the feeling of self- 
being and the higher grade is one of self-negation. (109-110) The 
feeling of rot having a feeling is itself a feeling. It can only be charac- 
terised as the feeling of a feeling. It is not introspection but the stage 
prior to it. It is the self-negation of feeling and is already the attitude 
of knowledge of what is neither felt nor unfelt, or of the unmeanable. 
(111) We are aware of the unmeanable in two stages, as the meant 
unmeanable and as the mere function of meaning. The knowledge im- 
plied in the former is of a contradiction while that implied in the 
latter is not of anything, being merely knowing. The feeling of feeling 
is the former kind of awareness, while the latter is just introspection 
which is the pure knowing function and is a complete detachment from 
felt being. 


CHAPTER VIII 
SPIRITUAL SUBJECTIVITY (Contd.) (sec. 112-119) 


INTROSPECTION 


(112) The introspective awareness of a psychic fact is the aware- 
ness of its distinction from object and, therefore, of its distinction in 
itself also as existing apart from introspection. The introspective 
awareness of a feeling proper, on the other hand, is the knowledge of 
its distinction in itself only and is the recognition of the distinction as 
being entirely through introspection. (113) Introspection into feeling 
is just the function of meaning the feeling. It is a subjectivity that is 
detached both from being and negation, and it is positive as freedom. 
It is the positive of which the negation is not even tried to be meant. 
It is something which can only be sought to be impugned by the imagi- 
nary problem of conceiving its negation and is, therefore, never actually 
impugned. (114-115) The object and every subjective fact that is 
introspectively believed is capable of being doubted, but introspection 
as a function of believing or meaning which is not itself meant even 
as the unmeanable is not actually doubtable. It is just the first person 
‘T’ and is not a believing in the ‘I’. It is simply the function of speak- 
ing. 

(116) Introspection into feeling implies the possible detachment 
from the being of feeling. This possible detachment from all distinct 
being is introspective awareness and is the conscious identity with- 
out being of the self. (117) The self is taken by Kant as the think- 
ing function and also as an accomplished meaning. But here the 


ANALYSIS | 17 


self has been identified with the function of introspection and has 
been taken to be detached from thinking and feeling. The self is a 
believing which is a self-knowing. (1 18) The self is the first person 
T. The ‘P is neither meanable nor unmeanable. The word ‘I has 
a meaning-function but not a meaning. It is the expression of intros- 
pection or the I-function. (119) The meaning function of the 
word ‘I’ is to the speaker his actual introspection, but the understand- 
ing of the word by the hearer is indicative of a form of consciousness 
subtler than introspection. It is the awareness of a possible intros- 
pection. 


CHAPTER IX 


SPIRITUAL SUBJECTIVITY (Contd.) (sec. 120-126) 


BEYOND INTROSPECTION 


(120) The word ‘I’ has no meaning either to the speaker or to 
the hearer and yet it stands like any other word for the same thing 
to both. This ‘standing for’ is not only not meaning but not also mere 
symbolising. The word ‘I’ may be said at once to symbolise and to 
be symbolised by my introspective self. It is this characteristic of a 
word other than its meaning-value or merely symbolising value 
that indicates a grade of self-consciousness higher than our actual 
introspection. (121) Actual introspection is unrealised knowledge 
because it is actually only self-evidencing to another and not self- 
evident to itself. One’s own self should be self-evident and should be 
intuited by oneself even as it is intuited by another. The self should 
be at once self-evidencing and self-evident, but so far we have only 
the self as self-evidencing and evident to another. (122) The other 
self is to the self-evidencing self a possible introspector whose intui- 
tion of the latter is a possible intuition to the latter. The awareness 
of these possibles in oneself indicates the necessity of a spiritual dis- 
cipline of realisation of the self already implied by introspection. 

(123) Introspection into a possible mental state involves un- 
derstanding of a word meaning the mental state. To mean a mental 
state is not, however, to think it but to remember it, to want it or to 
dreamily wish it. All these may be regarded as a stage of intros- 
pection prior to the introspection into an actual mental state and are 
capable of being themselves introspected into. 

(124-125) Introspection into the awareness of a possible sub- 
jective state is possible or imaginary introspection and is half-disso- 


18 THE SUBJECT AS FREEDOM 


ciated from the actually introspective self. Complete dissociation 
from this actual awareness is reached when the content of it is a sub- 
jective staté that is illusory. There are actual illusions about the sub- 
jective just as there are illusions about the objective. 

(126) Ordinarily, introspection is the awareness of a subjective 
fact as owing its facthood to itself and is in this sense the appropriator 
of it. But there are experiences where one gets the hint of an intros- 
pection that is not appropriative. This kind of introspection would 
be self-intuition. The possibility of a silent self-enjoying ‘I’ is intelli- 
gible only because we are aware of certain subjective modes previously 
appropriated as utterly unappropriable and as appearing only as though 
they are distinct. The absolute intuitable self is only understood if 
the non-being of distinction is understood. The non-being of distinc- 
tion is finally understood in the awareness of subjective illusion which 
is the explicit awareness creating a distinction that is no fact at all. 


CHAPTER X 


THE SUBJECT AS FREEDOM (sec. 127-135) 


(127) It is in introspection that we are aware of the demand 
for the consummation of the freedom that is felt in every grade of 
subjectivity in respect of the object presented to it. The introspec- 
tive subject is free from possible objectivity and is thus freedom itself. 
But it knows itself not as itself but as a distinct subject that is only 
possibly identical with itself. It is thus aware of a demand to know 
this subject as actually itself. This demand is for the intuition of 
the subject as absolute freedom. (128) The subject is understood as 
freedom that is real. The idea of realising the subject arises only 
because we are actually indentified with the body while we are intros- 
pectively aware of ourselves as not objective and yet as definitely 
positive. We do not know ourselves as undissociated from the object, 
yet we are aware of a possible dissociation or freedom. (129) 
Actual freedom from the object is Known in some measure in bodily 
subjectivity. In higher stages there is only a feeling of it. The 
higher the stage of subjectivity, the less is the freedom felt to be 
achieved though the more assured is the faith in its achievability. In 
the introspective stage, the feeling of achieved freedom lapses al- 
together but the faith in its attainability is completely assured. (130- 


135) The three broad stages of subjectivity and the several substages 
under each stage recapitulated. 


CHAPTER I 
THE NOTION OF SUBJECTIVITY 


1. Object is what is meant, including the object of sense- 
perception and all contents that have necessary reference to it. 
Object as the meant is distinguished from the subject or the subjective 
of which there is some awareness other than the meaning-aware- 
ness. The subjective cannot be a meaningless word: to be distin- 
guished from, it must be a significant speakable and yet if it be a 
meant content, it would be but object. It can thus neither be asserted 
nor denied to be a meant content and what cannot be denied need 
not be assertable. Apparently, the significant speakable is wider than 
the meanable : a content to be communicated and understood need 
not be meant. 

2. A meaning that is conveyed by a word must be intelligible 
to the hearer as what he would himself convey by the word. What 
the speaker means by a word must be capable of being meant by the 
hearer if he were to use it. The word this as used by a speaker 
means primarily what he perceives; and although the hearer may use 
it of some other object, he can use it of the same object. A general 
term is always understood by the speaker and the hearer to mean the 
same thing but such identity of the general meaning is possible only 
because it applies to the same individual thing, the same perceived 
this to both. The word this may accordingly be taken as the symbol 
of the object or what is meant. 

3. The word J as used by a speaker is not understood by the 
hearer to convey what he would himself convey by the use of it. If 
he used the word, he would intend himself and not the speaker. 
Actually, however, when he understands the word / as used by the 
speaker, he understands it to stand for the speaker. He may accord- 
ingly be said to understand the thing intended by the speaker through 
the word but not through the meaning of the word. The thing is not 
meant by the word for the further reason that the communicating act 
of the speaker which is never a part of the meaning of a word is it- 
self conveyed by the word J. When the object-consciousness of the 
speaker is communicated, the object and not the speaking of the 
object is what is understood to be meant. But when his self-cons- 
Ciousness is communicated, it is not his self only but the self as speak- 
ing, communicating or expressing itself that is understood. His self- 


$%72 


20 THE SUBJECT AS FREEDOM 


consciousness may in this sense be said to be not merely expressed 
but incarnated in the word J. What is here intended by the speaker 
is not only what the hearer can never intend by the word if he were 
to use it: it is also the thing-subject—as expressing itself and not as 
merely expressed. What then is meant and is expressible as this is 
not what is conveyed by the word I. 

4. Object as symbolised by the word this may be an individual 
object or a generality. The word / as intending the subject is not 
definitely either singular or general. It is indeed used to indicate 
not only one thing at a time but a thing which cannot be indicated 
by more than one speaker ; but then different speakers can be under- 
stood to use it—each of a distinct thing viz., himselfi—by the same 
hearer and understood to use as he would use it. As used, the term 
has a uniquely singular reference ; but as understood, it is general in the 
sense the term unique is general. It is thus unlike a term meaning an 
objective content, which has the same reference—singular or gener- 
al—to the speaker as to the hearer. What is meant by this is distinct 
from what is intended by J, though the latter may be intended or indi- 
cated by this. The object is not the subject but the subject may be 
spoken of though not meant as object. The subject may be incarnated 
in the spoken word ] which is objective. As incarnated in the object, 
the subject is the object which yet is distinct from it. In terms of I 
and this, we may say that the statement ‘this is I’ is false while the 
statement ‘I am this’ cannot be denied. 

5. If this stands for a perceivable object including my body, 
there is no occasion to make the statement ‘this is I’ or ‘I am this’. But 
this may stand for myself who spoke the word / ; and in answer to the 
conceivable question ‘who is this speaker’, I may say ‘this is I’. The 
answer would imply not a judgment but a correction ; it would mean 
‘this speaker is not this or object to myself, this as distinct from me 
is here false, the fact being I’. So one may say ‘that snake is but a 
rope’ where what is meant is that the snake is illusory, the rope 
being the fact. But the statement ‘I am this speaker’ or ‘I said [’ 
would not be false in such a context: it would be a mode of ex- 
pressing what is called personal identity. Nevertheless it is not a 
judgment : my consciousness of personal identity is not a recognitive 
judgment as it is ordinarily taken to be. In my answer ‘I am this 
speaker’, the predicate does not appear to me, as it appears to the 
questioner, as what the subject may not be. The pastness of the 
subject, moreover, as implied in the predicate—this speaker being I 

who spoke—is not consciously relative to the presentness of the subject. 


THE NOTION OF SUBJECTIVITY 2| 


In saying ‘I spoke’, I make no assertion at all about myself being 
now, the pastness of ‘spoke’ being consciously distinguished only from 
the present objective situation. The belief in my pastness can never 
be formulated by me as the judgment ‘I who am now am I who was 
then’. It is only another person who can assert my personal identity 
in a recognitive judgment. I cannot deny the judgment and may take 
it as a symbolic expression of my felt belief. My personal identity, 
however, is to me only a felt content which though not false is not 
asserted by me. The equation of / and this is then logically un- 
intelligible, being the rejection of this in the form ‘this is I’ and only 
a felt content in the form ‘I am this’. 

6. The object can be pointed out without the use of a word but 
it is expressible by the single word this. The subject cannot be indi- 
cated except by a word and the word for it is not 7 only but any 
personal pronoun (or any word the use of which is ultimately ex- 
plained by a personal pronoun). The subject is what is intended by 
the words J, you or he and though it is always what can call itself /, 
the use of you or he is as directly intelligible as the use of J and need 
not be explained by it. There is, however, a characteristic difference 
between the first person and the other persons. If this means the 
object, there is no occasion to consciously identify it with J, though 
I may be implicitly identified with my body. But I am somehow cons- 
cious of an identity between another person and his body, conscious 
of them as distinct and yet one. The relation accordingly of you and 
he to this and & requires closer examination. 

7. You and he are to me subjects individualised in the objec- 
tive body, the body being, however, as much distinguished from them 
as from myself. Like their bodies they also can be spoken of as 
individual, but while the individuality of he is evidently derived from 
his body which is this to me, the individuality of you appears to be 
prior to that of your body. You are individual to me primarily 
through my act of addressing and only secondarily through what 
appears to my imagination as your identification with or appropriation 
of your body. He is individual to me only through his body being 
imagined as identified with or appropriated by him. This body is 
presented to me first through which I apprehend this subject or he. 
It may be—though it is not necessary—that before I can address 
you, I have to apprehend you as this subject or he; but this subject 
appears to me as you, only as I address. To say ‘this is you’, 
is to mean, in fact, that this person is not this person, the third person 
or he : it is to imply a correction as in the statement ‘this is I’. The 


22 THE SUBJECT AS FREEDOM 


statement ‘this is he’, however, implies a belief though like ‘I am this’, 
it represents a felt content and not the content of a judgment. My 
identification of a body presented to me first with the subject he is 
not the knowledge of this object being identical with him, since the 
object is as much distinct from him as from me though I cannot assert 
his distinction from his body. I apprehend the third person as distinct 
from me, only as I take him to be individualised in his body. Con- 
ceived apart from his body, he would be known neither as distinct 
from me nor therefore as identical with me but only as one who can 
call himself 7; and there would be as little occasion to say of him 
that he is his body as to say of me that I am my body. The state- 
ment ‘he is this’ is thus excluded but the statement ‘you are this’ 
would, like ‘this is he’, represent a belief that is not knowledge, a 
felt content that is only symbolised as a judgment. The apprehen- 
sion of you, however, logically precedes while that of he follows the 
apprehension of this or the body appropriated. There is no occasion 
to say, as has been explained, either ‘this is P or ‘I am this’, where 
this stands for my body: and where this means a temporal determi- 
nation of myself, the former represents a correction and the latter a 
felt and believed content. 

8. Thus of the six possible equations of this with 7, you or he, 
three are excluded and the three that are believed viz., ‘I am this’ (in 
the sense of myself as then), ‘you are this’ (your body) and ‘this 
(his body) is he’ represent a felt or imagined content that is not 
known. The object as meant by this is known as distinct from the 
subject as intended by a personal pronoun ; and the subject may also 
be said to be known in itself, being what is either illusorily or imagi- 
natively spoken of as this but is not known to be related to this either 
in the way of identity or distinction. The correction implied in the 
statement ‘this is I’ indicates the nature of the subject such as it is 
aware of before it calls itself 7 and incarnates itself in the spoken 
word. This here means myself who spoke and was in the past and 
the correction is to the effect that the this-ness or pastness is not really 
mine and only illusorily appears so, that not this 7 but the unspecified 
I should be taken as the subject. There is no denial, however, of the 
subject being objectifiable as this or then but the objectification is an 
incarnation in which the projected objectivity is not known as a 
determination belonging to the subject, the subject being felt to be 
dissociated from it. The subject as you or he, so far as known, is not 
known as this or the appropriated body. You, as addressed and con- 
ceived to be logically prior to your body, are not known by me like 


THE NOTION OF SUBJECTIVITY 23 


your body as distinct from me, being only felt to be the subject that 
J am distinct from. So, too, if his body is known to be distinct from 
him and from me, he, if conceived at all apart from his body, is known 
not as distinct from or identical with me but as only distinct. You and 
he are to my knowledge as much unique as what is intended by 
the word J, being, in fact, understood simply as one who can call 
himself 7. The three persons are not known to be distinct from or 
identical with one another. 

9. The object is known as distinct from the subject but the 
subject is only known in itself and felt to be free or dissociated from 
the object. I feel dissociated from the object as I feel dissociated from 
the subject you or he that appears to me somehow ‘identified’ with 
the object. I am aware of alienating you by the fact of addressing and 
of him being alienated from me as his body is alienated. I actively 
“dissimilate’ you and, therefore, also the body that you appropriate and 
feel unable to ‘assimilate’ him and, therefore, his body with which he 
is found identified. The object in either case is a body somehow one 
with a subject which I would not or cannot identify with myself. 
With regard to my own body, I only do not feel actually dissociated 
from it and am not consciously identified with it. I am indeed 
individualised in my body but I am not introspectively aware of it. 
I am aware of myself as this not in the sense of my body but only in 
the sense of myself in a temporal position, myself as having been, 
for example, in the past and having spoken of myself as J. This 1s 
here only thought and not known as distinct from myself and I am 
conscious not only of being dissociated from it but also of its distinc- 
tion from myself being illusory. Thus everywhere the subject is 
known in itself and not as related to the object, being at best felt to be 
dissociated from the object with which it was identified. 

10. The subject, understood as the unique speaker—actual or 
possible—of the word /, and the object that is meant as distinct from 
the subject are the two things that are known. The reality of what is 
meant can always be doubted and so the object is not known with the 
same assurance as the subject that cannot be said to be meant. There 
may be such a thing as an illusory object ; and in the statement ‘this is 
Yl, as already explained, this is understood as an objectivity that is 
annulled. The idea of a possible annulment of objectivity being there, 
an object that is given as distinct from the subject can be conceived to 
be not distinct, though the distinction may not be actually cancelled, 
The denial of reality is intelligible only about what is meant, the nega- 
tion of the meant being also either actually or problematically meant, 


24 THE SUBJECT AS FREEDOM 


The unreality, however, of the subject as intended but not meant by J 
is meaningless. It is not only inconceivable like the opposite of an 
axiom ; it is not even tried to be conceived, a content being taken to 
be inconceivable only after it has been tried to be conceived. The 
word I expresses a unique and unanalysable content from which all 
that is meant is distinct and which yet is ginderstood and unquestion- 
ingly believed. The belief cannot be called a grammatical superstition, 
though the fact believed is inexpressible except in language by a gram- 
matical pronoun. The subject appears as a known fact, only as it is 
spoken of through a personal pronoun or conceived to be so speakable. 
One’s private awareness of J before its expression in speech is indeed 
knowledge but the J here does not appear as a known fact distinct 
from the knower. To be aware of the subject as a known fact is to be 
aware of it as a spoken fact. It is not so about the object of which 
one may be aware as known even if unnamed. The subject as spoken 
fact is, however, a meant fact. 

11. The metaphysical controversy about the reality of the subject 
is only about the subject viewed in some sense as object. The thin- 
nest sense in which it is objectified is ‘being taken as meant’. Ordina- 
rily the validity of this degree of objectification of the subject is not 
questioned, nor therefore the possibility of a dispute about its reality. 
If, however, the subject is taken, as explained, to be what is expressed 
by the word / as expressing itself, it is not meant or at best meant as 
unmeant and is accordingly above metaphysical dispute. There is 
properly no metaphysic of the subject, if by metaphysic is understood 
an enquiry into the reality conceived as meanable. Even the unknow- 
able thing-in-itself of Spencer and Kant is not taken to be unmeanable. 
It is at worst taken to be a problem in meaning. The knowable is 
meant and the negation of the knowable is, if not meant, tried to be 
meant, being not a gratuitous combination of words but a believed 
content that is problematically formulafed. The subject which is also 
believed is formulated as J which is, however, understood as unmean- 
able though not as a mere word like abracadabra. The understanding 
here is not a mystic intuition though it may point to its possibility, 
nor the intuition of a meaning that can be a term of a judgment, nor 
yet the thought of a meaning that is not known because not intuited 
or that is known without being intuited. It is somewhere midway 
between a mystic intuition and the consciousness of a meaning , being 
the believing awareness of a speakable content, the negation of which 
is unmeaning and which, therefore, is not a meaning. What is 
claimed to be mystically intuited is speakable only in metaphor which 


THE NOTION OF SUBJECTIVITY 25 


presents a contradiction in meaning and what is affirmed or denied 
in metaphysic is a meanable. The subject as I is neither contradictory 
nor meanable and the exposition of it accordingly is intermediate 
between mysticism and metaphysic. As, however, the subject is com- 
municable by speech without metaphor, it cannot be taken as falling 
outside philosophical enquiry. 

12. The attitude of metaphysics like that of the sciences includ- 
ing psychology is objective. It seeks to know reality as distinct from 
the knowing of it, as objective, at least, in the sense of being meant. 
Knowing as a fact from which the known is distinct is not properly 
the subject either of psychology or of metaphysics. Psychological 
introspection is at best awareness of the knownness of the object, the 
knownness being meant as an accident of the object, as an abstraction 
from the known object, as the difference between the object as known 
and the object that is only believed, or as the object coming to be 
known. If there be a metaphysic of the psychological fact of known- 
ness, its problem would be to determine what it is in the object that 
makes it known and not what the subject should be in order that it 
may know. Knowing from which all that is known or objective is 
distinct is dealt with in epistemology which distinguishes it as a func- 
tion from the object but does not, therefore, take it to be a known fact. 
Knowing is not given as distinct to introspection nor inferred as dis- 
tinct, being only distinct through the self-conscious act of distinguish- 
ing it. Knowing cannot be known as a fact unless the distinguishing 
of knowing be the knowing itself, unless, in fact, the distinctness of 
the knowing from the distinguishing of it appears illusory, even as 
this appears illusory in the apparent judgment ‘this is I’. To realise 
that the distinctness of knowing is entirely through the distinguish- 
ing of it is to realise knowing as a self-evidencing fact, as not distinct 
from the object known Sut as unrelated or illusorily related to it, 
as not the Knowing of object but as the solitary fact of the subject 
itself. Knowing is not thus known in epistemology which, however, 
does not disbelieve in its facthood. Were it known as a meanable 
fact, there would be room for the metaphysical inference of the 
subject as the ground of it. As it is, knowing is only symbolised as 
an activity ; and the inference of the subject as the agent is rightly 
characterised as involving a grammatical superstition. ‘There is no 
room for metaphysics after epistemology has worked itself out of 
the objective attitude of metaphysics and the sciences by distinguish- 
ing knowing from the object known. 

13. At the same time the belief in the facthood of knowing is 


26 THE SUBJECT AS FREEDOM 


there, as epistemology is not an enquiry into the significance of the 
mere phrase ‘knowing of object’. The belief is in the facthood of 
the knowing function, function being a metaphor for a positive some- 
thing which is literally expressed only in the negative way as what the 
known object is not and being thus not even an accomplished mean- 
ing. ‘The awareness of this unmeant something involves, however, a 
higher certitude than the belief in the meant object. Epistemology 
claims this certitude though it cannot justify it and has to recognise 
it to be other than the certitude of knowledge. Thus it appears that 
while the subject can be said to be known by itself and the meant 
object to be known as distinct from the subject, a subjective func- 
tion like knowing is only believed though it may be with greater as- 
surance than the object. The knowing of an object is not given as 
distinct from the object and is only in being distinguished from it, 
as relating and not as related to it, as not distinct from the distinguish- 
ing but not therefore as identical with it, as the free reference of the 
subject to the object. The subject is, as explained before, free from 
the object in the sense of being known by itself and not as related 
to it either in the way of identity or distinction. The knowing func- 
tion represents a positive mode of this freedom, the freedom of the 
subject to relate to object without getting related to it, which is believed 
to be more certain than the object but is not known. We are aware 
of knowing a content when it is formulated and believed to be in- 
dependent of our formulating, speaking or distinguishing act. It is 
so believed when it is felt either to be a given distinct—as in the 
case of the object known—or to be ‘incarnated’ in the formulation, in 
the sense explained, of being expressed as expressing or self-revealing 
—as in the case of the subject. Subjective function or the positive 
freedom of the subject to refer to the object is felt to be neither and 
is accordingly said to be only believed. The belief is bound up with 
the knowledge of the self-evidencing subject and as belief in a content 
which is like the subject itself not presented as meant, it is incapable 
of being doubted and is more certain than the knowledge of a meant 
object. 

14. The three believed contents—the subject, the positive free- 
dom of the subject and the meant object—are all speakable and it is 
from the speakable that we have to start in philosophy. The subject 
is taken to be known, as one who says | is immediately understood 
by the hearer through the word but not as meant by the word. The 
speaker is understood as revealing himself to another of whom he is 
positively aware as distinct but not as independent of his distingui- 


THE NOTION OF SUBJECTIVITY 27 


shing. The positive awareness may be called feeling of alienating the 
subject you. What is known is the body of the other subject as an 
object distinct from the speaker. The speaking subject may thus be 
said to have a feeling of relating itself to the object, of addressing 
itself to it as though it were you. This felt relating is the positive 
freedom of the subject having different felt modes like knowing, {feel- 
ing or being which though not objectively meanable can be symbo- 
lised by objective meanings. Such symbolic elaboration of the felt 
or believed spiritual functions would be a procedure of philosophy 
intermediate between the recognition of the subject purely through 
the intention of the word J and the inferential inquiry into the reality 
behind the meant object which is called metaphysics. 

15. There is properly no metaphysic of the subject and the ap- 
parent problems about the existence of the subject and its relation 
to the object are really illegitimate. The question if the subject is 
real is unmeaning, for the subject as I is not a meaning. The reality 
of the subject is known in the direct understanding of the word / 
as used by a speaker, which is neither the understanding of its mean- 
ing nor a mystic intuition of an unspeakable content. There can be 
also no relation of subject to object if the subject is not objectively 
meant, the subject being only aware of its function of relating or refer- 
ring to object. The subject may believe itself and the object without 
speaking of them but it believes its relating function only as it speaks 
of it. If it speaks of the object, it believes in it as meant and if it 
speaks of itself as I, it believes in it as unmeant. But in speaking 
of its function it believes in it neither as meant nor as unmeant but 
as being constructed as fact by being spoken. A believed content 
that is spoken appears objective but while the appearance is denied 
of the spoken subject and asserted of the spoken object, it is only not 
denied of the spoken function. The speaking creation of a system of 
subjective functions or the symbolising elaboration of the positive free- 
dom of the subject constitutes a special study which as not asserting 
meanable and justifiable truth cannot be called metaphysic and as yet 
inviting to believe and exhibiting the interval between the self-evidenc- 
ing I and objectively knowable truth has to be taken as coming within 
philosophy. 

16. There is no theoretic passage from what is meanable or ob- 
jectively knowable to the subjectively knowable I ; metaphysics cannot 
pass out of the region of meanings. Epistemology indeed deals with 
the subjective function behind the accomplished meaning but it does not 
assert it as fact. It assumes the facthood of the function—knowing of 


28 THE SUBJECT AS FREEDOM 


object—and only paraphrases the intention of the preposition of in refer- 
ence to the different modes of knownness of the object such as are pre- 
sented in psychology. The facthood of the knowing function and of 
subjective function in general is believed though not known and is ela- 
borated into a system of symbolisms in a new philosophical study which 
may be called Spiritual or Transcendental psychology. The symbolism 
is fact in the sense of being the form of the non-theoretic or spiritually 
practical mode of escaping the objective knowing attitude of which 
the meaning attitude represents the subtlest stage. No meanable 
truth is self-evidencing, its negation being at least a problem in 
meaning and yet the self-evidencing I is the type of truth. The impli- 
cation is that meanable truth which cannot be denied to be truth 
has to be realised as self-evidencing, not by being objectively thought 
again but by the spiritual cultivation of a subjective attitude. As the 
positive freedom of relating—which is an objective attitude—is to 
the objectively meant relation, so is the negative freedom in the culti- 
vation of the subjective attitude to the positive freedom of the 
objective attitude. Spiritual psychology symbolises the subjective 
attitude by the objective attitude from which it seeks to be freed. 
The modes of subjectivity are the modes of freeing oneself from the 
modes of objectivity. 

17. Hence comes the justification of the name Spiritual psycho- 
logy. Psychology, as has been pointed out, deals not properly with 
knowing but with knownness as a character or aspect of the object. 
It deals, as we may say generally, not with subjective function but 
with the object regarded explicitly as distinct from it, as known, felt 
or willed. If there be a metaphysic of psychology, its problem would 
be what there is in the object to make it known, felt or willed. We are 
aware of an object that was only believed as coming to be known 
though its existence is not asserted or denied before the knowing. The 
metaphysical problem about the objective knownness, feltness etc., is in- 
telligible though it may not be capable of objective solution. The 
distinguishing of knownness etc., as an abstraction from the object, 
as the objectivity of the object is what is called psychological intros- 
pection. The distinguishing of the subjective function of knowing 
etc, as other than this abstraction of objectivity may also be 
called introspection and, it may be, with greater right. If 
psychological introspection be an abstracting from the object, 
this introspection is a creative symbolising, the functions being 
subjective facts and not mere abstractions, though they are only 
believed and not known. The symbolising of the subjective function 


THE NOTION OF SUBJECTIVITY 29 


is by a mode of objectivity like knownness, dissociation from which 
is precisely indicated by the word function. Thus the functions re- 
present the modes of freedom from the corresponding psychological 
abstractions. The consciousness of freedom is as direct as that of 
such abstraction and its content can only be indicated as some sort 
of negation of the abstraction. If the consciousness of the abstrac- 
tion be called psychological introspection, the consciousness of free- 
dom may be called spiritual introspection and the philosophical study 
that is based on it may be designated Spiritual psychology. 

18. The metaphysical problem—what it is in the object that 
determines its known or felt appearance—assumes that.an appea- 
rance of object that is not unreal is caused by object, which implies 
further that object has an assured reality independent of the sub- 
ject. It has, however, been indicated that the reality of object is not 
incapable of being doubted like the reality of the subject ; and even if 
object be as real as the subjective process that refers to it, it is not 
necessary that its relatedness to the subject should be caused at all. 
The emergence of such relatedness of an object is an event in time, 
only so far as it is not other than the emergence of the object or of 
an objective situation comprising it. The knownness of feltness of 
an object is an abstraction, the problem of the causation of which 
is illegitimate. Change in the object, as distinguished from the object, 
is also an abstraction but it is still understood as objective fact 
though unseparated from the object. Knownness etc., or the object- 
ivity of the object is an abstraction that has no objective meaning 
at all by itself and about which, therefore, the demand for causal 
explanation is meaningless. The explanation of the emergence of 
the object as related to the subject is an ordinary objective or scien- 
tific problem and no separate explanation can be demanded for the 
emergence of the abstraction of relatedness. The metaphysical pro- 
blem is thus apparently only a problem in meaning—how relatedness 
to the subject can be spoken of as a character of the object. 

19. Spiritual psychology, however, has a place because its busi- 
ness is not to explain or to solve a problem. Its business is in the 
first place to interpret empirical psychology in terms of the positively 
felt and believed freedom of the subject from objectivity ; and next 
to elaborate modes of freedom that have no reference to object at all, 
to conceive the possible illusoriness of all objects and thus to assign 
an intelligible place to what is ordinarily scouted as spiritual mysti- 
cism. In the objective attitude, the knownness or feltness of the object 
appears positive and knowing or feeling appears as its problematic 


30 THE SUBJECT AS FREEDOM 


negation. In the subjective attitude, the case is reversed : freedom is 
positively believed and the relatedness of the object to the subject—its 
objectivity-appears as constructed, as not belonging to the object 
in the sense change belongs to it and is thus understood as the self- 
negation or alienated shadow of the subject. In the objective attitude 
again, this or object appears to exist beyond its this-ness or relatedness. 
to the subject, while in the subjective attitude not only is the transcen- 
dent this rejected as meaningless, this-ness—meaning the so-called 
psychological entities, knownness or feltness—appears also not to be 
given as distinct to introspection but to exist only as distinguished or 
constructed, this distinguishing or constructing being felt as less certain 
than the self-evident subject behind it. The object or this beyond ob- 
jectivity, this-ness or relatedness to subject is sought to be known not 
only in the metaphysic of psychology, but in all metaphysic. From the 
standpoint of spiritual psychology, this transcendent object is simply 
meaningless and metaphysic is the quest of a chimera. All so-called 
metaphysical problems are to it symbolisms for modes of freedom, the 
forms of spiritual discipline by which the objective attitude has to be 
renounced and the positive subjective functioning has to be reversed in 
direction towards the realisation of the subject behind it. 

20. Kant’s critical philosophy may be taken as a disguised form 
of spiritual psychology as thus conceived. The elaboration of the 
three modes of belief—theoretic, practical and aesthetic—is transcen- 
dental psychology, the spiritual equivalent offered by him for dogmatic 
metaphysics. The start is from epistemology which assumes the reality 
of the subject and subjective function though it does not explicitly 
confess in the case of the knowing function that it is only assumed or 
believed to be real and presents instead a make-believe of inference 
in the so-called transcendental deductions. The other functions are, 
however, definitely asserted to be only believed: the reality of the 
willing function, for example, is taken to be apprehended in the willing 
consciousness only. The confession is not made about the knowing 
function because epistemology is to Kant not so much a branch of 
transcendental psychology as a prolegomena to it, concerned not with 
the presentation of subjective fact but with the meaning of the pre- 
position of in ‘knowledge of object’, the facthood of which is implicitly 
taken for granted. Its interest is still in the object, in the known- 
ness or objectivity of the object which it seeks to understand theore- 
tically as knowing. It does not abandon the objective procedure of 
metaphysics and the sciences, even though it sets itself to correct the 
conceit of independent objectivity. The objective procedure may be 


THE NOTION OF SUBJECTIVITY : 31 


necessary to show up the seamy character of objectivity and may also 
imply the truthful admission that we do not get rid of our actual belief 
in the independent object by the mere thinking criticism of it. But 
it misleads so far as it presents the function as an objective meaning 
and does not recognise that it is believed without being meant. Episte- 
mology might be mistaken as only a philological study, unless it is 
consciously viewed as rooted in the faith in the facthood of the know- 
ing function and unless the so-called deduction that it presents is defi- 
nitely known to be not inferential and not literally meant but to be 
the mere symbolisation by logical form of what is immediately 
believed as spiritual fact. 

21. The persisting objective attitude of Kant in his first critique 
explains not only his admission of the thing-in-itself and his denial 
of self-knowledge but also his disbelief in the possibility of a spiritual . 
discipline of the theoretic reason through which self-knowledge may 
be attainable. From the subjective standpoint, object beyond known- 
ness, this beyond this-ness is, as explained, meaningless. It may be 
that, wedded as we are to our body, we cannot get rid of the objec- 
tive attitude and the tendency to look beyond the constructed object 
to the purely given. But not to be able to deny need not imply ad- 
mission and though the Kantian disclaimer of idealism as. accom- 
plished knowledge is intelligible, his admission of the unknowable 
reality appears to be an unwarrantable surrender to realism. After 
the resolution of the objectivity of the object into the knowing func- 
tion, the independence of the object becomes inconceivable though it 
continues to be believed. Such a belief cannot be asserted though 
it cannot also be rejected. Realism should, therefore, be held as sus- 
pect though idealism is only a faith and not knowledge. But the 
faith has to be cherished and there should be a subjective discipline 
to get rid of the persisting realistic belief. Kant does not admit such 
a discipline at least for the theoretic reason. 

22. Self-knowledge is denied by Kant : the self cannot be known 
but only thought through the objective categories—unity, substantiality 
etc., there being no intuition of it. The view presented so far is that 
the subject is known though neither thought (meant) nor intuited. 
It is known as what the speaker of / is understood to intend by it. The 
understanding is a direct believing in something that is not meant 
but revealed as revealing itself, a question about the reality of which 
does not arise and is unmeaning. The subject is thus known by itself, 
as not meant but speakable and not as either related or relating to 
the object. It is, however, believed as relating to object and sym~« 


32 THE SUBJECT AS FREEDOM 


bolised as such by the objective relations. The modes of relating 
are at the same time the modes of freeing from objectivity, the forms 
of the spiritual discipline by which, it may be conceived, the out- 
going reference to the object is turned backwards and the immediate 
knowledge of the / as content is realised in an ecstatic intuition. 

23. Spiritual progress means the realisation of the subject as 
free. The realisation may or may not involve a specific activity of 
the subject. There are those to whom it is only a resultant experi- 
ence. One lives an objectively good or full life and finds his self 
correspondingly realised. Others, however, recognise a specific dis- 
‘cipline or consecutive method of activity for such realisation. The 
‘consciousness of perfection, freedom or salvation as the end is to 
them a demand for some kind of activity of the subject towards itself. 
This cult of the subject, as it might be called, takes various forms but 
they all involve a feeling of dissociation of the subject from the ob- 
ject, an awareness of the subject as what the object is not. The speci- 
fic activity demanded is primarily in the inwardising direction and 
‘secondarily, if at all, in the direction of creating objective or social 
values. One demand among others—all being absolute demands—is 
that the subjective function being essentially the knowing of the ob- 
ject as distinct from it, this knowing which is only believed and not 
known as fact has to be known as fact, as the self-evidencing reality 
of the subject itself. This would be the cult of the subject par 
excellence, a spiritual discipline of the theoretic reason, a method of 
cognitive inwardising, the possibility of which, as indeed of any me- 
thod of realisation, is not ordinarily recognised. 

24. The possibility of such a method has to be exhibited in Spiri- 
tual psychology. A method implies a series of consecutive steps for 
the realisation of an end. The steps in this case should correspond 
to a gradation of subjective functions, of modes of freedom from the 
object. Identified as we are with our body, our freedom from the 
perceived object is actually realised only in our bodily consciousness, 
though even this, as will appear later, is only imperfectly realised. 
Bodily consciousness may as well be called conscious body, there being 
no dissociation at this stage of the subject from the body, though the 
extra-organic object is known to be distinct from it. The next stage 
of freedom is suggested by the distinction of the perceived object in- 
cluding the body from the ghostly object in the form of the image, 
idea and meaning which may be all designated ‘presentation’. Cons- 
ciousness as undissociated from such presentation, but dissociated 
from the perceived and felt body may be called presentational or 


THE NOTION OF SUBJECTIVITY 33 


psychic subjectivity. The dissociation of the subject or conscious- 
ness from this presentation conceived as a kind of object, would be 
the next stage of freedom which may be called non-presentational or 
spiritual subjectivity. The three broad stages of subjectivity would 
then be the bodily, the psychical and the spiritual and each would 
comprise substages. Wedded as we are to our body, actual freedom 
is felt only in bodily subjectivity and freedom in the higher stages as 
suggested by psychology is believed not as what is actual but as what 
has to be achieved or realised. The grades of subjectivity imply 
grades of objectivity, the terms being conceived in a relative sense. 
To spiritual subjectivity, the psychical is objective and so to psychic 
subjectivity, the bodily and to bodily subjectivity, the extra-organic is 
objective. The objective at any stage is known as distinct from the 
subjective next to it, which, however, is not known as distinct from 
the objective but only felt and believed to be free or dissociated 
from it. The elaboration of these stages of freedom in_ spiritual 
psychology would suggest the possibility of a consecutive method of 
realising the subject as absolute freedom, of retracting the felt positive 
freedom towards the object into pure intuition of the self. 


CHAPTER II 
PsycHIc FACT 


25. The facts of empirical psychology have to be interpreted 
from the subjective standpoint in spiritual psychology. What is called 
psychological introspection is apparently a process of abstraction from 
the object of its modes of relatedness to the subject. This related- 
ness, viewed as a character of the object, is the so-called psychic 
fact. There is a difference, however, between this objective character 
and other objective characters. A character of a thing is an abstrac- 
tion distinguished from it but not imaginable as separated from it. 
As distinct in the thing, it is a fact; but as spoken of by itself, it need 
not mean a fact. An abstraction like colour, for example, means a 
fact while an abstraction like intensity does not mean a fact though 
the intensity of colour as in the colour is a fact. These two kinds 
of abstraction may be designated respectively as of the first degree 
and of the second degree. Knownness or any other mode of related- 
ness of object to subject, as taken by itself, is an abstraction of the 
second degree: it does not mean a fact though the object as thus 
related is a fact. There is a difference, again, between this relatedness 
and intensity as abstractions. In the knowing of a bright colour, col- 
our is not known as distinct from brightness, being only spoken of as 
distinct while in the knowing of the knownness of an object, the object— 
at least as non-perceptually known—is known as distinct from its 
knownness or presentation. Knownness or relatedness is a floating ad- 
jective of the object like its beauty or like the absence of an object 
as a character of the object in which it is absent. The so-called 
psychic fact, as abstracted from the object by psychological intros- 
pection, may thus be taken as a floating abstraction of the second 
degree. It is interpreted from the subjective standpoint in spiritual 
psychology as a subjective function that is a fact. 

26. To psychological introspection with its objective attitude, 
psychic fact is a character of the object, existing like the object even 
apart from introspection. It is, however, only quasi-objective : unlike 
the object which when not perceived is known to exist in some other 
mode of cognition, psychic fact that is believed during introspection 
to exist is believed on the testimony of the same introspection to exist 
also apart from it. The perception of an object is immersed in the 
object and as such is not, as will appear later, knowable in direct in- 


PSYCHIC FACT 35 


trospection. As the object is only indirectly known to be distinct from 
the perception of it, perception cannot be taken as a given psychic 
fact for purposes of psychology. Feeling, again, is a psychic fact only 
as the feltness of a known object and as bound up with its known- 
ness ; and if there is feeling not bound up with object-cognition, 
it cannot appear to introspection to exist apart from it and as such 
cannot be called psychic fact. To start with at any rate then, the 
term psychic has to be restricted to modes of subjectivity that lie 
between sense-perception on the one hand and such objectless feeling 
on the other. 

27, Psychic fact is either the knownness of object or the feltness 
etc., of known object, being fact from which object is distinguishable. 
What does not involve the knowledge of object is no psychic fact. 
Is mere imagination then—imagination of the imaginary which is no 
known object—to be regarded as psychic fact? What is imagined need 
not be imaginary and even what is taken as imaginary is not wholly 
imaginary. The imagination of a golden mountain involves not only 
the awareness of what never is but also the belief in the possibility 
of a mountain being made of gold, in the compatibility of the ob- 
jective facts, golden and mountain. This compatibility is not ima- 
ginary, is not merely an imagined relation of two images but Is an 
objective fact expressed in an abstract and periphrastic way. The ima- 
gination of golden mountain is a psychic fact so far as it implies an 
unrejected belief in such objective fact. 

28. But is the awareness of the content as what never is, to 
be taken as psychic fact? The belief in the absence of what is at 
some time somewhere is still knowledge of objective fact. Even the 
awareness of what never is, where there was wrong belief in it or a real 
question about it, implies an unrejected belief in some objective fact. 
But golden mountain is imaginary in the sense that it not only never 
is but that it does not even suggest a real question about its exis- 
tence. The awareness of such an imaginary content implies the rejec- 
tion of all belief in objective fact. Introspection is belief in the 
psychic fact of believing in an objective fact. Is there a belief in 
the absence of objective belief or, in other words, introspection into 
the consciousness of the imaginary? There may only be disbelief 
or no-belief in believing and so there seems to be no introspection 
into mere imaging, the awareness of it being other than, though on a 
level with, introspection. What introspection does not reveal is no 
psychic fact and hence the consciousness of the imaginary is no psy- 
chic fact. 


36 THE SUBJECT AS FREEDOM 


29. Is there such a thing as objectless feeling , feeling that does 
not involve knowledge of an objective fact? The feeling that we 
introspectively believe as being a fact outside introspection is the 
feeling of an object as known, from which indeed the knowledge is 
distinguished but which is not itself distinguished from the knowledge. 
Objectless feeling, if such there be, would be like introspection itself 
only a non-psychic fringe of some psychic fact. The general pos- 
sibility of such feeling will be exhibited later but it may be asked at 
this stage if the feeling of an object that is believed to be illusory 
should be taken as psychic fact. The past belief in the snake, 
for example, which is now known to be only a rope, was bound up 
with a feeling of fear. Is the fear now believed as a past psychic 
fact > Obviously, we do not believe it now as the fear of that snake. 
But it may be said that although that snake is not believed, the cha- 
racteristic feeling of bodily reaction in the past is believed, which 
is just the past fear of the snake. A feeling, however, is essentially 
individual and its individuality is constituted by the belief in the 
individuality of its object. The reduction of what was taken to be 
the fear of snake to the feeling of bodily reaction would be the dis- 
belief in that feeling. Belief in the past fear of some object, indeed, 
remains over with the belief in the past bodily condition. But it 
remains over only in the sense of not being rejected and not of being 
asserted, and it remains over not by itself but as only the non-psychic 
fringe of the memory of the past bodily condition. 

30. When we speak of the feeling of an object, we are not in- 
trospectively aware of the feeling as distinct from and accompanying 
the belief in the object. We do not distinguish the feeling at all 
from the belief though we may be aware of the belief without the 
feeling. The feeling, in fact, refers to the object as directly as the belief 
and along with it. It is artificial to understand it to refer to the ob- 
ject in the first instance related to the belief in the object and, there- 
fore, to take the fear of the snake now believed to be illusory as fear 
related to the past belief in snake as distinct from the snake. We 
cannot say that the fear of the snake was just as real as the past 
belief in the snake. The false belief, now that it is corrected, is 
known to have been a fact, for the correction can be expressed in 
the form ‘what was believed to be snake was not snake but rope.’ 
It cannot be said, however, about the fear that it was fear of the rope 
or of that snake or of that idea of snake or that it was fear of nothing 
at all. The rope was the cause but not the object of the past feeling ; 
so, too, was the idea of the snake while that snake cannot be called 


PSYCHIC FACT 37 


its object because it is now disbelieved. Nor can we take the object 
to have been snake-in-general, for fear of such a generality is, at best, 
a disposition to feel and not an actual feeling. We believe, indeed, in 
the past feeling of a characteristic bodily reaction but a bodily feeling 
is not the consciousness of the body as its object, there being as 
little conscious distinction between bodily feeling and felt body as 
between perception and perceived object, while the past feeling in this 
case was distinctly consciousness of something as object. We cannot 
say that the fear was of nothing at all, since we do not remember the 
feeling as unformulated. After the belief in the snake has been correct- 
ed, it is impossible to describe as past fact what was called fear of the 
snake when it was believed. It may be arbitrary to deny that the fear 
was a fact but it cannot be asserted to have been fact because its object 
is now indescribable. The feeling then of an object now believed to 
be illusory cannot, at least, be asserted to have been a psychic fact. 


31. A psychic fact involves belief in an objective fact and intros- 
pection into it is a belief in such belief. The awareness of the 
imaginary as such, being a disbelief in objective belief, has been shown 
to be other than but on a level with introspection. Are these modes 
of subjectivity to be taken as psychic facts? A psychic fact may 
involve belief in another psychic fact but it is primarily a belief in some 
objective fact. One may remember, for example, an objective event 
and also be aware of the subjective fact of its having been previously 
known. Such awareness is not memory unless the past knowing of the 
event was itself known in the past and should be taken accordingly as 
nothing but introspection. It is no psychic fact by itself but is only the 
transitive fringe of the substantive fact of objective memory. Introspec- 
tion is always awareness of a psychic fact that is past though the psychic 
fact need not be known as past as in this case and may persist at the time 
of introspection. In any case introspection into it is bound up with 
another psychic fact like memory as in this case, which is primarily 
a belief in the object and need not have this fringe. Like introspection 
which is belief in believing, disbelief in believing also—the conscious- 
ness of the imaginary, which is not introspection but may be taken as 
co-ordinate with it—is a non-psychic fringe of a substantive psychic 
fact. The correction of an objective illusion appears to present a diffi- 
culty, since in it we are aware not of the past object but of the 
past belief in object, the awareness being also introspection. It implies, 
however, a present disbelief in the object which as implying in every 
case an unrejected belief in something objective is psychic fact and 


38 THE SUBJECT AS FREEDOM 


the introspective belief in the past fact of belief is the non-psychic 
fringe of this psychic fact. 

32. ‘So then we conclude that a form of consciousness which 
does not involve belief in an objective fact is no psychic fact but is 
only the fringe of some psychic fact that involves such belief and need 
not have the fringe. The fringe may epistemologically be primary or 
secondary in respect of the psychic fact but never stands by itself. 
Introspection, for example, is primary in respect of the psychic fact of 
which it is a fringe while the awareness of an illusory object is second- 
ary in respect of the belief that remains over after the correction. 
Again, the individual feeling that cannot be denied as bound up with 
the past belief in the object that is now taken to be illusory is pri- 
mary in respect of the remembered body-feeling and may be taken as 
secondary in respect of the present remembering of the bodily feeling. 

33. A psychic fact is or involves not merely the belief in an 
objective fact but the knowledge of it. We are aware of a belief as 
having been belief in an object as now formulated if the object is now 
either known or disbelieved. It is in introspection into knowledge or 
in the consciousness of the unreal object as such that we realise that 
we believed before we knew or disbelieved and that there was then no 
awareness of a distinction of the object believed from the belief. Know- 
ledge as distinct from mere belief involves awareness of the distinc- 
tion, this being testified by introspection into knowledge even about 
such knowledge as precedes introspection. The distinction that is pre- 
sented to introspection is believed to exist also ‘apart from introspec- 
tion. The distinction of the object from the belief in it is something 
more than the object itsclf, though it cannot be said to be not objec- 
tive. It is just what is called presentation of the object, which is taken 
as a psychic fact only as it is in introspection abstracted from the object. 
Presentation and object are so related that while the latter is given 
distinct from the former, the former is not given distinct from the latter, 
being only abstracted or tried to be distinguished in introspection. 

34, Two extreme cases have to be considered in understand- 
ing this relation of presentation and object. In perceptual knowledge, 
the object does not appear distinct from its presentation; and in percep- 
tual illusion, there is apparently the presentation only, with no object 
distinct from it. We do not, indeed, introspectively distinguish per- 
ceptual knowledge from its object but still such knowledge is not mere 
belief inasmuch as in it the object is given as distinct in itself though 
not from its presentation and has not to be distinguished, as in the case 
of mere belief, in a later act of knowledge. The object explicitly ap- 


PSYCHIC FACT 39 


pears distinct from its presentation in non-perceptual knowledge, such 
distinction being the condition of possible introspection into it. There 
is accordingly no introspection into perceptual knowledge, though 
other knowledge, when introspected into, may be distinguished from 
perceptual knowledge. Still the perceived object being consciously 
distinct in itself may be distinct from its presentation, though it is not 
consciously so appreciated. Knowledge involves only the conscious or 
evident distinctness of the believed object, whether or not there is the 
consciousness of the presentation as that from which it is distinct. 

35. Perceptual illusion presents another kind of difficulty. The 
perceived object being disbelieved is not removed altogether from con- 
sciousness. The appearance may be still presented though such pre- 
sentation would not embody belief in an object. Like mere imagina- 
tion, mere perceptual presentation is no psychic fact at all to which 
object may be related in the way of distinction: the awareness of it 
is only the fringe of perception as a fact. In the correction of an 
illusion as expressed in ‘not snake but rope’, the rope is utterly un- 
related to the mere presentation: the word not in it means rejection 
only and no distinction, the rejection being the fringe of the present 
perception of rope. The awareness of the mere presentation is not 
belief in it, though unlike mere imagination the presentation is not 
explicitly disbelieved. The mere presentation as this equivocal some- 
thing that is neither believed nor disbelieved is very different from the 
presentation from which the object is said to be distinct in knowledge 
and which is definitely believed in introspection and taken to embody 
belief in an object. It should, in fact, be designated by some word 
other than presentation. 

36. Intermediate between perceptual knowledge and perceptual 
illusion are the other forms of knowledge involving a conscious dis- 
tinction of the known object from its presentation. It is in the aware- 
ness of the illusory that the presentation definitely emerges from the 
preceived object into which it was merged. But this emergence or 
freedom is also the death of the presentation in the sense that it no 
longer embodies belief. The presentation is a fact to introspection so 
long as the object presented is believed and distinguished from it. 
Introspection into non-perceptual knowledge is thus a belief in pre- 
sentation. As introspection is the belief that its content is a fact 
even apart from introspection, the presentation is a fact, the facthood 
of which consists in its being a belief in a distinct objective fact. As 
there is no direct introspection into perceptual knowledge, there is no 
consciousness here, but not therefore a denial, of a presentation from 


40 THE SUBJECT AS FREEDOM 


which the object is distinct. Introspection into non-perceptual know- 
ledge is such consciousness of presentation of object from which object 
is distinct. ' 

37. The distinctness of the object from its presentation does not 
mean the distinctness of the presentation from its object. The intros- 
pective belief in the presentation is belief in the object as well and 
so presentation is not not-objective, not illusory- nor purely subjec- 
tive. As the object, however, is distinguished from it in non-per- 
ceptual knowledge, it is the perceivable object and something more 
that is believed in, something that is not known but is wanted to be 
known. The knowledge of the distinction of the object as imagined 
to be perceived from the presentation is the belief embodied in pre- 
sentation in something that cannot be imagined to be perceived but 
appears still as adjectival to the perceivable object. This believed 
something is, if known, known as unknown and as only wanted to be 
known. 

38. There are different grades of non-perceptual knowledge 
implying different modes of presentation or belief in object. By ‘per- 
ception’ is meant here external perception of object. What is the know- 
ledge of the body from within, body as internally felt and not exter- 
nally observed > The observed object including the observed body is 
distinguished from the internally felt body which thus is no part 
of the observable world and yet is believed not as other than the 
observed body but as its character of internality. Again, there is the 
immediate apprehension of the absence of an object which cannot 
be said to be known by external perception, at least, in the ordinary 
sense and yet is known as a present objective fact. There is me- 
mory which is belief in the perceivable object as past, pastness being 
an unperceivable character of the object. Imagination so far as it in- 
volves belief is non-perceptual apprehension of the object as forming 
or becoming formed to be a perceptible object. Inference, again, is 
belief in the perceivable object as involving the unperceivable charac- 
ter of necessity. None of these non-perceptual forms of apprehen- 
sion is mere belief; the object cannot be said to be not known in 
them and yet each is a belief in something that cannot be known by 
external perception and, being still about the object and indefinite, is 
wanted to be somehow known or realised. Perceptual knowledge is 
the actual standard of knowledge. The other modes of apprehen- 
sion imply it, are not taken in introspection to be mere belief and 
involve further a belief in something not yet known but which may be 
known in some ideal mode of realisation or intuition. 


PSYCHIC FACT 4] 


39, Perception as the actual standard of knowledge not only 
lends the cognitive character to the other modes of apprehension but 
also prevents them from reaching their ideal completion. ‘The inter- 
nality of the felt body, absence or pastness, forming or necessity as 
facts are wanted to be known as the object is actually known in per- 
ception. Yet these are facts of such a kind that if they were so known, 
the perception of the object could not remain unaffected in its cog- 
nitive character. So far as these modes of apprehension are know- 
ledge, they are knowledge of these facts as adjectival characters of the 
perceptually knowable object. These facts however, as shown about 
the general character of knownness, are floating adjectives from which 
the object to which they are ascribed are distinct though as abstrac- 
tions of the second degree, they have to be referred adjectivally to 
the object as substantive. They are, however, necessarily symbolised 
as substantive by objective metaphors, being not merely thought but 
sought to be believed as though they were substantive objects. If 
they could be known as such, the actual perceived object would be. 
at best, a particular manifestation of a more essential object. They 
are, however, not known as substantive and there is only the metaphy- 
sical aspiration to extend and deepen the conception of the object. 
They are not known because as a matter of fact, though not neces- 
sarily, we are wedded to the body and to the perceptual object that is 
organic to it. The identification with the object is so deep-rooted 
that, though not necessary, it is not annulled by any logic and may be 
regarded for all ordinary purposes as a ‘permanent illusion’. 

40. The believed object as perceived or imagined to be per- 
ceived is distinct from presentation but the presentation is not distinct 
from its object. In perceptual knowledge, if the object is not consciously 
distinct from its presentation, its distinction is yet knowable through 
some ordinary non-perceptual mode of knowledge. But if the presen- 
tation is not known as distinct from the object, it does not come to be 
known as such by any logic or in any ordinary form of knowledge. It is 
believed and symbolised as what should be distinct: the distinction here, 
not being a character of the object, cannot exist unconsciously. It can 
exist only in being achieved or realised subjectively. The psychic fact, 
being essentially presentation as embodying belief, is on the one hand 
not imaginary or non-factual and on the other not accomplished as fact 
but only to be accomplished. It is at once known and unknown, its 
facthood being what has begun to be achieved and is yet to be com- 
pleted. Introspection is belief in the psychic, not as utterly unknown 
but as only not isolated or freed from objective fact. The complete 


42 THE SUBJECT AS FREEDOM 


knowledge and facthood of the psychic has to be achieved by such 
isolation but the demand itself is roused by such knowledge as has 
already begun. 

4|. Psychic fact involves knowledge of object and such know- 
ledge exists outside introspection as presentation from which object is 
distinct but which is not distinct from the object. Presentation is the 
object and more than the object, embodying, as it does, belief in some- 
thing that can never be perceived by sense, from which the perceived 
object is distinct but which yet appears as a character of the object. 
As such, this presentation may be said to be known as unknown and 
as to be known and has to be symbolised as object, including, as it 
does, the object as its manifestation or appearance in some sense. 
Psychic fact accordingly is that of which the facthood is at once 
accomplished and to be accomplished, unlike the facthood of objective 
fact which is only accomplished and the reality like that claimed for 
the moral ought which is only to be accomplished. 

42. The complete accomplishment of psychic facthood is con- 
ceivable as implying presentation that is wholly turned into known 
object, which would mean, not the lapse of the conscious distinction 
of object from presentation such as characterises sense-perception, 
but the conscious or evident objectivity of what in presentation is more 
than the sense-given object and suggests a metaphysical reality— 
what in ordinary psychic fact is only not denied as objective and may 
be conceived to be subjective. The image of a believed object, for 
example, is more than the perceivable object in the sense that it 
appears being formed and not given as formed. The forming is pre- 
sented as a process of the object itself and yet somehow prior to its 
existence as formed. There is no ground to take it as merely subjec- 
tive, for it appears to be seen in the non-introspective attitude though 
the object as formed is distinct from it. As a becoming of the object 
prior to its accomplished being, it implies a metaphysical fact that is 
not known as intelligibly related to the object, appearing as it does as 
an un-objective character of the object which is a contradiction. It 
is in this sense known as unknown in the object and felt as dissociated 
from it. If imagination were to be realised. this contradiction would 
disappear, the becoming would be evident as a substantive fact and the 
object would be seen as its contingent manifestation. The image would 
then be dissociated in knowledge and not in mere feeling from the 
object and would be said to have achieved a free existence. Similar 
suggestions of metaphysical reality and the possibility of realising it 
would be presented by psychic states higher than the imagination. 


PSYCHIC FACT 43 


43. To such a view a Kantian may be supposed to object that 
the metaphysical reality thus adumbrated in the presentation is only 
subjective though it appears real in the object by illusion, by a per- 
manent illusion which we can critically correct without being able to 
remove. The critical correction may only be sought to be streng- 
thened in a non-cognitive way—the moral or aesthetic way—with the 
entertainment of the metaphysical reality in faith. Our contention 
would be that the appearance of its objectivity is incomplete but not 
illusory; that the illusion is to take it as known but not as knowable; 
that if it were unknowable, it could not be entertained in faith even 
for non-cognitive realisation and that the demand to know it is legiti- 
mate if not necessary. The thought of the metaphysical entity is a 
conscious problem but the problem is soluble in a mode of knowledge 
in which the object would appear as its free efflux, as what it can be 
but need not be. The metaphysical would appear in such know- 
ledge as an evident real, as the existent fact of knowledge itself, with 
the object as its free possibility and as negated in its actuality. 

44, That metaphysical reality is subjective is admitted in the 
sense that it is not an object behind the perceivable object. The 
objective attitude of metaphysics should terminate with the recog- 
nition of something that is known as unknown in the object. of the 
contradiction in the presented unobjective character of the object. 
But this unknown something that is known as such and formulated 
is not merely subjective in the sense of being illusory or in the sense 
of being the content of a faith that can never be turned into know- 
ledge. To take it as mercly subjective is to assume the object to be 
alone knowable and to be incapable of being known as put forth 
subjectively or freely. It is to deny the facthood of the constructive 
function by which the perceivable object comes to be for the subject. 
The epistemological functions are indeed believed and not known but 
they are not believed as merely subjective. They are, no doubt, sym- 
bolised by objective metaphors but the symbolism is necessary and 
has to be entertained in faith. The demand to entertain the objective 
symbolism in faith is inconsistent with the denial of the knowability or 
objectivity of the functions. To be aware of a description as meta- 
phorical but necessarily so is to take it to be unknown in the sense 
of being unrealised, of being imagined to be known but not yet known. 
It implies the possibility of knowing not indeed by any logical proce- 
dure but by a specific self-realising activity of the imagination itself. 
It argues a gratuitous difidence to take such activity to be a mystic 
chimera. The imagination of knowing or the symbolising faith would 


44 THE SUBJECT AS FREEDOM 


not be faith at all if the possibility of such subjective achievement of 
the feeling of knowledge were to be denied. 

45. ‘A faith that is spiritually demanded to be entertained can- 
not be taken to be incapable of being turned into knowledge. The 
moral postulates of Kant, for example, are such faiths. There is 
indeed no moral demand to entertain them, for they proceed from the 
demand for moral willing and there is no obligation on the part of 
the will to contemplate their objects. But when they have proceeded, 
are they mere speculative luxuries ? Is the formulation of their ob- 
jects with an as though spiritually indifferent or does it suggest a hope 
and a discipline to realise the hope of there being a grade of subjective 
realisation higher than the moral ? Such a grade may be admitted as 
‘religion within the limits of pure reason’ but the conceit of possible 
metaphysical knowledge, it may be said, need not, therefore, be reins- 
tated. The conceit would be to Kant a moral impurity and critical 
honesty as essential to moral purity is essential to moral religion. But 
the conceit that implies intellectual dishonesty is the belief that meta- 
physical reality is known, not that it is knowable. To take the spirit 
as finally known when its reality is to be achieved would be to take 
away the will to achieve. But if the spirit is believed to be un- 
knowable, is not the will to achieve equally taken away >? The will 
to realise the self, whether in knowledge or otherwise—for there may 
be different moded of realisation, implies at any stage the knowledge 
of the self as not known and the belief that it is something more than 
as it is known. It cannot imply a belief in the self that is not know- 
ledge at all, far less a belief in the self as unknowable. 

46. The distinction of the object that is non-perceptually known 
from its knownness, presentation or idea is just its character of being 
unknown which is believed and sought to be isolated by introspection. 
The known object is thus a problem to all knowledge other than per- 
ception. Perception is at once full knowledge, and restricted know- 
ledge, full in so far as no lack of knowledge is felt in it and restricted 
because nothing beyond the object is necessarily suggested by it. In 
imaginative knowledge, as in higher forms of non-perceptual know- 
ledge, there is a felt lack of intimacy with the object known while 
something is known in the object—its becoming before being, for 
example,— which is unknown in the sense of not being as evident as 
the perceived object and of being incapable of being perceived. It 
is believed as constituting the reality of the perceivable object, the 
object being its appearance which is not unreal and in this sense 
a phenomenon of the reality. Non-perceptual knowledge is thus 


PSYCHIC FACT 45 


knowledge of the object as phenomenal with belief in a reality consti- 
tuting it. 

47, There is no explicit belief in metaphysical reality except as 
thus implied in the knowledge of the phenomenal. To know the 
phenomenon is not not to know the reality but to know it as unknown 
and, it may be, as wanted to be known. Belicf that is not knowledge 
at all is either unaccompanied by an idea of the object as distinct from 
the belief or is false belief. It is not possible, therefore, to say about 
the postulates of moral or aesthetic consciousness that they have only 
to be believed and cannot be known. They are, in fact, known as un- 
known, known as objects that are not to be rejected as permanent 
illusions but to be contemplated as symbols of the reality to be known, 
What in the case of the understanding is known as phenomenon is in 
the case of the reason known as symbol, neither of which can be taken 
in our ordinary consciousness to be illusory though they would be 
realised as illusory if the reality that is known as unknown were to be 
completely known. 

48. It would indeed be wrong to say that what is known as un- 
known is necessarily wanted to be known, that there is a necessity for 
the idea of a believed object to get transformed into knowledge. The 
knowledge of the unknown as such is the precondition as much of 
moral or aesthetic realisation as of cognitive realisation. It would be 
equally wrong on the other side to say that for non-cognitive reali- 
sation it is necessary to give up faith in the knowability of the un- 
known. Belief in the unknowability of reality is not only not de- 
manded ; it is impossible and although in a sense the unknowable 
real can be conceived, the confusion of this mere conceiving with 
belief will exclude the possibility of all spiritual realisation. We know 
or believe the reality to be unknown but we cannot believe it to be 
unknowable. We can doubt the knowledge of the phenomenon or 
symbol such as is implied in the knowledge of the unknown reality ; 
but either such doubt does not amount to disbelief or if it does, the 
belief in the unknown reality also disappears, for that stands so long 
as the knowledge is not doubted. While the belief in the reality 
persists, the doubt is only an imaginary doubt, only the conceiving of 
a disbelief—no psychic fact at all but only a fringe of it—a conceiving 
of the totally unknown that is yet real. The concept of the totally 
unknown reality is the imaginary concept of the unknowable. 

49. The factors of actual knowledge can never be proved to 
be necessary to all knowledge. A content that is claimed to be known 
may be shown afterwards to have been only believed or to be known 


46 THE SUBJECT AS FREEDOM 


as unknown but cannot be shown to be unknowable in the sense of 
being totally unknown and yet demanded to be believed. So long as 
it can be spoken of and believed, it is not to be regarded as totally 
unknown on the ground of some “factor of actual knowledge being 
wanting. If the thing-in-itself or an Idea of Reason is spoken of and 
believed, it is already known as unknown ; and because of the two 
factors of actual object-knowledge—thought and intuition—either is 
wanting in this case, one has no right to doubt such knowledge as is 
there already or—what amounts to the same thing—to doubt the 
knowability of the unknown. To know something to be unknown 
implies, in fact, a demand to find a condition of its being known and if 
the conditions of other admitted knowledge be not there, it is a call to 
revise our epistemology and not to reject the knowledge of the un- 
known that sets the problem. 

50. The knowledge of the unknown is what starts the actual 
problem of realisation whether in the cognitive or in the non-cognitive 
direction. The demand for either mode of realisation is absolute, 
though there is a spiritual choice—which is not merely the free choice 
of a will—between them. The non-cognitive mode does not enter- 
tain the demand that the unknown that is known as such should be 
known as known, that the belief in the reality has to be turned into the 
knowledge of it as evident. Not that it therefore demands that there 
should be a belief in its unknowability : it would, in fact, be impossible 
with such a belief. What is demanded for any mode of spiritual reali- 
sation is that there should be the knowledge of a reality as beyond the 
known and that it should not be known as unknowable. The non- 
cognitive mode of realisation does not demand the belief that it is 
the only mode and that the cognitive mode implies, as Kant would 
have it, a fanatical conceit or theosophic illusion. The impossibility 
of the cognitive mode would argue the impossibility of the non-cogni- 
tive modes as well. 

51. Thus we meet the Kantian difficulty. Psychic fact, ‘we 
said, involves presentation from which the perceivable object is dis- 
tinct and which accordingly is object and more than object. It is 
more in the sense of being a metaphysical reality constitutive of the 
object which is its phenomenon, a reality that is known as unknown 
and as knowable, though the complete knowledge of it need not be 
demanded. Psychic fact as embodying belief in such reality is at 
once real and realising, realising as being already real, this being the 
objective counterpart of knowing the object as unknown. To Kant, 
metaphysical reality—what in presentation appears to be known as 


PSYCHIC FACT 47 


unknown in the object—is only thought and believed and appears to 
be known by an inevitable or permanent illusion. We agree that the 
introspective awareness of the presentation as distinct from the object 
is not knowledge of knowing but only imagination of knowing the 
metaphysical. The imagination, however, is not an illusion but only 
incomplete or unrealised knowledge and hence the imagined knowing 
appears as the knowing of the unknown as such in the object. There 
is no question of turning this imagined knowing into actual knowing 
by sense-intuition ; it can be actualised, if at all, by the concreting 
activity of imagination itself. Metaphysical reality is only symbolised 
in objective terms: it is not literally objective though the symboll- 
sing may be a step towards knowledge of it as a subjective reality and 
need not be in the service of willing or feeling only. The subject may 
be sought to be realised morally or emotionally and the conceit of 
knowing the reality may be dropped but there is no necessity to drop 
it. Cognitive realisation of the metaphysical reality as subjective has 
to be admitted, at least, as an alternative spiritual possibility. 

52. In this cognitive realisation, the knowledge of the unknown 
as such implies the demand to know the metaphysical reality not as 
an object hidden behind the perceivable object but as that of which 
the object is a free efflux and to know empirical fact as real not by 
being given but by the self-shining substantively existent cognition of 
it. What appear as characters of the object—characters like forming, 
pastness or necessity revealed by imagination, memory or inference—— 
would in such realisation cease to be adjectival and appear substantive. 
Psychic fact would not only appear isolated from its object in the 
stage of introspective realisation proper to it but would cease to be 
distinguished from introspection as its object, shining out as a mode 
of introspection itself, as a self-evidencing functional fact. The pheno- 
menal object—the object as imagined to be perceived—would appear 
to be a possibility that is not actual by its own right, being negated 
or turned into illusion in this sense though not in the sense that when 
put forth, it is not real at all. 

53. Psychic fact appears to our ordinary unrealised introspec- 
tion as more concrete than objective fact only in promise and not in 
actuality. It does not, however, appear as co-ordinate with objective 
fact: it is what should be more real but is actually less real. To be 
more real is not to be a whole of which objective fact is an element, 
for the unobjective element of psychic fact that is known in intros- 
pection as the unknown character of the object is what constitutes the 
reality of the object. Psychic fact contains within it objective fact 


48 THE SUBJECT AS FREEDOM 


as a possibility but it would be wrong to say that the realisation of the 
psychic must mean the actualisation of this possibility. Actualisa- 
tion of a possible is, indeed, a necessity to knowing, provided we choose 
to know or to adopt the cognitive mode of realisation. Object is a 
possibility within the psychic only in the sense that it can be actualised, 
not that it will or need be actualised. It is not comprehended in the 
psychic in the Hegelian sense. 

54. The Indian conception of a specific activity of realisation 
on the part of the individual spirit is alien to modern philosophy 
generally and specially to Hegelian philosophy. The individual spirit 
is supposed in the latter to be individual so far as he is subject and 
does not know his subjectivity objectively. He knows it objectively 
only as he finds it through non-cognitive spiritual activity. He asserts 
it non-cognitively but does not in such assertion will towards it as 
what is to be developed, does not know it and stand outside it in 
spiritual willing though in the consciousness of the resulting fulfilment, 
he knows the subjectivity to have been developed. To the absolute 
spirit, however, his will to realise his subjectivity is knowledge of his 
subjectivity in the willing and not after the willing : realisation in the 
Indian sense is thus admitted in the absolute spirit alone. So far as 
it is admitted, it is understood as cognitive, non-cognitive activity 
being only a stage or constituent function in it. So the object, so far 
as it is known as unknown in the psychic state, would be taken by the 
Hegelian to be known by the individual as eternally known by the 
Absolute, as what not only can but will be unfolded by the psychic, 
being eternally unfolded in the Absolute. It is this necessity that is 
denicd here as against the Hegelian: object as an ideality within the 
psychic is what can be unfolded but need not be. The psychic is 
more concrete than the object in the sense that it can freely put forth 
the lesser reality; and even as it does put forth, it does not lend to it 
its whole reality but keeps itself still as more concrete than the mani- 
fested object. Nature is still to the Psyche a magic or playful ap- 
pearance. 

55. The parting from the Hegelian view is suggested at a com- 
paratively late stage. But the view of the psychic as co-ordinate with 
the object and still more the view of it as comprehending the object 
as a real element have to be rejected at the very start. There is a 
tendency in certain recent developments of psychology to reject the 
ghostly psychic fact as co-ordinate with objective fact either in favour 
of an experience-unity of subject and object or in favour of the biolo- 
gical unity of the organism and its environment. We are not con- 


PSYCHIC FACT 49 


cerned with the latter for the present. The experience-unity of subject 
and object is supposed to be known in introspection. It is the psychic 
fact as implying the object as a real element, the presentation which is 
not not-object and from which the object is differentiated out by ‘inter- 
subjective intercourse’. Now the question is if this experience-unity 
is rightly claimed to be known by introspection, known so unambigu- 
ously that it can be proposed to be substituted for the current duality 
of subject and object. All that can be admitted is that we do not 
distinguish the presentation from the object as we distinguish the 
object from the presentation: we only cannot deny that the presen- 
tation is object though the object is other than presentation. The 
distinguishing of the object from its presentation is definite knowledge 
but the non-denial of the identity of presentation with its object does 
not amount to the knowledge of it. The presentation, in fact, cannot 
be known except as what the object is distinct from. By itself it is 
believed in introspection and it embodies belief in the object. Psychic 
fact as bound up with presentation cannot be asserted to include the 
object on the ground that presentation is not known as not-object or 
implies belief in the object. 

56. The ordinary view of the ghostly psychic fact as co-ordi- 
nate with objective fact ignores the experienced non-distinction of 
presentation from its object while the view of experience-unity un- 
warrantably asserts it as identity. Is the duality of psychic fact and 
objective fact secured any better by the recognition of the distinction 
between the ‘enjoying’ and the ‘contemplative’ modes of knowing ? 
For one thing, it is doubtful if the enjoying knowledge of the psychic 
fact should be called knowledge at all. Even if it be taken as know- 
ledge of it as objectively unknown, the difficulty is to relate the con- 
tent of it with the content of contemplative knowledge. The distinc- 
tion of objective fact from presentation or psychic fact may be taken 
to be itself an objective fact that is contemplatively known. But the 
distinction of psychic fact from the object, to be known, would have 
to be enjoyingly known. All that, however, can be said to be enjoyingly 
known is the psychic fact as distinct in itself. Its distinction from the 
object is only symbolically thought by an illegitimate extension of the 
reversible character of the relation of distinction within contemplative 
knowledge. It is not known but is only a symbolism for the felt dis- 
sociation or freedom of the psychic fact from the object. 


CHAPTER III 
BopiLy SUBJECTIVITY 


THE BODY AS PERCEIVED AND FELT 


57. Psychic fact has been taken to be fact of which we are 
introspectively aware as capable of existing apart from introspection. 
Introspection is the distinguishing of the presentation from its object, 
, the object being given as distinct from the presentation. In percep- 
tual knowledge, the object is not given as distinct from its presentation 
and hence perceptual knowledge is not at least directly the object 
of introspection and is not a psychic fact in this sense. We are, how- 
ever, aware of the subject even in the sub-psychic perceptual stage. 
The body as externally and internally perceived, as observed and felt 
may be regarded as the subject in relation to the environment and 
psychology has to start with this bodily subjectivity. 

58. The materialistic view that the subject is but the body is 
true in so far as the body represents a stage of being of the subject. 
But it ignores the unique singularity of one’s own body even as a per- 
ceived object. No merely objectivistic account can do justice to this 
singularity. The objectivity of other perceived objects is constituted 
by their position relative to the percipient’s body which itself, therefore, 
cannot be taken to be so constituted. To the percipient, his body is 
an object situated in space relatively to some other percipient’s body 
as imagined, being not perceived by himself in a space-position though 
not known, therefore, as non-spatial.. The percipient as in his body 
or as his body is, in this sense, dissociated from the external world, 
being what his perceived world is distinct from. At the same time 
he cannot help imagining himself as included in the world though it 
may be as a privileged object. 

59. One’s own body is only half-perceived, the rest being 
eked out by imagination. The unseen face of a solid object that is 
perceived is imagined by the percipient by imagining his own body 
being placed in a different position. To imagine the unseen half of 
one’s own body, however, the observer does not imagine his own body 
thus placed differently. He imagines another observing body, not his 
own, as thus placed. In this respect also his own perceived body is 
uniquely different from other perceived objects and has no place in 
the objective world that he conceives to be presentable to him as a 


THE BODY AS PERCEIVED AND FELT 51 


solipsistic observer. The world as a construction out of the views or 
perspectives of many observers cannot be simply identified, with the 
world constructed out of the views of the same observer in different 
positions. The former is not, indeed, known as other than the latter ; 
but it is a world organic to a subject that feels dissociated from his 
body, a warld therefore that has no perceivable position and involves 
a space that he as percipient cannot take to be objective to him. Thus 
even if the subject is taken as nothing but one’s own perceived body, 
it involves the knowledge of something unknown as such in the object, 
something that cannot be understood in terms of the perceptible ob- 
ject in the merely objectivistic attitude. It still implies the mystic 
awareness of dissociation from the object in which subjectivity con- 
sists. What is intended by the word /] cannot be characterised even 
in the lowest stage of subjectivity as simply this object. 

60. One’s own body is not only perceived from outside : one 
is immediately or sensuously aware of it also from within in what is 
called ‘feeling of the body’. This feeling is not, like the feeling of an 
object, a psychic fact from which the object known is distinguished. 
The bodily feeling is but the felt body which is not known to be other 
than the perceived body. Yet the perceived body is distinct from it 
so far as it is an ‘interior’ that is never perceived and cannot be ima- 
gined to be perceived from outside. Introspection, indeed, is some- 
times taken as nothing but sense-perception of the interior of the 
body. But the interior cannot be understood here as the interior 
that one may imagine oneself seeing. To say that it is the same 
spatial interior, only appearing indefinite, is to ignore the qualitative 
difference that is felt between the indefiniteness of a perceived posi- 
tion and the indefiniteness of a felt position, the position, for example, 
of a pain in the perceived body. Our knowledge of objective space 
may have been developed from the felt spread of the body or the 
felt location in it but we are always aware of such felt space as only 
partially defined into perceived space and, therefore, cannot assert 
the former to be nothing more than the latter. Perceived space, how- 
ever it may be extended and complicated by the geometric imagina- 
tion, can at best symbolise the uniquely felt space that sets the prob- 
lem of objective interpretation and is always in advance of the inter- 
pretation. It is even as the uniquely singular / is symbolised by the 
objectively singular this, being never adequately interpreted by it. 

61. Objective space that is indefinitely perceived is the same 
as the objective space that is definitely perceived and the definition 
does not involve any fresh objectification. But felt space is indefi- 


52 THE SUBJECT AS FREEDOM 


nite in the sense that it is more than the objective space it is defined 
into, more in the sense already explained in which the presentation 
of an object is more than the object. The felt interior of the body 
may thus be regarded as the prototype of the observable interior, 
not merely the latter as presented indefinitely but what can only be 
symbolised by the latter in its full definiteness. Definite objective 
space is related to felt space as the objective exterior is related to the 
objective interior, the latter relation being, in fact, the reflection of the 
former relation. 

62. The awareness of the body from within is, indeed, sensuous 
but it can hardly be called sense-perception. It is only not denied to 
be perception, though the perceived body as an object among objects 
is distinguished from the body as felt from within. The body is felt 
as extending from a vague interior to the outer surface that may be 
both felt and perceived. But the perception of the body stops at the 
surface and if it is extended by the imagination of the interior, the 
interior is still imagined as an external surface. The perceived and 
imagined body is always an exterior which may also be felt but the felt 
interior can never be imagined as perceived. Thus the felt body can- 
not be distinguished from the perceived body though the latter is distin- 
guished from the former. 

63. The relation between the felt body and the perceived body 
is similar to the relation of presentation and its object in non-percep- 
tual knowledge. There is, however, the difference that introspection 
into such knowledge is possible because the presentation is felt to be 
dissociated though not known to be distinct from its object while there 
is no introspection into body-feeling, as we are not aware of it as disso- 
ciated from the perceived body. Body-feeling and felt body are only 
verbally distinct ; and the awareness of the felt body is not the aware- 
ness of anything but the perceived body though the perceived body is 
distinguished from the felt body. As in the case of the perception of 
objects, there is no conscious duality of presentation and object in 
body-feeling and as in the case of non-perceptual knowledge, the per- 
ceptible object—here the body—is distinguished from something which 
however here is the felt body and not presentation and is not suspected 
like presentation as the possibility of anything other than the per- 
ceived body. Body-feeling may accordingly be regarded as not psychic 
fact but the potentiality of it. The problem of dissociating it from the 
objective body does not yet arise, as it arises in the case of psychic fact. 
But the possibility of dissociation is there, in the actualisation of which 
body-feeling may be conceived to be transformed into psychic fact. 


THE BODY AS PERCEIVED AND FELT 53 


Actually in body-feeling, we are not interested in withdrawing from the 
environment : it is only an interest derived from higher stages of sub- 
jectivity that suggests such withdrawal. 

64. We may consider body-feeling in relation to psychic fact 
and introspection into psychic fact on the one hand and to the per- 
ceived body and perceived object on the other. The perceived body 
is only potentially dissociated from the perceived object inasmuch as 
it is not merely like presentation not denied to be object but is posi- 
tively known as object. There is no explicit awareness of disso- 
ciation from the object but since position relative to the body, which 
is a constitutive character of the object, may not be analysed out in 
perception, the object is only half-distinguished from the body, the 
body being, therefore, only implicitly or potentially dissociated from it. 
The object, however, is fully distinguished from the felt body: the 
perceived object presents exterior surface only, its so-called interior 
being, as perceived or imagined to be perceived, still an exterior. Cor- 
responding to this full distinction from the felt interior, there is the 
actual but imperfect dissociation or freedom of the felt body from the 
perceived environment. The felt body, however, does not appear 
even imperfectly dissociated from the perceived body. It is only 
potentially dissociated because the perceived body is half-distinguish- 
ed from the felt body in the sense one who observes his body as ex- 
terior to him may not feel it. 

65. Again, the perceived body is fully distinguished from psy- 
chic fact—from the imagination of the body, for example—which 
however is imperfectly but consciously dissociated from it. There 
may be consciousness of the body as mine and at the same time as 
not other than myself, unlike the consciousness of the object which if 
felt as mine is felt as not me. The felt body is, however, only half- 
distinguished from psychic fact, since it is the feeling of the body 
on the one hand and is not actually dissociated from the perceived 
body on the other. Psychic fact accordingly is only potentially or 
implicitly and not actually or explicitly dissociated from the felt body. 
In introspection into psychic fact, this potential dissociation of the 
psychic fact from the felt body becomes imperfectly actual : there 
is no awareness of the psychic fact as not involving bodily feeling at 
all though bodily feeling as the felt body itself is other than the psy- 
chic fact. The felt body begins to get resolved into a bodiless psychic 
feeling in introspection and may be conceived to be fully resolved 
when introspection gets realised as assured knowledge. Meantime 
our ordinary introspection involves awareness of the felt body as 


«54 THE SUBJECT AS. FREEDOM 


not other than the perceived body from which, however, psychic fact 
is felt to be completely detached. It is in this sense only that intros- 
pection may be taken as the sense-perception of the bodily interior. 
Strictly speaking, it is the awareness of a psychic fact felt. as fully 
_ detached from the perceived body or the bodily exterior and half- 
detached from the felt bodily interior which also is half-detached 
from the bodily exterior. 

66. The facthood of the subjective is constituted by this feeling 
of detachment or freedom. The first hint of this freedom is reached 
in the feeling of the body. In the perception of the object, there 
need not be the knowledge of the object being distinct from the body. 
Developed perception may involve such knowledge but still the body 
is taken as perceived object. When the perceived body is distin- 
guished from the felt body, the exterior from the interior, we have 
an explicit feeling of distinction, detachment or freedom from the 
perceived object. Apart from the specific activity of realisation 
which subjectivity suggests, the first given feeling of freedom in body- 
feeling is what all freedom of higher grade involves and derives its 
meaning from. Subjectivity apart from spiritual discipline is rooted 
in body-feeling and is only imagined to be dissociable from it. 
Psychic fact is then fact because of the knowledge of object or the 
presentation that it involves, because of the consequent felt detach- 
ment of it from the perceived body and of its non-detachment from 
the felt body. In introspection, indeed, there is the initial detach- 
ment of psychic fact from the felt body but introspection itself is fact 
only as a fringe of some psychic fact which is undetached from the 
felt body. This initial detachment here is only imagined, for the 
felt body is not yet turned into a psychic feeling, introspection being 
only the faith that the detachment can be realised. The realisation 


of this freedom from the felt body is the pre-condition of all distinctive- 
ly spiritual activity. 


CHAPTER IV 


BopiLy SuBJEcTIviTy (Contd.) 
KNOWLEDGE OF ABSENCE AS A PRESENT FACT 


67. The perception of objective fact does not imply a dis- 
tinguishing of the object from the presentation of it, That there 
is a presentation here from which the object is distinct is not directly 
known. by introspection. Perception as a psychic fact is known only 
in introspection into non-perceptual knowledge. In memory, for 
example, there is the distinguishing of the past object from the 
presentation (image) of it and in introspection into memory, there is 
the further distinguishing of the past perceptual presentation of the 
object from the present image of it, the object being thus known as 
having been unconsciously distinct from the past presentation. The 
perceived object may, however, be directly distinguished from the felt 
body which, as has been pointed out, is like the perceived object 
undistinguished from presentation but yet involves a feeling of detach- 
ment from all object other than perceived body. The feeling of the 
body may accordingly be taken to be an implicate of developed 
perception, of the perception of the object as distinct from the felt 
body and to be only a fringe of perceptual knowledge. The knowledge 
of absence as a present fact that now comes up for discussion is 
similarly a fringe of object-perception of a higher grade, involving 
like all perception no distinction of the fact from the presentation 
of it. The absence of object that is immediately known as a present 
fact is just midway between the body felt to be present and the presenta- 
tion that is felt to be detached from present fact in non-perceptual 
knowledge. 

68. Objective fact may be said to be present as external, as 
internal and as absent. The felt body is objective fact in its internal 
aspect. An object may be also directly known to be now absent, 
to be ‘present as absent’ in this sense—a paradoxical phrase to be 
justified presently. All these three aspects may be said to be known 
in connexion with sense and involve no distinguishing from presenta~ 
tion. A present object as external may be distinguished from other 
present objects as external, from a present object as internal or from 
the present absence of itself. The feeling of the body is already a 
detachment from the external object though not from the body as 


56 THE SUBJECT AS FREEDOM 


external. The direct knowledge of the present absence of an object 
is a detachment not only from the object but also from the perceived 
body though not from the body as internally felt. The absence of an 
object, so far as it is located, is located like its presence in reference 
to the body but the reference is in opposite directions. The object 
as present is there away from my body. In the case of absence, the 
object being missed or unreached by my body is what my body is 
away from: the absence is where my body is not. Thus the body 
as external is distinguished from the object as absent and not the 
latter from the former. Corresponding to this distinction, there is 
the felt detachment from the body of the present absence of the object 
or of the object as now missed, the consciousness of the absence or 
the absent being thus removed from the space round the body. 

69. The sense-conditioned knowledge of an object being now 
absent is not to be confused with the memory, expectation or imagina- 
tion of the object. None of these need involve knowledge of its 
present absence. An object may be remembered, expected or 
imagined though it is now present : non-perceptual knowledge of it 
may co-exist with perceptual knowledge. There are cases, again, in 
which there is no distinct image of the absent object at all and where 
yet we may be aware of the perceived locus of the absence as empty 
or devoid of an indefinite something. A consciously imagined object 
as now absent or the absence of an object not consciously imagined 
that characterises a perceived locus as empty is known in connexion 
with sense and known, if not in perception, in a cognitive mode 
undissociated from perception. The cognition is a fringe either of 
the perception of the locus or of the perception of the body and is in 
either case undissociated from the feeling of the body. 

70. The cognition of an object as now absent may but need 
not involve the cognition of its absence as characterising a locus and 
the latter also may but need not involve the former. The two cogni- 
tions are, therefore, distinct and each as primary may involve the latter 
as secondary. A field, for example, was observed in the past with 
a tree standing on it, which might not have been particularly noticed 
at the time. The observer comes to the place when the tree has been 
removed and finds a new bare look about the place. He may not 
know that it is absence of the tree that makes the difference but he 
notices the difference, bareness or absence. To take another example, 
a person is looking for a book in a room but does not find it. He 
knows the book to be absent without being conscious of any empty 
look about the room and without, in fact, consciously referring the 


KNOWLEDGE OF ABSENCE AS A PRESENT FACT - 57 


absence to the room at all. The former example would be a case of 
cognition of the absence of an object (tree) and the latter of cognition 
of an object (book) being absent. Neither cognition here need imply 
the other and both are direct sense-conditioned cognitions of objective 
fact. Yet each may develop into the other cognition : what is absent 
may come to be realised as tree in the first example and the absence 
of the book may come to be realised in explicit reference to the room 
in the second. 

71. Should the primary and secondary cognitions in each case 
be called perception >? In the first case, the absence of the tree is 
known as a character of the locus, the perceived field where the trec 
stood. The tree may not be definitely remembered but if remembered 
it is recognised to be the specification of the absence that continues 
to be known, the place not ceasing to wear the bare look because of 
the definite memory. As the place is perceived, absence as a 
character of the place may also be claimed to be perceived. There 
is, however, a distinction between the sense in which absence is a 
character and that in which a quality like colour is a character of the 
place. The place in being percceived with the bareness or absence 
is, if not perceived, at least imagined as what need not have the 
character, being presented as with a new look or, in other words, as 
distinct from what it might be. But to perceive the place with a 
colour is not necessarily to imagine that it might be without it. The 
perceived locus of absence being imagined in the very perception 
of it as without the absence, the absence is only a floating adjective 
that unlike colour is felt to be dissociated from the locus. There is 
a suggestion of the absence being outside the space where the locus 
stands—the space round the body, of its being nowhere like an image, 
though it is believed to be objective and not psychic fact. The sugges- 
tion is not actual imagination of positionless objective fact but only 
the attempted symbolising of the feeling of detachment from objective 
space. The absence cannot be said to be not known as objective 
but it is implicitly felt to be dissociated from objective space. The 
perception of it as a character of the object in the feeling that it is not 
a character and with the conscious distinguishing of the object from 
it may be called aesthetic or imaginative perception to distinguish it 
from ordinary perception. 

72. In the second example, what is known in the first instance 
is not the absence of the book but the book as absent. The book 
is not found and the room where it is not found is not perceived, 
at least immediately, to have any empty look owing to the absence. 


58 THE SUBJECT AS FREEDOM 


The book as absent is immediately known as a present objective 
circumstance that is neither remembered nor merely imagined. The 
missing of the imagined book is a characteristic experience, implying 
a feeling of the body not reaching it, which is interpreted as the 
objective fact of the book being absent. The knowledge of this fact 
of the book as absent is with the conscious imagination of the book 
as found being distinct from it and implies the feeling of the present 
fact being outside objective space altogether. Such knowledge also 
may, therefore, be called aesthetic or imaginative perception. The 
difference from the previous case is that what is imaginatively distin- 
guished within the perception is not the perceived locus of the absence 
from the absence but the imagined object-as-present from the perceived 
object-as-absent. In neither case is the positive object distinguished 
from a presentation as in non-perceptual knowledge. It is distinguish- 
ed in both cases from the objective fact of absence or the absent and 
not from a psychic fact. This objective fact that is distinguished from 
may thus be said to be perceived. 


73. The primary cognitions of absence and the absent which 
are both perception may be followed by secondary cognitions. The 
perception of the absence of the tree in the first example may develop 
into the cognition of the tree as absent and the perception of the book 
as absent in the second example into the cognition of the absence of 
the book imagined explicitly as the book in the room. The interest 
may shift in the former case from the bare look of the locus to what 
was in it but is no longer existing and in the latter case from the book 
that is missed to the locus which might have been but is not with the 
object. Are these secondary cognitions also perception.? 


74, When after the perception of the absence of the tree as a 
character of the place, the tree as remembered is known to be now 
absent, there is no missing of a looked-for object like the missing of 
the book in the second example. If an object is looked for and not 
found, the object as it might be now, with presentness as its adjective, 
is perceived to be absent. Again, when absence is known as a 
character or adjective of a present locus, it is taken to be perceived. 
But when as in this case that object tree is known to be mow absent, 
the presentness is not adjective either to the object or to the locus 
but is only an adverbial mode of the adjective absent. What is con- 
sciously referred to as now is neither the object nor the locus but 
the absence only. That object is not now perceivable and the percep- 
tion of this place is irrelevant to the knowledge of the tree as absent. 


KNOWLEDGE OF ABSENCE AS A PRESENT FACT 59 


Such knowledge is not perception : there is no perception that is not 
or does not consciously imply apprehension of a concrete as present. 
75. The secondary cognition of that tree as now absent is 
not perception, though it is immediate and sense-conditioned cognition 
of the present. What is known to be now absent is known in the cons- 
ciousness of not perceiving it, with the belief that it would have been 
perceived had it been present. Not that it is, therefore, inferred to 
be absent : the consciousness of not perceiving what, it is inferred, 
would have been perceived is itself no inference and is at once the 
objective knowledge of the present fact of absence. Present absence 
by itself is then immediately known in connexion with sense and 
inference by what may be called conscious non-perception. This has 
to be recognised as a new mode of knowledge and is comparable with 
the pure perception of object, conceived as that to which the object 
is not given but before which it floats up like an image and is none- 
the-less believed. Conscious non-perception is, indeed, in connexion 
with sense but what is perceived by sense is irrelevant to its content. 
76. The secondary cognition in the second example is also a 
case of conscious non-perception. To make it more readily intelli- 
gible, we may vary the illustration and consider the absence of 
a beloved person instead of a book that is looked for in a room. 
When such a person is missed or imaginatively perceived as now 
absent, there may not be any relevant reference to the locus viz., the 
room. But one may come to imagine the room as with the person 
and then realise his absence in reference to this imagined content. 
To imagine an object in a perceived locus is a special form of ima- 
gination in which the present locus is viewed as characterising and 
not as characterised by the imagined content. The belief in the 
absence of the object as thus characterised by the locus, the absence 
here of the imagined room as sentimentally associated with the 
beloved person, is immediate knowledge but not perception. The 
absence is not taken to be fact in the present locus; and as the 
presentness of the absence is not the presentness of any concrete thing, 
it cannot be said to be perceived. The secondary cognition is 
conscious non-perception, the room that is perceived by sense being 
turned into the imagined character of location of the imagined person. 
77. The primary cognition of absence and the absent is 
imaginative perception and the secondary cognition of them is con- 
scious non-perception. The relation of these modes of cognition with 
the apprehension of the body has now to be brought out. The 
primary cognition is related to the perception of the body as the 


60 THE SUBJECT AS FREEDOM 


secondary cognition is related to the feeling of the body. The absence 
of the treg in the first example is where its locus is. The tree as 
absent, however, is not essentially referred to the locus, being felt in 
fact as outside the space round my body, as detached from reference 
to the perceived body. The positionlessness is felt and believed as 
a mode of my body-feeling which is dissociated from the object. The 
now or presentness of the absence is the now or the presentness of the 
body-feeling. But while the now of the body-feeling is not distin- 
guished from the then as remembered or the might be as imagined, 
being only an implicit now, the now of the absent tree in this case 
is so distinguished. The absent-now is felt dissociated from the 
perceived body as the felt body is not. Thus the felt body is im- 
perfectly distinct from the absent-now which, therefore, only appears 
to be a mode of the felt body, being undetached from it but really 
represents a stage higher and just falling short of the detached image. 
There is a similar relation of the primary and secondary cognitions 
in the second example to the perceived body and the felt body. 

78. In the imaginative perception of absence and the absent, 
there is no explitly felt dissociation from the position of the perceived 
body, which however is imperfectly distinguished from the imagined 
position of absence or of the absent. In conscious non-perception, 
there is the explicitly felt dissociation from the perceived body but 
not from the felt body, though the felt body has begun to be distin- 
guished from the fact of absence or the absent. The relation of the 
perceived body in the former case and of the felt body in the latter 
to the known absence is like the relation of the perceived body to 
the felt body. The perceived body is half-distinguished from the felt 
body which, however, is not felt to be dissociated from the perceived 
body. Absence imaginatively perceived is thus on a level with the 
felt body, both being felt undissociated from the perceived body which 
however is half-distinguished from them. Absence known by consci- 
ous non-perception is on a higher level, being felt half-dissociated 
from the perceived body which. however, is fully distinguished from 
it and undissociated from the felt body which is half-distinguished 
from it. 

79. Conscious non-perception then is a_ transitional stage 
between body-feeling and imagination with which psychic fact begins. 
It is the consciousness of presentness without space-position, the same 
as the presentness of the felt bodv but distinguished from such absence 
of the perceived object as is realised in imagination, memory or 
expectation as the might be, the past or the future. It is free from 


KNOWLEDGE OF ABSENCE AS A PRESENT FACT 6] 


space but not from the present and accordingly does not imply a 
presentation of the object as dissociated from the object. Psychic 
fact begins with the distinguishing of what the present is not. 
Conscious non-perception is the distinguishing of the present from the 
detached presentation and not reversely and may be taken as the 
immediate pre-condition of the felt detachment of the presentation 
from the present. Were one to start with object-perception as the 
actual standard of knowledge, the first clear hint of the subjective 
fact would be realised in the knowledge of absence through conscious 
non-perception. 


CHAPTER V 
PsycHIC SUBJECTIVITY 


THE IMAGE 


80. Psychology does not begin till the perceived object 1s 
distinguished from the half-perceived body. The body may not be 
felt as dissociated from the objective world but it is still realised as 
a uniquely central object round which the world is disposed. To 
those who would not go farther in psychology, introspection is only 
observation of the indefinite body-interior and psychic fact is only a 
bodily attitude, the beginning of the behaviour of an organism to the 
environment. Some, however, would go one step farther and admit 
the image as a unique fact, appearing as a quasi-object from which 
object including the body is distinguished. Psychology to them 
cannot ignore the image, even if it be only ancillary to bodily behaviour. 
The image may be functional in character as a reference to the object, 
the reference being ultimately a behaving mode ; but that it appears 
presented as a substantive something from which the object is distinct 
and exists in a sense in which the object does not exist cannot be 
denied. 

81. The meaning of facthood appears to change as we pass 
from the perceived object as fact to the image as fact. This is realised 
if we interpose between them the three entities so far discussed—the 
perceived body, the felt body and absence of object as known in 
conscious non-perception. Each later term in the series appears to 
be fact in a sense different from the term before it—the perceived 
body from the perceived object, the felt body from the perceived body 
and so on. Facthood as an abstraction has an unformed symbolic 
meaning : its actual meaning depends on the nature of the content 
that is taken as fact. Fact in general means only what is believed 
or asserted but what fact means as a predicate applied to a content 
apart from the subjective function of assertion is indeterminate. Its 
meaning depends on the form of knownness of the content, the 
knownness that is its constitutive character and is abstracted by the 
so-called psychological introspection. The object is object to us so 
far as it is given and not self-evident like I, so far as it is presented 
and believed as more than it is known, so far, in fact, as it is known 


THE IMAGE 63 


to be unknown. Knownness as an abstraction emerges only with 
this positive awareness of the unknown and has meaning only in 
reference to it. If the abstraction by itself has a meaning, it stands 
for an indeterminate which is not given nor yet is self-evidencing 
like the knowing I, being at best what is to be known. The concept 
of fact in general or knownness by itself is thus a problem in mean- 
ing and not an accomplished meaning. Meantime facthood is but a 
name for many grades or modes of fact which have no actual relation 
of similarity or point of similarity. We have accordingly to begin by 
accepting the different grades of fact as implying different meanings of 
facthood. 

82. A perceived object is necessarily a spatial object having a 
position relatively not only to other perceived objects but also to the 
percipient’s body. The perceived parts of his body are to him like 
outside objects situated relatively to some part of his body that he 
does not perceive nor even imagine himself perceiving but imagines 
only as perceivable (by another) and yet as continuous with the part 
that he perceives. His perceivable body as a whole is not perceived 
by him as situated relatively to the object. The perceived positional 
relation of one object to another is reversible but that of the object 
to the percipient’s body as a whole is not reversible. Position 
relatively to the percipient’s body is a character that constitutes the 
facthood of the perceived object, but his body as a perceivable fact is 
not constituted to his perception by position relative to the object 
though it is imagined by him as situated relatively to another spectator 
in a perceived objective position. This lack of perceived position 
is what distinguishes the facthood of one’s perceivable body from 
the facthood of the objects perceived by him. 

83. The imagined position of the perceived body is in objective 
space, space that is all exterior to the actual or imaginary percipient. 
Interior and exterior within objective space are understood relatively 
to two spectators: what the same actual spectator perceives is only 
the exterior. What he apprehends as interior is the felt space ; his 
felt position consists in withdrawal from objective space, though it 
is not known as other than the imagined position of the perceivable 
body. The body is still felt to have a position which objective position 
is not but which is not, therefore, known as other than objective posi- 
tion. The interiority of the felt body is what distinguishes its exis- 
tence from that of the perceived body. 

84. The absence of an object is immediately known as a pre- 
sent objective fact. Has its facthood any reference to space-position? 


64 THE SUBJECT AS FREEDOM 


In what we have called the aesthetic or imaginative perception of 
absence, the absence is taken to be where the thing absent is ima- 
gined to be. Now in imagining an object in a perceived position, 
the position is turned into an imagined character of the object. The 
position of the absence of the object is thus imagined though not 
imaginary. The position of the perceived body is also imagined 
and of both it may be said that they are not unperceived because 
imagined, being, in fact, perceived through the imagination. The differ- 
ence is that the body is half-perceived by sense while the absence 
is perceived wholly through imagination, Absence has a_ factual 
position only as the felt body is undetached from the perceiving 
body. The position of absence as distinguished from the absence 
itself, is like the perceivable body half-perceived through the imagi- 
nation : the locus is perceived by sense and it is also imagined as 
turned into a character of the imagined object. Perceived absence 
then is on a level with the felt body but its position is on the level of 
the perceived body. Such absence is undetached from its position as 
the felt body is undetached from the perceived body. 

85. Absence that is known by conscious non-perception is not 
referred to objective space. It is not known as with a position though 
it would be going too far to say that it is known as positionless. 
It is felt even as the body is felt, the belief in it being a bodily feel- 
ing of not feeling the object. Yet as the felt body is not detached 
from the perceived body and appears spatial as the mystic interior, 
absence in conscious non-perception is referred to this interior. It 
is as though the absent object was in the felt body. Yet the felt 
body is half-distinguished from it, just as the perceived body is half- 
distinguished from the felt body. Absence is here not known as with 
position while the felt body is known as with an unknown position 
from which objective space-position is distinct. There is the further 
distinction that the presentness of the absence is asserted explicitly 
while bodily feeling is only the implicit feeling of presentness. It is 
the explicit presentness that makes it possible for absence to be 
known as objective and yet without position. 

86. The image is known to be without position while absence 
in conscious non-perception is only not known with position. So, 
too, absence is known as present or now, while the image is not known 
as now. ‘The image has no space-position and it cannot be asserted 
to have a time-position, which, however, is not denied. To imagine 
an object is not necessarily to know it as now absent. We may 
imagine it while we perceive it e.g., when the object is our body and 


THE IMAGE 65 


we may perceive it wholly through imagination as in what has been 
called aesthetic perception. But we imagine the object also when 
we know it to be absent. In such a case we imperfectly distin- 
guish the object as now absent from the image of the object, which 
however is undissociated from the absent object and as such is not 
denied to be now but is not, therefore, asserted to be now. 

87. The ordinary perception of object is said to involve ima- 
gination but the image here is only inferred and cannot appear to 
introspection. In a perception like that of one’s own body, there is 
the direct consciousness of something in it as not sensed, from which 
the sensed portion of the body is distinguished but which itself is not 
distinguished from it. In what has been called aesthetic or imagi- 
native perception, not only is the sense-perceived locus of its object 
distinguished from it: the object as imaginatively perceived is dis- 
tinguished from itself as merely imagined though not conversely. In 
none of these cases is the image felt to be dissociated from the percept. 
In the knowledge of absence through conscious non-perception, the 
image of the absent object is felt to be dissociated from the felt 
body but not from the present absence. What is known to be 
Wholly distinct from the image at this stage is the object as present 
and not as absent. The knowledge of present absence is still a mode 
of bodily subjectivity; but in imagination as a free psychic fact, even 
the present absence is distinguished from the image; and so the 
image, though not explicitly dissociated from the presentness, is not 
known as with this character which is the last vestige of perceptible 
facthood. The image here appears with objective form but does 
not appear with objective position. 

88. The relation of the image and of psychic fact generally to 
objective time has been the subject of controversy. There is the 
current banality that psychic facts are only in time while objective 
facts are in both space and time. We have pointed out on the one 
hand that absence that is known in conscious non-perception is not 
known to be in space though it is objective and that the image pro- 
per on the other is not known to be in time. We cannot assert nor 
can we deny that such objective absence is in space and that the 
image is in time. The image is assertable as not in space, neither in 
perceptible space nor in felt space. It has, indeed, spatiality as a 
character or form ; .and it is even possible to imagine an object on 
a perceived locus, where, however, the image is not in space but has 
Space-position as an aesthetic expression. Thus there is a felt dis- 
sociation of the image from objective space and even from the felt 


5 


66 THE SUBJECT AS FREEDOM 


interior of the body. Since the absence known in conscious non- 
perception is not consciously dissociated from the felt body, it is 
only halfsdistinguished from the image, being not deniable as in 
space while the image is so deniable ; and thus the image is not felt 
dissociated from the present absence though it is potentially disso- 
ciated. 

89. This potential dissociation of the image from the now is 
realised in ‘thought’. In the examples of non-perception so far given 
it has been assumed that the object that is absent is imaged. But 
there may be cases where the absent object is only thought, as for 
example, when we say ‘no man is present here’: man in general is 
here thought and not imaged. The vague image of an individual 
man may float up but the absence that is known is the absence 
not of this man in particular but of all men. The image here as 
symbolising the thought may be said to be consciously dissociated 
from the presentness of the absence. Thus though the image need 
not be denied as now, it may be denied. We cannot assert that the 
image of the object now absent is now and we can in higher stages 
e.g., in the stage of image with thought definitely deny it. 

90. The lowest stage of psychic fact is represented by the 
image without thought, emerging in the conscious non-perception of 
the absent as such. Just as the perception of the object half-cons- 
ciously implies the perception of the body, this the feeling of the 
body and this again the conscious non-perception of the absent, so 
this last implies the image of the absent from which the absent as 
such is imperfectly distinguished. Attention here is primarily direc- 
ted to the objective absence but in distinguishing it we attend indirec- 
ly to the image of the object that is absent. As thus indirectly at- 
tended to, the image is not distinguished and appears without thought. 
There is no awareness yet of its being not objective : it appears as 
a ghostly object that does not consciously imply belief, much as the 
half-perceived body appears when an object is perceived to be there. 
The awareness of the image is still bound up with the perceiving 
attitude and is not introspective. The image is still consciously as 
though it were an object. It is like the illusion of the object persisting 
after correction, though it is only without belief and does not imply 
as in the case of illusion a conscious disbelief. It is only potentially 
psychical, being an object for possible introspection. 

91. The distinguishing of the presentation of an object from the 
object is introspection which does not amount to the knowledge of 
the presentation as a given distinct. The distinguishing of the object 


THE IMAGE 67 


from its presentation is, however, a phase of object-knowledge. The 
presentation as thus distinguished from is an indefinite quasi-object. 
It is felt dissociated from the object as having no position in objective 
space and except in its lowest phase as image is felt also as not in 
time. In the case of the image, there is only no consciousness of its 
being an event in time: it is not felt to be not in time. Conscious 
“ non-perception of an object implies, indeed, the conscious image of 
the object but what is believed to be present fact is the object as 
absent, as distinct from the image which is neither believed nor dis- 
believed to exist at the moment, In the thought of an objective fact, 
however, the meaning which is the presentation is not only not re- 
ferred to time : its existence in time is meaningless. 

92. In conscious non-perception of an object, its image is not 
directly attended to and there is no introspective distinguishing of it 
from the object as absent. When it is introspectively attended to, 
it changes its character; the image appears as imaging, as being 
formed though not as unformed, as functional without ceasing to be 
substantive. A presentation like meaning also appears functional 
under introspection but loses its substantive character. The completed 
meaning is turned into the meaning act and loses its ghostly objectivity. 
All psychic fact conceived in introspection to be outside introspection 
is the quasi-objective fact of presentation which, however—with the 
exception of the image—appears as a mere function or act under 
introspection. The ghostly psychic fact cannot accordingly be taken 
to be a mere illusion ; it is what introspection testifies to as existing 
consciously outside itself and the lowest form of it viz., the image is 
apprehended even in the objective attitude apart from the testimony 
of introspection. The view of psychic life as the self’s transaction with 
quasi-objective presentation is suggested by the image. A presentation 
like meaning that wholly melts into function under introspection does 
not stand before the self as object for its attention. 

93. The image appears under introspection as functional and 
substantive at the same time, as a form being formed. This forming 
or incomplete character of the image requires fuller consideration than 
it has received. There is a qualitative difference between the incom- 
pleteness of an image and the incompleteness of a perceived object, 
much like the difference between felt space and perceived space. The 
incompleteness of a percept is in reference to a fuller percept ; taken 
by itself, a percept is finished and definite and an indefinite and un- 
finished sense-appearance is not yet a percept. The sense-given can- 
not be incomplete in itself withant heino indefinita and isl -.-4 2-1 


68 THE SUBJECT AS FREEDOM 


ing short of a percept. The image, however, is incomplete not merely 
in comparison with a percept but in itself ; it could not, in fact, be 
complete without being a percept. There cannot be a finished form 
that is not believed as the form of a perceived object. The imagined 
form is always being formed without, however, being indefinite like the 
sense-given content which is being formed into a percept. It is de- 
finite because the consciousness of the forming is at once the conscious- 
ness of the form to be completed. The forming and the form appear 
to be seen together, as they are actually seen together in what has been 
called aesthetic or imaginative perception. The image under introspec- 
tion is, in fact, a standing process where the forming is not 
chronologically prior to the form and yet appears distinct from the 
form which is its interpretation. Under introspection accordingly the 
image appears as not in time while the image before introspection, 
as in the stage of conscious non-perception, is only not known to be 
in time. The consciousness of the finished form that interprets the 
forming is sometimes called idea. But the idea at this stage is not 
a separate presentation but only a fringe of the image. It is not disso- 
ciated from the image as forming, which, however, is distinguished 
from it. The idea as dissociated from the image would be the next 
psychic stage. 


CHAPTER VI 
PsycHIC SUBJECTIVITY 


THOUGHT 


94. The image under introspection appears as a forming form 
in which the finished form is evident in the forming process as its 
interpreting idea. The idea as dissociated from the image is idea 
of the object as not imaged and sought to be imaged. The object 
here appears indefinite and the imagining or forming that is started 
by the conscious want of the image is the process of defining it. 
This process which may be called the materialising of the dissociated 
idea is intrinsically incomplete and is cver to be completed. The 
undissociated idea of the previous stage is the complete form that 
as much appears to be seen as the incomplete forming. The disso- 
ciated idea thus implies the imaging process and the conscious want 
of the image. The want is here only partial but there may be idea 
of something in the object that cannot be defined or concreted into 
image at all. Such idea is thought proper that is definite in itself 
and is not defined in meaning but at best fixed or detained in the 
mind by the images it may still call up. The images here have a 
consciously metaphorical or symbolising value for the idea. 

95. Image or thought here is considered as presentation that 
embodies or at least does not exclude belief in the object. The mere 
image or the mere meaning, the object of which is disbelieved from 
the start is, as indicated before, no psychic fact at all. Now what 
in the object is believed specifically through imagination—viz., the 
form, though not posited in the space that is organic to the body, 1s 
still represented as spatial, appearing as though it were felt like the 
body. What is believed specifically through thought, however, does 
not thus appear to be intimately felt and is yet as definite as the 
imagined form. The dissociated idea lies midway between the definite 
form and the definite intelligible, being non-spatial in form but 
indefinite and only partially definable by an incomplete forming. It 
may be called pictorial thought to distinguish it from thought proper, 
the object of which is definitely presented as unpicturable meaning. 
Picturable metaphors and symbols may be used to fix the identity of 
such meaning and for purposes of easy communication but they do 
not help to define or elaborate it. 


70 THE SUBJECT AS FREEDOM 


96. The image lacks space-position but still appears spatial in 
form and temporal as forming or becoming and as such implies a 
belief in its possible objectivity. Thought as the awareness of the 
unimaginability of its specific content is the awareness of its objectivity 
being impossible and thus involves a complete detachment from 
objectivity. Thought is still about the object but it is of something 
about the object that is definitely unobjective. In lower stages and 
even in the stage of body-feeling, something unobjective in the object 
is also presented but it is not known explicitly to be unobjective, not 
completely denied as objective. It is completely denied in thought 
and if it is still said to be something in the object, it is understood to 
be what appeared as objective, what the object was not distinguished 
from in the lower stages. The thinkable universal or relation, for 
example, was presented as objective in the lower stages and the object 
was never sufficiently distinguished from that presentation. Even in 
the stage of pictorial thought or the dissociated idea, the universal 
appeared as a quasi-spatial whole and relation as a quasi-temporal 
transition. In non-pictorial thought, this conceit of their quasi- 
Objectivity is dropped, though the object continues to be referred to 
as what exists and is known without name and without relation. The 
universal and relation in the object are recognised, if not as thinking, 
as not distinguished from thinking, the object given as distinct being 
reduced to unrelated singulars or unique contents such as may be 
conceived to be ‘purely perceived’. As thus referring to the object, 
meaning is still objective though explicitly through thinking, being a 
presentation and not a free subjectivity. 

97. Non-pictorial thought which is definite independently of the 
image may be sought to be metaphorically or symbolically indicated 
by the image. Metaphor differs from symbol: the object that is 
thought is imagined as though it were the same as the metaphor but 
not as though it were the same as the symbol. Both are recognised 
to be other than the object thought; but while the metaphor is con- 
sciously employed as similar to the object, the symbol which is also 
remotely similar to the object in relational constitution is not employed 
as similar. The word is a symbol and not a metaphor for the object 
meant; the metaphor is only half-distinguished from the meaning 
while the symbol is fully distinguished. Thought in its higher grade 
is detained in the mind by the word and not by its figurative re- 
presentation. 

98. Thought as distinct from the forming image under 
introspection is a completed product and the thinking that does not 


THOUGHT 7{ 


amount to a complete thought is a misnomer and should only be called 
a trying to think. This complete thought is about an object and the 
object thought is quite definite, whatever indefiniteness or incomplete- 
ness there may be in the symbolic imaging of it. Thought is complete 
as dissociated altogether from time, not merely from time-position 
from which the image (at least under introspection) is also dis- 
sociated but also from the forming or ideal timing that characterises 
the image. It is complete in the sense of being eternal ; and spatial 
or temporal objectivity is distinguished from it. Still thought is about 
the object and as such should be called ‘presentation’. Its content is 
such as is necessarily characterised as what the object is distinct from, 
Thought is thus a psychic fact, having a facthood apart from 
introspection. Despite its eternity, it would be incorrect to speak of 
it as a pure subjective activity. Much of the mysticism in Kantio- 
Hegelian philosophy has sprung from the confusion of thought with 
pure subjective activity, of reason with the Spirit. Compared with the 
awareness of J, thought is objective and objective in its very dissocia- 
tion from objectivity. It has still to be characterised in reference to 
the object as what the object is not. 

99, That thought is a presentation comes out in the form of 
consciousness which we have called trying to think. Thought outside 
introspection is the accomplished meaning. The meaning stands in 
higher thought, at any rate, through the word. The word is quite 
distinct from the meaning but as being used, it is only half-distinguished 
from the meaning while the meaning is not dissociated at all from it 
within thought. The identity of the meaning with the word cannot 
be denied though it would be going too far to assert it. The identity 
is disturbed in the consciousness of missing the meaning of a word- 
combination of which the constituents have a meaning. The problem 
as to what a combination of significant words means, if it means 
anything, is an intelligible problem and so attained meaning is dis- 
tinguished from possible meaning. Attained meaning has accordingly 
a kind of being outside subjective activity and is a presentation in this 
sense. 

100. What, however, is this possible meaning, the missing of an 
actual meaning, the trying to think? The logical form of word- 
combination or syntactical connexion is a generality that has no actual 
meaning apart from the constituent words but cannot be denied to 
have a meaning when the word-combination has a meaning from 
which the meanings of the constituent words can be distinguished. 
The form of connexion here is not itself distinguished as an actual 


72 THE SUBJECT AS FREEDOM 


meaning, being only distinguished from. As itself distinguished, it 
is possible meaning ; and in the problem of finding the meaning of a 
word-combination, the possible meaning is what symbolises the lack 
of actual meaning. Within thought, the image or the word furnishes 
the symbolism but here the form of thought itself constitutes the 
symbol for the felt problem. The feeling of the problem with the 
unrejected active faith in its solubility is the trying to think which 
is beyond thought or meaning, beyond all presentation. 


CHAPTER VII 
SPIRITUAL SUBJECTIVITY 


FEELING 


101. Thought is still presented as meaning, as the unobjective 
something about the object, being characterisable only in reference 
to the object as what the object is not. The introspective awareness 
of meaning as distinct from the image is awareness of the explicitly 
unobjective. Feeling is also explicitly unobjective but it is not merely 
negative but positive as subjective fact without any reference to 
objective fact. The thought of object may accompany a feeling but 
it is recognised as only a symbolism for the feeling, as what no longer 
intends the object, being not consciousness of object as unknown but 
an avowedly over-definite representation of the merely unknown. The 
consciousness of the merely unknown as distinct from what is known 
as object that is also unknown is feeling. The consciousness may be 
called knowledge, such knowledge as has been sometimes supposed 
to constitute dreamless sleep. It is purely subjective in the sense that 
there is no conscious reference to object even in the way of dissocia- 
tion from it though not yet in the sense that the meanability or 
thinkability of its specific content is denied. Feeling is as much 
undissociated from its content ‘absence of knowledge’ as conscious 
non-perception is undissociated from the objective absence that is 
its content. In the trying to think, as in feeling, thought is distin- 
guished from the conscious absence of thought which itself is not 
distinguished from thought. While however in the trying, there is no 
belief in the unmeant as a distinct content, feeling involves such belief, 
much as perception involves belief in an object as distinct but not 
as distinct from perception. 

102. To introspection, the content of thought appears distinct 
from thought though it does not appear to be given as distinct. 
Feeling, so far as we are aware of thought as only symbolising it, may 
be said to have a content, an unthought or unmeant content which, 
however, appears to introspection as only distinct in itself and not as 
distinct from feeling. While again in the case of thought or other 
phychic fact, introspection seeks to distinguish it from its content, it 
seeks to distinguish the unmeant content of feeling from the feeling 


74 THE SUBJECT AS FREEDOM 


and not reversely, though the seeking to distinguish does not amount 
to the knowledge of distinction in any case. Because psychic fact is 
distinguished in introspection from its object! it is believed to exist 
also outside introspection. But as the feeling is not thus distinguished 
from its content, it cannot be believed to exist outside introspection 
as a merely conscious fact. Feeling is never outside introspection, 
just as perception is never within introspection. 

103. Introspection into feeling, however, is an awareness of the 
feeling as apparently distinct from the awareness. Introspection into 
psychic fact is a distinguishing of the fact which appeared undis- 
tinguished from itself, consciousness being implicitly self-consciousness 
in this sense. Introspection into feeling, however, is an identifying of 
the feeling which appeared to be outside introspection as a psychic 
fact illusorily bound up with a presentation and implies the annulment 
of this illusion. Feeling is bound up with thought and imagination, 
being the awareness of their detachment as presentation from their 
objects, corresponding to the known distinction of the objects from 
their presentation. In introspection into psychic fact, the felt detach- 
ment is symbolised as a thinkable distinction of the psychic fact from 
its object, though its merely symbolic character is not appreciated as 
such. In introspection into feeling, the distinction of feeling from 
its presentative content is appreciated as definitely not known but 
only felt and symbolised. The content as presented is recognised 
to be not ifs content. To distinguish a feeling from the meant content 
is to view the content as a mere symbolism. When thought views 
the image as its symbol, the symbol still stands as presentation though 
it is not meant. But when along with feeling, there is the awareness 
of meaning as its symbol, the symbol is not only not felt: its object- 
reference lapses altogether. The meaning loses its actuality and turns 
into the form of a possible meaning. Possible meaning is no presenta- 
tion, as the awareness ‘as though feeling meant something’ is no belief 
in it as fact. There may be a faith that some meaning of feeling will 
emerge but the faith is not a belief in what is, at least, partly meant 
actually. It may imply a trying to think which is not so much a doing 
as a wishing, being but the free self-expressive play of the feeling. 
When a presentation is reduced to mere play, there is a make-believe 
and no belief. Not that the faith must be there but the belief in the 
object must lapse. Feeling as detached from meaning is awareness 
of the meaning as its symbolism and may in this sense be taken as 
implicitly introspective, being never a merely conscious fact outside 
introspection. Explicit introspection into feeling means only out- 


FEELING 75 


growing the necessity of thus symbolising feeling by meaning and 
recognising that feeling does not mean anything but itself. 

104. The place of willing may be indicated here as co-ordinate 
with feeling. If feeling represents the complete dissociation from 
objectivity, willing means the free identification with objectivity. 
Throughout we have been tracing the movement of dissociation, begin- 
ning with the dissociation of the perceived body from the object. 
To knowledge, the object is there and the body here is its presupposi- 
tion ; and as knowledge deepens, there is a regress to prior pre- 
suppositions, the felt body etc., up to feeling or what we have called 
the knowledge of the merely unknown. Each presupposition persists 
undistinguished in a lower stage and hence feeling may be said to 
inform even the perceived object, though this is known only when 
feeling has been dissociated from thought. It is at this stage also 
that the identification in the lower stages is known to have been free 
in the sense of not being necessitated by the object. The playful self- 
expression of feeling in a meaning or thought as its symbol is the first 
conscious identification with a lower stage, self-objectification without 
the lapse of dissociation, the initial act of objective willing as distinct 
from spiritual willing. Willing starts as the aesthetic expression of 
feeling. The freedom from thought is as much a progress as a regress, 
as much a willing as a feeling. Regress and progress are two distinct 
movements in the lower stages, distinct because the object as known 
is there the starting point. With the cancellation of the objective 
attitude, there is the consciousness of being free, of being unrestricted 
by the object whether for withdrawal from it in feeling or for conquest 
over it in willing. 

105. Knowing means freedom both from blindness and from 
error, escape from the confusion of the object with the subject and 
from the identification of the subject with the object. As we have 
shown at many points, the distinguishing of the object from its 
presentation implies a half-detachment of the presentation from the 
object when a consciousness emerges of something in the object that 
is unknown, the presentation being however not denied to be object. 
The consciousness of the unknown is at the stage we have reached 
understood as feeling inwardness; and the consciousness of the 
presentation as a ghostly object, as what cannot be denied as object 
but cannot, therefore, be asserted as such is now interpreted as the 
objectifying or self-externalising function of the will. The so-called 
knowledge of the object thus appears to be a single function of in- 
wardising and objectifying, of regress and progress, of feeling and 


76 THE SUBJECT AS FREEDOM 


willing. The freedom or detachment implied in knowing means the 
outgrowing of the positive attitude of not knowing, of conscious 
entertainment of the unknown—which is feeling—and of conscious 
projection of objectivity—which is willing. Thus to the knowing 
attitude, feeling and willing appear as what are jointly outgrown and 
as what also symbolise the inwardness and reality of knowledge. 
106. The positive consciousness of detachment from meaning 
which is the last residuum of the object is feeling. Feeling is the 
knowledge of the purely unknown as such, the unknown that is not 
even meant. It is only symbolised as knowledge of the unknown, 
though the unknown being unmeant, the preposition of has no mean- 
ing and is recognised as a mere exigency of language. There is no 
distinguishing of the knowledge from its content : the knowledge stands 
by itself and is the awareness of its content as no content, as unmeant. 
The next stage would be the awareness of the content as unmeanable. 
In feeling there is still the demand for a symbolical meaning to be 
denied, a will to expression, the awareness of the absence of actual 
meaning and the non-denial of a possible meaning. That will to 
expression is a trying to think and there may come after the trial the 
consciousness of a failure to think and the consequent abandonment 
of the trial. Such consciousness of failure may be regarded as feeling 
that has purged itself from the persisting will to objectification, as the 
awareness not merely of the unknown but of the contradictory or 
unmeanable, of what is not imaginary but is given as false. It is 
feeling in the sense that it comes : if trying to think is still an activity, 
the consciousness of inability to think is what is borne in upon us. 
107. The consciousness of given falsity or objective illusion 
has to be distinguished from the consciousness of the imaginary. In 
the example of the illusory snake corrected into the perceived rope, 
the snake appears after correction to have been not merely a sport 
of the imagination like golden mountain but to have been believed as 
real. At the same time while the disbelief in golden mountain implies 
no uncertainty as to its being merely imagined, the present disbelief 
in the snake implies an uncertainty as to its having been perceived. 
What we are conscious of now is that it is as though it was perceived. 
So we say about a dreamed object—‘it is as though it was seen’. The 
snake, we say now, was believed and not merely imagined but not 
known. What is now remembered as having been believed and 
appears as though it was known was not, therefore, merely imagined. 
Belief in an object ideated, as a psychic fact existing outside introspec- 
tion, is presentation. The present awareness of an object as though 


FEELING 77 


it was known might be called appearance of presentation. The ap- 
pearance of presentation is a disbelieved possibility of object. It can- 
not, however, be taken as imaginary, for an imaginary thing does not 
appear presented (with belief) at all. The awareness of an imagined 
thing may not be a belief in the thing but is belief in the presentation. 
The awareness of an imaginary thing is disbelief in the thing and is 
no belief in the presentation. The awareness of a thing as illusory 
is not only disbelief in the thing but implies, at least, a positive doubt 
about its presentation. Disbelief in the imaginary thing may still be 
called knowledge, knowledge of the negation of all objective facthood. 
But disbelief in the illusory thing is not even knowledge of such nega- 
tion, being the consciousness of an indetermination which Is neither 
factual nor imaginary, neither presented with belief nor not presented 
at all. What being first presented with belief comes to be disbelieved 
cannot be asserted to be presented without belief : that it is presented 
cannot only be denied. Disbelief in the illusory object is not know- 
ledge of its falsity but the awareness of what cannot be asserted or 
denied to be true. When this ‘indescribable’ content is altogether re- 
jected, there is knowledge not of falsity but of the self. 

108. The indescribable is unmeanable and so there may be a 
consciousness of the unmeanable and not merely of the unmeant in 
feeling. This consciousness cannot be said to be not feeling, though 
there is no longer the belief in the possibility of symbolising it by a 
meaning. Introspection into the first stage of the feeling process 
means, as has been shown, not a distinguishing of the feeling from 
thought—for feeling does not exist except in being thus distinguished 
—but an identification of it, the positive assertion of the feeling being 
itself only, of freedom from thought constituting the very being of 
feeling. Such freedom is a positive being because there is no rejec- 
tion yet of possible thought or meaning. The awareness of the un- 
meanable then, as implying such rejection, is freedom from the being 
of feeling, though as the lapse of the trying to think comes as a result 
of such trying, it cannot be said to be not felt. Roughly then two 
stages of feeling can be distinguished—freedom from actual thought 
and freedom from possible thought, from the faith in a possible mean- 
ing, from the will to think. It is the persisting will to think that con- 
stitutes the being of feeling in the lower stage. Freedom from the 
will to think is thus feeling that has no being, possible feeling that 
yet is possible not to a will or trying but to feeling itself, being the 
feeling of self-negation as distinct from the lower feeling which is 
feeling of self-being. 


78 THE SUBJECT AS FREEDOM 


109, The feeling of not having a feeling is not an uncommon 
experience. The awareness of wanting a feeling—whether sense- 
enjoyment, aesthetic satisfaction or spiritual serenity—is itself a feel- 
ing. All desire involves a present feeling of not having a feeling, an 
awareness of the ‘inferiority’ of the anticipatory pleasure to the actual 
feeling that is to come. It is not simply one feeling due to the want 
of another feeling but the feeling of the want of its own being or 
actuality. Nor is it yet the disinterested awareness of the want, a 
detachment from it such as introspection would imply. It can only 
be characterised as the feeling of a feeling, with which are bound up 
interesting spiritual attitudes like sentimentalism on the one hand 
which confuses the felt want with the actual feeling that is wanted and 
the experience of the want on the other as a pain that miraculously 
ends in a fulfilment. 

110. This feeling of a feeling is not introspection but the stage 
prior to it, even as the trying to think is prior to feeling. It is the 
negative of which introspection is the positive equivalent—the self- 
negation of feeling or feeling detached from its being. Such detach- 
ment or self-negation is already the attitude of knowledge, knowledge 
of what is neither felt nor unfelt, of a negation that cannot be denied, 
of the indeterminate unmeanable or indescribable. Such knowledge 
may be regarded as introspection that yet has a being and is not 
denied to be the object of introspection. Introspection proper is not 
the object of further introspection. 

111. The nature of this pre-introspective knowledge may be 
intelligible through the analysis of a puzzle about the unmeanable. 
Unmeanable is itself a significant word and so the unmeanable, it may 
be said, is meant. The puzzle suggests a two-fold function of the 
significant word. Speaking as to the speaker has to be distinguished 
from speaking as to the hearer ; and to the speaker himself, the word 
being spoken has a function different from the word as already spoken. 
What the speaker means as unmeanable after having tried to mean 
may be to the hearer what he does not even try to mean. Again, while 
in speaking of the unmeanable, as in any act of speaking, the speaker 
only means without contemplating the meaning as accomplished, the 
word as spoken appears either to his or to the hearer’s contempla- 
tion to have an accomplished meaning. If the speaker does not 
contemplate it, the hearer (or he himself later) may contemplate it ; 
and if the speaker contemplates, the hearer may not. There is thus 
a difference between the meaning being coined out or being under- 
stood and the meaning as accomplished and contemplated. We are 


FEELING 79 
aware of the unmeanable in two stages, as the meant unmeanable and 
as the mere function of meaning or speaking. The knowledge im- 
plied in the former is of a contradiction while that implied in the latter 
is not of anything, being merely knowing. The feeling of feeling is 
the former kind of awareness while the latter is just introspection. 
Self-negation in feeling of feeling is still a felt being, existent know- 
ledge rather than the function of knowing. Introspection is complete 
dissociation from felt being and is the pure knowing function. 


CHAPTER VIII 


SPIRITUAL SUBJECTIVITY (Contd.) 


INTROSPECTION 


112. Introspection into a subjective fact means a distinguish- 
ing of it. There is no direct introspective awareness of perceptual 
knowledge. In non-perceptual knowledge, object is already distin- 
guished from presentation and the introspective awareness of such 
knowledge is the awareness of its distinction in itself with a feeling of 
its dissociation from the object. This feeling is symbolised as a think- 
able distinction from the object by a reversal of the known distinc- 
tion of the object from the presentation. Introspective distinguish- 
ing is only the knowledge of a subjective fact as distinct in itself, 
though in the case of subjective fact lower than feeling, it appears 
through such symbolised feeling of dissociation as the knowledge of 
the fact as distinct from the object. Feeling is nothing but this con- 
scious dissociation, as is realised when presentation in the attenuated 
form of meaning is known to be distinct from feeling. Introspection 
into feeling from which meaning is known to be distinct—feeling 
which is nothing but the conscious dissociation from the object— 
is the awareness of feeling being distinct in itself only and does not 
involve the further symbolism of being distinct from anything. Thus 
while the introspective awareness of a psychic fact is the awareness of 
its distinction from object and, therefore, of its distinction in itself also 
as existing apart from introspection as presentation, the introspective 
awareness of a feeling proper is the knowledge of its distinction in 
itself only and is the recognition of the distinction as being entirely 
through introspection. Such recognition may be called an identi- 
fication. 

113. Introspection into feeling is the recognition of the distinct 
being of the feeling as entirely through the introspection. It is just 
the function of meaning the feeling, of distinguishing, referring to or 
speaking of the feeling. Meaning as a function as distinct from the 
meant is intelligible only after the self-negation of feeling, feeling 
of wanting a feeling, the detachment of feeling from its being or the 
awareness of the meant unmeanable. To mean not merely the cons- 
cious absence but the conscious impossibility of meaning is the pure 
function of subjectivity, the function of introspection that is not objec- 


INTROSPECTION 81 


tive even in the form of the meant unmeanable. If the feeling of 
feeling is already a detachment from subjective being, it is as a con- 
tradiction, as a be-ént want of feeling. Introspection is a subjecti- 
vity that is detached both from being and from negation, being posi- 
tive as freedom. It is not simply like the meant unmeanable or the 
‘indescribable’ what is neither be-ént nor non-be-ent, a negation that 
cannot be asserted or denied. It is the positive of which the nega- 
tion is not even tried to be meant. The negation of the function of 
meaning is a gratuitous problem in meaning which there is no call 
to solve. Unlike the illusory object which is first presented and then 
reduced to the unmeanable, this negation is an imaginary problem in 
meaning which can, indeed, always be asked in logical sport but sug- 
gests no actual uncertainty about the introspective function. The 
imaginary problem is never ousted but never amounts to an uncer- 
‘tainty about any actual belief. Introspection is an actual believing 
which can only be sought to be impugned by the imaginary problem 
of conceiving its negation and is, therefore, never actually impugned. 
The content believed in introspection is, as will appear presently, 
capable of being impugned but not the believing itself. We speak only 
of introspective believing because a belief the object of which turns 
out false is no longer a belief in the object but is still a fact to in- 
trospective memory as the past believing in an unmeanable, as a con- 
tentless believing that is not other than the introspection. 

114. The old argument against absolute scepticism that it is 
doubting on the strength of believing is untenable if it is intended to 
exclude doubt about the object of belief. The object of belief is 
always impugnable though the grounds of the doubt must be actual 
or believed to constitute a relevant doubt. The argument, however, 
is valid if it intends to say that believing cannot be doubted. It will 
be presently apparent that not object only but every subjective fact 
that is introspectively believed, even though it be meant as unmean- 
able, is capable of being doubted. Believing then would not be fact 
at all, being not even meant as unmeanable. Nor is it, therefore, an 
illusion, for an illusion about the subjective has a place, as will be 
shown, beyond the introspection that we are now considering. 

115. Introspection is the function of believing or meaning which 
is not itself meant even as the unmeanable and is, therefore, not actu- 
ally doubtable. It is just the first person I, the speaker who is not an 
object to introspection but is simply the function of speaking. Intros- 
pection is not believing in the I : it is the I, the believing that is not 
fact at all but is not, therefore, illusory. As not believing even in the 


6 


82 THE SUBJECT AS FREEDOM 


meant unmeanable, it is not believing in anything distinguished from 
it and so may be loosely expressed as believing in itself. The cons- 
cious inadequacy of the expression is itself evidence of the believing 
being not believing in anything. 


116. Introspection as a conscious dissociation even from feel- 
ing that is distinct only through it is an annulment of the distinction— 
what we have called identification. Introspection into a psychic fact 
bound up with presentation reveals that its subjective facthood is 
nothing but the facthood of feeling. Such introspection appears to 
be a believing in a distinct because the distinctness of psychic fact is 
not immediately annulled by introspection, being reduced in the first 
instance to the distinctness of feeling. The direct unidentifiability of 
the psychic fact is what constitutes its apparently independent being ; 
and it is thus that the psychic fact is pronounced by introspectior 
itself as having a ghostly existence outside introspection. ‘That it 1s 
directly unidentifiable is due to the fact that it is never a complete 
detachment from the felt body and that accordingly psychic fact never 
appears to it as having only the facthood of feeling. But there is the 
conscious semi-detachment of feeling from the meanable psychic fact 
pointing to the possibility of complete detachment ; and there is the 
identifying introspection into feeling implying possible detachment 
from the being of feeling. This possible detachment from all distinct 
being is introspective awareness. Introspection is essentially the an- 


nulment of all distinct being, being self-identification or the conscious 
identity without being of the self. 


117. The self is taken by Kant as the thinking function. The 
thinking function is thinking of a thought or accomplished meaning 
and Kant does not deny that the self as an Idea of the Reason is an 
accomplished meaning. There is, however, the awareness not only of 
trying to think without any accomplished meaning but also of the 
impossibility of meaning. We can mean the unmeanable and thus 
the speaking or meaning function is more fundamental than thinking. 
In calling introspection the self, we not only bespeak the detachment 
of the self from thinking and feeling but also take it to be a believ- 
ing or self-identifying, the negation of which is not even a meant 
unmeanable and which, therefore, cannot be denied to be a self-know- 
ing. The introspective self is self-knowing, not as having the self as 
the object of knowledge but as denying the distinct being of feeling, 
as identifying it without denying its being and as having itself no deni- 
able being. 


INTROSPECTION 83 


118. The self is the first person I. The / is not unmeanable 
Nor is it meant—meant even as unmeanable. It is not unmeanable 
in the sense that it presents no problem in meaning at all and can 
be said to be neither meanable nor unmeanable. Meaning is the thin- 
nest presentation of the object, as existing apart from introspection. 
I has no meaning in this sense : it has not even the meaning of being 
unmeant or unmeanable, which feeling in its two stages may be sup- 
posed to have. The word / is used by the speaker not for what is 
distinct but for what is only being distinguished by him ; and it is not 
understood by the hearer to mean a distinct content. No two per- 
sons would use the word / of the same thing ; but the speaker and the 
hearer must be agreed about a meaning. Yet if a person understand 
me when I call myself 7, though he does not use the word himself 
about me, it is—it may be contended—-because of the meaning of the 
word. But in that case it would be a kind of general term meaning 
any speaker, in which sense, however, it is not used, not being applied 
to more than one thing at a time. The term, in fact, is not singular 
in the sense that different people use it of the same thing and not 
general in the sense that it is understood by any of the different things 
at a time. If a person using the word / is understood as referring 
to himself by another, it is not because the latter means the speaker 
by the word and would use the word to refer to the speaker. Thus 
it may be said that a speaker calling himself / is understood through 
the word but not through the meaning of the word. The word here 
has a meaning function but not a meaning: it is the expression of 
introspection or what may be called the /-function. 

119. Like the word unmeanable, the word / illustrates a use of 
language other than for purposes of thinking, the former being still 
the expression of an inability to think while the latter has not even 
this negative reference to thought. The meaning function of the word 
I is to the speaker his actual introspection but the understanding of 
the word by the hearer is indicative of a form of consciousness subtler 
than introspection. It is the awareness of how the speaker would 
introspect, awareness of a possible introspection. | 


CHAPTER IX , 
SPIRITUAL SUBJECTIVITY (Contd.) 


BEYOND INTROSPECTION 


120. The realisation of what a speaker means by the word 7 
ts the hearer’s awareness of a possible introspection. Such aware- 
ness is as much knowledge as actual introspection. The speaker calls 
himself J and may be understood by the hearer as you. As thus under- 
stood, the introspective self is individual, not an individual being— 
for introspection is not a subjective being like feeling—but the func- 
tion of addressing to another self. The speaker does not understand 
himself through the meaning of the word /: his introspection is through 
the word and not through its meaning and is less a self-knowing than 
a self-revealing, revealing to a possible understander of the word /. 
Yet as the addressing attitude is only implicit, it is to him accidental 
and posterior to his self-knowing. To the understanding self however, 
although he understands the speaker’s self-knowing because he is him- 
self self-knowing, his understanding of the other I is primary while his 
own self-knowing is accidental and secondary. The speaker knows 
himself in implicitly revealing to the hearer and the hearer knows the 
speaker in implicitly knowing himself. Neither self-knowing nor other- 
knowing is through thinking or the meaning of the word and both 
might be called ‘intuition’ in this negative sense. There are thus two 
cases—self-intuition with other-intuition implicit in it and other-in- 
tuition with self-intuition implicit in it. Both are actual knowledge 
implying the use other than the thinking use of a word like J, which 
is like a pointing gesture at once self-evidencing and self-evident. My 
self-consciousness is not the understanding of the meaning of the word 
I: the word only reveals it to another. His understanding of the word 
as referring to me is not the understanding of it in the sense he would 
use it himself. The word has no meaning either to him or to me and 
yet it stands like any other word for the same thing to both. This 
standing for is not only not meaning but not also mere symbolising. 
It is on the one hand revealing and on the other an accomplished 
revelation, at once self-evidencing and self-evident. The word may 
be said at once to symbolise and to be symbolised by my introspective 
self. The hearer takes it to symbolise myself but I, the speaker, 
symbolise it by myself or in a sense explained before, incarnate my- 


BEYOND INTROSPECTION 85: 


self in it. The reference of the word / varies with the user of it: its 
meaning function is through his self-consciousness, is symbolised by 
his meaning function which is what he is primarily aware of, the symbol 
being better known than what is symbolised by it. Because the word 
I is at once the symbol and the symbolised, it cannot be said to have 
simply the symbolising function. It is this characteristic value of a 
word other than the meaning value or merely symbolising value that 
indicates a grade of self-consciousness higher than our actual intros- 
pection. 

121. Actual introspection is implicitly social, being a speaking 
or addressing or self-evidencing to another possible introspection or 
self to which its conscious solitariness or self-identity is evident. The 
evidencing and the evidentness are actual to different selves, speaker 
or hearer. The evidentness as to the hearer is, however, only a possible 
evidentness to the speaker. Actual introspection is unrealised know- 
ledge because it is actually only self-evidencing to another and not 
self-evident to itself. One’s own self should be self-evident, should be 
intuited by oneself even as it is intuited by another. The introspection 
that is actually reached by the annulment of the alien character of 
feeling as subjective being is, as already shown, only a speaking, self- 
evidencing or self-revealing, a function in the Kantian sense though 
not thinking function, a kind of transcendental willing which is not 
known by the introspector but should be known as it is already known 
by another self. The self should be at once self-evidencing and self- 
evident but so far we have only the self as self-evidencing and evident 
to another. 

122. The other self is to the self-evidencing self a possible intros- 
pector whose intuition of the latter again is a possible intuition to the 
latter. It is because the actual introspector is thus aware of the pos- 
sible introspector that he can conceive a possible introspection of his 
own beyond his actual introspection ; and it is only as he is thus aware 
of a possibly intuited subjectivity that he can understand the possibility 
of a subjective illusion. The awareness of these possibles in oneself— 
possible knowledge and possible illusion of subjectivity-——indicates the 
necessity of a spiritual discipline of realisation, realisation of the know- 
ledge of the self already implied by introspection. 

123. Introspection into a possible or non-existent mental state is 
or involves understanding of a word meaning the mental state. To 
mean a mental state is not to think it : it is either to feel the want of 
it or to give it a distinction which it has not, which is like creating it. 
Where the mental state is not present, to mean it is to remember it, 


86 THE SUBJECT AS FREEDOM 


to want it or to dreamily wish it. All these are forms of awareness of 
a possible mental state and may be regarded as a stage of introspec- 
tion prior to the introspection into an actual mental state. If it is 
introspection, it cannot be said to be completely dissociated yet from 
subjective being and as such it is capable of being itself introspected 
into. There can be, for example, introspection into the conscious 
want of a feeling. 

124. The want of a feeling is an actual feeling and introspection 
into it, as into any feeling, means its identification with the introspec- 
tion. It does not, however, mean identification with itself of the feel- 
ing that is wanted. The introspector is not aware of such a feeling as 
his feeling : the possible feeling is an unappropriated feeling. The 
introspective awareness of an unappropriated subjective state is like 
the awareness of another self having it. To the introspector it is the 
awareness of what he himself might appropriate. There may be 
actual knowledge, as immediate as introspection and standing on a 
level with it, of another self and his subjective state. But as the in- 
trospector only imagines and does not know his own being, his aware- 
ness of his possible subjective state is not actual knowledge. Intros- 
pection into the awareness of a possible subjective state is thus possible 
or imaginary introspection. Such introspection is half-dissociated from 
the actually introspective self, half-dissociated in the sense that we 
only cannot deny it to be our introspection. It is, indeed, completely 
dissociated from the possible subjective state but not from the actual 
awareness of it. Complete dissociation from this actual awareness 1s 
reached when the content of it is a subjective state that is illusory and 
not merely absent or possible. 

125. There are illusions about the subjective just as there are 
illusions about the objective. A subjective state appears illusory to 
later introspection into the subjective state that supersedes it through, 
it may be, the effervescence of interest or other subtle subjective cause. 
But a simple form of subjective illusion may be presented in connexion 
with an objective illusion. When the objective presentation with which 
a psychic fact is bound up turns out to be illusory, there is at least 
a partial reduction of the psychic fact to illusion. In the example of 
the correction of the presentation of snake into the presentation of this 
rope, the fear as of that snake—that individual fear—is, as pointed out 
before, also felt to be, if not illusory, at least incapable of being 
asserted as a past fact. We cannot say that we feared that snake if we 
now know that the snake never was. Some feeling bound up with 
the bodily reaction was, indeed, felt but that feeling of fear or fear 


BEYOND INTROSPECTION 87 


of that snake was never felt. The specific character of the feeling 
bound up with the past belief in the snake cannot be said to have 
existed. Introspection now not only does not identify thar feeling 
with itself : it rejects it as what it cannot possibly appropriate. There 
is a doubt, if not a denial, of possible appropriation of it by any 
individual self, of its being knowable by any introspection and yet 
it is introspection itself that denies the possibility. 

126. Introspection is the awareness of a subjective fact as 
owing its facthood to itself and is in this sense the identification or 
appropriation of it. Such subjective fact may be itself the awareness 
of the absence or possibility of another subjective fact and introspec- 
tion into it is the awareness of this other fact as not actually appropriated 
but as possibly appropriated by another introspection. The subjec- 
tive fact introspected into may be again the awareness of the impos- 
sibility of a subjective mode previously taken to be fact. Introspec- 
tion here would be the awareness of this mode as beyond all possible 
introspective appropriation. One gets here the hint of an intros- 
pection that is not appropriative, of the appropriative function being 
accidental to the introspective self, of the distinctness or exclusiveness 
of J being an eliminable feature, of an intuitable self-identity that 
has not any subjective fact distinct from it to identify. Introspec- 
tion that is not appropriation would be self-intuition, the / that is 
evident to itself and not merely to another, that does not like the 
individual 7 create a distinct subjective mode by distinguishing to 
resume it by identifying and proclaim this resumption again by 
speaking in the first person to another possible person. The possi- 
bility of such a silent self-enjoying 7 is intelligible only because we 
ure aware of certain subjective modes previously appropriated as not 
only now unappropriated but as utterly unappropriable and as accord- 
ingly appearing only as though they were distinct. The absolute intuit- 
able self is only understood if the non-being of distinction is understood. 
Objective illusion is still a meant unmeanable, meant and therefore dis- 
tinguished. But subjective illusion is not even meant as unmeanable. 
Introspection too is an unmeant meaning function; it is not known as 
distinct nor is it primarily so much a distinguishing as an identifying 
so far as it is knowledge. It is, however, still a distinguishing in the act 
of self-revealing and therefore also a distinguishing from itself as pos- 
sible. The awareness of subjective illusion goes beyond introspection, 
being the explicit awareness of illusorily distinguising, of creating a 
distinction that is no fact at all. The non-being of distinction is finally 
understood here and hence too the conception of the absolute self. 


CHAPTER X 
THE SUBJECT AS FREEDOM 


127. The subject is understood as what intends by the word 
1, The subject that intends is other than the subject that understands, 
being self-evident as self-evidencing to another and not to itself. The 
intuited subject is not only revealed but revealing: it is directly known 
as self-expressing in the spoken word / without being meant by it. It 
does not, however, intuit itself, as the intuiting subject also does not 
reveal itself. There is no introspective awareness of being revealed or 
incarnated in the word J, of one’s freedom to self-expression as itself 
an evident fact. There is at best an imaginative demand for such aware- 
ness, for the realisation of the felt identification with the word (or the 
object) as presupposing dissociation from it, for the transformation of 
the felt freedom into the intuition of freedom. It is in introspection 
that we are aware of this demand for the consummation of the freedom 
that is felt in every grade of subjectivity in respect of the object pre- 
sented to it. The object appears alien to the subject up to the stage of 
thought. The feeling subject is free from the thought or meant content 
in so far as the latter is reduced to a symbolism. But it is still subject 
having being, subject that can still be object to introspection, being free 
but not freedom itself. The introspective subject is, indeed, free from 
this being or possible objectivity and is thus freedom itself but it is still 
a distinct individual though only unconsciously. It knows itself not as 
uself but as a distinct subject that is only possibly identical with itself. 
It is thus aware of a demand to know this subject as actually itself, to 
annul its possible distinction from itself and, therefore, also its actual 
distinctness through the word J. The demand is for the intuition of 
the subject as absolute freedom. 

128. The introspective self is aware of itself as the psychic self 
and the bodily self. At all stages it knows itself as to be known. It 
knows the bodily self indeed as known not only as object but also as 
definitely separated from other objects. But it does not know it like 
other objects as having a space-position and is aware of the demand to 
realise its positionless objectivity. The psychic self is also known as 
identified with objectivity as pure form or pure meaning but it is only 
felt as dissociated from the perceived body; and in introspection we are 
aware of the demand to realise this felt dissociation in knowledge. 


THE SUBJECT AS FREEDOM 89 


The introspective self is unaware of being objective to itself though it 
understands another self calling itself 7 and thus knows it as having 
objective distinctness, the distinctness of the word 1. As’ however, 
itself revealing through the word to another self, it is aware of itself 
as a possibly understood distinct entity. It knows itself not as known 
like the psychic or bodily self but as only to be known. As to bé 
known, it is understood as what is only symbolised as distinct like the 
word J and what would lose its distinctness in being actually known. 
The subject is understood as freedom that is real and is characterisable 
by no objective category, not even by the category of distinctness. As 
we do not in introspection cease to be the bodily self which alone is 
actually evident to us, the subject that is absolutely unobjective or is 
freedom itself is to us only a possibility to be realised. The idea of 
realising the subject arises only because we are actually identified with 
the body while we are introspectively aware of ourselves as not objec- 
tive and yet as definitely positive. Introspective awareness of oneself 
is awareness of the subject as not only not objective in the sense of 
being thought or meant but also as what cannot be said to have the 
being of feeling nor to be contradictory like the feeling of the want of 
a feeling nor even to be distinct like the subject to which it reveals 
itself. At the same time it is not awareness of a mere negation or of an 
indefinite. This definite positive cannot be said to be not known, though 
as actually undissociated from the object we cannot assert it to be 
known. We are only aware of not being dissociated, being disso- 
ciated to the extent implied by such awareness. Such implied dissocia- 
tion is possible freedom that is to be realised as evident. 


129. The consciousness of not being actually dissociated is pre- 
sent even in the stage of bodily subjectivity where alone actual dissocia- 
tion is known in some measure and not merely felt as in higher stages. 
It is Known, as has been pointed out, as the perceived separation in 
space of the body from the outside object, though there is a feeling still 
of one’s body not being perceived in a space-position, all position being 
relative to it. In higher stages, there is no knowledge of freedom from 
the object but only a feeling of it, the feeling so far as it falls short of 
knowledge being the implicit awareness of not being actually free from 
the object. The higher the stage of subjectivity, the less is the freedom 
felt to be achieved though the more assured is the faith in its achiev- 
ability. In the introspective stage, the feeling of achieved freedom 
lapses altogether, since it is here that the possibility of freedom is first 
definitely known. The faith in its achievability, however, is completely 


‘90 THE SUBJECT AS FREEDOM 


assured in this stage and takes the form of a conscious spiritual demand 
for the intuition of freedom as evident. 

130.‘ Three broad stages of subjectivity have been exhibited— 
the bodily, the psychical and the spiritual. In the bodily stage, three 
substages have been discussed—the body as externally perceived, the 
body as internally perceived or felt, and the absence of object known as 
a present fact. As externally perceived, the bodily subject 1s the 
centre of the perceived world but is not itself perceived as in it. As 
felt, it is definitely known to be not in this world though it is not known 
as not the externally perceived body. The subject that imaginatively 
perceives the absence of an object is also like the felt body not con- 
sciously dissociated from the perceived body but the subject that knows 
absence through conscious non-perception is consciously dissociated 
from it. He feels himself unlike the felt body as definitely without 
reference to space-position and as only the time-position—present or 
now, as distinct from the image of the absent object, which also is 
without this reference but is not consciously felt as now. 

131. The image of the object whose absence is known in con- 
scious non-perception marks the transition to the psychic stage. It 
appears as the object that is absent and is not yet felt to be dissociated 
from it. The psychic stage begins when attention is shifted from the 
objective fact of absence to the image. As attended to, the image 
appears as imaging or the forming of a form, the process and the pro- 
duct being presented at once. The consciousness of the form as evi- 
dent in the forming process and as a product that does not yet come 
in time after it is the idea as undissociated from the image. A later 
stage is the idea as dissociated from the image, or pictorial thought 
which wants to be imaged and is definite so far as it is imaged. Non- 
pictorial thought comes next, thought that is definite in itself and has 
properly no image though an image may serve as its metaphor or 
symbol. These grades of image and thought are the grades of pre- 
sentation which is explicitly felt to be dissociated from the object. 
Such dissociated presentation is known in introspection to have no 
space-position and is at least not known to have time-position. The 
image still appears, however, as though it had spatial form and to be 
forming as though it were a temporal process. Some trace of this quasi- 
temporal process may persist in thought but thought as a non-pictorial 
meaning is felt to be free from it and to be eternally complete. Still 
such meaning appears as though it were object, being introspectively 
believed like other psychical facts to exist outside introspection. Its 
presentational character is explicitly indicated by the consciousness of 


THE SUBJECT AS FREEDOM 9] 


the absence of accomplished meaning in what we have called trying to 
think which may be taken as pointing to the positive freedom from objec- 
tive meaning such as characterises the non-presentational or spiritual 
stage of subjectivity. 

132. The positive freedom from objectivity appears in the first 
instance as feeling. Feeling still seems to mean something but the 
meaning here so far ay it is formulated is avowedly a symbolism for it 
only. To introspection indeed, feeling appears to be object but not as 
what may exist outside introspection. Its alien character is to intros- 
pection only apparent, being distinct only through introspection and 
not capable of existing outside introspection except as illusorily bound 
up with a presentation. The feeling subject has a being to introspec- 
tion so that it is free and is not freedom itself. The next stage is the 
feeling of wanting a feeling, which is, in fact, a felt contradiction or self- 
negation that still appears distinct from the introspection into it. The 
introspecting subject, however, is not introspected into and is self-reveal- 
ing through the word /. It is aware of being revealed or evident not 
to itself but to the subject addressed and therefore of being possibly 
revealed to itself also. As thus only possibly evident to itself, it is 
unappropriated by itself while as introspecting, it is aware of address- 
ing a subject and of being dissociated from it by the very fact of address- 
ing. It thus feels being distinct but does not know itself as distinct. 
It 1s aware of the subject as possibly free from distinctness, as its very 
self but not as exclusively its own. 

133. I am introspectively conscious of my body as subject but 
not as not mine or the appropriated. 1 am conscious of a psychic fact 
as not mine, as subject that is not, however, not me as the known. As, 
however, I speak of / in introspection, I intend what before I spoke was 
not me but not what was not a distinct 7. There is no introspection 
into introspection but just as perception is known indirectly in intro- 
spection into some other subjective state like memory, so introspec- 
tion is known indirectly in introspection into feeling. Feeling appears 
to introspection as subject that has no reference to object, as I but 
still as I distinct from I, as the be-ént I illusorily distinct from the 
introspective I. Introspection into the feeling I then is awareness of 
the introspecting 1 as not distinguished but as only distinguished from, 
as that from which being and non-being are both distinguished, as that 
which cannot be denied to be distinct in itself but of which such dis- 
tinction is not known. 

134. The apprehension of I as not even distinct in itself is indi- 
cated by the consciousness of subjective illusion, of a mode of sub- 


92 THE SUBJECT AS FREEDOM 


jectivity that is not only unappropriated but unappropriable. There is 
occasion to correct the conceit not only of my body and of me as a 
presentation, not only of I as felt being but also of I as an actual distinct 
introspector. The introspecting self that I am indirectly aware of in 
introspection into feeling appears to be an actual self. In introspection 
into the feeling of wanting a feeling it turns out to be only a possible 
self that is still distinct as an introspector. But there may be the con- 
sciousness of a feeling being illusorily wanted: I may, for example, 
recognise not only that I am not religious but also that even my hanker- 
ing after religion is not real but only a sentimental make-believe. Such 
recognition would be the awareness not only of an unappropriated but 
of an unappropriable religious aspiration, of the self that only appears 
as I aspiring and is not it, is not an actual introspector and not even a 
possible introspector. 

135. Iam never positively conscious of my present individuality, 
being conscious of it only as what is or can be outgrown, only as I feel 
freeing myself from it and am free to the extent implied by such feeling. 
I do not know myself as free but I conceive that I can be free succes- 
sively as body from the perceived object, as presentation from the body, 
as feeling from presentation and as introspective function from feel- 
ing. I am not introspectively aware of my actual introspective indivi- 
duality but I am aware in my introspection into feeling that the self from 
which the feeling is distinguished may not actually introspect and may 
not even possibly introspect, that individual as it is as introspecting— 
individual or distinct freedom without being, it may be free even from 
this distinctness, may be freedom itself that is de-individualised but not 
therefore indefinite—absolute freedom that is to be evident. 


THE CONCEPT OF PHILOSOPHY 


ANALYSIS 


J. ORIENTATION TO KANT (1-5) 


According to Kant, the self is not knowable but is thinkable; but 
according to the view presented here, the self is not thinkable, though 
not therefore utterly unknowable. Kant’s ‘Idea of Reason’ is not 
‘thought’ in the literal sense: it is only the verbal form of thought as a 
symbol of an unthinkable reality. The self is knowable without thinking 
and has to be so known. It may be a moral postulate but it is formu- 
lated for the contemplation of it as a truth to be known. This contem- 
plation is the process of reaching the truth without thinking. What 
applies to the self applies mutatis mutandis to other metaphysical enti- 


ties. Philosophy is then not only not actual knowledge: it is not even 
literal thought. 


II. GRADES OF THEORETIC CONSCIOUSNESS (6-18) 


(6) Philosophy presents beliefs that are speakable. To speak is 
to formulate a belief and it is the understanding of what can be spoken 
that constitutes the theoretic consciousness. (7) Such understanding 
may not be knowledge, but it involves belief in something as known or 
to be known. (8) All forms of theoretic consciousness as involving the 
understanding of a speakable are sometimes called ‘thought’. Four 
grades of thought may be distinguished: (a) empirical thought which 
involves reference to an object perceived or imagined to be perceived; 
(b) pure objective thought which has reference to an object but not 
necessarily to a perceived object; (c) spiritual thought which has no 
reference to any object and is subjective; (d) transcendental thought 
which is neither objective nor subjective. The content of (a) is ‘fact’, 
of (b) the ‘self-subsistent’, of (c) ‘reality’ and of (d) ‘truth’. 
Science deals with (a), the other three being the subject-matter of 
philosophy. (9) The grades of thought are really grades of speaking. 
Speakability is a contingent character of the content of scientific thought, 
but it is a necessary character of philosophic thought. (10) (b), (c) 
or (d) is not assertable as fact. Belief in it may indeed be expressed 
in the form of a judgment, but the form would be only symbolic. 
In a real judgment about a ‘fact’, the predicate amplifies or expli- 
cates the meaning of a subject that is already believed. But in the 
apparent judgment concerning the other three contents, the subject 


-96 THE CONCEPT OF PHILOSOPHY 


is believed as a self-evident elaboration of the predicate that is already 
believed to be self-evident. 

(11-15) Philosophy is such self-evident elaboration of the 
self-evident which is spoken but not spoken of. There are three forms 
of this self-evident according as it is spoken in the objective, the sub- 
jective and the transcendental attitudes. The objective self-evident is 
spoken as the apparent judgment “the relation of A and B is”, where 
‘is’ means an objective content that is self-subsistent and where the 
objective attitude is still retained. The subjective self-evident is spoken 
as “I am”, where ‘am’ means something that is subjectively ‘enjoyed’. 
Here the objective attitude is explicitly dropped and the content is 
only spoken as though it were objectively contemplated. In ‘I am’ the 
predicate is a symbol of a literally spoken subject. The transcenden- 
tal self-evident is spoken as “the absolute self is”. But unlike the 
above two cases of the self-evident it is not even literally spoken. Still 
it is not meaningless and it symbolises ‘truth’ i.e., what is believed 
and is not literally speakable. 

(16-17) The s€lf-subsistent entity meant by ‘object is’ de- 
mands to be known in absorbed contemplation or intuited as simply 
‘object. The real ‘I?’ demands to be known without the objective intui- 
tive attitude i.e., in pure enjoyment. In these two cases there is no 
demand to know the content without the speaking attitude. Trans- 
cendental consciousness starts by regarding all speaking as only symboli- 
sing and is accordingly conceived as completed when this symbolising 
speech is dispensed with. (18) We have three grades of philosophy 
corresponding to the three attitudes, viz., philosophy of the object, 
philosophy of the subject and philosophy of truth. 

WI. Science AND METaPHysics (19-24) 


(19) Both science and the first grade of philosophy deal with the 
object. But object as discussed in philosophy is believed to be self- 
subsistent. (20) Science has no interest to formulate the concept of 
the self-subsistent object and it apparently believes that the object must 
be knowable or usable. To it the object is just what is known and 
though it may be unknown, there is no question of its being unknow- 
able. (21) The implicit belief in the necessary knowability and 
usability of the object is, at least, questioned in philosophy. It is this 
spiritual attitude of science towards the object that suggests the need for 
a speculative theory of the object. The concept of the self-subsistent 
object is the first corrective that philosophy offers of the predatory out- 
ook of the scientific intellect. (22) The problem of piecing together 


THE CONCEPT OF PHILOSOPHY 97 


the results of the sciences is wrongly taken to be a philosophical one: 
wrongly, because the expected synthesis can be accomplished only by 
the employment of the distinctive technique and methods of science. 
A world-view of this kind can at best be an aesthetic view. (23) The 
so-called philosophy of evolution as the significant story of cosmic evo- 
Jution is neither science nor philosophy but only a piece of imaginative 
literature. (24) The so-called philosophy of science as the formula- 
tion of the postulates or the structural concepts of science ignores the 
impassable gulf between fact and the self-subsistent. 


IV. PHILOSOPHY OF THE OsjecT (25-31) 


(25) That object is called ‘fact’ in which the reference to the sub- 
ject or the speaking function is not necessary. This fact is dealt with in 
science. The object that has necessary reference to the subject is called 
the self-subsistent and is dealt with in philosophy. (26) ‘Objectivity’ 
which is common to these two objects is itself no fact, being only the 
self-subsistent form that is elaborated in Logic. Logic is thus no 
science but only a branch of the philosophy of the object. The pure 
object of which Logic is the form is the metaphysical object. Logic and 
metaphysics are thus the two branches of the philosophy of the object. 
((27) The concept of the object is first reached by contrast with the 
subject as the self-evident content of spiritual consciousness. Thus 
object is understood as self-subsistent before fact 1s understood as 
object. Logic in this sense presupposes metaphysics. (28) Meta- 
physics involves the objective attitude and is philosophy of the object. 
There is no metaphysic of the subject. The rationale of any division 
of metaphysical contents, e.g., into matter, life and mind is to be found 
in the introspected distinction within spiritual experience. (29) The 
characteristic abstractions of metaphysics are symbolic meanings which 
derive their whole value from spiritual experiences that they symbolise. 
Metaphysical beliefs are not reached by inference and metaphysical 
reasoning is only the systematic exposition of symbolic concepts. 
(30) The spoken fact and the spoken self-subsistent agree in having 
certain unavoidable speech-created forms. Logic presents a system of 
these unavoidable forms. And since Logic presupposes metaphysics 
which presents alternative theories, there may be alternative systems of 
Logic. Apparently, every metaphysical system has its distinctive 
Logic. (31) The contrast between Logic and Metaphysics suggests the 
distinction between the self-subsistent and the real. 


7 


4 


98 THE CONCEPT OF PHILOSOPHY 


VY. PHILOSOPHY OF THE Spirit (32-37) 


(32)*The suggested distinction between  self-subsistence and 
reality is verified in the ‘enjoying’ consciousness of a content (viz., I) as 
symbolised by a ‘contemplated’ meaning (viz., ‘am’ in ‘I am’). This. 
‘enjoying’ understanding is what should be meant by ‘introspection’. 
Its content is not understood as fact nor even as the  self-subsistent 
object. It is understood as what object is not, as the speaking sub- 
jectivity. (33) Introspection, in the proper sense of the term, is to 
speak in the first person—actually or ideally—with the consciousness 
of the ‘I’ as what the object is not. When such speaking involves the 
consciousness of being what is spoken, it may be called spiritual intros- 
pection. (34) In spiritual introspection, the subject ‘I’ is never 
enjoyed by itself. It is always enjoyed first (a) as unaccountably 
embodied, next (b) as having personal relation to other selves and 
lastly (c) as having identity with the over-personal self. The study of 
all contents enjoyed in explicit reference to the subject ‘I’ may be called’ 
the philosophy of the spirit. (35) In (a) the object is conceived not 
as self-subsistent but only as a shadow or symbol of the ‘I’. In (b) ‘T 
and the other person are each not the other and each contradictorily the 
symbol of the other. In (c) there is the consciousness of the over- 
personal reality as symbolised by ‘I’: this conscious symbolising is 
consciously being nought and is the soul of religious experience. 
(36) Religious experience is consciousness of being and, as simple, 
it admits of no variation within itself. There is, however, an infinite 
plurality of unique religious experiences and the Hegelian notion of a 
single and exclusive gradation of religions is unacceptable. (37) The: 
theoretic form of a religious system is a philosophy of religion. Every 
system of religious philosophy has its distinctive theory of the spirit, 


Metaphysic and Logic. All philosophy is systematic symbolism and 
symbolism necessarily admits of alternatives. 


VI. PHiLosopHy oF TRUTH (38-41) 


(38) There is a theoretic consciousness of ‘I am nought’. But 
the denial of the ‘Il’ is possible because we already believe that the abso- 
lute is. Reality as apprehended in religion is expressed literally in so 
far as it is expressed as a self. The positive character of the Absolute, 
however, is expressible only by the negation of the ‘I’ and, as such, is 
not literally expressible at all. If then it is said that the Absolute is, 
the ‘is’ means not reality but truth. (39) Truth is believed as inde- 
pendent of speaking, as self-revealing. As a positive to which even 


THE CONCEPT OF PHILOSOPHY 99 


the ‘I’ is nought in itself, it is nothing to be distinguished from and is, 
in this sense, absolute. It is, however, symbolically spoken, and as 
such it has to be believed as distinct. If, then, truth as absolute is 
distinguished, it can only be distinct from itself. There is, however, no 
necessity in this self-distinction. The absolute may be truth, or it may 
be freedom or it may be value. There is no sense in speaking of the 
absolute as the unity of truth, freedom and value. It is each of them. 
(40) This triple Absolute is the prototype of the three subjective func- 
tions—knowing, willing and feeling-—which are elaborated not in the 
introspective but in the transcendental consciousness. (41) The theory 
of truth is the theory of the other two absolutes also, but it recognises 
the possibility of elaborating a primary theory of each of them in 
reference to the other absolutes. 


THE CONCEPT OF PHILOSOPHY 


1. An explication of the concept of philosophy appears to me 
more important than the discussion of any specific problem of philoso- 
phy. The possibility of philosophy as a body of knowledge distinct 
from science is nowadays called in question. I may indicate my general 
position by stating wherein I differ from the Kantian view of the sub- 
ject. 


I. ORIENTATION TO KANT 


2. With.regard to the knowability of the self as a metaphysical 
entity, Kant holds that the self is a necessity of thought and is the 
object of moral faith, but is not in itself knowable. My position is, on 
the one hand, that the self is unthinkable and on the other that while 
actually it is not known and is only an object of faith, though not 
necessarily only of moral faith, we have to admit the possibility of 
knowing it without thinking, there being a demand, alternative with 
other spiritual demands, to realise such knowledge. This is practically 
reopening the entire epistemological question of the meaning of thought 
and knowledge. 

3. In taking the self to be unthinkable, I understand Kant’s Idea 
of the Reason to be not only not knowledge, but to be not even thought 
in the literal sense. The so-called extension of thought beyond experi- 
ence and the possibility of experience means to me only the use of the 
verbal form of thought as a symbol of an unthinkable reality, such sym- 
bolising use not being thinking. I go further and hold that a form of 
thought as understood by itself in logic and apart from its symbolising 
use is not literally thought. Some present-day positivists who deny not 
only metaphysical knowing, but also metaphysical thinking, would not 
go so far as to deny logic itself to be a body of thought. They rely, in 
fact, on logic which they take to be pure thinking, in order to deny 
metaphysical thinking. I take logic to be a philosophical and not a 
scientific subject: the logical forms are shadows of metaphysical sym- 
bolisms and are as such themselves to be understood as symbolisms. 

4. On the negative side then I go much further than Kant. On 
the positive side, however, I would tone down his agnosticism. That 
the self is believed in and is yet actually unknown is itself to me ground 
for holding that it is knowable without thinking and has to be so 
known. The self or freedom is takén to be a moral postulate, but why 


THE CONCEPT OF PHILOSOPHY 101 


is a moral postulate formulated at all? Neither morality nor meta- 
physical theory gains anything by the formulation in theoretic form. A 
moral postulate is not simply an Idea of the Reason, nor is it a con- 
struct of the aesthetic imagination. It appears to me to be formulated 
for the contemplation of it not as a moral good or as an enjoyable value 
but as a truth to be known. Such contemplation cannot be a spiritual 
luxury or make-believe, but must have behind it the faith that it is just 
the process of reaching the truth without thinking. It is not indeed a 
duty to contemplate, but the contemplation being already there, it 
demands fulfilment in knowledge. The contemplation of the self as 
truth may start from consciousness other than the moral, nor need 
moral consciousness develop into it. A distinctively spiritual activity 
comes spontaneously and has no necessary origin. The contemplation 
of the self as truth demands fulfilment in knowledge only by one in 
whom this activity has already started. It is an absolute demand co- 
ordinate with the other absolute demands. 


5. What applies to the self applies with necessary alterations to 
other metaphysical entities. Metaphysics, or more generally, philoso- 
phy including logic and epistemology, is not only not actual knowledge, 
but is not even literal thought; and yet its contents are contemplated as 
true in the faith that it is only by such contemplation that the Absolute 
can be known. 


II. GRADES OF THEORETIC CONSCIOUSNESS 


' 6. Whether philosophy is knowledge or embodies literal thinking 
may be open to dispute. But in any case it presents beliefs that are 
speakable or systematically communicable and is like science an expres- 
sion of the theoretic consciousness. Theoretic consciousness at its 
minimum is the understanding of a speakable. What is spoken must 
be in the first instance believed. What is disbelieved must be, to start 
with, a believed content. The meaning of a sportive combination of 
words like the “hare’s horn” or “square circle” is only not believed 
and cannot even be said to be disbelieved. Nor is such combination 
said to be spoken except as an example of what is not spoken. To 
speak is to formulate a belief. Even imperative or exclamatory speech 
expresses some kind of belief of the speaker, though the belief is not 
primarily intended to be communicated. A lie which is not believed 
by the speaker is not felt by him to be informatively spoken, being felt 
to be spoken only as incorporated in the implied prefix of all speech, 
viz., the imperative “believe me.” It is believed content that is spoken 


102 THE CONCEPT OF PHILOSOPHY 


and it is the understanding of what can be spoken that constitutes the 
theoretic consciousness. 

7. Such understanding may not be knowledge, but it involves 
belief in something as known or to be known. The belief may not be 
explicitly an awareness of the actual or possible knownness, but it 
can always be made explicit as such. The belief in knowledge may be 
implied in the explicit awareness of unknownness. The agnostic or 
the anti-rationalist or the absolute sceptic is primarily conscious of un- 
knownness, but to be conscious of unknownness is to be conscious of 
knownness also. They may not be said to know the unknown as such 
but they believe it and impliedly believe also in something as known, 
even though it may be speakable only as unspeakable. They are said 
to present a philosophy so far as they express the theoretic conscious- 
ness which implies belief in something as known. 

8. All forms of theoretic consciousness as involving the under- 
standing of a speakable are sometimes called ‘thought’. Of these, as 
will appear presently, only one form is literal thought, the others being 
symbolistic thought which should not be called ‘thought’ at all. Four 
forms or grades of thought may be distinguished. They may be roughly 
called empirical thought, pure objective thought, spiritual thought and 
transcendental thought. Empirical thought is the theoretic conscious- 
ness of a content involving reference to an object that is perceived or 
imagined to be perceived, such reference being part of the meaning of 
the content. There are contents that are objective but have no neces- 
sary reference to sense-perception and the consciousness of such con- 
tents may be called pure objective or contemplative thought. The con- 
tent of spiritual thought is no object, nothing that is contemplated in the 
objective attitude, being subjective in the sense of being appreciated in 
a subjective or ‘enjoying’ attitude. Transcendental thought is the con- 
sciousness of a content that is neither objective nor subjective, the fur- 
ther characterisation of which will come later. The contents of the four 
grades of thought may be provisionally called fact, self-subsistence, 
reality and truth. Science deals with fact, the content of empirical 
thought. Philosophy deals with the last three, the contents of pure 
thought in the objective, subjective and transcendental attitudes. 

9. All contents of the theoretic consciousness are speakable. The 
so-called grades of thought are really grades of speaking. Fact in 
science is spoken of as information and understood without reference 
to the spoken form. It is what need not be spoken to be believed. 
Speakability is a contingent character of the content of empirical 
thought, but it is a necessary character of the content of pure philo- 


THE CONCEPT OF PHILOSOPHY 103 


sophic thought. In philosophy, the content that is spoken is not intelli- 
gible except as spoken. Pure thought is not thought of a content dis- 
tinguishable from it and is accordingly sometimes regarded as a fiction, 
philosophy being rejected as a disease of speech. Philosophical con- 
tents are, indeed, believed to be self-evident and the self-evident means 
what is independent of the spoken belief of an individual mind. This 
independence of speaking is, however, a part of their meaning. It is 
not part of the meaning of a scientific content which is understood 
without reference at all to be linguistic expression of it. 

10. Now a believed content that has necessary reference to the 
speaking of it is not spoken of as information. Self-subsistence or 
enjoyed reality or truth is not assertable as fact. Belief in it may be 
expressed in the form of a judgment, but the form would be only arti- 
ficial or symbolic. Fact is always expressible as a judgment of the form 
“A is thus related to B”, this being the only judgment-form that is 
literally intelligible. A judgment of the form “X is”, if it expresses 
belief in a fact of science, is only a periphrasis for a judgment of the 
above rational form. In “X is’, if X stands for “A is related to B”, 
the assertion means either only that A is related to B or that A that is 
thus related is related to something else. Fact is always a fact related 
to facts. If anywhere “X is’ means something other than the relational 
assertion, it means that X is self-subsistent, real or true, which is only 
an apparent judgment. The subject is here understood as presupposing 
the predicate. The predicate does not, as in a judgment proper, amplify 
or explicate the meaning of a subject that is already believed. The sub- 
ject is here believed as a self-evident elaboration of the predicate that 
is already believed to be self-evident. 

11. Philosophy is such self-evident elaboration of the self-evi- 
dent and is not a body of judgments. The self-evident is spoken, but 
is not spoken of. Of what is only spoken and contains a necessary 
reference to the speaking of it there are three forms according as it is 
spoken in the objective, the subjective or the transcendental attitude. 
The difference between the first two forms is the difference between the 
imports of the apparent judgments “The object (-in general) is” 
and “I am”. In a judgment proper “A is thus related to B”, if the 
word is by itself means anything, if in other words the assertion means 
any content more than “A related to B”, the content as isolated would 
be objectivity. It may be expressed as an apparent judgment “the 
relation of A and B is”. In a judgment proper, the word ‘is’ expresses 
only the objective attitude of the subject, but in this apparent judg- 
ment, ‘is’ means an objective content which is self-subsistent but not 


104 THE CONCEPT OF PHILOSOPHY 


fact. To express or formulate this content is still to retain the objec- 
tive attitude. The attitude is explicitly dropped in saying “I am”. 
The content here also is spoken and not spoken of, but it 
is explicitly understood as not objective and as only apparently objec- 
tive or symbolised by objectivity. What the word ‘am’ means is not 
contemplated in the objective attitude but is subjectively enjoyed and 
only spoken as though it were objectively contemplated. If fact is 
spoken of and the self-subsistent object is only spoken—both being 
spoken as meant, reality is spoken not as meant but as only symbolised. 

12. All the three are literally speakable. To say that the object 
is not the subject and that the latter is symbolised by the former is stilt 
to speak literally. The word that is used as symbol is not indeed liter- 
ally understood, but what is symbolised by it (and that it is symbolised) 
is literally spoken. The subjective is a positive entity through which 
the objective is understood. The concept of the object is not reached 
through a generalisation of the objective facts of science. Were it not 
for the direct consciousness and speakability of the subject J, the con- 
cept of the object would never be precipitated. The first person / is 
the primary instance of a content that necessarily refers to the speaking 
of it. It is, in fact, the spoken that is understood as the same as the 
speaking function. In “I am” then, the predicate is a symbol of 2 
literally spoken subject. What is taken as_ self-subsistent or real is 
literally spoken and understood. What, however, is taken as true is 
not literally understood. 

13. How then is truth as beyond reality spoken? To answer 
the question, the connection between the notions of fact, self-subsis- 
tence and reality has to be further elucidated. The denial of each of 
these is possible. The judgment “A is thus related to B” may be denied 
in the form “that A is so related is not fact”. “That A is so related” 
is no judgment, but what is nowadays called a ‘proposition’. The 
enunciation and denial of it are possible because we have already a 
belief in the self-subsistent. If the proposition is understood as not 
fact, it is because we cannot deny its self-subsistence?. So we may 
deny the self-subsistent in the form “object is not”, meaning “What is 
other than the subjective is not a definite or self-identical content for 
contemplation”—a recognised philosophical view that is not prima facie 
meaningless. The denial is possible because we already believe in the 


* The term ‘self-subsistence’ instead of ‘subsistence’ is used because we meant 
only in reference to a belief. The believed subsistent is the self-subsistent as 


meant. A meaning that is not a believed content of one grade is a believed content 
of a higher grade, 


THE CONCEPT OF PHILOSOPHY 105: 


subjective as enjoyed reality. We may also deny reality in the fornt 
“I (as individual subject) am not”. This, too, is prima facie intelli- 
gible and it represents a new grade of negation, for the individual sub- 
ject is understood to be real as subject and not as object though it may 
be individual through some sort of identification with the object. Even 
as individual, the J is enjoyingly believed and the denial of such a con- 
tent is possible because we have already the notion of truth beyond 
reality. 

14. Taking a sentence of the form “X is”, it is a judgment pro- 
per if ‘X’, ‘is’ and their combination (or the judgment-form) are’ 
each literally understood. Where X stands for the  self-subsistent, 
both X and ‘is’ are literally understood but the combination is not, 
since X is intelligible only through ‘is’. Where X stands for the (indi- 
vidual) self as enjoyed, it is literally understood, but the word ‘is’ is only 
an objective symbolism for enjoyed reality and the combination, there- 
fore, is also symbolic. Where X stands for the negation of the (indivi- 
dual) self, it is not literally understood, because no positive is under- 
stood as equivalent to it. The self is unintelligible except as the sub- 
ject J or as what the subject / is not. There is no consciousness of an 
absolute or transcendental self without reference to the subject /. If 
such a self is understood, it is only as the implication of the enjoyed 
/ and never by itself. It is indeed positively believed, but there is no 
positive formulation of it independent of the notion of 7. Thus here 
X is only symbolically understood and consequently the word ‘is’ and the 
judgment-form also are symbolically understood. “Object is” is no 
judgment, being tautologous as a judgment and “I am” is no judgment 
because ‘am’ is only symbolism, but both are literally spoken because 
the subject is literally understood as positive. But the sentence “the 
absolute self is” is not only no judgment but is not even literally spoken. 
Still, it is not meaningless and symbolises what is positively believed, 
viz., truth. What is believed and is not literally speakable (and is as 
such undeniable) is truth. 

15. So there are the four grades of speakables. There is the 
primary distinction between what is only symbolically speakable and 
what is literally speakable. The literally speakable comprises what is 
spoken of as information and what is only spoken and not spoken of. 
Of these, what is only spoken is spoken either as symbolised or as 
meant. Truth is only symbolically spoken, reality is literally spoken 
as symbolised and the self-subsistent is literally spoken as meant. 
None of these are spoken of as information, while fact is spoken of as 
information. These correspond to what were roughly called empirical, 


.106 THE CONCEPT OF PHILOSOPHY 


contemplative, enjoying and transcendental thought. It is only what 
is spoken of as information or fact that is or can be meant literally. In 
contemplative, enjoying and transcendental thought, the content is not 
spoken of but is only spoken. If it is put in the judgment-form “X 
is”, the form is only symbolical. In the first two, X being literally 
understood, the content though not literally thought is still said to be 
literally spoken. In contemplative thought, the judgment-form is only 
symbolical; even in enjoying thought, the word ‘is’ is also used symboli- 
cally. In transcendental thought, X also being symbolical, “X is” is 
not only not literally thought but not also literally spoken. 

16. A content that can be literally spoken of is the content of a 
judgment. The content of a judgment is information or fact that ts 
intelligible without reference to the speaking of it. A content that is 
necessarily understood in reference to the speaking of it is in some 
respect, at least, symbolically understood and is not information, fact 
‘or content of judgment. Beliefs in science alone are formulable as 
judgments and literally thinkable. If a content is literally thinkable in 
a judgment, the belief in it as known is actual knowledge. If it is only 
symbolically thinkable, it is not said to be known but to be only believed 
as known. 

17. Theoretic consciousness was said to be belief in a speakable 
content involving belief in a content as known. When the content 1s 
spoken symbolically, it may not be believed as known, but is at least 
understood as pointing to what is believed to be known. In science, 
the content is spoken literally, and is just the content that is believed 
to be known and is as such actually known. In philosophy, the con- 
tent is spoken as at least partially symbolised. The self-subsistent con- 
tent meant by “object is” where the judgment-form is symbolical and 
not actually known and demands to be known in absorbed contempla- 
tion (or intuited) as simply ‘object’. The real / similarly demands 
to be known not only without the judgment-form, but also without the 
‘objective intuitive attitude, i.e., in pure enjoyment. Yet in all these 
cases something ts literally spoken and there is no demand to know the 
‘content without the speaking attitude. The speaking function is the 
final form of individual subjectivity and even the ‘pure form of spiritual 
thought implies it. Transcendental consciousness starts by regarding 
‘all speaking as only symbolising and is accordingly conceived as 
completed when this symbolising speech.also is dispensed with. What 
transcendental consciousness amounts to and whether it remains con- 
sciousness at all when it frees itself from speech or individual subjec- 
tivity we do not know, for absolute or impersonal consciousness is 


THE CONCEPT OF PHILOSOPHY 107 


only conceivable in a negative way. A\ll that can be said is that truth 
which consciousness starts by symbolising continues to be believed and 
becomes more and more self-evident as the symbolising ascomplishes 
its purpose. 

18. Theoretic consciousness is embodied in science and philo- 
sophy. Science alone speaks in genuine judgments, the content of which 
is fact intelligible without reference to speaking and is alone actually 
known and literally thought. Philosophy deals with contents that are 
not literally thinkable and are not actually known but are believed as 
demanding to be known without being thought. Such contents are 
understood as self-subsistent object, real subject and transcendental 
truth. We have accordingly three grades of philosophy which may be 
roughly called philosophy of the object, philosophy of the subject and 
philosophy of truth. 


IHl. SclENCE AND METAPHYSICS 


19. The philosophy of the object requires to be further distin- 
guished from science. Both deal with the object understood as what 
is believed to be known in the objective attitude as distinct from the 
subjective, enjoying or spiritual attitude. The object in science, how- 
ever, is understood as fact and not as self-subsistent. By ‘fact’ is meant 
what is perceivable or has necessary reference to the perceivable, is 
speakable in the form of a literal judgment and is believed without refer- 
ence to the speaking of it. The self-subsistent is an object that has no 
necessary reference to the perceivable, is not literally expressible in a 
judgment and is believed only as it is spoken. A speakable is under- 
stood in necessary reference either to sense-perception or to the speak- 
ing of it. What is believed and understood in necessary reference to 
the speaking of it is, however, believed as self-evident or independent 
of the belief of any individual mind. As understood in the objective 
attitude, the self-evident is the self-subsistent. Fact in science is not 
believed as self-subsistent, as what would be even if no one believed 
It. 

20. The self-subsistent object is a concept of philosophy, and it 
is not only not a concept of science but may be even denied by science. 
Science has no interest to formulate the concept of the self-subsistent 
object; and it apparently believes that the object must be knowable 
or usable. The self-subsistence of the object implies that the object 
may be in its very nature inaccessible to the mind. To contemplate 
the object as what would be if there were no subject to know it is to 
believe that it may be unknowable, that in any case it is not known as 


108 THE CONCEPT OF PHILOSOPHY 


of right. Science would not only take this suggestion to be gratuitous 
but would positively deny it. The notion that truth freely reveals 
itself and isin itself a mystery or even that it is its very nature to reveal 
itself would be scouted by science as obscurantist or anthropomorphic. 
To science, there is nothing in the object to make it known; it is just 
what is known and though it may be unknown, there is no question of 
its being unknowable. 

21. The implicit belief of science then is that the object is know- 
able and usable as of right. This belief is at least questioned in philo- 
sophy to which it is an expression of solipsistic self-sufficiency on the 
part of the subject. In normal practical life, nature is not consciously 
exploited as a tool but is negotiated in the primitive spirit of sociable- 
ness. It is the arrogant exploiting attitude of science towards the 
object that provokes a self-healing reaction of the spirit in the form of 
philosophy or some cognate discipline. The spiritual demand is that 
_hature should be contemplated and not merely used or manipulated. 
Science even as theory is evolved in a practical interest. What is more 
significant is that its very intellectual method is practical, being the use 
of actual or ideal contrivances. It is the wrong spiritual attitude of 
science towards the object rather than the so-called contradictions and 
problems left unsolved in scientific theory—as imagined by the philo- 
sopher but never felt by the scientist—that suggésts the need for a 
speculative theory of the object. The concept of the self-subsistent 
object is the first corrective that philosophy offers of the predatory out- 
look of the scientific intellect. Realism is a philosophical faith among 
faiths: the creed of science, if formulated, would be a pragmatist form 
of solipsistic idealism. 

22. The relation between science and the philosophy of the 
object may be brought out by a reference to certain problems which 
have been wrongly taken to be philosophical. There is the problem of 
piecing together the results of the sciences into a world-view. The 
synthesis wanted is sometimes imagined to be the generalisation of the 
primary laws of the sciences into more comprehensive laws. To sup- 
pose, however, that it can be accomplished by philosophy without the 
employment of the distinctive technique and methods of science would 
be nothing short of a presumptuous folly. If a law as distinct from a 
loose descriptive concept could be thus established, philosophy might 
well take in hand the entire work of science. All that can be achieved 
in this direction is an imaginative description of the world, which 
would be not only actual knowledge but not even a_ hypothesis 
that is intended to be turned into knowledge. Nor could it claim the 


THE CONCEPT OF PHILOSOPHY 109 


a priori certitude of a theory of logic or of metaphysics. Philosophical 
contents, if not known, are at least theoretically believed, but a world- 
view of this kind cannot even be claimed to be believed. It can be 
only an aesthetic view, having at best a suggestive value for science 
and an illustrative value for philosophy. 

23. As an example of such speculation, I may refer to what is 
called evolutionary philosophy as distinct from the scientific account of 
evolution. Metaphysics may discuss the general concept of evolution 
which is but the concept of life and its materialistic, spiritualistic or 
other interpretations. For this, however, it does net require to piece 
together the results of science, all the data needed—matter, life and 
mind—being presented in the knowledge of oneself as in the body. 
The details and specific generalisations of science are utilised in the 
so-called philosophy of evolution not as evidence but as only illustra- 
tive material intended for visualising the metaphysical theory on the 
subject. The scientific account of evolution is knowledge or hypothesis, 
the metaphysic of life in relation to matter and mind is believed, if 
not known, but the so-called philosophy of evolution, so far as it is 
different from either, is only an organised presentation of the known or 
supposed facts of evolution as though they constituted the history of a 
single cosmic life. Cosmic life is not known as a fact, but may still be 
believed as self-subsisting. The single significant history of this life, 
however, as rounding off the jagged groupings of facts in science and 
bridging over the gaps left by it, is only imagined, and is understood 
to be neither self-evident nor verifiable. The significant story of cosmic 
evolution then is neither science nor philosophy but only a species of 
imaginative literature. 

24. There is another problem, viz., the formulation of the postu- 
lates or structural concepts of science, which used to be regarded as a 
philosophical problem. Pure physics, for example, was taken by 
Kant as a branch of knowable metaphysic established by deduction 
from the a priori principles of synthetic knowledge. There is a similar 
confusion of thought at the present day in the romantic philosophy that 
has sprung up round the physico-mathematical theory of relativity, 
although here the confusion is of science with philosophy and not of 
philosophy with science as in the other case. In both, the impassable 
gulf between fact and the self-subsistent is ignored. The so-called 
axioms of science are but postulates, the formulation of which is the 
work of science itself. The postulates are hypothesis of a kind which 
are intended not for the anticipation of facts, but for the organisation 


of them into a system. They admit of rival hypotheses and may be 


110 THE CONCEPT OF PHILOSOPHY 


rejected though not as contradicted by fact, but only as clumsier and 
less expeditious to work with than the rival hypotheses. Again, there: 
is no passage from a postulate of science to a concept of the object in 
itself. Whether the real world is four-dimensional or is intrinsically 
indeterminate in its behaviour can never be determined from the basic 
conceptual devices that happen to organise the facts of science at the 
present day. The postulates of science neither lead to nor are deducible 
from any metaphysical conception of the object. 


IV. PHILOSOPHY OF THE OBJECT 


25. What then has philosophy to say about the object? The 
objective attitude is understood only in contrast with the subjective or 
enjoying attitude. What is believed in the objective attitude, viz., the 
object, need not, however, be understood in reference to the subject. 
Where the reference to the subject is no part of the meaning of the 
object, the object is called fact and is dealt with in science. Philosophy 
deals with the object that is intelligible only in reference to the subject. 
By ‘subject’ is meant the individual subject or 7 which is understood in 
the theoretic consciousness as the speaking function that is symbolised 
by itself as spoken. The object that has necessary reference to the 
speaking of it is the self-subsistent object for philosophy. 

26. Philosophy formulates and elaborates the concept of the 
self-subsistent object. What is common to such object and scientific 
fact is objectivity which is itself no fact, being only the circumstance of 
being understood in the objective attitude. This is just the form of the 
object, the self-subsistent form that is elaborated in Logic. It is indeed 
the form of spoken fact, but as it is the form of the self-subsistent object 
also, it cannot be said to have necessary reference to fact or the perceiv- 
able. Logic as the study of this form is thus no science, but a branch 
of the philosophy of the object. The form is itself a pure object and 
is also the form of pure object. The pure object of which Logic is the 
form or shadow is the metaphysical object. The two branches of the 
philosophy of the object then are Logic and Metaphysics. 

27. Logical form or objectivity is not a concept reached by a com- 
parison of the objects or facts of science. The concept of the object is 
reached in the first instance by contrast with the subject as the self- 
evident content of the spiritual consciousness. It is in the theoretic 
consciousness of the spiritual grade that one is first explicitly conscious 
of the object as such. In the consciousness of “I am”, one appreciates 
the objective attitude of judgment as distinct from the enjoying attitude 
and understands it to be assumed only as a necessary make-believe. 


THE CONCEPT OF PHILOSOPY Tt 


The consciousness of the asserted being (ant) or object as such here 
emerges as the consciousness of a necessary symbol of the subject J. 
That object is symbol of subject implies that object is not subject. The 
consciousness of negation as such, in fact, emerges only in this symboli- 
sing Consciousness. One may be conscious of the object without being 
explicitly conscious of the subject, but object has no meaning except as 
the negation and the symbol of the subject. The symbolism here is 
necessary, and hence when the reference to the subject is only implicit, 
the object appears as the immediacy of the subject, as implicitly real. 
Thus object is understood as self-subsistent before fact is understood as 
ubject. Hence objectivity or the form of the object is intelligible in 
reference to the object that is taken to be implicitly real or what is called 
metaphysical object. Logic in this sense presupposes Metaphysics. 

28. Metaphysics is philosophy of the object and involves theoretic 
consciousness in the objective attitude. There is properly speaking no 
metaphysic of the subject. What Passes as such is either the meta- 
physic of the mind understood as a particular type of object or is no 
metaphysic but a self-symbolising form of spiritual activity. Meta- 
physics elaborates the concept of the object in reference to the subject. 
The rationale of any distinction of metaphysical contents is to be found 
in an introspectively appreciable distinction within spiritual experience. 
Even the crude division of the object into matter, life and mind is not 
intelligible as an inductive classification of fact. That these are all that 
is can at least never be known by induction. The notion of the objec- 
tive universe is that of an infinite singular and not of a universal: and 
an exhaustive division of such a singular into items that are all positive 
can only be reached if the singular self-evidently unfolds itself in them, 
if, in other words, each item means every other item or means the entire 
system. Such a system is self-evident only as the symbol of an intros- 
péective or enjoyed content, as the symbolic analysis of the simple or 
unitary consciousness of oneself living in the body. The analysis is 
symbolic because the so-called constituents of the content—matter, life 
and mind—are intelligible not by themselves but only in reference to 
this consciousness. Their difference is such as is immediately felt and 
every apparently factual characterisation of them is understood in refer- 
ence to this feeling. 

29. No metaphysical concept is intelligible without reference to 
the subject or spirit which itself goes beyond metaphysics. The cha- 
racteristic abstractions of metaphysics which are supposed on the one 
hand to be of an ‘extra high grade’ and on the other to be only diseases 
of speech are really symbolic meanings which derive their whole value 


342 THE CONCEPT OF PHILOSOPY 


for belief from the spiritual experiences that they symbolise. There are no 
judgments, accordingly, in metaphysics and, paradoxical as it may 
‘sound, the metaphysical beliefs are not reached by inference. The ela- 
borate parade of deductive proof in metaphysics is only a make-believe, 
unless proof is taken, as it is sometimes taken, as the exposition of an 
unperceived tautology. Metaphysical reasoning is only the systematic 
exposition of symbolic concepts, concepts that are implicitly taken as 
‘symbols of contents that are enjoyingly believed. 

30. Fact and the self-subsistent are both literally spoken and in 
‘both the believed content is figured by being spoken. Fact is under- 
stood as independent of this figuration while the self-subsistent is pre- 
sented as constituted by it. What is common to these spoken contents 
is this speech-created form. There are accidental forms of speech, but 
there are also certain structural forms that are unavoidable in the com- 
munication of belief and which are believed to belong to the understood 
content and not to the speech only. When a fact is spoken, there is a 
peculiar dualism in the understood content of the meant and the be- 
lieved, the latter being meant as beyond meaning or as perceivable. 
When a self-subsistent is spoken, the dualism lapses, the meant and 
‘the believed being coincident. The unavoidable forms of speech are 
constitutive of the meaning. Logic presents a system of speech-created 
forms of meaning. There may be alternative systems, for logic pre- 
supposes metaphysics which presents alternative theories. The funda- 
mental disputes in logic are unavowed metaphysical disputes. Apart 
from the question of accidental inconsistency within a logical system, 
whether one logical system is better than another is settled not by logic 
but by metaphysic. Metaphysical dispute, however, is not settled by 
logic, for apparently every metaphysical system has its distinctive logic. 

31. The suspicion that the subject is not believed in the same 
sense as the metaphysical object does not arise within metaphysics. 
Metaphysics is unaware of the distinction between the _ self-subsistent 
and the real. There seems to be nothing wrong, for instance, in the 
characterisation of matter or mind as real. The distinction is suggested 
by a contrast of logic with metaphysics. The forms of meaning as dis- 
cussed in logic are a kind of entity that must be said to be believed in, 
but it would be absurd to say that they are real. They are believed in 
as not real and yet not nothing, or in other words, as self-subsistent. 
If logical form or objectivity is self-subsistent, has the object of meta- 
physics any higher status? The distinction of abstract and concrete has 
meaning only within fact and hence the object cannot mean anything 
more than objectivity. The metaphysical object is defined, in contrast 


THE CONCEPT OF PHILOSOPHY 143 


with fact, as objectivity or self-subsistent meaning. Metaphysic defines 
itself in logic. 


V. PHILOSOPHY OF THE Spirir 


32. The suggested distinction of self-subsistence and reality is 
explicitly verified in the spiritual or enjoying consciousness of objec- 
tivity as a symbol of the real subject. As already pointed out, in ‘I 
am’, am meaning self-subsistent being as understood in the objective 
attitude is the symbol of J as understood in the subjective attitude. 
Enjoying understanding of a content, in fact, is the consciousness of it 
as symbolised by an objectively contemplated meaning. Without such a 
symbolism, the subject would be enjoyed but not enjoyingly under- 
stood. It is not only understood like the self-subsistent in necessary 
reference to the speaking of it: it is understood further as symbolised 
by its spoken form. This enjoying understanding is what we mean or 
should mean by introspection. Introspection proper is a form of the 
theoretic consciousness that implies an abjuration of the objective 
attitude. Its content is not understood as objective fact nor even as self- 
subsistent object. The content is not the ‘interior’ of the body which 
is fact nor is the ‘mental’ which as unintelligible without reference to the 
speaking of it is a self-subsistent object. The content is 7 or implies /, 
and although it is spoken as though it were an object, it is understood 
as what object is not, as the speaking subjectivity. 

33. To introspect is actually or ideally to speak in the first per- 
son. To speak in the first person may not be to explicitly con- 
scious of the I as what the object is not. When it involves such con- 
sciousness, it amounts to introspection. Again, introspective speak- 
ing may or may not involve the explicit consciousness of being what is 
spoken. When it involves such consciousness, it may be called spiri- 
tual introspection. The consciousness of being what is spoken (/) is 
itself a new achievement of the subject, its realisation or deepening of 
being. All introspection involves such achievement: introspection 
cannot be like the knowledge of objective fact, which leaves the fact un- 
affected in being. But there is a form of introspection which appar- 
ently leaves the content thus unaffected, where really there is an altera- 
tion of subjective being which is enjoyed only in the non-theoretic way. 
This may be taken to be an implicit form of spiritual introspection. 
Sometimes there is a conscious suspension of theoretic consciousness 
about such alteration, a deliberate exclusion of it from introspection. 


8 


114 THE CONCEPT OF PHILOSOPHY 


In such a case, introspection tends to degenerate into objective con- 
sciousness of the mind as distinct from the J—-what is ordinarily called 
psychological introspection. 

34. The subject J is never accepted by itself in spiritual introspec- 
tion. Something else is always enjoyed along with the subject and 
enjoyed in reference to it. This may be of three grades. There is in 
the first place the explicit consciousness of the subject as unaccountably 
embodied, this being the same as the consciousness of the subject as 
what the object including the mind is not. Next there is the conscious- 
ness of personal relation to other selves. Lastly there is the conscious- 
ness of the over-personal self. The over-personal self is enjoyingly 
understood not only in reference to the subject 7 but as implying the 
specific experience of communion, the felt form of identity with the /. 
Such enjoying identity is what is called concrete identity or identity-in- 
difference, a relation that is unintelligible in the objective attitude. 
Identity in the philosophy of the object is conceived as abstract identity 
of the form ‘A is A’ and there is no place for relation of identity in 
the sphere of fact. The consciousness of the over-personal self as thus 
one with the / is the religious form of the spiritual consciousness. The 
study of all contents enjoyed in explicit reference to the subject J may 
be called the philosophy of the spirit. 

35. Spiritual consciousness is not mere consciousness of reality 
but is reality itself. Except in the specifically religious form of it, how- 
ever, it involves some consciousness of reality as distinct from what 
may be called empty objectivity. In the enjoying consciousness of the 
self as embodied or symbolised by the object, the object is conceived 
not as self-subsistent, but only as a shadow or symbol of the J, the 
consciousness of the shadow as such being said to be empty. In the 
consciousness of personal relations—the moral consciousness, for 
example—/ and the other person are each not the other, each the 
symbol of the other, there being an alternation of symbolisms. The 
other person is to me ‘another I’ which taken literally is a contradic- 
tion through which alone, however, he is understood. Or I (first per- 
son) am aware of being ‘this person’ (third person) to him, which 
too is symbolising by a contradiction. Each alternative is real in being 
but contradictory or empty in meaning or theory. The experience of 
religious communion or worship is the consciousness of the over-per- 
sonal reality as symbolised by 7. The conscious symbolising by / is a 
non-theoretic experience of self-abnegation: it is consciously being 
nought and not consciousness of J as nought. What emerges to theoretic 
religious consciousness is the over-personal reality alone. In this sense 


THE CONCEPT OF PHILOSOPHY 115 


the religious consciousness is said to outgrow all empty subjectivity and 
to be the enjoyed fulness of being. 

36. Religious experience as consciousness of being is simple 
and admits of no variation within itself. There is, however, an infinite 
plurality of unique religious experiences. Their relation is determined 
by themselves and not by any external reflection. Each experience by 
its self-deepening gets opposed to or synthesised with other experiences. 
One experience may enjoy another as a stage outgrown or as in abso- 
lute conflict with it, where a third experience may emerge as adjusting 
them to one another. There is no possibility of systematising them by 
secular reason and so far as they systematise themselves, they present 
themselves in many alternative systems. Each experience, in fact, is a 
revelation and we believe in a system only so far as it is actually revealed. 
Extensive internally coherent systems with indefinite boundaries are 
actually revealed, though there is no a priori necessity of a system and 
still less of a system admitting of no alternative systems. The Hegelian 
notion of a single and exclusive gradation of religions would appear 
from this standpoint to be intrinsically irreligious. 

37. The theoretic form of a religious system is a philosophy of 
religion, there being as many forms of this philosophy as there are reli- 
gious systems. This form expresses itself in the lower grades of philo- 
sophy—in the theory of the sub-religious spirit, in the metaphysic of 
the object and even in logic. Every system of religious philosophy has 
its distinctive theory of the spirit, metaphysics and logic. The funda- 
mental differences within logical theory are, as has been suggested, 
implicitly metaphysical, those in metaphysic are implicitly spiritual 
and those in the theory of the secular spirit are implicitly religious. 
Religions may indefinitely multiply and indefinitely get synthesised. So 
is there indefinite scope for differences and syntheses in philosophical 
theory in general. There is no question of philosophy progressing to- 
wards a single unanimously acceptable solution. All philosophy is 
systematic symbolism and symbolism necessarily admits of alternatives. 


VI. PHILOSOPHY OF TRUTH 


38. In religion, there can be no theoretic denial of the subject /. 
In worship, indeed, the subject abnegates itself but the abnegation 18 
there an affair of enjoyed being and not of theory. There is, however, 
a theoretic consciousness of ‘I am nought’, of the possibility at any rate 
of the subject or the individual self being unreal. The denial of the 
I is possible because we already believe that the absolute is, The 
absolute is not the same as the over-personal reality that is enjoyed in 


116 THE CONCEPT OF PHILOSOPHY 


religion. It means what the subject / is not, but the reality of reli- 
gious experience while it is enjoyed and symbolised by J does not 
mean such theoretic negation of J. What is called the absolute is a 
positively believed entity that is only negatively understood. It is an 
entity that cannot be understood as it is believed, and is speakable only 
by way of symbolism. Reality as apprehended in religion is, indeed, 
symbolised by J, but so far as it is expressed as a self, it is ex- 
presssed literally. The positive character of the absolute, however, 
is expressible only by the negation of J (or more accurately by ‘what- 
I am not’) and as such is not literally expressible at all. If then we 
say that the absolute is, we mean by ‘is’ not reality but truth. Reality 
is enjoyed but truth is not. The consciousness of truth as what is 
believed in but not understood either in the objective or in the subjec- 
tive attitude, as not literally speakable at all but speakable only in the 
purely symbolistic way, is extra-religious or transcendental conscious- 
ness. 

39. What is believed in and understood as literally unspeakable 
may be said to be self-revealing. Reality is still literally speakable and 
may be taken to depend on the speaking for its revelation, though the 
speaking (which means the 7) is not there empty subjectivity. Truth 
is believed or revealed as independent of it, as self-revealing, what is 
true being spoken as what the speaking 7 is not. At the same time, to 
be even symbolically spoken, it has to be believed as a distinct. Asa 
positive to which even the / is but a symbol and, therefore, nought in it- 
self, it has nothing to be distinguished from and is absolute. If, then, 
truth as absolute is distinguished, it can only be distinguished from it- 
self. The self-distinction of the absolute cannot mean self-identity as it 
appears in the religious consciousness in which the identity-in-difference 
is conceived to be necessary. There is no necessity in this self-distinc- 
tion. The absolute may be truth or it may be what truth is not or it 
may be their mere distinction without any unity in the background, 
which means their indeterminate togetherness which cannot be denied 
to be either of them. What truth is not and is yet positive is the absolute 
freedom beyond being (the absolute freedom of the will) and what is 
indeterminately either truth or freedom is absolute value. There is no 
sense in speaking of the absolute as the unity of truth, freedom and 
value. It is each of them, these being only spoken separately but not 
meant either as separate or as one. The theoretic consciousness of 
truth; then, is the consciousness of truth as distinct from itself as free- 
dom and from this identity-less self-distinction or value. The abso- 
lute as transcending the enjoyed reality of religion is positive being 


THE CONCEPT OF PHILOSOPHY ~<A 


(truth) or positive non-being (freedom) or their positive indetermina- 
tion (value). The absolute is conceived rigorously as. truth in 
(Advatia) Vedanta. What is loosely called nihilist Buddhism appa- 
rently understands the absolute as freedom. The Hegelian absolute 
may be taken to represent the indetermination, miscalled identity of 
truth and freedom which is value. All these views belong to what may 
be called the transcendental grade of philosophy. 

40. This triple absolute is apparently the prototype of the three 
subjective functions—knowing, willing and feeling. These functions 
are primarily the self-distinction of the transcendental consciousness. 
The distinction of the functions does not .emerge in the spiritual con- 
sciousness. Spiritual consciousness is simple and integral in its very 
nature. The consciousness of J is not only not the consciousness of 
a complex unity of these functions, it is not even the consciousness of 
a unity revealing itself in each of them. It not only does not analyse 
itself: it supplies no motive for such analysis. The tripartite elabora- 
tion of consciousness is not introspective but transcendental. The 
absolutes reveal themselves and the J appears trinal only as their shadow 
or symbolism. As the absolutes are not related into a unity, neither 
can their subjective shadows be said to be related. The simple J has 
no enjoyed elements or aspects to be related. Nor are the so-called 
functions intelligible as pure acts or interests of the I. They cannot be 
defined in subjective terms nor can they be taken as unique subjective 
experiences, being not presented as distinct to introspection at all. 
Their whole meaning is derived from the self-revealed absolutes. 

41. The theory of truth is the theory of the other two absolutes 
also. At the same time it recognises the possibility of elaborating a 
primary theory of each of them in reference to the other absolutes. We 
have shadows of these primary theories in the lower grades of philo- 
sophy. The theory of truth, for example, as conceived in its explicit 
transcendental form has its shadow in the theory of knowledge which 
belongs to the philosophy of the spirit and in the theory of objective cate- 
gories which is somewhere intermediate between metaphysics and logic 
in the philosophy of the object. 


THE CONCEPT OF THE ABSOLUTE AND 
ITS ALTERNATIVE FORMS 


ANALYSIS 


(1) Philosophy starts in reflection which is the awareness of a con- 
tent as fo a mode of consciousness. The nature of this relation of ‘as to’ 
has got to be analysed. (2) There can be no consciousness of a rela- 
tion prior to reflection. Yet the relation between content and conscious- 
ness has to be understood in terms of the relation between two contents 
of consciousness. (3) It is sometimes held, on the contrary, that the 
relation between two contents of consciousness has to be understood in 
terms of the relation between consciousness and content, which is claim- 
ed to be one of identity-in-difference. That the relation under refer- 
ence is actually what it is said to be has got to be examined. (4) To 
reflection, the relation of content and consciousness appears to be one 
of asserted implication. Now if A is asserted to imply B, a factual 
relation is always meant and this relation is one which obtains between 
a term which must be definite and independent of the relation and the 
implied term B. Unless such a definite independent term is found, the 
implication has to be taken as an indefinite formulation of a factual 
relation. In the case under reference, the independent term is not a 
definite nameable thing, and thus in the reflective stage, we have only 
an indefinite relation between content and consciousness. (5-8) This 
indefinite relation appears to reflection as at once distinction and non- 
distinction. But this non-distinction cannot be positively asserted as 
an identity. Neither can it be denied to be so. The relation, then, 
of content and consciousness appears to reflection as an indefinite 
distinction only and not as an indefinite identity. The demand is for 
this distinction to be defined and for a supra-reflective consciousness 
where this distinction can be visualised. 

(9) The absolute has to be understood not as the identity but only 
as a completely definite distinction of content and consciousness, 
(10) Now, as consciousness is of three kinds—knowing, feeling and 
willing—the implicatory distinction is also threefold. The mode of 
resolution of these implicatory distinctions into corresponding non-impli- 
catory distinctions will accordingly vary in these three spheres. Thus 
the absolute has to be formulated not as a unitary something but as an 
utt-unifiable triplicity. (11) The variations of the implicatory distine- 
tion in these three spheres may be represented by three modes of. dis- 
tinction that are recognised to hold between known contents. The 
content may be spoken of (a) as unconstituted by consciousness, or 


122 THE ABSOLUTE AND ITS ALTERNATIVE FORMS 


(b) as constituted by consciousness, or, again (c) as along with con- 
sciousness constituting some kind of unity. (12-16) The content of 
knowing, i.e., the object known is independent of and thus unconsti- 
tuted by knowing. The content of willing, ic., an act, an end or an 
empirical embodiment of the end is not independent of willing 
and is, in this sense, constituted by the willing. Reflective knowing, 
as also reflective willing, is the consciousness of the content as distinct 
from the consciousness. Reflective feeling, on the other hand, is the 
consciousness of the content as in unity with the feeling. 

(17-19) The content of knowing is necessarily understood in 
reflection as what is perfectly distinct from knowing. The content im- 
plies such a reference to knowing and apparently means nothing with- 
out it. To say that the reference is necessary is not, however, to say 
that the content is a fact necessarily related to knowing. But the con- 
tent is not also apprehended as only accidentally related to knowing. 
Reflection tells us nothing either way, and both the idealistic and 
realistic positions appear to be over-statements. (20) The realistic 
position that the known content may exist unknown cannot either be 
denied or asserted. The possibility, however, of such a content is 
understood in reference to what is taken as self-evidently known. The 
self-evident is that which reveals itself and which might not have been 
to the knower at all. (21) The realistic view of the independence of 
the known content can only be admitted in the sense of the content 
being in some respect self-evident. 

(22) The self-evident is not ‘necessary’ in the sense of being that 
whose opposite is unintelligible. It is rather that in regard to which the 
problem of thinking the opposite is not entertained at all. To be con- 
scious of a content as self-evident is to be conscious not of its nega- 
tion being unmeanable but of the problem of meaning the negation not 
even arising. (23) The self-evident is that of which we cannot be 
conscious except as true. It cannot as a rule, be the content of a 
judgment in the true sense of the term. (24) That a conclusion 
follows from a premise or premises is the only content that can be claim- 
ed to be self-evidently known, but it is not, properly speaking, a judg- 
ment. (25-26) A disguised form of this inferential ‘following’ is 
found in ‘to know A is to know B’. This content cannot, however, be 
said to be no judgment and yet we are not conscious here of the pro- 
blem of meaning its negation. It is the primordial and the only self- 
evident judgment. (27) The copula of this judgment is not known 
like other copulas. It is understood as spoken but not as spoken of. 
The word ‘is’ in the judgment is known, no doubt, but is not under- 


ANALYSIS 123 


stood as known content. (28-29) It may, accordingly, be 
(loosely) called a known no-content. It is explicitly known as what 
known content is not. (30) This then is the element in ‘all that is 
reflectively known that is known as what need not be known. It is the 
element that is free from the implicational relation of the content to the 
knowing of it. This is the absolute for knowing that demands to be 
freed from its immanence in the implicatory distinction of content and 
knowing. 

(31) The implicative distinction is demanded to be resolved in will- 
ing also. The content of willing is something that is foreign to and 
is thus a limitation to itself. But in the reflective stage this limitation 
is not realised as a self-limitation or the free limitation of the will to 
realise itself. But reflection demands that the limitation should be 
realised as self-limitation in this sense. (32-34) The relation between 
two contents willed suggests the relation between the willed content and 
willing. Now, two contents are said to be willed at once when one of 
them is a means to the other. This relation of means and end has to 
be understood as the relation between the willed content and willing. 
It 1s difficult, however, to understand how one can be said to act in a 
particular way to act freely. Reflection indicates that it is to be under- 
stood by contrasting ‘I will this act’ with ‘I will this act that I ought to 
will’. The contrast yields the implication that willing as represented 
by the former is itself a being that is to be superseded by willing as 
represented by the latter, and that we will an act in order to get rid of the 
being of the act. But reflection cannot understand this willing or free- 
dom at its limit. 

(35-39) In reflective feeling, there is the definite consciousness 
of an indefinite distinction of the content felt and the feeling of it. 
Reflection demands that this idefinite distinction be resolved into a 
definite self-subsistent unity, that is to say, a unity where the constitu- 
ents are distinguishable from it. We try to understand this relation on 
the analogy of the relation between two contents which are felt together, 
as for example, in the feeling of a beautiful object. We do not com- 
pletely succeed. The constituents (i.e., the felt content and the feeling) 
appear to be imperfectly distinct, and the unity here means an imperfect 
distinction of the constituents and not the self-subsistent unity that is 
demanded to be realised in reflection. Value as such unity is not thus 
realised as self-subsistent like the beautiful object. The felt content 
and the feeling-consciousness are not together distinguished from the 
value that is their unity. (40) Recapitulation of sections 22-40. 

(41) In the case of knowing, a known content has to be under- 


124 THE ABSOLUTE AND ITS ALTERNATIVE FORMS 


stood as what need not be the content of any knowing, that is to say, as 
utterly unrelated to knowing. In the case of willing, the reality of 
willing has to be understood as the negation of being or of an emergent 
distinct. In the case of feeling, the being of value has to be understood 
as a being from which known being is distinct: it is to entertain an 
indifference of being and non-being. All the three—unrelatedness, 
negation of the emergent and the indifference of being and non-being— 
imply unmeaning modes of negation to reflection. In all these cases, 
what demands to be understood cannot actually be understood, because 
such understanding would involve a species of negation that is unmean- 
ing to reflection. To admit the absolute in any form is to admit a 
negation that is unintelligible to the logic of the understanding. 

(42) The absolute may be defined from the standpoint of reflec- 
tion as what is free from the implicational dualism of content and con- 
sciousness. There are three ways in which this freedom can be under- 
stood: (a) the content may be freed from its reference to conscious- 
ness and we have truth—the absolute for knowing; (b) conscious- 
ness may be freed from its content and we have freedom of the will— 
the absolute for willing; (c) the implicational relation of content and 
consciousness may be freed from their distinction as a unity and we 
have value—the absolute for feeling. (43) The absolute has thus to 
be formulated in a triple way. It is meaningless, however, to cogni- 
tively assert that there are three absolutes or one absolute, for the abso- 
lute is not Known content and it is only about a known content that the 
question ‘one or many’ has any meaning. (44-45) Freedom may 
alternatively be called reality and, as it is not known, it is meaningless to 
call it truth. Truth is the self-evident and is known, though it is not 
a known content. What is known, however, may be either the self- 
evident in its purity or some relation of given contents with the form 
of self-evidence. The self-evident in its purity is truth and not reality: 
but a relation of given contents is not only said to be true but cannot also 
be said to be not real. The real then is not true, but the true may be 
real. (46) Similarly, truth is not value, but value is not un-true. 
The predicates ‘valuable’ and ‘worthless’ do not apply to truth. 
(47) The predicates ‘real’ and ‘unreal’ do not apply to value. But 
reality or freedom cannot be said not to be a value. (48) Thus it is 
meaningless to speak of truth as a value, of value as real and of reality 
as true; while value may be truth, reality value and truth reality. 
The absolute may be regarded in this sense as an alternation of truth, 
value and reality. 


THE CONCEPT OF THE ABSOLUTE AND ITS 
ALTERNATIVE FORMS 


1. Philosophy starts in reflective consciousness. Reflection is 
the awareness of a content as to a mode of consciousness. The phrase 
‘as to’ means some relation and it is in reference to this relation that the 
concept of the absolute has to be understood. What is this relation? 


2. We ordinarily understand a relation as between the contents of 
consciousness and we have here apparently to conceive some such rela- 
tion as subsisting between content and consciousness. Of the two rela- 
tions—-between content and content, and between content and con- 
sciousness—the latter has to be understood in terms of the former. Not 
that we know relation in objective consciousness before we come to be 
reflectively conscious of a relation between content and consciousness. 
To be aware of a relation as such between two terms, of their relation 
as distinct from their whole having the form of being, is to be aware at 
the same time of the possibility of the terms being not related in that 
relation. Now unlike a term known to be existent, a relation known to 
subsist between two terms cannot be imagined to be absent. The possible 
absence of a known relation, in fact, can never be apprehended in merely 
objective consciousness. Hence we can know a relation as such of 
two contents only in reflection which is specifically the consciousness 
of a relation between content and consciousness. Yet although there 
can be no consciousness of a relation prior to reflection, the relation 
of contents may be said to be prior to the relation of content and 
consciousness in the sense that the former is intelligible by itself 
while the latter is intelligible only in terms of the former. 

3. There are those who hold that because we are only reflectively 
conscious of relation, the relation between content and consciousness 
should be read into the relation of content and content and not vice 
versa. The relation of content and consciousness is to them a trans- 
parent identity-in-difference and all relation of contents is to be under- 
stood as the same relation in an implicit form. The difficulty is that 
the relation of content and consciousness is not explicitly or self-evi- 
dently appreciated as an identity-in-difference by reflection itself, being, 
in fact, claimed to be so appreciated only in a higher consciousness 
called absolute or speculative consciousness. The possibility, how- 
ever, of this supra-reflective consciousness may be disputed and it is 


126 THE ABSOLUTE AND ITS ALTERNATIVE FORMS 


necessary in the first instance to show if and how reflection itself points 
to it. 

4. Prima facie to reflection, the relation of content and con- 
sciousness appears as an implicative distinction. We are reflectively 
aware of the content as distinct from and in necessary reference to con- 
sciousness and the reference is not merely verbal but is implicitly an 
assertion. In the case of an asserted implication between two terms, 
the fact asserted is a relation (or unity), the terms of which are not 
the terms asserted to be in implication. If A is asserted to imply B, a 
factual relation is meant but A is not understood as a term of the rela- 
tion. A here stands for a fact which need not have the relation but 
is thought as having it, the fact being not altered by being so thought. 
This fact should be capable of being expressed by a term that does not 
refer to the relation and the relation should be taken as between this 
term and the implied term B. For every implying term, it is neces- 
sary to find such a non-implying term, if possible; and until and unless 
it is found, the implication has to be taken as an indefinite formulation 
of a factual relation (or unity). To reflective consciousness there is 
implication between the content and the consciousness of it and the 
implication points to a factual relation (or unity) of which one of them 
at least is not really a term. One of them at least stands for an un- 
named something which need not be related to the other. Some factual 
relation then appears to be only indefinitely formulated as the impli- 
cation of content and consciousness in the reflective stage. 


5. Now if it can be shown within reflection that this indefinite 
relation cannot be denied to be a distinction and cannot be denied also 
to be an identity, a stage of consciousness in which distinction and 
identity of the same terms are positively known together may be taken 
to be demanded by reflection which cannot understand them together. 
That the content is somehow distinct from consciousness is obvious to 
reflection but identity is not so obvious. What immediately appears is 
an indefinite distinction between content and consciousness: the terms. 
are undoubtedly distinct but they are not wholly distinguishable. Have 
we the right to interpret this vague indistinguishability as an identity? 


6. The indefinite relation of content and consciousness appears 
to reflection at once as distinction and as not distinction but this non- 
distinction cannot be positively asserted as an identity. Things may 
come to be distinguished that were undistinguished but what are once 
distinguished cannot be later taken to be non-distinct without at least 
one of the terms being taken to be illusory. Hence to distinguish terms 


THE ABSOLUTE AND ITS ALTERNATIVE FORMS 127 


imperfectly is to be able to assert their distinction but neither to 
assert nor to deny their identity. 

7, But it may be contended that distinction and identity stand on 
the same footing in respect of undeniability : like distinction identity 
also once apprehended cannot be denied. That we distinguish what 
were undistinguished does not mean that we knew their relation of 
identity which is now denied. We reply that it is possible to deny the 
relation of identity even when it is explicitly apprehended. There is 
something peculiar about the relation of identity, as expressed in the 
dilemma: if its terms are not distinct, they are not related at all, and 
if they are distinct they are not identical. We cannot get rid of the 
dilemma and admit identity as a relation unless we hold that while the 
distinction of its terms is cognitively undenied, it is positively enter- 
tained only in non-cognitive consciousness. The fact A in the con- 
text M is said to be identical with A in the context N and A has the 
differential characters x and y in the contexts, which are presented and 
yet as neither factual nor non-factual. If the characters be facts, A 
cannot be identical in the two contexts and if they be no facts at all, 
there is no distinction of terms and, therefore, no relation. They have 
accordingly to be taken as not cognised characters but aesthetically 
apprehended expressions which do not preclude the cognised identity of 
A and yet are themselves cognitively undenied. To assert a relation is 
not to assert a distinction between its terms but only not to deny it. 
We may be affectively or conatively aware of a distinction where we do 
not intellectually disbelieve the distinction but do not also assert it. 
Identity then such as is knowable is a relation of terms, the distinction 
of which is undenied but unknown. Now what is unknown and yet 
speakable as felt may come to be known. If the differential characters 
x and y come to be known, the identity of A would be denied. Iden- 
tity cannot accordingly be taken to be undeniable like distinction. 

8. The indefinite relation then of content and consciousness 
should not be interpreted as indefinite identity. There is no demand, 
therefore, in reflection for a stage of conscious in which content 
and consciousness may be explicitly seen to be identical in differ- 
ence. The only necessary demand in knowledge is that what appears 
as indefinite in an assignable respect should be definable in that respect. 
If further the indefiniteness is such as necessarily appears to a stage 
of consciousness, that stage is taken to demand a higher stage where 
the indefinite gets defined. To reflection, the relation of content and 
consciousness appears necessarily as an indefinite distinction only and 
not as an indefinite identity. The demand is for this distinction to be 


128 THE ABSOLUTE AND ITS ALTERNATIVE FORMS 


defined and for a supra-reflective consciousness where this distinction 
can be visualised. 

9. The concept of the absolute in any form is taken to belong to 
a supra-reflective consciousness. The possibility and nature of this con- 
sciousness have to be understood in reflection as a necessary problem. 
The cenception of an explicit identity-in-difference of content and con- 
sciousness is not demanded in reflection. Reflection demands only a 
non-implicational distinction of them to define the necessarily implica- 
tional or indefinite distinction that is presented to it. The absolute 
accordingly has to be problematically understood within reflection as 
meaning not an identity but only a completely definite distinction of con- 
tent and consciousness. It may be that the supra-reflective conscious- 
ness in which the reflective implication of content and consciousness 
is turned into a non-implicatory distinction is itself consciousness of 
identity in a symbolic or metaphorical sense. But in any case identity 
as a logical relation has to be definitely denied between content and 
consciousness before this mystic identity can be appreciated. 

10. We are concerned for the present with the conception of the 
absolute such as is intelligible as a problem to reflection. We have 
to trace in detail how the indefinite distinction of content and conscious- 
ness can be defined, how their apparent identity can be denied, how, 
in fact, the implicatory distinction can be resolved into a non-impli- 
catory distinction. We shall find presently that the implicatory dis- 
tinction of content and consciousness varies according as the con- 
sciousness is knowing, feeling or willing. The implication is resolvable 
in different ways in these three spheres and the absolute is understood in 
the reflective stage in terms of the mode of resolution in each case. 
Knowing, feeling and willing will then each have its own formulation 
of the absolute—viz., truth, value and reality (or freedom) respec- 
tively, as will be justified later. In the reflective stage these absolutes 
or formulations of the absolute will be found to be un-unifiable and to 
be in a sort of alternation. Whether a mystical identity of the absolutes 
can be reached in the supra-reflective consciousness does not concern 
us. Our problem is to show how reflection demands a specific abso- 
lute in each case. 

11. What is specifically apprehended in non-cognitive cons- 
ciousness cannot be literally formulated in terms of knowledge. 
Philosophy which cognitively deals with the contents of all conscious- 
ness should claim to know not the non-cognitive contents themselves 
but only that they are non-cognitive, that we believe in contents which 
we do not know. It can, therefore, speak of these believed contents 


THE ABSOLUTE AND ITS ALTERNATIVE FORMS 129 


only by a sort of intellectual symbolism as though they were known. 
To reflection, the implicative distinction of content and consciousness 
varies according as the consciousness is knowing, feeling or willing. 
The variations may be represented by three modes of distinction that 
we recognise as between known contents. If A is distinct from B, 
B may be simply an other, or it may be constitutive of A, or A and B 
may be both constitutive of C. So the content that is distinguished 
in reflection from consciousness may be spoken of as unconstituted 
by consciousness or as constituted by consciousness or as along with 
consciousness constituting some kind of unity. The first mode of dis- 
tinction is the relation of content and consciousness in knowing and 
the last two will be found to appropriately symbolise the relation in 
willing and feeling respectively. 

12. The content of a knowing act is unconstituted by the act 
The particular act of knowing discovers and does not construct the 
object known, even if the object be admitted to be constructed by some 
knowing. Knowledge would appear to mean that the object known 
is in some sense independent of it though it may be a question whether 
what we ordinarily claim to know is properly said to be known and to 
be independent of the knowing. Where the object is coloured by the 
particularity of the act of knowing, it may be said to be only empiri- 
cally known but it is still taken to be known so far as it is believed to 
be independent of it. 

13. The content of willing may be said to be an act, an end, 
or the empirical embodiment of the end—the organisation of certain 
objective facts (including the means) by the end. None of these is a 
fact that can be said to be known in the willing, believed as indepen- 
dent of the willing in the sense the content of knowing is independent 
of knowing. Each is constituted by willing in the sense that apart from 
willing it is nothing at all. It cannot be said that it is a future fact 
that is Known in the willing. Willing is, indeed, some form of conscious- 
ness of the future but the future here, unlike the future that is said 
to be known, is not a fact but a contingency, not what will be but what 
would be if it were willed, not as already determined but what is 
being determined by the willing and as therefore apart from the will- 
ing nothing at all. Yet the content of willing is distinct from willing, 
distinct as what is constituted is distinct from what constitutes it. 

14. Reflective knowing is consciousness of the known object as 
distinct from the knowing. Reflective willing is consciousness of the 
act willed as being distinguished by the willing from itself. Neither is 
consciousness primarily of the distinction itself or the distinguishing. 

9 


130 THE ABSOLUTE AND ITS ALTERNATIVE FORMS 


Reflective feeling is primarily consciousness of the distinction (or the 
distinguishing) of content and consciousness. To be conscious of a 
content as felt is to be conscious of the content in unity with the feel- 
ing or of feeling unified with the content. The unity of two contents 
means—whatever else it means—an imperfect distinction between 
them ; and we have to understand the unity of content and conscious- 
ness on this analogy. The unity of which reflective feeling is conscious 
is the imperfect distinction between content and consciousness, taken it- 
self as a content. To be conscious of a content as known or willed is 
not even to be implicitly conscious of a unity of content and 
consciousness. The known content appears to reflection as perfectly 
distinct from knowing and a unity of perfect distincts cannot be reflec- 
tively conceived to be knowable. The content of willing as constituted 
by the willing alone cannot be understood to constitute along with 
the willing any unity other than the content itself. It is only in re- 
flective feeling that we are conscious of something, viz., value 
that is as much content as consciousness, that is not indeed both of 
them at once but what each of them is and is not alternately. The felt 
content is imperfectly distinguished from feeling but not constituted by 
it in the sense that apart from it, it is nothing at all. We do not, 
indeed, know but cannot deny that the value of an object is really in it. 

15. Reflective consciousness is definite consciousness of some- 
thing. The content of feeling of which we are reflectively conscious 
is not a definite content. What is perfectly distinct from another or 
constituted by another in the sense of being nothing without it is de- 
finite in itself. What, however, is imperfectly distinct from another and 
unconstituted by it is not definite in itself. Now an indefinite can 
only be referred to in connexion with a definite content. What we 
are definitely conscious of in reflective feeling is the imperfect distinc- 
tion itself of content and consciousness, this indefinite as such being, 
in fact, their unity. The indefinite content of feeling can only be refer- 
red to as a factor of this unity. 

16. The content of knowing then is perfectly distinct from know- 
ing and is unconstituted by it. The content of willing is imperfectly 
distinct from willing though distinct in itself and is constituted by it. 
Content and consciousness make a unity in the case of feeling but 
not in the case of knowing and willing. There are thus three modes 
of distinction of content and consciousness of which we are reflectively 
conscious. Each of these is an implicative or indefinite distinction in 
some sense and the indefiniteness will be found to consist in the fact 
that a relation that is intelligible as between content and content is 


THE ABSOLUTE AND ITS ALTERNATIVE FORMS 131 


only half intelligible when taken to be the relation between content and 
consciousness. 

17. To begin with knowing. If the content of knowing be per- 
fectly distinct from knowing, how can the distinction be implicative or 
indefinite at all? It is implicative in the sense that the content of 
knowing is necessarily understood in reflection as what is perfectly 
distinct from knowing. The content implies such a reference to know- 
ing and apparently means nothing without it. When one content is 
asserted to imply another, a relation is asserted of which, as we said, 
the implying content is not really a relatum but some other content 
which need not have the relation and which as thought with the rela- 
tion is the implying content. This irrelative content may not be actu- 
ally formulated but we conceive it to be formulable. It is difficult to 
conceive, however, what the known content apart from the knowledge- 
relation can possibly mean, since it is before the mind only as known. 

18. The consciousness of a content as known is not, indeed, the 
consciousness of it as a fact necessarily related to knowing but it is 
not also the positive consciousness of it as only accidentally related 
to knowing. Reflection, in fact, on knowing tells us nothing about 
whether the content known is or is not necessarily known. The known 
content means indeed what is perfectly distinct from knowing but this 
verbal reference to knowing need not mean a necessary factual rela- 
tion. The perfect distinction, too, does not mean that the content 
stands for something that would be even if it were not known by 
any one. Both the idealistic and the realistic positions here appear 
to be over-statements. In one sense, however, the realistic position 
may be said to have an advantage, for although reflection does not 
testify that what is known need not be known, it does not deny it 
while the idealistic view that the content is constituted by the know- 
ing of it appears to be plainly opposed to reflective testimony. 

19. It may be, however, that if and when the realistic concep- 
tion of the known content as what need not be known is realised, the 
idealistic notion of its being constituted by knowing will be found to 
have a meaning. Criticism of knowledge may show that all that is 
actually taken to be known in the reflective stage is in some respect 
constituted by the particular act of knowing and, therefore, is in that 
respect not properly known though its known character cannot be 
denied altogether. Meantime we may reject the ordinary idealistic 
argument that to be aware of knowing an object is to be aware of 
recognising it, aware therefore of the object as necessarily known. 
There is actually no consciousness of recognising the object in the 


132 THE ABSOLUTE AND ITS ALTERNATIVE FORMS 


literal sense of remembering the past knowing of it. All that is actu- 
ally meant is that to be aware of knowing an object is to be aware 
of knowing truth, knowing something—in other words—to be eternal 
or timeless. The object may be temporal but that it is in time is not 
itself a temporal fact. To know is to have a timeless truth revealed 
but this does not mean that it is timelessly known and so known 
again in the present act of knowing. There is apparently no ground 
to assume either a previous knowing or of a timeless, impersonal or 
universal knowing along with the present knowing to justify the use 
of the word ‘recognition’. 

20. The realistic position that the known content may exist 
unknown is not denied but cannot also be asserted in the reflective 
consciousness. It may be said, however, that it cannot be denied or 
asserted because only the proposition is meaningless. Can reflection 
understand it as a possibility? The possibility, we reply, is understood 
in reference to what we take to be self-evidently known. Certain 
known contents appear at least to be self-evident, not simply evident. 
So long as the evident is not contrasted with the self-evident, we say 
about it ‘it 1s’ and not ‘it is to me’. When it is contrasted however, we say 
‘it is to me’ (though not ‘to me only’), while of the self-evident we 
say simply ‘it is’. To say ‘it is to me’ is to suggest that it may not be; 
and to say—in denial of this possibility—that ‘it is’ is to imply that it 
might not have been to the knower at all, that it is eternally true, 
that it is truth literally revealing itself. If anything then is known 
to be self-evident, it is known as what need not be known. 

21. That the known content may exist—or more accurately— 
may be true without being known is then intelligible as a problem to 
reflection. It is, therefore, deniable, and it is not denied (though not 
asserted) because some content claimed to be self-evident appears to 
be implied in all knowledge. What is taken to be known is thus 
implicitly believed to be self-evident and only in this sense to be what 
need not be known. The realistic view of the independence of the 
known content, of its knownness being accidental, can only be ad- 
mitted in the sense of the content being in some respect self-evident 
or self-revealing. The realist’s definition of knowledge has to be 
accepted; but the question against him would be if what is claimed 
to be known is really known, is independent of the particular act of 
knowing or knowing generally. It is not the question if what is taken 
to be true is true. Value, for example, may be claimed to be known 
but it may be legitimately asked if it is known at all, if it is not merely 
believed in a non-cognitive way. So one may ask if what is taken by 


THE ABSOLUTE AND ITS ALTERNATIVE FORMS 133 


Kant to be only empirically known as involving construction of ex- 
periences is, as the realist will claim, really known, known as indepen- 
dent of the constructivity of the knowing act. The Kantian ‘view may 
or may not be accepted but the question is certainly legitimate if what 
is claimed to be known is known in the realist’s sense of the term. The 
realist apparently would not admit the necessity of testing whether 
what is supposed in the first instance to be known is really known. 

22. The known content should be what need not be known but 
where is the content that is known as such? The self-evident, we 
take it, is what is known to be independent of knowing in the sense 
of being eternally true without requiring to be known; but is any- 
thing admitted to be self-evident in the reflective consciousness? No 
known content is absolutely indubitable and in any case there is no 
agreement as to what content is indubitable. But some content or 
other appears self-evident in the sense of there being an explicit con- 
sciousness of doubt about it being unintelligible. The unintelligibility 
of doubt about a content should be distinguished from what is called 
the inconceivability of the opposite. Inconceivability of the opposite 
is understood only by trying to conceive it and to try to conceive it is 
to entertain a problem in thinking or meaning, if not of knowing. But 
there are cases where the problem of thinking the opposite of the con- 
tent known is not entertained and one is conscious of its not arising at 
all. To be conscious of a content as self-evident is to be conscious 
not of its negation being unmeanable but of the problem of meaning 
the negation not even arising. We are conscious of the self-evident 
in this sense though the negation of what appears as such may later 
come to be conceived through a new self-evident cognition or revela- 
tion. 

23. What we reflectively speak of as true or false is a judgment. 
The self-evident is that of which we cannot be conscious except as 
true. Is there then any self-evident judgment? To form a judgment 
is apparently always to be conscious of the problem of meaning its 
negation. This applies even to what is taken as a necessary judgment. 
Its negation is found to be inconceivable only after it has been tried 
to be conceived, and it is so found because it is but the elaboration 
of a systemic concept which is really a postulate that is neither true 
nor false and may admit of rival postulates. It is a direction of im- 
agination in which what tends to be imagined is eo ipso believed. 
The belief is here not properly cognitive but is what may be roughly 
called a feeling of cognition. It is the consciousness that something 
must be without the consciousness that it is: it is as though one 


134 THE ABSOLUTE AND ITS ALTERNATIVE FORMS 


dimly felt what must be. The so-called necessary judgment is an 
analysis of the content of such felt cognition and is not properly 
knowledge. 

24. What however is inferred, i.e., believed as what must be 
because something is, is believed also as what is and as such cannot 
be said to be merely felt as known. It is only the necessary that is 
not consciously inferred that should be so characterised. That a 
conclusion follows from a premise or premises is the only content 
that can be claimed in reflective consciousness as self-evidently ksown 
and not merely necessarily known i.e., felt to be known. Properly 
speaking, indeed, that a conclusion follows from a premise is not a 
judgment though expressed as such. The ‘following’ is not a relation 
of contents that is itself a content co-ordinate with them. Still as it 
is not an arbitrary subjective relating of contents, we cannot say it 
is not a believed relation though it is not content of consciousness. 

25. A disguised form of this inferential ‘following’ we have in 
a judgment like ‘A implies B’ which may be paraphrased ‘to know 
A is to know B’. What does the word ‘is’ here stand for? The two 
knowings stand for subjective acts but the connecting word ‘is’ does 
not mean another act co-ordinate with them. Nor does it mean a 
relation of the contents A and B that is a third content. It appears 
to be a relation not of the contents but of the cognitions in respect 
of their content, being itself however no subjective act of cognition. 
It cannot be said not to be known though it is not content of the 
knowing of which A and B are contents. Whether it is the con- 
tent of the reflective consciousness is not known in the reflection it- 
self and so for the reflective consciousness it means neither the cons- 
ciousness nor the content of consciousness. 

26. The self-evident is to reflection a relation that is without 
being the content of a knowing that is known. ‘To know A is to 
know B’ cannot be said to be no judgment and yet here we are not 
conscious of the problem of meaning its negation. It may well be 
that the assertion is a mistake but when it is made, it is made on 
the basis of an immediate unquestioning belief which is yet on the 
reflective level. The problem of meaning the negation of a perceiv- 
ed content does not arise during the perception because perception 
is not on the reflective level. But it, is only reflectively that we say 
‘to know A is to know B’ and yet the knowledge here is immediate 
so that if later it turns out to be false, it is taken to be an illusion 
and not merely a thinking error. Since the knowledge is reflectively 
immediate, there is not only no conscious problem of meaning its 


THE ABSOLUTE AND ITS ALTERNATIVE FORMS 135 


negation, there is the consciousness of such a problem not arising. 
It is only about what is known as the content of knowing that such a 
problem arises. So it is about judgment generally (which’ is on the 
reflective level) except what we take to be the primordial judgment 
viz., ‘to know A is to know B’. It is primordial judgment because it 
is the basis of necessary judgments that are the bases of all other 
judgments. A necessary judgment is still known mediately through 
the baffled attempt to conceive the opposite. This also is based on 
a judgment like ‘to know the inconceivability of the negation of a 
judgment is to know the judgment to be axiomatic’. A judgment of 
the form ‘to know A is to know B’ is self-evident judgment which 
is implied in all other judgments. That the terms of a judgment have 
a relation i.e., appear to be related to the relation only means that 
to know the terms is to know the relation—which is just a judgment 
of this form. 

27. That the copula of this primordial self-evident judgment is 
not known as a content requires further explanation. The judgment 
is, indeed, knowledge and knowledge of the contents A and B as known, 
but so far as it is knowledge of the relation implied by the word ‘is’, 
it is not knowledge of it as a content that is known. In the case of a 
judgment like ‘A is B’, we understand the copula as a relation that is 
al least partially a content on a level with A and B. But in the judg- 
ment ‘to know A is to know B?’ the ‘is’ is not on a level with the cogni- 
tions of A and B, far less with A and B. It is not known as known like 
the cognitions and their contents in the reflective consciousness. How 
then do we say that it is known? Because the sentence ‘to know A 
is to know B? is significant and what it signifies cannot be disbelieved. 
The import of the sentence or of the word ‘is’ in it is, in fact, under- 
stood only when already spoken and not in the speaking of it. When 
even understood as already spoken, it is not retrospectively taken as 
the content of that speaking and distinct from it. It is understood, in 
fact, as spoken but not as spoken of. The word ‘is’ in the judgment 
is not understood as known content. 

28. What is understood (without disbelief) only as already 
spoken and not in the speaking of it is understood as known but not 
as known content. By ‘known content’ is meant what is knowable 
as distinct from the knowing of it. It may not sometimes be so known 
in the knowing of it but it may be known later. The import of the 
word ‘is’ in the judgment ‘to know A is to know B’ is not so know- 
able at all and may accordingly be (loosely) called a known 
no-content. It may be suggested that the import of the word ‘is’ here, 


136 THE ABSOLUTE AND ITS ALTERNATIVE FORMS 


therefore, is the knowing act itself (or I) that is known by first 
appearing as content and then getting denied. It does not, however, 
appear at all as content to be negated : it is only symbolically spoken 
of later as content in the full consciousness that it is only verbally 
distinguished from the problematic knowing of it. Meantime the 
knowing of A and B that appears to reflection is definitely distin- 
guished from it. What then the judgment ‘to know A is to know B’ 
signifies is known but does not appear as content to be accepted or 
rejected. It appears neither as known knowing nor as the content 
of such knowing. 

29. This judgment is the only self-evident entity of which re- 
flection is aware and the copula in it is not only not known as content 
but is explicitly known as what known content—including the apparent 
reflective content ‘known knowing’—is not. The known position from 
which all content is distinguished—as represented by the copula here 
~~is implied in all reflective knowledge, in all judgment like ‘A is B’ 
where the ‘is’ means this over and above a relation that is a content. 

30. To sum up. In reflection on a content as known, the con- 
tent implies knowing and is indefinitely distinct from it in the sense 
that it means this reference to knowing (though it means perfect dis- 
tinction from knowing), that it does not mean independence of this 
reference and is not known as what is accidentally known. Reflection 
demands that it should be so known. The content is known to be 
only accidentally known i.e., to be only accidentally a content, when 
it is self-evident. The only self-evident of which we are reflectively 
aware is a judgment of the form ‘to know A is to know B’ or what 
the word ‘is’ in it stands for, this being meant in all judgments or 
knowledge on the reflective level. This then is the element in all that 
is reflectively known that is known as what need not be known, the 
element that is free from the implicational relation of the content to 
the knowing of it, the element that reflection demands to be isolated 
but cannot itself isolate. This is the absolute for knowing that 
demands to be freed from its immanence in the implicational distinc- 
tion of content and knowing. 

31. So far about knowing. We may now rapidly indicate how 
the implicative relation of content and consciousness is demanded to 
be resolved in the case of willing and feeling. What implication of 
content and consciousness does reflective willing present ? The willed 
content, as has been pointed out, is constituted by willing in the sense 
that apart from willing it is nothing at all. Yet the constituted content 
as definite in itself appears as a limitation to the constitutive - willing : 


THE ABSOLUTE AND ITS ALTERNATIVE FORMS 137 


willing appears to be necessarily the willing of what is foreign to itself. 
In the reflective stage the willed content is appreciated as real through 
the willing but yet as its limitation, not as its self-limitation. ‘It is not 
apparent at this stage that the will limits itself to realise itself, freely 
commits itself to a being to annul it and become freer. Reflection 
demands that the limit that is necessarily constituted by willing should 
be realised as self-limitation in this sense. That is how the implication 
of content and consciousness is problematically understood to be re- 
solvable in the sphere of willing. 

32. To elaborate the problem. The relation of two contents 
willed at once may be taken to suggest the relation between willed con- 
tent and willing. Two contents e.g., two acts are said to be willed at 
once when one of them is a means to the other. Two unrelated acts 
cannot be said to be willed at once and two acts that are jointly means 
to a third act cannot be distinctly willed in the willing of the third act. 
A conscious will-relation of two contents must be a relation of prior 
and posterior, the prior being that through which the other is possible. 
In the relation of means and end as willed, the end is the prior through 
the willing of which it is possible to will a content as means. Now 
this relation of means and end has to be understood as the relation 
of willed content to willing. A willed act has to be taken as a means 
to the willing of it though it is through the willing that the willed act 
is possible. It is difficult to understand, however, how the willing of 
an act is the end of the act willed, how in other words willing is 
realised by the putting forth of the act, how one can be said to act in 
a particular way in order to act freely. 

33. That we objectively act to be subjectively free, that the good 
will and nothing but the good will is the value for which we will an 
act—the view, in fact, of Kant—may be called the idealistic view in 
this connexion. The realistic view here then would be that we act 
for an objective end and not for the subjective end of being free; and 
an extreme form of the view may be conceived that we objectively act 
in order that we may objectively act for evermore. In the case of 
knowing, we pointed out, the realistic view is prima facie more accept- 
able than the idealistic view.’ In the case of willing apparently, the 
idealistic view is acceptable in the first instance. The realistic view 
amounts to saying that there is no willed act that is good in itself and 
the view that we objectively act in order that we may objectively act 
ig just its logical consequence and its reductio ad absurdum. The 
idealistic view is consonant with the nature of reflective willing—viz., 
tliat the prior is the end, but in the reflective stage it appears to 


138 THE ABSOLUTE AND ITS ALTERNATIVE FORMS 


amount to the barren statement that it is good to will what it is good 
to will. The demand is to find a vital meaning for the statement, to 
understatid how willing is a willing of itself. 

34. Reflection indicates how it is to be understood. There is 
the difference between ‘I will this act’ and ‘I will this act that I ought 
to will’, when the former is not contrasted with the latter, the will- 
consciousness is expressible as an imperative ‘let this act be done’. 
When, however, it is contrasted, it is expressed as mere information ‘I 
am doing it’ while the latter is properly expressed as an imperative 
‘let this be done’ which implies ‘I may not do it’. In contrast with it, the 
former appears as a statement of fact though by itself it appears as an 
imperative. The implication is that willing as represented by the form- 
er is itself a being that is to be superseded by willing as represented by 
the latter, that what is taken as free is implicitly not free, that therefore 
we will an act in order to get rid of the being of the act, get rid of the 
self-complacent will to continue in this being—what may be called 
the will to indolence. Reflection indicates the way but cannot under- 
stand willing or freedom at its limit. 

35. In reflective feeling there is the definite consciousness of an 
indefinite distinction of the content felt and the feeling of it. The 
content felt is not definite in itself like the known or willed content 
and is understood in reference to this indefinite distinction definitely 
appearing to reflection as though it were a unity. We say ‘as though’, 
because the unity does not appear as a definite self-subsistent unity 
from which its constituents are distinguishable. The implication of 
content and consciousness would be resolved in the sphere of feeling, 
if a unity of this kind could be apprehended. In the feeling of two 
contents together, we can reflectively apprehend a self-subsistent unity. 
Reflection accordingly demands such a unity of felt content and feeling 
but cannot itself understand it. 

36. To explain. In the apprehension of an object having spatial 
parts as beautiful, both the whole and the parts are felt but differently. 
The whole as a known content is distinct in itself and even if it be 
conceivably distinguished from the parts, the parts as in the whole 
cannot be distinguished from the whole and, therefore, can only be 
imperfectly distinguished from one another. The parts are, however, 
distinguished in the feeling way from the whole, being, in fact, felt as 
not felt in the way the whole is felt. The whole is felt to be beautiful 
but the parts are felt to be indifferent, felt to be ‘only known’, such 
feeling of their mere knownness being necessary for the appreciation 
of the beauty of the whole. To feel two contents at once then is to 


THE ABSOLUTE AND ITS ALTERNATIVE FORMS 139 


feel their unity and to feel them otherwise than the unity. We try 
to understand the relation of the felt content and the feeling of it on 
this analogy. They appear imperfectly distinct and unity means to 
reflection an imperfect distinction of the constituents. But the unity 
does not appear to reflection self-subsistent in the sense of the con- 
stituents being distinguishable from it. Such a self-subsistent unity is, 
however, demanded. 

37. As in the case of knowing and willing, so here one may 
imagine an alternation of realistic and idealistic or objectivistic and 
subjectivistic views. The unity of felt content and feeling may be 
understood as content that is indefinitely other than consciousness or 
as consciousness that is indefinitely other than the content. Value may 
be regarded as a kind of object though not as completely distinct from 
the consciousness of it as the known object or it may be taken to be 
an impersonalised feeling as somehow expressed in the object and thus 
objectified symbolically but not as a known character. Neither view 
appears to have any advantage over the other. Does reflection, how- 
ever, indicate how consciously the alternation may be stopped and the 
unity come to be definite in itself ? 

38. Taking value, the unity of felt content and feeling, realisti- 
cally as objective, we are reflectively aware of the value as referred 
to the known object that is distinguishable from it. We feel the object 
as known to be not the value, to be neutral, felt otherwise than the 
value, This is feeling the distinction of the object from the value of 
it and it is thus that the value tends to appear distinct in itself by 
having the object distinguished from it. So also if we take the value 
as an impersonalised feeling rather than as an objective character, in 
understanding it as expressed in the object we may feel the knowing 
of the object as somehow inside the impersonal feeling, involved in it 
without being confused with it, much as the image in a mirror shows 
the mirror to be unaffected by it. Thus we may be said to be aware 
of the felt object as well as of the individual feeling as distinct from 
their unity. 

39. So far the relation of felt content and feeling appears to be 
similar to the relation of two contents of the same feeling. In both 
there seems to be a unity from which its constituents are felt to be 
distinct. There is, however, discrepancy in an important respect. In 
appreciating a beautiful object where we feel the object as a whole 
as well as the parts, the parts that appear neutral are together felt to 
be distinct from the whole that appears beautiful. The beautiful object 
as beautiful thus appears in feeling as a whole isolated not only from 


138 THE ABSOLUTE AND ITS ALTERNATIVE FORMS 


amount to the barren statement that it is good to will what it is good 
to will. The demand is to find a vital meaning for the statement, to 
understatid how willing is a willing of itself. 

34. Reflection indicates how it is to be understood. There is 
the difference between ‘I will this act’ and ‘I will this act that I ought 
to will’, when the former is not contrasted with the latter, the will- 
consciousness is expressible as an imperative ‘let this act be done’. 
When, however, it is contrasted, it is expressed as mere information ‘I 
am doing it’ while the latter is properly expressed as an imperative 
‘let this be done’ which implies ‘I may not do it’. In contrast with it, the 
former appears as a statement of fact though by itself it appears as an 
imperative. The implication is that willing as represented by the form- 
er is itself a being that is to be superseded by willing as represented by 
the latter, that what is taken as free is implicitly not free, that therefore 
we will an act in order to get rid of the being of the act, get rid of the 
self-complacent will to continue in this being—what may be called 
the will to indolence. Reflection indicates the way but cannot under- 
stand willing or freedom at its limit. 

35. In reflective feeling there is the definite consciousness of an 
indefinite distinction of the content felt and the feeling of it. The 
content felt is not definite in itself like the known or willed content 
and is understood in reference to this indefinite distinction definitely 
appearing to reflection as though it were a unity. We say ‘as though’, 
because the unity does not appear as a definite self-subsistent unity 
from which its constituents are distinguishable. The implication of 
content and consciousness would be resolved in the sphere of feeling, 
if a unity of this kind could be apprehended. In the feeling of two 
contents together, we can reflectively apprehend a self-subsistent unity. 
Reflection accordingly demands such a unity of felt content and feeling 
but cannot itself understand it. 

36. To explain. In the apprehension of an object having spatial 
parts as beautiful, both the whole and the parts are felt but differently. 
The whole as a known content is distinct in itself and even if it be 
conceivably distinguished from the parts, the parts as in the whole 
cannot be distinguished from the whole and, therefore, can only be 
imperfectly distinguished from one another. The parts are, however, 
distinguished in the feeling way from the whole, being, in fact, felt as 
not felt in the way the whole is felt. The whole is felt to be beautiful 
but the parts are felt to be indifferent, felt to be ‘only known’, such 
feeling of their mere knownness being necessary for the appreciation 
of the beauty of the whole. To feel two contents at once then is to 


THE ABSOLUTE AND ITS ALTERNATIVE FORMS {4| 


act to be distinct from willing and yet to be nothing apart from it, 
or—to put it differently—for the act not to be and yet to be real as 
willing is to conceive the negation of an emergent distinct or the emer- 
gent distinction of a negation. To take the felt value also as a being 
from which known being is distinct is to be definitely conscious of an 
indefinite, to entertain without disbelief an appearance or an indiffer- 
ence of being and non-being. All the three—unrelatedness, negation 
of the emergent or the emergence of negation, and the indifference of 
being and non-being—imply unmeaning modes of negation to reflec- 
tion ; and yet the specifiable indefiniteness in the content of reflection 
demands to be defined precisely through such modes of negation. To 
admit the absolute in any form is to admit a negation that is unintelli- 
gible to the logic of the understanding. 

42. The absolute may be generally defined from the standpoint 
of reflection as what is free from the implicational dualism of content 
and consciousness, There are three ways in which this freedom can 
be understood. The content may be freed from its reference to con- 
sciousness i.e., from its contenthood., Or consciousness may be freed 
from its reference to content, in which case it ceases to be conscious 
of anything beyond itself. Or the implicational relation itself may be 
freed from its terms as a definite self-subsistent unity. The known that 
is free from its contenthood is known as the content that need not be 
content, is the self-evident is, just what we call truth—the absolute for 
knowing. Consciousness that is free from its content (in the sense 
that it solely constitutes its content, makes the content a content, 
creates its distinction from itself) is freedom of the will—the absolute 
for willing. The implicational relation of content and consciousness 
that is freed from their distinction as a unity is value in itself—the 
absolute for feeling. 

43. Truth, freedom and value then are absolutes for knowing. 
willing and feeling. It is impossible to avoid this triple formulation 
of the absolute though the notion that there are three absolutes would 
be just as illegitimate as the notion of there being only one absolute. 
The absolute is not a known content, about which alone the question 
‘one or many’ has meaning. Truth is self-evident and is as such known 
but is no content; of value as the self-subsistent unity of content and 
consciousness, we cannot say either that it is not known or that it is 
like truth self-evident and, therefore, is no content; and there is no 
question even of knowing freedom, the belief in freedom being, as 
Kant pointed out, no intuition but willing itself. It is meaningless 
therefore to cognitively assert that there are three absolutes or one 


142 THE ABSOLUTE AND ITS ALTERNATIVE FORMS 


absolute. The absolute has, however, to be formulated in this triple 
way. Each is absolute but what are here understood as three are only 
their verbal symbols, they themselves being understood together but 
not as together. 

44, For freedom, an alternative name would be reality. The 
real is understood either as will or what is given to will. Will means 
free will or freedom which though not theoretically known is not dis- 
believed, the belief in willing being willing itself. The expression of 
willing is always an imperative ‘let this be done’, which means no 
known being and, if anything, means ‘let this known situation here be 
negated, used as means, melted into the future’. Willing in this sense 
is the negation of being and is yet real, its reality consisting in the 
supersession of being. This comes out more explicitly in the con- 
sciousness of the imperative as the moral ought. Ought is real as the 
explicit rejection of the is or the actual that is known, explicit annulment 
of the known being of the presupposed ‘natural willing’. Known being 
may be real but reality is understood in its purity as the conative 
rejection of known being; or more accurately, since everything has to 
be understood here in conative terms, as the freedom to withdraw or 
abstain from ‘natural willing’. Natural willing, called ‘natural’ in 
reference to the ought, is in itself an imperative : the person who wills 
says to himself ‘let this be done’ and not ‘I am doing it’. So any 
willing and specially the willing to abstain from willing is unknowable 
freedom or reality. What is given to the will is also said to be real 
because either it is consumed by the will as a means to itself as end 
or if it cannot be so consumed, it has to be taken as an opposed will. 
Freedom or reality may accordingly be taken as synonymous, 

45. Freedom or reality then is not known or, in other words, 
it is meaningless to call it truth. The true is the self-evident, that 
of which we are conscious as known but not as known content. Free- 
dom or willing is not known at all or if we are aware of knowing it, 
we are aware of its knownness as illusory. We are only aware in one . 
grade of willing that a presupposed willing of another grade—natural 
willing, as we have called it—had an illusory being or appeared to be 
known. What is known, however, may be either the self-evident in 
its purity or some relation of given contents—meaning contents given 
to the will—with the form of self-evidence. Every judgment, as has 
been pointed out, involves a self-evident judgment of the form ‘to know 
A is to know B’. The self-evident in its purity is eternal truth and 
not reality : but a relation of given contents is not only said to be 
true but cannot also be said to be not real. 


THE ABSOLUTE AND ITS ALTERNATIVE FORMS 143 


46. The real then is not true but the true may be real. So 
speaking of truth and value, we may say that truth is not value but 
value is not untrue. Just as the predicates true and false do not apply 
at all to freedom or reality, so the predicates valuable or worthless 
do not apply to truth. Truth is not felt or if it is felt, it is felt as 
unfelt i.e, as no value. But the predicate false applies to value in 
so far as the falsity of a felt value is denied though its truth cannot 
therefore be asserted. A value like beauty is evident but not self- 
evident; it appears as a content to an appreciative consciousness and 
appears without being disbelieved as an illusion but not as what need 
not have reference to the consciousness. The self-evident is the true 
and the evident is true if it implies self-evidence and till the self- 
evidence becomes explicit, it cannot be said to be false. 

47. Again in respect of reality and value it may be said that 
while the predicates real and unreal do not apply to value, reality or 
freedom cannot be said not to be a value. Value is a felt being and 
is neither given to willing nor is itself willed into existence though it 
may appear as the fulfilment of willing. It is in this respect similar to 
truth which may shine out in fulfilment of willing in the form of atten- 
tion but is not brought into existence through its causality. Reality 
or freedom may, however, be felt and an act that is claimed to be 
willed is at least not morally indifferent if it is felt to have been 
genuinely willed. An act, in fact, that is felt to be morally indifferent 
is eo ipso felt to have been not free, not willing at all, the sole proof 
of freedom being in the retrospective moral valuation. To say that 
an act is free is to take it as not valueless though it may be going too 
far to assert that freedom is a value. Value is a felt being while free- 
dom or willing is felt as the real negation of a known being and can 
at best be the felt being of a negation (of known being). 

48. Thus it appears to be meaningless to speak of truth as a 
value, of value as real or of reality as true while we can significantly 
speak of value as not false, of reality as not valueless and of truth as 
not unreal, although we cannot positively assert value to be truth, 
reality to be value and truth to be reality. Each of them is absolute 
and they cannot be spoken of as one or many. In one direction their’ 
identity and difference are alike meaningless and in another direction 
their identity is intelligible though not assertable. Truth is unrelated 
to value, value to reality and reality to truth while value may be truth, 
reality value and truth reality. The absolute may be regarded in this 
sense as an alternation of truth, value and reality. 


KNOWLEDGE AND TRUTH 


ANALYSIS 


(1-2) The doctrine of truth and error stands on a different 
level of self-consciousness from that occupied by Logic or Epistemo- 
logy. The level is indicated by the contrast between falsity which is 
the content of rejection and negation which is the content of disbelief. 
Disbelief is a kind of knowledge and negation is said to be known in 
the sense that truth may be asserted of it. But rejection is not know- 
ledge and falsity cannot be said to be known, though it is something 
of which we have some kind of awareness. The consciously unknown 
or the unknowable, the false, the abstractly possible, the impossible 
or the unnameable and what is only willed or felt—these are only 
‘half-thoughts’ and not accomplished meanings. These should be the 
subject-matter of a new philosophical discipline and not of Logic or 
Epistemology which is concerned with complete thoughts or accom- 
plished meanings. The doctrine of truth and error would really 
belong to this new discipline. (3) Epistemology as the study of the 
knowing function is based on a kind of introspection which is neither 
logical mediation nor mere internal perception. It is a self-evident 
transition in self-consciousness, and is exemplified by Kant’s tran- 
scendental method. (4) Since the time of Kant there have been 
rival epistemologies each with its assurance of finality. It is only a 
doctrine of truth and error that can possibly adjudicate between them. 
This doctrine must, therefore, be based on a still deeper assurance of 
finality. And the possible falsehood of a theory based on epistemolo- 
gical introspection suggests that the concept of falsity belongs neither 
to Logic nor to Epistemology as they are commonly understood. 
(5-7) Kant gives a hint of a transcendental Psychology behind the 
general theory of knowledge. The systematic doctrine of truth and 
error would be the same as or a part of transcendental Psychology 
and it must itself be a body of knowledge. 

(8) Knowledge and truth have to be defined in terms of each 
other. Knowledge is what alone is true and truth is what alone is 
known. It is only metaphorically that we speak of the truth of a 
feeling or willing. (9) An object may be known without being 
known explicitly to be true. But knowing is never known except as 
implied in the assertion of the truth about its content. This, how- 
ever, may be disputed and a perception may be held to be known in 
memory without any question arising as to the truth of the memory. 


148 KNOWLEDGE AND TRUTH 


(10) There are reasons, however, to hold that the past perception is 
not known by any method by which an object is known. (11) There 
is occasion to know a past cognition only if its content is challenged 
or confirmed. (12) Neither is there any perception of knowing at 
the time of knowing. In perception, a content is never distinguished 
from it, so that it is not possible to know whether they are synchronous 
or not. The question, therefore, about the temporal relation of 
Cognition and its perception does not arise at all. 

(13) Cognition is not thus known by psychological introspec- 
tion conceived either as perception or as memory. It is known by 
epistemological introspection such as is involved in the explicit aware- 
ness of truth. (14-15) Though there is this kind of introspective 
knowledge of knowing, there is no such knowledge of feeling or 
willing. There may, however, be a belief in the latter along with and 
implied in the knowledge of knowing. (16-18) Three consequences 
follow from the above: (a) there is no such thing as false know- 
ledge; (b) there is no knowledge of objects as merely distinct but 
not otherwise related to one another : that is to say, the known content 
must be explicitly coherent and not merely co-existent with other 
known contents; (c) interpretations of knowing in terms of non- 
cognitive modes are unacceptable. 

(19-22) The view that truth is predicated of the subsistent 
‘proposition’ and that it is a relation between knowledge and its object 
cannot be accepted. The so-called ‘proposition’ or the merely meant is 
an illegitimate abstraction and no predicate may be asserted of it. It is, 
again, a misleading use of the term ‘relation’ to speak of the knowledge 
of an object as in relation or as the relation to the object. The reference 
of knowing to its object is no relation at all. For, there cannot be 
any relation without mutual distinction. And in the present case, 
though knowing is known as distinct from its object, the object is not 
known as distinct from knowing. The so-called distinction of the 
object from knowing is only unrelatedness. (23) Though this one- 
sided distinction is not, properly speaking, a relation, yet it has to be 
necessarily symbolised as a relation. (24) To knowledge, the object 
is only evident and not related to it though symbolised as such. To 
willing and feeling, however, this symbolism is real and unrelatedness 
is a believed quasi-relation. 

(25) It has been said before that knowing is known only when 
confirmed by other cognitions and as so confirmed. But this entails 
the paradox that the confirming relation constitutes knowing and yet 
falls beyond it. (26) Confirmation is not a character either of the 


ANALYSIS 149 


cognition or of its object. It is not felt as a character of the complete 
cognition that is confirmed. The object, again, is unrelated to the 
object of the confirming cognition. (27) The confirmation of which 
we are aware in the awareness of a cognition implies a conscious dis- 
tinction of it from the confirming cognition but not the distinction 
of the latter from the former. Though it is not a known relation, it 
has to be symbolised as a relation. And what is symbolised is a 
metapsychical or spiritual process. (28) There is symbolising in 
another direction. Confirmation in the epistemic sphere is a spiritual 
overtone of cognition as a psychic fact. It is itself a metaphor for a 
mode of cognitive realisation. 


KNOWLEDGE AND TRUTH 
J. PLACE OF THE DOCTRINE OF TRUTH AND ERROR 


1. The present-day doctrine of truth and error may be regarded 
as a part of Logic or Epistemology but it is to be recognised as stand- 
ing on a level of self-consciousness different from that on which these 
subjects, as ordinarily conceived, appear to stand. The level is indi- 
cated by the contrast between the concept of falsity and the concept 
of negation. There are two grades of negation from both of which 
falsity has to be distinguished. When we disbelieve a content, we 
may only exclude it from a particular context while believing it to 
exist in another context. Such exclusion may be regarded as nega- 
tion of the first grade. In the second grade, there is exclusion from 
a context without inclusion in another, disbelief without a positive 
complementary belief. It is what is sometimes called pure negation, the 
content negated being only known to be non-existent. Negation in both 
the grades is said to be known in the sense that truth may be asserted 
of it. Disbelief here amounts to a kind of knowledge which, however, 
is not the case when we reject a content as false. (The false is not 
simply the non-existent but the non-existent as appearing existent, to 
reject which is not logically to deny). We cannot say that we know 
the falsity, for then falsity would be regarded as a truth. We should 
only say that we are aware of the falsity: we only disbelieve the 
content without knowing its non-existence. The non-existence of the 
possible, as in the second grade of negation, is a tautology but the 
non-existence of the false is meaningless. 

2. Objective Logic recognises only the first grade of negation. 
It takes note of existents only, disbelieving them only in the sense of 
believing them as outside or distinct from the context in question and 
knows nothing of pure non-existence, far less of falsity, Pure non- 
existence is admissible as a known content only in epistemology and 
in such logic as is undistinguished from it. The believed and the dis- 
believed are taken here as two classes of known content and what is 
common to them is the possible which is a quasi-objective or ‘sub- 
sistent’ content from the epistemic stand-point. But epistemology 
confines or should confine itself to the known, the possible being 
known in the disbelief in its existence as a complete meaning. It 
should have nothing to do with what is only a problem in meaning 


152 KNOWLEDGE AND TRUTH 


as distinct from an accomplished meaning, with the consciously un- 
known or the unknowable, and with the false. We have no knowledge 
of the absence of knownness ; we speak of it and are aware of it 
variously in respect of the abstractly possible, of the impossible or 
the unnameable, or of what is only willed or felt but such awareness 
is not knowledge. Half-thoughts like these should find place in a new 
philosophical subject though they are as a matter of fact admitted in 
epistemology or logic. The doctrine of truth and error would really 
belong to this subject. 

3. Epistemology is founded on a species of introspection 
different from what is called psychological introspection. The latter, 
if it knows knowing at all, knows it as indistinguishable in quality 
from mere believing. A qualitative distinction between knowing and 
believing is, however, known, being just what is called the logical 
character which is apprehended by a new quality of introspection. 
It is a confusion to speak of the function of knowing or the logical 
character being known by a logical procedure again. Kantian criticism 
is sometimes distinguished as logical from the criticism of Locke 
which is taken to be psychological. But the particular logical method 
by which Kant obtained his transcendental constants has never been 
identified or named in logic. There is, indeed, a quasi-logical transi- 
lion from the logical forms to the apriori functions but it is not transi- 
tion from one objective content to another as one would ex- 
pect in logic. The transcendental method is a self-evident transi- 
lion, a process in self-consciousness and not in consciousness and, 
as such, should be taken as a kind of introspection which is neither 
logical mediation nor mere internal perception. To be necessarily 
implied or presupposed by the logical content is no logical relation 
at all nor is it a name for the mere psychological mode of knowing 
the content. 

4. Epistemological introspection knows only this presupposi- 
tion, the functional character that distinguishes the known content 
from the merely believed content. It claims a special quality of 
certitude, deeper than that claimed by mere objective or logical cogni- 
tion, cognition through what Kant would call the uncritical employ- 
ment of reason. Kant, in fact, hoped that critical reflection, as he 
understood it, would establish a final science of knowledge above the 
reach of philosophical controversy. The hope has not been realised 
and rival epistemologies have been put forward since his time, each 
claiming the same degree of certainty as that set up by him. The 
conflict of these assured theories of knowledge has brought to the fore 


KNOWLEDGE AND TRUTH 153 


the importance of a doctrine of truth and error competent to adjudi- 
cate between them and, therefore, based on a still deeper assurance of 
finality. The possible falsity of a theory based on epistemological 
introspection suggests the unique character of the general concept of 
falsity which, as we have indicated, belongs neither to logic nor to 
epistemology, as these subjects are ordinarily conceived. 

5. The assurance of critical reflection does not in itself con- 
stitute the subjective criterion for distinguishing truth from error and 
cannot be the level of self-consciousness from which one can sit in 
judgment on an epistemology. A _ criticism of epistemology is 
demanded to-day, of the very subject that emerged as the criticism 
of the logical or dogmatic procedure of reason. The doctrine of 
truth and error, if it could be systematised according to a principle, 
would furnish such a criticism of criticism. The two degrees of criti- 
cism are not distinguished and there is so far no principle on which 
we may decide between rival epistemologies. In the Kantian 
critiques, there is the hint of a transcendental Psychology behind the 
general theory of knowledge, with an occasional recognition of the 
necessity of distinguishing between them. Kant speaks, for example, 
of error being due to the ‘subjective use’ of reason as distinct from its 
intrinsically logical function and of certain principles being real to 
reason as employed in an extra-theoretic ‘interest’. His theory of 
knowledge is properly concerned with the general logical function 
which is common to true knowing and error. His references to reason 
as a subjective faculty capable of perverse or extralogical use are 
accordingly to be looked upon as mere obiter dicta within his 
epistemology and as really belonging to transcendental Psychology 
which was always assumed but never sufficiently distinguished by 
him. 

6. The systematic doctrine of truth and error would be the same 
as or a part of this transcendental Psychology. To empirical psycho- 
logy, the logical function going astray and yielding a false content con- 
veys no meaning at all. Logic can recognise error only as a blind fact 
and epistemology should regard it as a miracle: the question of ex- 
plaining its possibility does not arise at all in these subjects. Yet a 
theory of truth and error is ordinarily claimed to be established by a 
conscious or self-conscious logical method and there is no recognition 
so far of any mystery of cognitive level about it. One tendency, how- 
ever, is noticeable in theories thus established—viz., to slur over the 
absolute distinction that is recognised in commonsense between truth 
and error. The suggestion is put forward in different forms that error 


154 KNOWLEDGE AND TRUTH 


is a partial truth, truth within a limited context; and it is sometimes pro- 
posed in a manner to drop the conception of truth itself, a content 
being taken to be true only in the sense that it is known or ‘asserted’, 
Such flagrant opposition to commonsense requires to be justified by 
something more than the consideration that it is conceivable and logi- 
cally irrefutable. It is necessary to show on the one hand that a doc- 
trine of this kind is itself knowledge and not a mere hypothesis and on 
the other that a theory admitting the absolute distinction of truth and 
error cannot be maintained. 

7. Here we have the hint of a principle or criterion for deciding 
between rival theories of knowledge. An epistemology must itself be 
a body of knowledge; there is no room for a hypothesis or a mere 
conceivability in this region where finality is claimed for every asser- 
tion. With regard, for example, to a voluntarist theory of knowledge, 
the preliminary question must be asked in what sense, if at all, willing 
is known, if psychological introspection yields knowledge of it, and 
whether some spiritual consciousness of the practical kind amounts to 
the knowledge of the impossibility of pure knowing. There is the con- 
nected negative demand that theoretic reasons have to be adduced for 
the rejection of a theory that keeps within the commonsense distinction 
of truth and error. Such a theory, in fact, has a prior claim to considera- 
tion, even if these theories can interpret knowing all the way without 
stumbling. The interpretation of the cognitive by the non-cognitive— 
by willing or feeling or any superior spiritual process—is prima facie 
suspect and can be accepted only if a purely cognitive interpretation 
is shown to be impossible. 


II. MUTUAL IMPLICATION OF KNOWLEDGE AND TRUTH 


8. Two propositions may be stated about knowledge—that 
knowing is known only as implied in the explicit awareness of truth 
and that truth is asserted only of a content that is known. Knowledge 
and truth have to be defined in terms of each other, the former as what 
alone is true and the latter as what alone is known. It is only meta- 
phorically that we speak of the truth of a feeling or willing; and values 
in the non-cognitive sphere are what we only believe but do not know. 
We may examine in this connexion two positions that appear to be 
fundamentally opposed to our view, viz., that knowing is known by 
psychological introspection and that truth is a relation, not to a 
known, but to a_ suggested possible content, an idea or mere 
meaning. 


KNOWLEDGE AND TRUTH 155 
(i) KNOWING IS NOT KNOWN BY PSYCHOLOGICAL INTROSPECTION 


9. We may know an object without knowing it explicitly to be true 
but do we ever know the psychic fact of knowing except as implied in 
the assertion of truth about its content? It may be contended that 
knowing is known by memory or internal perception, like any other 
psychic fact. The past perception of an object, for example, may be 
taken to be remembered in the remembering of the object without any 
conscious reference to the truth of it. When we remember an objective 
event, we do not at once reproduce every detail of it and need not 
know that it was perceived. But just as omitted objective details are 
gradually reinstated, so also, it may be said, does the subjective fact of 
perception come to be known in the course of the mere fulfilment of 
the memory without any question arising as to the truth of the memory. 
Is such a contention tenable ? 

10. There is in the first place the obvious difficulty that the past 
perception was not perceived in the past and so cannot be said to be 
now remembered, unless we admit either that all perception is impli- 
cifly perception of perception or that we can remember without having 
perceived. Nor can the past perception be said to be now internally 
or introspectionally perceived, for the objectf perception is ordinarily 
understood to be synchronous with the perception. There cannot be 
also any question of inferring the past perception from the remembered 
object of it, for that presupposes, what we never had previously, know- 
ledge of other objects and their cognition as together. To know the 
cognition of object is not to know the cognition and the object to be 
together. 

11. The past perception is, indeed, known but it is not known by 
memory, perception or inference,—by any method, in fact, by which an 
object is known. There is occasion to know the past psychic fact if 
the object or content of it is challenged or confirmed. If any grounds 
now present themselves for doubting the reality of the past objective 
event, the doubt is laid by the assurance that we actually perceived it. 
Or, again, if any facts or inferences now yield an explicit confirmation 
of the reality of the event, the sense of confirmation implies the aware- 
ness of the past perception of the event. We cannot imagine any other 
occasion for such awareness. Not that we can say why the awareness 
of the past cognition emerges. We know only that this awareness is 
at the same time awareness of the confirmation or the rejected doubt 
that is involved in the explicit assertion of the objective content as 


true. Properly speaking, the knowledge of cognition does not emerge 


156 KNOWLEDGE AND TRUTH 


in time as the cognition itself emerges and so does not demand expla- 
nation. We start with this knowledge which is the same as the 
knowledge of the truth of the objective content. The time-position of 
the content determines, not the time position but only a differential 
quality of its cognition,—a quality, however, which does not appear 
ta affect the knowledge of the cognition at all. 

12. There is apparently then no memory of a cognition in the 
mere interest in fact, as distinct from interest in the truth of the fact. Is 
there an introspective perception of knowing at the time of the know- 
ing? The question is really illegitimate; for, as just shown, there is 
no possibility of knowing the synchronousness of a content and the 
perception of it. A content and its perception are never known in- 
dependently to be taken as together or successive : the content is never 
distinguished from its perception, though the perception distinguishes, 
manifests or reveals the content. If this holds good when the content 
is Objective, it holds good with greater reason when the content is cog- 
nition itself. ‘The cognition as we have said has no time-position but 
cnly a quality due to the position of its objective content; and the know- 
ledge of the cognition has not even this quality, so that there is no 
question at all of the cognition and the knowledge of it being tempo- 
rarily related. We conclude then that neither a past nor a present 
cognition can be said to be known as such for the purposes of 
psychology. 

13. Cognition is, indeed, known but not by the so-called psycho- 
logical introspection, conceived either as perception or memory. It 
is known by what we have called epistemological introspection such 
as is involved in the explicit awareness of truth. All that psychology 
claims to know about cognition, it gets either through this unconfessed 
epistemological reflection or through a blend of imagination and verbal 
interpretation which yields only the appearance of knowledge. This 
blend is what passes by the name of psychological introspection which 
can never know a psychic process as a fact as distinct from fancy or 
mere meaning. Belief in psychic reality emerges only as the implica- 
tion of belief in a spiritual value like truth or beauty or obligatoriness. 

14. The object of cognition is distinguished by the cognition 
though it is not known as distinct from it. In the awareness of the 
cognition, the cognition is distinguished from its object which then 
as not appearing distinct from it becomes indefinite. In the awarer 
ness of a feeling or willing, however, the psychic fact is not distinguished 
from the object, the object being only distinguished from it. The psy- 
chic fact and its object are in neither case presented as mutually dis- 


KNOWLEDGE AND TRUTH 157 


tinct : the cognitive fact is only distinguished and the non-cognitive 
fact is only distinguished from. This is apparent from the nature of 
the value in apprehension of which the awareness of the psythic fact 
is implied. Truth does not appear as a character of the object while 
beauty or sacredness appears as such. Hence in the awareness of 
truth, the object is indefinite and its cognition definite while the cons- 
ciousness of beauty etc., implies the reverse—viz., the object as definite 
and the corresponding psychic fact as indefinite. The awareness of 
the fact of cognition accordingly itself amounts to a cognition, while 
that of the hon-cognitive psychic fact is nothing more than a belief. 
There is no introspective belief in the reality of the mental except as 
the implication of belief in value, and there is introspective knowledge. 
as distinct from belief, of knowing only, not of feeling or willing, 

15. There may, however, be a belief in willing or feeling along 
with and implied in the knowledge of knowing. In the knowledge of 
knowing, the object of the knowing is cognitively indefinite but that does 
not prevent it from being definitely real to a non-cognitive interest. 
Such indefiniteness of the object does not prejudice the complete- 
ness of the cognition of it, though the feeling or willing that it implies 
points to a new conception about cognition—viz., the necessity of sub- 
jectively realising it. The non-cognitive value of the object known—e.g., 
its beauty or scaredness—demands to be realised as the truth-value (if 
that can be called value at all) of the cognition, though the truth which 
has already presented itself does not suffer because it is not yet realiscd. 
Again, just as there is the demand to realise other values as truth, 
so there may be demand in the non-cognitive interest to realise truth 
as other value, realise it, as we say, in life. Thus something can be 
done through feeling or willing to secure the subjective maturation of 
knowing, as these too may be matured by a discipline of knowing. 

16. We have so far tried to establish that psychological intros- 
pection is not knowledge of psychic fact, that psychic facthood emerges 
only as the implication of belief in value, and that knowing alone among 
psychic facts, as implied in the belief in truth, can be said to be known. 
Certain consequences follow. There is, in the first place, no such 
thing as false knowledge. If knowing could be known as an indifferent 
psychic fact, both truth and falsity would be predicable of it. But if 
knowing is known only as the implicate of the awareness of truth, 
to know an object is to know it as in some sense implicitly true. Truth 
cannot be taken simply as additional confirmation of what already 1s 
known indifferently, though the explicit knowledge of truth itself testi- 
fies to a prior knowing of the object without this conscious asser- 


158 KNOWLEDGE AND TRUTH 


tion of truth. Not that the truth of this mere object-knowledge can be 
said to be now recognised: the loose use of the term ‘recognition’ jg 
responsible for a good deal of epistemological superstition. Knowledge 
is implicit knowledge of truth only in the sense that the explicit know- 
ledge of truth is the knowledge of a knowing that was not known. It 
does not mean that truth as a character or content of the knowing was 
somehow hidden in it. We can only say that the knowing, when it 
was not known, could not be false, as then it would be no knowing at 
all. An object to be known need not be known explicitly to be true; 
but if it now appears to be not true, it is never said to have ‘een known 
but taken at best to have been believed. 


17. Another consequence of the view that knowing is only know 
in the knowledge of truth is that there is no knowledge of objects as 
merely distinct but not otherwise related to one another. To be known, 
an object must not only be distinct but consciously confirmed by the 
contents of other cognitions. The known content must be explicitly 
coherent and not merely co-existent with other known contents. ‘The 
coherence emerges not only within the content of a particular cognition 
but also between it and the contents of cognitions that fall beyond it. 
The content as a whole of a given cognition, without losing complete- 
ness or self-sufficiency, is felt to be confirmed by the contents of other 
cognitions that retain their distinction from it and do not get fused. The 
coherent plurality within the content may be taken as representing a 
fusion of cognitions, although the coherence does not appear as cons- 
cious confirmation but not, therefore, also as a mere relation of co- 
cxistent elements in a whole. 


18. <A third consequence of our view about the knowing of know- 
ing is that interpretations of knowing in terms of feeling or willing are 
excluded as not themselves amounting to knowledge. If the awareness 
of willing, for example, is not knowledge but at best a belief, a volun- 
tarist interpretation of knowledge has to be regarded, not as a scientific 
or factual theory, but as a prescription to imagine or believe the fact 
of knowing in a particular way for some practical end or purpose. It 
is a contradiction, in fact, to claim a voluntarist epistemology to be 
true, though it may be practically useful or even obligatory as an im- 
perative to the imagination. If cognition is only a means to activity, 
the knowledge that it is so cannot again be a means to further activity 
without leading to an infinite regress. The awareness that a belief 
works and is, therefore, cognition does not itself appear again as an 
efficient belief. 


KNOWLEDGE AND TRUTH 159 
(ii) TRUTH IS NOT RELATION TO A MERE MEANING 


19. We have examined the proposition that knowing is only 
known as the implication of the awareness of truth. There is next the 
converse proposition that truth is asserted only of knowing. The affir- 
mation of truth in respect of a feeling or willing is, as we have said, 
only a rhetorical expression of its non-cognitive value. Within know- 
ing, however, truth is sometimes taken to be asserted, not of the known 
content, but of the merely suggested content, of what has been pro- 
posed to be called ‘proposition’ as distinct from judgment. We have 
said that the awareness of the truth of a content is knowledge of the 
content as known, not merely suggested. The content is known as 
known for the first time in such awareness; and to say that it is true 
is to say that it is known as known. In the view just suggested, how- 
ever, the assertion of the truth of a content means only the assertion 
that it is known, not that it is known to be or to have been known. 
The subject of the assertion ‘it is known’ is taken to stand only for a 
meant or ‘subsistent’ content as distinct from a known or existent 
content. The predicate known—or what is its equivalent, true—is 
understood to be external to it, to be however, not in relation to it, but 
the relation itself, being thus at once term and relation, constituting 
what is described as a ‘flavour’ of the content. 

20. Our objection to such a view is two-fold. On the one hand 
the merely meant or subsistent content—the possible, as it may be 
called—is an illegitimate abstraction of which no predicate may be 
asserted, and on the other, the knowledge or assertion of a content can- 
not be understood as a relation, far less as in relation to it. The first 
Objection comes out definitely if we consider an existential judgment 
of the negative from ‘A is not’. As we have already indicated, the 
disbelief in A here may be knowledge but need not imply belief in A 
as having being in some context. Properly speaking, therefore, such 
knowledge cannot be called a judgment at all. A is here known as the 
possible only through the apparent predicate non-existence, it being a 
mere tautology to say that the possible is not actual. The possible has 
NO positive being except as implied by verbal fixation. ‘A is not exis- 
tent’ is only an illegitimate extension of the form of a negative judg- 
ment like ‘A is not B’ which implies the existence of A. It should 
accordingly be recognised as a mere trickery of language: there is no 
belief in A here, the disbelief being the whole of the knowledge. 

21. Our second objection is that it is a misleading use of the 
word ‘relation’ to speak of the knowledge or assertion of an object 


160 KNOWLEDGE AND TRUTH 


as in relation or as the relation to the object. The realist, we hold, is 
right when he takes knowledge as external to or distinct from the object: 
knownness cannot be understood as an attribute or character of the 
object. When we are aware of the knowledge of an object, we distin- 
guish the knowledge from the object though the distinguishing does not 
amount to the knowledge of a factual distinction. It appears to be 
wholly wrong, however, to speak of the object as distinct from the 
knowing of it. We are not aware of the distinction from knowing as 
an objective fact. Nor is the knowing of the object the distinguishing 
of the object from itself. The object known is simply distinguished: 
it is not related at all to its knowing in the way of identity or distinc- 
tion. If the act of knowing or distinguishing be knowledge of the 
distinction of the object from itself, that itself would be a term known 
as distinct from itself and so on indefinitely. We have, therefore, to 
recognise that the reference of knowing to its object is no distinction 
or relation at all, that though we are aware of the knowing of the object 
as distinct from the object, the so-called distinction of the object 
from knowing is only unrelatedness of which we are aware but not 
cognitively. 

22. To explain the concept of unrelatedness. When two con- 
tents are known together, they need not be known as together. They 
may not only be known as unrelated in space, time or nature: they 
may not even be known as barely distinct from one another. To know 
two contents, it is only necessary to know that one is distinct from the 
other but not that the other is distinct from it. When two contents 
A and B are thus known, A being distinct from B, B is known, not as 
distinct from nor therefore identical with A, but as unrelated to A. 
In fact, even when we know them as mutually distinct, the two dis- 
tinctions are not known as making up one distinction. They alternate 
and the alternation appears, not as distinction between A and B, but as 
their unity or whole in space, time or nature. They are then not only 
known together but also as together, though the distinction of A from 
B and that of B from A do not cease to be themselves distinct. Hence 
it follows that to know one content as distinct from another is in no case 
to know the other as distinct from it but only to know it as unrelated, 
though the two distinctions may sometimes be known together. It is 
thus intelligible how while knowing is known as distinct from its object, 
the object is known, not as distinct from, but as unrelated to the 
knowing. 

23. When, therefore, in the view under discussion it is held that 
knowledge is the relation to the object, what is really meant is that 


KNOWLEDGE AND TRUTH 161 


knowledge is distinct from its object but not reversely. Our contention 
is that such onesided distinction is not relation at all. There is no 
relation without mutual distinction which implies some form ‘of objec- 
tive togetherness. Knowing and its object are not objectively together 
and, therefore, even the known distinction of knowing from its object, 
which we admit, is not relation. Yet such onesided distinction has to 
be necessarily symbolised as a relation. We have to speak of two 
things—knowing and object, though we know they are not objectively 
two, not known as two. The awareness of the distinction as onesided 
is the awareness of the evidentness, manifestation or prakasa of the 
object, which is no relation but is only symbolised by it. The evident- 
ness of the known content is a category utterly distinct from relation, 
{0 recognise which is to appreciate the differential character of knowing. 

24. We have said that the object is known, not as distinct from 
or identical with its knowing, but as unrelated to it. Properly, how- 
ever, we should say that it is known simply as evident and that it is 
not known as related to knowing. There is no knowledge of the 
circumstance of unrelatedness but only an extra-cognitive. awareness 
of it. As already pointed out, it is only in the awareness of willing 
or feeling, as distinct from that of knowing, that the object referred 
to is distinguished from the psychic fact. This distinguishing is not 
the knowledge of distinction or relation but only a direction or phase 
of willing or feeling. The object is not known as related to knowing 
but is willed as an end to be realised or felt as a value that is being 
realised. There is, therefore, no conflict between the deliverances of 
cognitive and non-cognitive consciousness; what we are not aware of 
cognitively we are aware of non-cognitively. The distinction between 
these deliverances is sometimes overlooked; and we have realistic and 
idealistic theories of knowledge asserting the object to be distinct from 
or identical with the knowing of it. The former take the willed dis- 
tinction and the latter the felt identity-in-difference as though it were 
the known distinction of the object from or the known identity of the 
object with the knowing of it. To knowledge, the object is only evident 
and not related to it though symbolised as such. To willing or feeling 
this symbolism is real and unrelatedness is a believed quasi-relation 
which is by confusion taken to be a known relation. 


Il]. NATURE OF LOGICAL CONFIRMATION 


25. Truth, we have said, is asserted of the known content. The 
assertion amounts to saying that the content is known as known, 


162 KNOWLEDGE AND TRUTH 


Knownness or truth is external to it in the sense that knowing is dis- 
tinguished from its object. Knownness is no character of the object, 
being but the fact of knowing, the knowing that reveals the object as 
evident, as distinct but not distinct from itself. This knowing is also 
known, known only when confirmed by other cognitions and as so con- 
firmed. The confirmation is not known as a relation within the content 
of the knowing, for then there would be no break between the content 
of one knowing and that of another. We have as a matter of fact many 
cognitions and a cognition does not, consciously at any rate, refer to 
the entire universe. The elimination of the distinction between cogni- 
tions or—what is the same thing—the conscious presentation of truth 
as single may be a spiritual ideal but we have no right to assume it 
in the characterisation of an actual cognition. Since a cognition, how- 
ever, is not known except when confirmed, there emerges the paradox 
of the confirming relation constituting it and yet falling beyond it. A 
cognition, as we have seen, must be complete but it is never known 
except as confirmed by other cognitions. 

‘ 26. Not that confirmation is known as a character of the cog- 
nition, or of its object. The object is unrelated to the object of the 
confirming cognition and the so-called systemic relation is only an 
imaginary objectification of the subjective circumstance of confirma- 
tion. Nor is the subjective circumstance felt as a character of the 
complete cognition that is confirmed. ‘There are cases, indeed, where 
the confirming cognitions get telescoped into the confirmed cognition; 
but there the latter gives place to a new cognition of which the content 
is a synthesis of the contents of previous cognitions and presents the 
confirming relation as some immediate relation of coherence like that 
between the substantive and the adjective. The cognition, however, 
that is said to be confirmed by others without prejudice to its complete- 
ness does not get modified in the confirmation; it only gets to be known 
through it. There may be a strengthening of belief but that is only 
a psychological circumstance. Logically then, confirmation is not a 
known character either of the cognition or of the object of it. 

27. The confirmation of which we are aware in the awareness 
of a cognition implies a conscious distinction of it from the confirming 
cognitions but not the distinction of the latter from the former. It is 
accordingly no known relation of the cognitions, though as the one- 
sided distinction is there, it has to be symbolised as a relation. What 
is symbolised here is a metapsychic or spiritual process which though 
not itself a cognition is not indifferent to cognition. The given cogni- 
tion is known only in the assertion of truth in respect of it, truth that 


KNOWLEDGE AND TRUTH 163 


is manifested in conscious confirmation symbolised as a relation. It 
is this pseudo-relation that has been elaborated into the objective sym- 
bolism of a system of relations, the system that is said to constitute the 
known object and which may be regarded as a shadow of truth, an 
imaginary projection of the knowing of knowing or self-consciousness. 
It is important to recognise that system is but a symbolism. 

28. There is symbolising in another direction. Confirmation in 
the subjective or epistemic sphere is no psychic character or relation 
but a non-cognitive or spiritual overtone of cognition as a psychic fact. 
It is itself a metaphor or symbolism : the strengthening or matura- 
tion of knowledge is but a figure of speech for a mode of cognitive 
realisation. The process may be otherwise symbolised as the shining 
out of thought, with the attenuation of error, as a mirror that catches 
the reflection of truth. Truth cannot be characterised; it has only to 
be symbolised by the evident content of a cognition, appearing within 
its magic interior. The interior or reference of a cognition is the con- 
scious gap or discontinuity between the cognition and its object, the 
sphere of what may be called problematic thought—comprising incom- 
plete but completing meanings, the consciously unknown, the con- 
tradictory, and this circumstances of confirmation—all centering round 
the evident content that is known. Truth is known as this evident 
content but not reversely : the particular known content is not known 
as the truth but is only demanded to be so known, by the process 
of confirmation and the consequent or independent process of the dis- 
sipation of error inherent in it. 


FACT AND THOUGHT OF FACT 


ANALYSIS 


(1-2) ‘Fact’ means that which is believed. It may be the 
existent, or the non-existence of a possible existent, or, again, that 
which is neither existent nor non-existent e.g., the moral ‘ought’ or 
freedom. (3) -The possible existent or that about which there can be 
an actual question of existence is a fact that is said to be ‘thought’, 
That which does not imply the question of existence cannot- properly 
be said to be ‘thought’. (4-5) This may be disputed and the ‘sub- 
sistent’ may be cited as an instance of a thought-content which does 
not necessarily involve the question of existence. The contention, 
however, is inadmissible. The ‘subsistent’ is, no doubt, a meaning or 
thought-content, but there appears to be no escape from the view that 
the subsistent also means the possible existent. A content abstracted 
from its possible existence is not a thought-content but only a signi- 
ficant speakable. (6) A speakable content that is not thinkable may 
or may not be a fact. The false or the unreal is a significant unthink- 
able that is not a fact, for the assertion of falsity implies pure disbelief. 
(7) The purely disbelieved content has no reference to existence. 
There is no actual question about its existence : we may have at best 
a possible question. (8-10) The ‘false’ is sometimes distinguished 
from the ‘unreal’, the former being taken to be asserted of a proposi- 
tion and the latter of a thing. The distinction is not tenable in the 
case of the ‘illusory’. The illusory snake e.g., can be spoken of in- 
differently as false or unreal. The term ‘unreal’, however, is apparent- 
ly wider than the term ‘false’. An unreal content is properly said to 
be false if it was believed and hence could be the subject of an actual 
question. 

(11) Belief in some fact is implied in all negative assertion. To 
say that a content is non-existent implies belief in some actual existent; 
to say that it is false implies belief in some possible existent; to take 
it as imaginary or contradictory requires no belief in a possible existent 
but only, in fact, about which there is no actual question of existence. 
(12) Though falsity implies belief in a possible existent, the thing 
believed in is only some possible existent which is not anything deter- 
minate. As an indeterminate entity, it is the unthinkable. (13-14) A 
speakable content is either fact or no-fact. Fact is either thinkable or 
unthinkable. The unthinkable fact is either assertable or unassertable. 
Just as the thinkable fact is the possible existent as determinate, the un- 


168 FACT AND THOUGHT OF FACT 


thinkable assertable is the possible existent as indeterminate. The in- 
determinate possible existent is believed to be other than the believing, 
i.c., to be something that is objective. What is believed without being 
objective, viz., concrete subjectivity would be the unthinkable, unassert- 
able fact. (15) The indeterminate fact that is said to be possibly existent 
is the objective or the assertable in general. It is possible to ask if objec- 
tivity is fact or no-fact. The question would be an actual one representing 
a spiritual uncertainty. (16) A subjective or spiritual fact is, like bare 
objectivity, a fact beyond the question of existence. But while there 
cannot be any actual question about the latter, about the former there 
cannot be even a possible question. The suggestion that objectivity is 
unreal is not meaningless. It is not worthless either, for there is a 
spiritual feeling of the symbolistic character of the object and of the 
vanity of the object-interest as independent of the spiritual interest. 
(17) A question about the facthood of the spiritual is meaningless. 
(18) No question arises about the facthood of the spiritual itself 
unless it is artificially objectified by language or otherwise. To 
realise that it is an unmeanable content would be to reject the ques- 
tion itself as illusory and not to obtain an answer to the question. (19) 
Doubt about an object implies the belief in some object or in bare 
objectivity. The apparent doubt about a subjective fact implies cer- 
tainty about the fact itself and uncertainty about its symbolic charac- 
terisation by an objective category. (20) The bare object or objecti- 
vity cannot be disbelieved but there may be a spiritual doubt about 
its being other than the spiritual, for the object may be conceived as only 
the self-symbolising function of the spirit. The suggestion has value 


for the spiritual consciousness but it is not assertable in the secular 
consciousness. 


FACT AND THOUGHT OF FACT 


I. Fact means what is believed : what a person believes is a 
fact to him. The characterisation of fact as what stands in a constant 
system of relations or as what is given and not constructed by the mind 
or as what conditions and constitutes successful willing is no definition, 
as it itself assumes some fact. Fact does not admit of an impersonal 
definition. 

2. Fact need not be the existent. The non-existence of that 
about which there can be an actual question of existence is also a fact 
that one believes and asks others to believe. A content about which 
there is no such question is, if believed, a fact and, if not believed, is 
no fact. There may be believed contents like the moral ‘ought’ or 
freedom which are facts that are neither existent nor non-existent. 
What is taken as false or unreal is no fact and one cannot speak of its 
non-existence also as fact, there being, as will appear presently, no 
question of its existence. 

3. The existence or non-existence of a content about which 
there can be an actual question of existence is a fact that is ‘thought’. 
Other facts are not properly said to be thought and the consciousness 
of a content as false or unreal is not a thinking consciousness. That 
about which the question of existence is asked is the possible existent. 
What is thought is either the possible existent or the existence or the 
non-existence of the possible existent. Nothing is properly said to be 
thought which does not imply the question of existence. 

4. This restriction of the use of the word ‘thought’ requires 
justification. In the question ‘does A exist or not’, A does not mean 
an existent; it is a thought-content that is sometimes said to be sub- 
sistent, Must such a thought-content be understood as a possible 
existent? Js anything souhgt to be known about it except whether it 
exists or not? One may, it may be said, seek to analyse it to find out 
if it is compatible with another thought-content. Are such problems 
answered by thinking without reference to existence and non-existence? 
The answer in any case, it may be contended, is self-evident, however 
it is reached. But it is not self-evident like an axiom, being no judg- 
ment if a judgment is understood to imply a reference to the fact of 
existence or non-existence. Is the explication of a meaning or its com- 
patibility or otherwise with another meaning a thought-content at all? 
Is the awareness specially of contradiction properly called thinking? 


170 FACT AND THOUGHT OF FACT 


A contradictory thought is no thought, being only a loose expression 
for a combination of words meaning contents in contradiction with one 
another :° the contradiction itself is no meaning. A synthesis of two 
meanings may, indeed, be a meaning but the so-called relation of com- 
patibility is no meaning. It is only a symbolic expression for the pro- 
blematic synthesising process which, if called thinking at all, is think- 
ing without any thought-content of which we are actually conscious. 
So, too, when a given meaning is known to be equivalent to the synthesis 
of two meanings, the equivalence is a symbolic expression for an equat- 
ing process which is at best a thinking without an actual thought- 
content. 

5. What then is sought to be known about a thought-content or 
objective meaning without reference to its existence or non-existence 
is not itself an objective meaning. If anything is objectively known 
about the subsistent as other than a possible existent, it is its distinct- 
ness. If the reference of the distinct subsistent to existence be not 
necessary, how is the relation understood at all? -In ‘A has or has not 
existence’, is the relation of having itself a subsistent or existent? If 
it is subsistent, how does it again get related to existence and if it is 
existent, how does A which means only a distinct get related to it> 
It will not do to say that the reference of the subsistent to existence is 
no objective content at all, for then the judgment ‘A exists or does not 
exist’ would have no objective meaning. There appears to be no escape 
from the view that the subsistent means the possible existent. A con- 
tent abstracted from its possible existence is not even subsistent. Not 
that a content as thus abstracted is an unmeaning phrase : it is only not 
subsistent, not a meaning or thought-content, though it is still a signi- 
ficant speakable. Even a contradiction which is no thought is a signi- 
ficant speakable. 

6. A speakable content that is not thinkable as having no refer- 
ence to existence may or may not be fact. The false or unreal is a 
Significant unthinkable that is no fact. It is unthinkable as implying 
the absence or withdrawal of the question of existence and is thus dis- 
tinct from non-existence, to assert which of a content is still to enter- 
tain the question of its existence. What is said to be false is a speak- 
able content that is sometimes wrongly taken to be a proposition 
understood as the thought-content that is asserted or denied in a judg- 
ment. A negative judgment is the denial of a proposition or of a 
possible existent but the awareness of a content as false is not a nega- 
tive judgment. To take something to be false is to reject or negate 
it without being aware of the negation as a thought-content. The 


FACT AND THOUGHT OF FACT 17] 


negative judgment also implies rejection or disbelief but the disbelief 
there is always a qualified belief. If the judgment ‘A is not B’ be a 
denial of the proposition ‘A being B’, it is also an affirmation of the 
proposition ‘A being not B’. Even in the limiting case of the negative 
judgment—the negative existential judgment ‘A is not’, the disbelief 
in the existence of A is a positive belief in the non-existence of A, 
non-existence being understood as a factual determination of the possible 
existent A. But the assertion of falsity implies pure disbelief that is 
not equivalent to any belief. The content that is disbelieved here is 
not even understood as a possible existent and is accordingly no 
thought-content. If it is still called a proposition, we have to distin- 
guish it as a merely speakable proposition from the thinkable propo- 
sition that is affirmed or denied in a judgment. 

7. But has not the purely disbelieved content, it will be asked, 
a reference to existence? If the golden mountain or the hare’s horn 
is disbelieved, do we not take these to be thinkable and as possibly 
existent? The question is if the person who disbelieves such a content 
takes it to be a possible existent during the disbelief. In forming a 
negative judgment like ‘A is not’, one entertains the question of A’s 
existence, the content of the undecided question being just the proposi- 
tion. But in stating the hare’s horn as an example of the false or 
unreal, we do not have an undecided question of its existence in our 
mind. We do not actually ask if it exists : we can only imagine our- 
selves asking it. If then a purely disbelieved content admits of a 
question about its existence, the question is not actual to the dis- 
believer, being only a possible question. The content of an actual 
question being the possible existent, the content of a possible question 
would be the possibility of a possible, an entity that we need not regard 
as unmeaning but which is not the same as the thought-content called 
proposition that is asserted or denied in a judgment. If the content 
that we take to be false or unreal has a reference to existence at all, 
it is this possible or imaginary reference. Such reference we may deny 
only to a contradiction like square circle; a question is not even ima- 
gined about the contradictory. Not that it is absolutely unimaginable, 
for the contradictory is not meaningless like the word ‘abracadabra’, 
We can ask about two thoughts if they are compatible and hence a 
possible question of existence about the possibly compatible—the 
doubly possible question, as we may call it—is not altogether excluded. 
If the content of a possible and a doubly possible question were to be 
called proposition, it would be only a speakable that is not siiokabie, 
a significant entity that is yet no meaning. 


172 FACT AND THOUGHT OF FACT 


8. What is rejected as false then is a speakable but not thinkable 
proposition. Must it be even a speakable proposition? The terms 
false’ and ‘unreal’ are sometimes distinguished, the former being 
taken to be asserted of a proposition and the latter of a thing about 
which there is only a possible question of existence. Is the distinc- 
tion tenable in the case of the perceptually false or the illusory? A 
perceptual judgment like ‘this stick exists——expressed, it may be, 
in the interjectional form ‘this stick’-—may be said to be the affirma- 
tion of the proposition ‘this stick existing’ or ‘the existence of this 
stick’, A proposition of this kind is, indeed, a useless paraphrase of 
the word ‘this’ but it is not meaningless. When a stick is mistaken for 
a snake and the mistake corrected, the correction is properly expressed 
not as ‘this is not a snake’ but as ‘this snake is not a snake’. It is not 
the thinking denial of a proposition, for the proposition ‘this snake 
being snake’ cannot be denied. It is no judgment but is only the 
symbolisation in the form of a judgment of the peculiar experience of 
perceptual annulment, of the visible reduction of the percept to un- 
reality. Correction is the correction of a falsity and so it is the thing 
snake as apparently perceived and no proposition that is taken to be 
false. The snake can be here spoken of indifferently as false or unreal. 

9. What is false then need not be a proposition. Where it is 
a proposition, it is speakable but not thinkable and is equivalent to a 
content about which there is no actual but only a possible question 
of existence. Such a content is said to be unreal and so, the false— 
whether perceptual or non-perceptual—may also be called unreal. 
The term ‘unreal’, however, is apparently wider than the term ‘false’. 
A content that is said to be unreal may or may not have been pre- 
viously believed and the question of its existence may or may not 
have been raised. All that is necessary is that it should be disbelieved 
and that there should not be an actual question of its existence during 
the disbelief. If the question was previously raised about it, it is 
now wholly dropped, and if it was previously believed, the belief is 
now wholly or partially withdrawn. About the unreal m the form of 
the contradictory, no question of existence could have arisen and it 
could not have been believed. What is called ‘imaginary’ may or 
may not have been believed and made the subject of a question but 
in any case the belief and the question are now wholly withdrawn. 
An unreal content is properly said to be false if it was believed and 
hence could be the subject of an actual question, the question being 
now wholly and the belief only partially withdrawn. What does the 
partial withdrawal of belief mean? 


FACT AND THOUGHT OF FACT 173 


10. The possible existent is fact that is indeterminately known 
as either a determinate existent or a determinate non-existence. We 
speak of the falsity of what was previously believed to be a possible 
existent. Existence or non-existence is itself a determination of fact but 
each again has its particular determination : we speak of the previously 
believed existence or non-existence of A as false. The falsity would 
imply disbelief in this existence or non-existence but not in some pos- 
sible existence as a determination of fact. When A is taken to be 
false, the non-existence of A may also be false but some possible 
existent must be believed. One may, for example, dream of the room 
in which he actually is and on waking take the dream to be false 
without believing in the non-existence of the room. So, too, the falsity 
of the belief in the non-existence of A need not imply belief in the 
existence of A, though in neither case is the belief in the possible 
existence of something rejected. This is the sense in which belief is 
to be understood as partially withdrawn in an assertion of falsity. 

11. Belief in some fact is implied in all negative assertion— 
the assertion of non-existence of falsity or of other forms of unreality. 
To say that a content is non-existent is to continue to believe in some 
actual existent. To say that it is false is still to believe in some fact 
as possibly existent. To take it to be imaginary or contradictory 
1equires no belief in a possible existent but only in fact, about which 
there is no actual question of existence. The assertion of falsity pre- 
supposes the belief that reality or fact can be existent fact or the fact 
of non-existence. The belief is not denied or rejected in the asser- 
tion of a content as contradictory or imaginary but it is irrelevant to 
such assertion of unreality. 

12. The notion of the possible existent may appear to present 
a confusion. A fact is taken to be ‘thought’ if there is an actual ques- 
tion of existence about it or, in other words, if it is a possible existent. 
The consciousness of falsity, however, has been said to imply a belief, 
that is not questioned, in some possible existent. Falsity 1s not a 
thought-content and the possible existent that is presupposed by 
falsity is also presumably not a thought-content and yet thought- 
content is defined as the possibly existent. There is no confusion if we 
remember that what falsity presupposes is some possible existent, only 
an indeterminate assertable, an unquestioned and, therefore, unthink- 
able fact; and that thinkable fact as a determination of this indeter- 
minate is the subject of a question of existence. The determinate 
assertable is thinkable fact, the indeterminate assertable is unthinkable 
fact and there may be unthinkable fact that is not assertable at all. 


174 FACT AND THOUGHT OF FACT 


13. A speakable content then is either fact or no-fact. The 
false, the imaginary and the contradictory are forms of unreality or 
no-fact. -Fact is either thinkable or unthinkable and unthinkable fact 
may or may not be assertable. Thinkable fact is the possible existent 
as determinate and the unthinkable assertable is the possible existent 
as indeterminate. Is there any unthinkable fact that is not assert- 
able and if so, is it co-ordinate with the unthinkable fact that is assert- 
able? 

14, The false or the unreal as such is an unassertable content 
that is not fact. It is unassertable in the sense that it is purely dis- 
believed. The believed content may be distinguished from the be- 
lieving but the disbelieved content is not distinguishable from the dis- 
believing. As thus indistinguishable, the disbelieved content is not 
asserted and so if there be a believed content that is not other than 
the believing of it, it would be said to be unassertable fact. A fact 
that is not yet known to be existent fact or the fact of non-existence 
but is known as not other than these alternatives—the indeterminate 
possible existent—is believed to be other than the believing, to be 
presented or objective in this sense. Unassertable fact then would 
be what is believed without being presented or objective. Not that 
it would be only the believing : it would be believed as not distinct 
from the believing, believed to be the subjective that is not merely 
consciousness of fact but is itself the fact of which it is conscious. 
Concrete subjectivity, as we may call it—the spiritual in our ordinary 
parlance—is thus the fact that is not only unthinkable but unassertable. 

15. Unthinkable fact—whether assertable or unassertable—is 
fact about which there is no actual question of existence. About the 
assertable unthinkable there may be a possible question, just as there 
may be possible question about the false or imaginary. The indeter- 
minate fact that is said to be possibly existent is the objective or the 
assertable in general about which there is no question of existence 
because the question presupposes it. But it is possible to ask about 
it—what idealism actually asks—if objectivity or distinction from the 
subjective or spiritual is fact or no-fact, real or unreal. It would be 
an actual question not of existence but of facthood or reality, represent- 
ing a spiritual as distinct from logical doubt. Spiritually actual, it can 
be admitted in logic only as a possible question of existence. The 
idealist’s doubt about the object is properly not about its existence, 
not whether it is an existent among existents. Since the object means 
the possible existent, the existent or non-existence, the doubt is 
whether the existent is existent and non-existence non-existence. It is 


FACT AND THOUGHT OF FACT 175 


an unintelligible question which is none-the-less real, being, in fact, 
a spiritual uncertainty symbolised by the logical form of a question. 
16. The possibility of existence and non-existence *or bare 
objectivity is a fact beyond the question of existence. Subjective or 
spiritual fact is also beyond the question but the difference is that a 
question about the former is not meaningless, while it is meaningless 
about the latter. No question is actually entertained about the former, 
while about the latter there cannot be even a possible question. The 
possible question entertainable about bare objectivity is, as already said, 
whether the existent is existent and non-existence non-existence. It 
is the question whether existence and non-existence are not both un- 
real. If the possible means either existent or non-existent, what is 
neither existent nor non-existent would be the impossible. It may 
be a contradiction to speak of a content as both existent and non- 
existent but to say that it is neither is only to imply that it is not 
thinkingly known, that it is impossible to thought but not that it must 
be unreal. The impossible may be fact, though this ‘may be’ is a 
motiveless possibility to logic, a possibility that cannot be thought but 
cannot also be rejected by thought. Hence it is not meaningless to 
suggest that objectivity—meaning both existence and non-existence— 
is unreal, though in the absence of a positive spiritual feeling or ex- 
perience of such unreality, the suggestion would be worthless. It is 
not worthless because there is a spiritual feeling of the symbolistic 
character of the object or of its unsubstantiality in itself or of both, 
of the vanity of the object-interest as independent of the spiritual 
interest—the heart of religion and the perennial spring of all idealism. 
17. Thus the facthood of objectivity though unquestioned in 
logic is questionable from the spiritual standpoint, the question being 
not meaningless but motiveless for hogic, no actual intellectual ques- 
tion. A question about the facthood of the spiritual, however, is 
meaningless. We may contrast three forms of certainty—the neces- 
sity of an axiom, the unquestioned character of the object in general 
and the self-evidence of the spiritual. All the three are logically 
undeniable. The axiom, however, admits of an actual question; there 
is only a possible question about the object in general; while a ques- 
tion is altogether meaningless in respect of the spiritual. An axiom 
is at once a law and an intuitable form of a particular organisation 
of thinkable facts. The law is necessarily true for the organisation 
but it does not exclude the possibility of an alternative organisation 
of the facts under a different axiom. Objectivity again, as presupposed 
by the logical question, is not itself questioned in logic; but while 


176 FACT AND THOUGHT OF FACT 


logic does not entertain, it does not exclude a doubt other than the 
intellectual, which is symbolised by a logical question. That doubt- 
ing cannot be doubted is true not of the logical but of the spiritual 
doubt. Spiritual uncertainty is itself a certainty and if objectivity is 
spiritually felt to be suspect, it is as much unreal as real. The object 
is never felt to be more than suspect, to be altogether unreal, though 
one may feel the want and the desirability of such feeling. 

18. No question arises about the facthood of the spiritual itself 
unless it is artificially objectified by language or otherwise. The ques- 
tion about the reality of the self arises when the self is represented— 
it may be, through a word like ‘I’—as a meant thing among things. 
To realise that it is an unmeanable or unthinkable content would be 
to reject the question itself as illusory and not to obtain an answer 
to the question. So if an alleged spiritual value of a thinkable object 
is pronounced unreal, it means either that it is not a spiritual value or 
that the value is not embodied or incarnated in the object but not 
that the spiritual value that it is alleged to be is itself illusory. So a 
doubt about the facthood of what is called a subjective state is an un- 
certainty about the naming of the subjective fact or about its being 
a fact in the mind of the doubter as appropriated by him or even 
about its being subjective at all, but not about there being the subjec- 
tive state. 

19. Doubt about an object need not imply the belief that the 
object exists at any time but only implies the belief that there is some 
Object, belief in bare objectivity which is not questioned within logic, 
though a question about it is not meaningless. What appears as a 
doubt about a subjective fact implies certainty about the fact and un- 
certainty only about its symbolic characterisation by an objective 
category. Uncertainty about the spiritual is a spiritual certainty about 
its persisting objective aspect being merely symbolic or superinduced 
and is, in fact, the beginning of the correction or elimination of the 
aspect. The spirit is born in the uncertainty about the facthood of 
objectivity and it realises itself on the one hand by freeing itself from 
or correcting away the objectivity that sticks to it and on the other 
by consciously symbolising or contemplating itself as object to con- 
solidate its freedom. 

20. While the bare object is an unquestioned fact, it is not co- 
ordinate with self-evidencing spiritual fact. Objectivity cannot be 
disbelieved but there may be spiritual doubt about its being other than 
the spiritual. As the spirit realises itself by symbolising itself as 
object, the object may be only the self-symbolising function of the 


FACT AND THOUGHT OF FACT 177 


spirit. The suggestion has value for the spiritual consciousness but 
is not assertable in the secular or logical consciousness, being only 
not denied in it. So long as the dualism of the spiritual and the se- 
cular consciousness remains, we have to regard the object as an un- 
questioned fact and the subject as an unquestionable fact without 
being able to assert their unity or duality. 


i2 


CORRECTION OF ERROR AS A 
LOGICAL PROCESS 


ANALYSIS 


(1-3) The correction of an error, €.g., of taking a rope for a 
snake cannot be adequately expressed by the single sentence ‘this that 
I believed as this snake is not snake’. It has to be expressed in the 
two sentences ‘this was taken as this snake’ and ‘what thiy was taken 
to be was no fact’. There is no unitary ‘logical form’ to express cor- 
rection. It is an epistemic function without any unitary logical con- 
tent. (4) There is an extreme view that the corrected consciousness 
was no belief and no consciousness of any unity like ‘this snake’. The 
position cannot be accepted. (5-6) There may, again, be the sug- 
gestion that the corrective consciousness is no disbelief of the form 
‘this was not snake’ and no awareness of ‘this snake’ as having been 
false when it was believed. But this appears to be an extreme state- 
ment that is not warranted by introspection. The testimony of intros- 
pection is not, however, clear as to whether the disbelief is in the form 
‘this was not snake’ or ‘this is not snake’, 

(7-11) It may be contended further that the content ‘this snake’ 
as false to my present belief does not contradict ‘this snake’ as true to 
my previous belief and that the former may even be said to be a 
‘transformation’ of the latter. But this alleged transformation or 
ideal inclusion is inclusion only in a constructive sense and, even as 
such, cannot be demonstrated. Secondly, it is hardly intelligible at the 
Stage of disbelief to describe the content of the previous belief as a 
‘this’. Thirdly, the previous belief stood only on the conscious level, 
while the present disbelief stands on the self-conscious level, But the 
conception of falsity—and, therefore, of truth as well—does not 
emerge on the level of the merely objective consciousness. It is thus 
meaningless to speak of ‘this snake’—as to the previous belief—as true 
or false. The suggestion, therefore, that a belief that is false in con- 
Scious reference to another belief may~be still true in itself has to be 
rejected as futile. 

(12) Falsity has no reference to the time-position of a cognition 
at all. What is taken as false cannot be specified in purely objective 
terms, and the expressions considered in sec. 1-2 are all a mixture of 
subjective and objective terms. (13-14) What is false is a meaning 
to self-consciousness and is this fact to the corresponding conscious- 
ness. As meaning, it cannot be spoken of as this, though it cannot be 
indicated except in reference to this fact. A false content is a mean- 


182 CORRECTION OF ERROR AS A LOGICAL 


ing with a necessary reference to the thisness of fact. There may be 
the realistic view, however, that ‘meaning’ or ‘content’ is but the fact 
that is meant and what is false is not content of a belief but the belief 
itself. The belief is false not in respect of its content—for it has no 
content—-but in respect of the content that is now thought to describe 
the particularising character of the belief. (15) Now this thought- 
content is not a true description of the belief but is only a constructive 
or symbolic description. The meaning of ‘correction’, accordingly, 
changes in this view : it is not a disbelieving in a previously believed 
content, but only disbelieving that the previous belief had a content 
at all. (16-17) The realistic view thus admits a contentless belief and 
is perilously near to the idealistic view that the object is nothing but 
belief with its subjectivity heterised. In the former, however, the 
contentless belief was only a believing and no presentation; in the 
latter, it is a presentation. The idealistic view is to be preferred to 
the realistic view. 

(18) Taking the disbelief implied in correction to be adequately 
expressed in the form ‘this snake is not’, the ‘this’ in it would not 
mean a perceived substrate of the snake-character. This, here, is 
not even a believed substrate but only an imagined specification of 
the imagined snake. (19) This in ‘this snake’ stands for no fact at 
all. The disbelief is absolute and is not capable of being expressed 
as a negative judgment. (20) It cannot, again, be said that what this 
was believed to be was not presented, nor that it was presented as 
this. I cannot now describe in objective terms what I then believed, 
nor can I say that there was only the subjective fact of contentless 
belief. I believed in a content that was neither fact nor absolute 
nought. 


CORRECTION OF ERROR AS A LOGICAL PROCESS 


|. I am said to correct and error of mine when I disbelieve in 
what I am aware I believed. The correction of the error of taking 
a rope for a snake may be expressed as two processes. I am now 
aware that I believed this object before me to the thiy snake and I 
now believe that this was not a snake. Is the singleness of the correc- 
tive process expressed adequately by the complex sentence, ‘this that 
I believed as this snake is not snake’? The clause ‘that I believed, 
etc.’ only gives subsidiary information though the corrective function 
is directed primarily towards what is meant by the clause, towards 
what this was taken to be and not towards this, Again, what is now 
taken to be no snake is a content that was believed to be fact and is not 
now believed. It is not believed as a past fact, nor can it here be said 
to be merely suggested to me as a possible fact about which there may 
be a genuine question whether it exists. The subject of a negative judg- 
ment is what is believed or suggested as a fact in the judgment. The 
complex statement above is no negative judgment and does not ade- 
quately express correction. 

2. The predicate of the complex sentence ‘(this...) is not 
snake’ is also open to objection. The disbelief implied in correction 
is primarily disbelief not in a certain naming of a previously believed 
content (that it is snake) but in its facthood. I now know that what 
this was taken to be was no fact. Correction has to be expressed in the 
two sentences, ‘this was taken as this snake’ and ‘what this was taken 
to be was no fact’; and these cannot be combined in one sentence. 

3, Not only is correction not expressible as a negative judg- 
ment: there is no unitary logical form to express it. By ‘logical 
form’ is here meant a form in which there is reference only to the 
content of a believing or thinking and not to the believing or thinking 
itself. Correction cannot be formulated in language without reference 
to the subjective fact of a past believing. It is an epistemological 
function that has no unitary logical content corresponding to it. 

4. Correction has been so far described in terms of two subjec- 
tive processes—a previous belief and a present disbelief referring to 
it. Are the processes rightly designated ‘belief’ and ‘disbelief’? Was 
the previous consciousness a belief, the content of which could be 
called ‘this snake’? There is the extreme view that it was no belief, 
no consciousness at all of the unity ‘this snake’. There was belief 


184 CORRECTION OF ERROR AS A LOGICAL PROCESS 


in this and belief in snake and these beliefs that were together were 
simply not distinguished. Or it may be allowed that the facts this and 
snake wére the contents of a single belief but they were not distin- 
guished. Or this view may go with the admission of some conscious- 
ness of the unity ‘this snake’ other than belief—suggestion or thought 
or speaking consciousness. There is no error according to these views 
and, therefore, also no correction. What is called error is only not 
distinguishing, the privation of the knowledge of distinction; and 
correction is nothing but the knowledge of the distinction that was 
previously unappreciated. Such a position can hardly be refuted 
except by an appeal to the testimony of consciousness. The appeal 
is not indeed decisive, for the testimony is indefinite. We are not 
clear at the time of correction whether the previous consciousness was 
of a definite unity but in any case we can say that it was not conscious- 
ness of an indefinite content, consciousness of this and snake as 
utterly unrelated. What was not appreciated as indefinite may yet 
have been indefinite but there is at least a presumption in favour of 
its having been a definite unity. 

5. Admitting then that there was a belief in the unity ‘this 
snake’, we ask if there is now a disbelief in it. That there is no longer 
a belief in ‘this snake’ is not disputed but it may not mean that there 
is now a disbelief in the form ‘this is not a snake’ or ‘this snake is 
not a fact.’ Even if such a disbelief be admitted, it may not mean dis- 
belief in this having been a snake when it was believed as such. These 
may appear to be unreal objections but they gain plausibility when 
developed. The present consciousness, it may be said, is primarily a 
belief in this being a rope. It refers indeed to the previous belief in 
‘this snake’ but the reference is only a belief in a positive distinction 
between this and snake which ousts the previous belief psychologically 
but does not amount to a disbelief in it. I may now say ‘this is not 
snake’ but the word ‘not’ here only means a distinction and does not 
imply a rejection. Negation in the objective content means nothing 
but distinction and even if there be a subjective feeling of rejecting 
or disbelieving as distinct from distinguishing, it has no content other 
than distinction. Even if ‘this is not snake’ means the non-existence 
of snake here and not simply its distinction from this, non-existence 
being as much an objective fact as distinction, it is the content of a 
belief and not of the alleged process of rejection or disbelief. Again, 
admitting that the disbelief has for its content the falsity of the pre- 
vious belief, this falsity, it may be said, is only an additional character, 
the knowledge of which means the psychological cessation of the 


CORRECTION OF ERROR AS A LOGICAL PROCESS 185 


previous belief but does not affect its truth. There is no contradic- 
tion in speaking of the content ‘this snake’ as both true and false, true 
in itself when the belief was there and false now in relation to the 
content now believed, viz., ‘this being rope’. 

6. The suggestion throughout is that there is no disbelief in the 
form ‘this was not snake’, no awareness of the content ‘this snake’ as 
having been false. when it was believed. That there is now only 
belief and no disbelief appears, however, to be an extreme statement 
that is not warranted by introspection. I am aware of having a dis- 
belief, and also a belief not only in ‘this rope’ but also in the non- 
existence of snake here though hardly in the distinction of this from 
snake. The testimony of introspection is not, however, clear as to 
whether the disbelief is in the form ‘this was not snake.’ If it be 
suggested that the disbelief is only in the form ‘this is not snake’, the 
suggestion does not appear to be definitely opposed to my introspec- 
tion. Not that the snake has now only ceased to exist and that it 
was when believed. Introspection apparently does not say anything 
about my present belief being in a snake having existed when it was 
believed. 

7. But, it may be said, the truth or falsity of a believed content 
does not mean its existence or non-existence in time. Disbelief in its 
existence now may be regarded as belief in its falsity as an additional 
character. The content ‘this snake as false now’ does not contradict 
the content ‘this snake as true then’ and may even be said to contain 
it ideally, to affirm it as not negated but positively transformed. The 
notion of ideal retention or transformation is difficult to understand in 
the case specially of perceptual error. But then perception as know- 
ledge would be taken in this view to be an implicit judgment. How 
is the content of the judgment ‘this is snake’ contained in that of the 
judgment ‘this is rope’? A judgment cannot be taken by itself: it 
has to be taken as implicitly cohering in the inferential way with other 
judgments. A judgment is to be understood as an epistemological 
condensation of a system of judgments and perception that is 
knowledge is a further integration of such a judgment into psychologi- 
cal immediacy. The percepts ‘this snake’ and ‘this rope’ are each 
an integration of a system of believed contents and one may be said 
to contain the other in the sense that the system integrated in the 
one is inclusive of the system integrated in the other. The relation of 
inclusion between the percepts is not indeed perceived and hence it 
may be called an ideal inclusion which appears to perception as the 
magic relation of transformation. 


186 CORRECTION OF ERROR AS A LOGICAL PROCESS 


8. The strictly logical assertion in this view is that the content 
‘this snake’ as false to my present belief does not contradict ‘this snake’ 
as true fo my previous belief. The rest of the view is couched in 
imaginative language and whether it can be fully presented in literal 
logical terms is disputable. The metaphors mainly employed are the 
implicit working of one cognition in another and the content of one 
cognition being present in ideality or transformed in the content of 
another. Implicit working of inference in judgment and of judgment 
in perception means in strict logic that the included cognition is cogni- 
tion of a content other than the content of the inclusive cognition, 
which yet is no new fact. When again the content A is said to be reduc- 
ed to ideality or transformed in another content X, nothing more is 
meant than that the cognition of X is the cognition of A in relation to 
B and that the cognition of this relation is implicitly contained in the 
cognition of A in the sense explained that it is cognition of no fact other 
than A. Whatever else appears to be meant by these notions is 
purely subjective and is only figuratively represented in objective 
language. 

9. When then the belief in ‘this rope’ is said to contain the 
belief in ‘this snake’ as transformed, what is literally meant is that 
the belief now is in the content ‘this snake’ in relation to new contents, 
the relation being no new fact. The perceived this taken with certain 
relations to outside facts makes a system which is constructively the 
same fact as ‘this snake’. (Again, this taken with the relations to 
these and other outside facts makes a fuller system which is the same 
fact as ‘this rope’.) The facts and relations contained in each system, 
however, can never be fully specified and it would, therefore, appear 
to be impossible to show that one system is included in the other. 
Even if this objection is waived, it is hardly justifiable to deny that 
the percepts integrating the systems are incompatible on the ground 
that one system includes the other. The percepts ‘this rope’ and 
‘this snake’ are wholly incompatible characterisations of the given this, 
one of which can be said to ideally include, define or transform the 
other only in a remotely constructive sense. 

10. The belief in ‘this rope’ is a disbelief in ‘the snake’ now, 
but does it mean that ‘this snake’ was false when it was believed? It 
all depends on what is meant by the content of a belief or disbelief. 
Is believing a content the same as believing a fact? If a content is 
believed, it is believed as fact. If later it is disbelieved, taken to be 
false, it is no longer believed as fact. The disbelief is a conscious 
reference to the previous belief, to the previous apprehension of the 


CORRECTION OF ERROR AS A LOGICAL PROCESS 187 


content as fact. Can the content be now spoken of as ‘this snake’? 
I can say now that what I believed and could have then spoken of as 
‘this snake’ is false but can I say ‘this snake’ is false? Can what 
is known as false be spoken of as this? Does not this at once mean 
this fact in time? If a content does not mean a fact in time, can we 
apply the word ‘this’ to it? 

11. The content of the consciousness ‘this fact? can be called 
‘this meaning’, if introspection into the consciousness of a fact as this 
is admitted to be itself the consciousness of the fact as a meaning. 
If what is now disbelieved be said to be ‘this snake’, ‘this snake’ is a 
meaning and not a fact to the disbelief, though the same expression 
stands for a fact to the previous belief. The present disbelief refers 
to the previous belief and is on a self-conscious level relatively to it 
which stood only on the conscious level. What then is false to 
self-consciousness need not be false to consciousness. Properly 
speaking, however, the concept of falsity does not emerge on the level 
of merely objective consciousness. We can speak of the content of 
consciousness as fact or no-fact, existent or non-existent but not as 
true or false. It is meaningless to speak of ‘this snake’—as to the pre- 
vious belief—as true or false. The suggestion running through the 
views just examined that a belief that is false in relation and conscious 
reference to another belief may be still true in itself has, therefore, 
to be rejected as futile. 

12. What was taken as ‘this snake’ cannot be said to have been 
false. What is now taken as false cannot also be expressed as ‘this 
snake’. Falsity, in fact, has no reference to the time-position of a 
cognition at all. What is taken as false cannot be specified in objec- 
tive terms. If the disbelief is expressed in the form ‘this that was 
believed and could be spoken of as this snake was not a snake’, the 
subject is a mixture of subjective and objective terms. If the disbelief 
be formulated—preferably for reasons explained—in two sentences 
‘what this was believed to be is no fact’ and ‘this was believed (or more 
accurately, could be spoken of with belief) as this snake’, both the 
sentences are a mixture of subjective and objective terms. The diffi- 
culty, it would appear, is not merely verbal. 

13. What is false is a meaning to ‘self-consciousness’ and is at 
the same time this fact to the corresponding consciousness. As 
meaning, it cannot be spoken of as this, though it cannot be indicated 
except by a reference to this fact. A false content is a meaning with 
a necessary or constitutive reference to the this-ness of fact. It may, 
however, be held that meaning or content is but the fact that is meant. 


188 CORRECTION OF ERROR AS A LOGICAL PROCESS 


The content of a belief that is not fact but mere meaning is a chimera. 
Meaning as distinct from fact meant is but the subjective function of 
thinking. ‘ It may be symbolically or figuratively spoken of as though 
it were objective but it is not objective at all. What is false then is 
not the content of a belief but the belief itself. ‘There was the belief 
formulated by the phrase ‘this snake’ which, however, was not belief 
in the content ‘this snake’. It was belief in this and belief in snake 
but not belief in the unity ‘this snake’. Yet it cannot be said that 
the two beliefs were simply not distinguished—a view already ex- 
amined, They were positively combined into a single belief which 
had, however, no content. It was not belief in ‘this snake’ and can 
only be figuratively spoken of as such. Correction indeed is disbelief 
but the content of the disbelief is the negation ‘this is not snake’ 
which, however, is not the whole content of the corrective conscious- 
ness. What is false or is corrected is not the judgment ‘this is snake’ : 
it is the previous belief which was not a judgment or inference but a 
perception. But as there was no fact corresponding to the phrase 
‘this snake’, the perception was only a perceiving and not the cogni- 
tion of a content or fact which are the same. 

14. Can belief as a mere subjective fact be said to be false? It 
can be said to be false only in respect of its reference, of what it says, 
unless the falsity of a belief means nothing but its ineffectiveness in a 
will-context. Falsity may be ascertained partially by a reference to 
the will-context but it does not mean ineffectiveness. Apparently then 
this view has to admit a content that is spoken of, thought or suggested 
without belief. What is false is belief in respect of this thought- 
content. There was a belief combining the beliefs in this and snake, 
which had no content, no fact corresponding to it. But the belief is 
now interpreted by a word-conditioned thought of which ‘this snake’ 
or ‘this being snake’ is the content. This thought is formulated at the 
time of disbelief and is taken to be the description of the belief. The 
belief then is false not in respect of its content—for it has no content 
-—but in respect of the content that is now thought to describe the 
particularising character of the belief. 

15. But is this thought-content a true description of the belief 
or is it only a constructive or symbolic description? It is the latter, 
though as no belief is claimed for it, there is no question of truth or 
error, The meaning of correction accordingly changes in this view : 
it is not disbelieving in a previously believed content but only dis- 
believing that the previous belief had a content at all. This is expres- 
sed by the negative judgment ‘this is not snake’ which, however, does 


CORRECTION OF ERROR AS A LOGICAL PROCESS 189 


not presuppose the suggestion that the belief had ‘this snake’ for its 
content. The negative judgment is ordinarily taken to presyppose an 
affirmative judgment or a question which suggests a possible fact. 
Here, however, the judgment ‘this is not snake’ would be taken to 
presuppose a belief that has no content and is only characterised by 
the thought ‘this being snake’ at the time of the judgment. The belief 
is false in respect of what is now constructively taken to be its content. 

16. The admission in this realistic view of a contentless belief 
would bring it perilously near an idealistic view according to which 
object is nothing but belief with its subjectivity alienated or heterised. 
There was, according to both, no belief in ‘this snake’ but only belief 
of this form, belief as factitiously characterisable by the present thought 
of ‘this snake.’ In the realistic view, however, the contentless belief 
was only a believing and no presentation; while in the particular 
idealistic view, it is a presentation. A further difference is that the 
belief that is corrected is in the realistic view contentless so far as 
‘this snake’ is not a unitary believed content, though it is still belief 
in the contents this and snake; while in the idealistic view, the belief 
of the form ‘this snake’ is not only not belief in the unity but not 
also in snake. 

17. The idealistic view here appears to have an advantage over 
the realistic view, for it is difficult to understand a unitary belief 
which is only partly determined or characterised by its content. Now 
that we have the thought of the unity ‘this snake’ or ‘this being snake’ 
which is disbelieved, the thought that symbolises the subjective unity 
of the belief, can we say that the predicate or determinant snake in 
it means the fact snake as remembered to be elsewhere? Is it believed 
at all within this thought? As the thought of ‘this snake’ now rises 
with disbelief, it implies an empty contingency like ‘if this could be 
snake, as it cannot be’. The emergence of the idea of snake may be 
through memory but does the idea continue to be believed memory- 
content within such a contingent thought? Apparently it continues 
only as meaning and for the belief now characterised by the thought of 
‘this snake’, ‘snake’ is as little a believed content as the unity ‘this snake’, 
being only the mode of the belief—the believing or the presentation. 

18. To the idealistic view, the previous belief is no belief in 
snake but is still belief in this as a presentation, though not as objec- 
tive fact. ‘This snake’ was a presentation and since this as believed 
now is objective fact (or heterised presentation), the word this appears 
to be a specification both of the objectified and of the unobjectified 
presentation. Taking the disbelief implied in correction to be 


190 CORRECTION OF ERROR AS A LOGICAL PROCESS 


adequately expressed in the form ‘this snake is not’ rather than in the 
form ‘this is not snake’, would this in it mean a perceived content, the 
perceived substrate of the snake-character? If neither ‘this snake’ 
nor ‘snake’ be a believed content for the previous belief, can this be 
regarded as a substrate at all> When I imagine a lion on a perceived 
object like the wall before me, the whole content ‘lion on the wall’ 
being imaginary, the term ‘wall’ in the whole means not the locus as 
perceived but the imagined character of location of the imagined lion. 
So here this is not a believed substrate but only an imagined specifica- 
tion of the imagined snake. The previous belief in the mode ‘this 
snake’ has thus no content at all or has for its content something that 
is no fact at all but absolute nought. 

19, The illusion ‘this snake’ is then a presentation in which 
there is no belief in this or snake or their unity as fact. The word 
‘this’ is here not only not the specification of an objective fact but 
not also of the presentation as a subjective fact. This in ‘this snake’ 
which is disbelieved stands for no fact at all. The disbelief is absolute 
and is not capable of being expressed as a negative judgment. If it is 
at all expressed as a negative statement, its form would be ‘this snake 
is not’ which would not be a negative existential judgment like ‘ghosts 
do not exist’ in so far as the subject ‘this snake’ is not even the 
suggestion of a possible fact. It is not even the psychic fact of presen- 
tation, being only the appearance of presentation, if such a phrase 
could be allowed. At the time of disbelief, we feel it is only as though 
‘this snake’ was presented. 

20. All this follows from the meaning of this in the disbelieved 
unity ‘this snake’: every part of an imaginary content is imaginary. 
The objection to this view is that ‘this snake’ was believed and was 
not merely imagined like the lion on the wall. I disbelieve it now 
not in the form ‘this snake is not’ but in form ‘what I believed this to 
be is not’, where the word this stands for a fact that is now believed. 
But then I believed this to be ‘this snake’ in which phrase or thought 
the word ‘this’ means what is like snake no fact. Yet the two this’s 
mean the same perceived content. I cannot say then that what this 
was believed to be was not presented nor that it was presented as this. 
Now that I disbelieve, I cannot assert that I perceived this snake nor 
can I deny that I perceived something as this, as an individual fact 
before me. I cannot now describe in objective terms what I then 
believed, nor can I say that there was only the subjective fact of con- 
tentless belief. I believed in a content which was not fact nor absolute 
nought. 


CORRECTION OF ERROR AS A LOGICAL PROCESS 189 


not presuppose the suggestion that the belief had ‘this snake’ for its 
content. The negative judgment is ordinarily taken to presyppose an 
affirmative judgment or a question which suggests a possible fact. 
Here, however, the judgment ‘this is not snake’ would be taken to 
presuppose a belief that has no content and is only characterised by 
the thought ‘this being snake’ at the time of the judgment. The belief 
is false in respect of what is now constructively taken to be its content. 

16. The admission in this realistic view of a contentless belief 
would bring it perilously near an idealistic view according to which 
object is nothing but belief with its subjectivity alienated or heterised. 
There was, according to both, no belief in ‘this snake’ but only belief 
of this form, belief as factitiously characterisable by the present thought 
of ‘this snake.’ In the realistic view, however, the contentless belief 
was only a believing and no presentation; while in the particular 
idealistic view, it is a presentation. A further difference is that the 
belief that is corrected is in the realistic view contentless so far as 
‘this snake’ is not a unitary believed content, though it is still belief 
in the contents this and snake; while in the idealistic view, the belief 
of the form ‘this snake’ is not only not belief in the unity but not 
also in snake. 

17. The idealistic view here appears to have an advantage over 
the realistic view, for it is difficult to understand a unitary belief 
which is only partly determined or characterised by its content. Now 
that we have the thought of the unity ‘this snake’ or ‘this being snake’ 
which is disbelieved, the thought that symbolises the subjective unity 
of the belief, can we say that the predicate or determinant snake in 
it means the fact snake as remembered to be elsewhere? Is it believed 
at all within this thought? As the thought of ‘this snake’ now rises 
with disbelief, it implies an empty contingency like ‘if this could be 
snake, as it cannot be’. The emergence of the idea of snake may be 
through memory but does the idea continue to be believed memory- 
content within such a contingent thought? Apparently it continues 
only as meaning and for the belief now characterised by the thought of 
‘this snake’, ‘snake’ is as little a believed content as the unity ‘this snake’, 
being only the mode of the belief—the believing or the presentation. 

18. To the idealistic view, the previous belief is no belief in 
snake but is still belief in this as a presentation, though not as objec- 
tive fact. ‘This snake’ was a presentation and since this as believed 
now is objective fact (or heterised presentation), the word this appears 
to be a specification both of the objectified and of the unobjectified 
presentation. Taking the disbelief implied in correction to be 


ANALYSIS 


(1-2) The consciousness of the false and the consciousness of 
the subjective imply one another. A. The consciousness of the false 
is the consciousness of the subjective. The consciousness of the false 
is the consciousness of a content that is not speakable except as the 
content of a belief. (3) The false is what is corrected and disbelieved. 
‘Disbelief’ is a positive mode of consciousness and is not merely the 
privation of belief. (4-6) The content said to be disbelieved cannot be 
expressed except as what was believed. The content of belief is 
formulated loosely as ‘this is A’, artificially as ‘this being A’ and 
naturally as ‘this as A’. The content of the corresponding disbelief 
cannot, however, be expressed in this form. It can only be described 
problematically as ‘What was believed’. (7) Disbelief of correction has 
thus to be taken as a form of reflective consciousness. It is not, how- 
ever, a cognitive belief in the prior belief: it is only a consciousness 
of it in necessary reference to itself. (8) It is not cognitive belief, for 
a cognitive consciousness is the conciousness of something which is 
speakable without reference to the consciousness. 

(9-16) B. The consciousness of the subjective is the conscious- 
ness of the false. That is to say, (i) the consciousness of a belief 
implies disbelief in its content; (ii) all consciousness of the subjective 
implies consciousness of a belief. (i) The consciousness of belief 
is the consciousness of having the belief as past for present rejection or 
re-affirmation. The consciousness of a past belief is either belief or 
disbelief in its content and never a mere non-committal consciousness 
of the content as merely subsistent. The consciousness of the subjec- 
tive is not a substantive conscious state like the consciousness of the 
object. To be conscious of a belief, in the way of rejection 
or re-affirmation, is in all cases to be conscious of a dissociation of the 
content of the belief from fact. This dissociation even in the case of 
re-affirmation implies that re-affirmation is really the rejection of dis- 
belief. In all cases then in which we are explicitly conscious of a past 
belief, we have a disbelief in the content of that belief. To be cons- 
cious of the subjective fact of belief is thus to be conscious of its content 
as false. 

(17) (ii) All consciousness of the subjective is consciousness 
of a belief. There is no consciousness of a subjectivity that is not 
consciousness of a content referred to fact. What we are reflectively 


13 


194 THE FALSE AND THE SUBJECTIVE 


aware of is the consciousness of a content as what is or may be believed. 
(18-20) Introspection is only distinguishing a mode of consciousness 
from its content. It cannot literally be said to be the consciousness of a 
subjective content, for that would lead to a vicious regress. Intros- 
pection is itself a subjectivity and we speak of it with belief without 
having any consciousness of it. Much of what we call ‘introspection’ 
appears to be only a naming of a subjectivity. (21) We have no cons- 
ciousness of a subjectivity that is not the consciousness of a content 
referred to fact. Thus to be conscious of the subjective is to be cons- 
cious of a belief. 


THE FALSE AND THE SUBJECTIVE 


1. The thesis elaborated in the present paper is that the con- 
sciousness of the false and the consciousness of the subjective imply 
one another. It may be analysed into two propositions (A) that the 
consciousness of the false is consciousness of the subjective and (B) 
that the consciousness of the subjective is consciousness of the false. 
The first denies that the false is but the objective fact of non-existence 
and the second denies that the subjective can be known without belief 
or disbelief in its content—which is apparently the theory behind what 
is called psychological introspection. The further implications of the 
thesis would be that the object is through the self-alienation of the sub- 
ject and that the subject is not known except by a denial of the object. 
These implications are not discussed in this paper. 


A. CONSCIOUSNESS OF THE FALSE IS CONSCIOUSNESS 
; OF THE SUBJECTIVE 


2. The proposition may be thus developed: 

The consciousness of the false is consciousness of a content that 
is not speakable except as the content of a belief which, again, is not 
speakable except as that the content of which is false. 

3, The false is what is corrected or disbelieved. Properly, ‘dis- 
belief? should mean correction or rejection of what was believed, though 
the word is sometimes used loosely to mean rejection of what is suggest- 
ed or the mere absence of belief in the imaginary or the contradictory. 
To be conscious of a content as imaginary or contradictory is to have no 
belief in it. Disbelief is a positive mode of consciousness and is not 
merely the privation of belief. The so-called disbelief in a suggestion 
is really a belief. A content is suggested as what either is or is not 
and never, as will appear, without all reference to fact; and the rejec- 
tion of it means that the negative alternative is accepted or believed. 
We take disbelief then in the sense of correction which we hold is in- 
capable of being regarded as equivalent to a belief in negation. 

4. Correction of error means disbelief not merely in what was 
believed but in what we are explicitly conscious of having believed. 
The content said to be disbelieved cannot, in fact, be expressed except 
as what was believed. What is it that we are said to disbelieve? If 
we start with the belief ‘this is A’— all belief in the last resort is in a 


196 THE FALSE AND THE SUBJECTIVE 


this or given reality—and then correct it, what is it that we take to be 
false? What we disbelieve may be taken to be what we believed. In 
the belief or judgment ‘this is A’, how should the content believed be 
formulated? Is the correct formulation of it ‘this is A’ or ‘this being 
A’ or ‘this as A’? If we accept the first two formulations, there is no 
difficulty in accepting them also as the formulations of what we dis- 
believe. If, however, the believed content be taken to be ‘this as A’, 
what we disbelieve cannot be said to be also ‘this as A’, for the word 
‘this’, when used as the principal word in a, verbal combination, can 
mean only what is believed and never what is disbelieved. 

5. We contend that the first two formulations of the content of 
belief are inadmissible. The judgment-form ‘this is A’ in which the 
principal word is the copula stands neither for the fact believed nor 
for the believing act but for an undifferentiated or confused unity of 
the two. There is nothing in believed fact or in the believing act— 
each taken singly—answering to the distinction between ‘this A’ and 
‘this is A’, i.e., to the copula, the meaning of which nevertheless has 
to be understood in reference to the fact and the act. The content 
of belief cannot, therefore, be formulated as ‘this is A’. Nor should it 
be expressed as ‘this being A’—what is nowadays called proposition 
as distinct from judgment. In ‘this being A’, the principal word is being 
which means here a relation, in a wide sense of the term, between this 
and A. What is believed, however, is not the relation but the con- 
crete fact this as related to A. It is briefly expressed as ‘this as A™ 
in which the principal word is this standing for the substantive fact. 
It is this fact as characterised by A and not the aaa relation 
that is properly said to be believed. 

6. The content of belief is formulated loosely as “this is A’ and 
artificially as ‘this being A’, the natural expression of it being ‘this as 
A’. The content of the corresponding disbelief—meaning what is dis- 
believed——cannot be expressed in this form. It cannot, in fact, be 
expressed in any form except problematically as ‘what was believed’, 
the what being unspecifiable at the time of the disbelief in purely 
objective terms. We cannot then even say that what was believed 
is ‘this as A’, for the word ‘this’ would mean content of a present 
belief. 

7. Disbelief or correction then as necessarily involving the con- 
sciousness of something subjective, viz., the previous belief has to be 
taken as a form of reflective consciousness. To be conscious of the 


*In more complex cases the content may have to be expressed as ‘this A as 
related to B’. 


THE FALSE AND THE SUBJECTIVE 


1. The thesis elaborated in the present paper is that the con- 
sciousness of the false and the consciousness of the subjective imply 
one another. It may be analysed into two propositions (A) that the 
consciousness of the false is consciousness of the subjective and (B) 
that the consciousness of the subjective is consciousness of the false. 
The first denies that the false is but the objective fact of non-existence 
and the second denies that the subjective can be known without belief 
or disbelief in its content—which is apparently the theory behind what 
is called psychological introspection. The further implications of the 
thesis would be that the object is through the self-alienation of the sub- 
ject and that the subject is not known except by a denial of the object. 
These implications are not discussed in this paper. 


A. CONSCIOUSNESS OF THE FALSE IS CONSCIOUSNESS 
OF THE SUBJECTIVE 


2. The proposition may be thus developed: 

The consciousness of the false is consciousness of a content that 
is not speakable except as the content of a belief which, again, is not 
speakable except as that the content of which is false. 

3, The false is what is corrected or disbelieved. Properly, ‘dis- 
belief’ should mean correction or rejection of what was believed, though 
the word is sometimes used loosely to mean rejection of what is suggest- 
ed or the mere absence of belief in the imaginary or the contradictory. 
To be conscious of a content as imaginary or contradictory is to have no 
belief in it. Disbelief is a positive mode of consciousness and is not 
merely the privation of belief. The so-called disbelief in a suggestion 
is really a belief. A content is suggested as what either is or is not 
and never, as will appear, without all reference to fact; and the rejec- 
tion of it means that the negative alternative is accepted or believed. 
We take disbelief then in the sense of correction which we hold is in- 
capable of being regarded as equivalent to a belief in negation. 

4. Correction of error means disbelief not merely in what was 
believed but in what we are explicitly conscious of having believed. 
The content said to be disbelieved cannot, in fact, be expressed except 
as what was believed. What is it that we are said to disbelieve? If 
we start with the belief ‘this is A’— all belief in the last resort is in a 


198 THE FALSE AND THE SUBJECTIVE 


past belief is either belief or disbelief in its content and never a non- 
committal consciousness of the content as merely subsistent. We may 
be conscious of the content of a past belief without being conscious 
of the belief itself. Such consciousness need not be actual belief or 
disbelief: it may be only an idea or suggestion." If however we 
are conscious of the belief as a subjective fact, our consciousness of 
its content is always a judgment that it is or is not a fact. 

12. Strictly speaking, the consciousness of a past belief, as of 
any subjective fact, is not memory but whether it is called memory or 
not, it differs from the memory of an objective fact in an important 
respect. To be conscious of a subjective state is to be in a subjective 
state referring to the content of the primary state, of which the con- 
sciousness of the primary state is a transitive fringe or function. The 
consciousness of the subjective is not like the consciousness of an ob- 
ject, a substantive conscious state subsisting by itself. 

13. To be conscious of a subjective fact like belief is to have 
a present dealing with the content of the belief in the way of rejec- 
tion or re-affirmation. Either way, it implies having the belief. How 
can we be said to have the belief when it is rejected? When we dis- 
believe the content of a belief, we understand the content, as already 
explained, not by itself but as what we believed. We are thus con- 
scious of the belief as past but as the belief is now understood only 
as rejected, we may say that to reject it is to have it now in the mind 
as past. ‘As past’? means ‘as rejected’: the consciousness of the past- 
ness of the belief is but the consciousness of the belief being rejected. 

14. To reject a belief is to have the belief as rejected. It is 
to be aware of a dissociation of the content of the belief from fact. 
Again, to re-affirm a belief is not only to continue believing in its con- 
tent but to be conscious that the content might not be fact. It also 
implies the dissociation of the content from facthood. To be con- 
scious of a belief then is in all cases to be conscious of such a dis- 
sociation. When the belief of which we are conscious is the belief 
of another mind expressed through speech, we are conscious of the 
content of the belief being dissociated from our own belief in the 
very act of understanding the speech. To understand a person’s asser- 
tion may be primarily to believe the content asserted but it is also 
from the very start to be aware that the content might not be fact.” 
When however we are conscious of our own belief, we are conscious 


®* The consciousness of a content without all reference to fact is not evén an 
idea which has a problematic reference to fact. 
° The content, however, is not here dissociated from the asserting act. 


THE FALSE AND THE SUBJECTIVE 199 


of the dissociation of the content from fact only through positive 
disbelief. 

15. We are explicitly conscious of a subjective fact like belief 
when we distinguish its content from it and we distinguish it only 
as we disbelieve it. The dissociation of the content of a belief from its 
facthood in the re-affirmation of the belief implies that re-affirmation 
is really the rejection of disbelief. To know a belief to be true is to 
1eject a disbelief in its content that is already emergent. Just as the 
rejection of a belief implies having the belief as past, so the rejection 
of a disbelief means having the disbelief as past. To be conscious of 
a past belief as true is also to have consciousness of its being false. 
In all cases then in which we are explicitly conscious of a past belief, 
we have a disbelief in the content of it. 

16. It may be said that to be conscious that the content of a 
belief might not be fact, it is not necessary that it should be disbelieved. 
It may be simply doubted or there may be only a question in the 
mind, a desire for information as to whether the content is existent 
cr non-existent. But a question of this kind does not imply cons- 
ciousness of the belief: it implies only the consciousness of its content 
as possibly existent or possibly non-existent and does not accordingly 
involve a dissociation of the content from fact. Existence and non- 
existence both come under believed content or fact. Doubt indeed— 
as distinct from such question—involves a dissociation of the con- 
tent from fact, being the consciousness of the content as either fact 
or no fact (where ‘no fact’ means ‘not even the fact of non-existence’). 
It is the consciousness of an alternation not of two beliefs but of 
belief and disbelief, of a belief as past and the disbelief in its content, 
both being present in the mind. Doubt cannot indeed be said to be 
both belief and disbelief but it cannot be denied to be either. Where 
then the content of a belief is doubted, it cannot be said to be not 
disbelieved. 

We may accordingly hold that we are conscious of a belief as 
past only when we have a disbelief in its content. To be conscious 
of the subjective fact of belief is to be conscious of its content as false. 

17. (ii) We now come to the other proposition that all cons- 
ciousness of the subjective is consciousness of a belief. It may be 
thus paraphrased: 

There is no consciousness of a subjectivity that is not conscious- 
ness of a content referred to fact. 

What is not the consciousness of a content is not the content of 
introspection, though it may be subjective fact. Again, there may be 


200 THE FALSE AND THE SUBJECTIVE 


the consciousness of a content without any reference to fact and this 
also cannot be said to be the content of introspection. What we are 
reflectively conscious of is the consciousness of an actual or possible 
fact, of a content as what is or may be believed. The consciousness of 
a content as what may be believed is still an actual consciousness of 
belief. 

18. Some explanations are necessary. Introspection should be 
taken as at once meaning the distinguishing of a mode of conscious- 
ness from its content. To be conscious of a mode of consciousness 
is to be conscious also of the content of the mode; and to be conscious 
of the mode and the content together is to distinguish them. Not that 
it can be said to be the consciousness of their distinction as a content; 
the distinction cannot be regarded as an actual content that is either 
objective or subjective. The distinguishing here is not the conscious- 
ness of distinction and the consciousness of the subjective is but the 
distinguishing of the subjective from its content. Introspection accord- 
ingly cannot be literally said to be the consciousness of the subjective 
content, though the form of expression is unavoidable. If it were the 
consciousness of a content, there would be introspective consciousness 
of introspection and therefore introspective consciousness of this cons- 
ciousness and so on ad infinitum. 

19. The subjective is not definable as the content of introspec- 
tion. Introspection is itself a subjectivity and we speak of it with 
belief, though we have no consciousness of it. A subjectivity, then, of 
which we are not conscious may not be denied and may be significantly 
spoken of. One example of it is the so-called consciousness of a 
content without a believing or disbelieving reference to fact. To be 
conscious of a content without reference to fact is to be conscious of 
it as without reference, as with the referring consciousness suspended. 
The so-called consciousness of the bare content is the suspending act 
which is the consciousness of the referring consciousness and not of 
the content only. If to introspect be to distinguish consciousness from 
its content, a content without reference to fact being incapable of 
being distinguished from, there can be no introspection into the cons- 
ciousness of such a content. The consciousness of a content without 
intentional reference is a non-relational acquaintance with the content. 

20. To the definition of introspection as the distinguishing of 
a subjectivity from its content, it may be objected that it would exclude 
introspection into perception and into all consciousness on the percep- 
tual level. The very character of perceptual consciousness is that it is 
not immediately distinguishable from the object perceived and yet we 


THE FALSE AND THE SUBJECTIVE 201 


seem to be obviously aware of such consciousness as when we say ‘I 
see the table.’ Nor does this awareness of perceiving the table imply 
any disbelief in the table, as would be demanded by our theory. 
Such awareness of perception, however, is not introspection but only 
a significant speaking of it. Just as there is no introspection into in- 
trospection though we may speak of introspection, so the fact that 
we speak of seeing the table does not imply that we are introspectively 
conscious of the seeing. We have no direct enjoying consciousness of 
the seeing operation—as distinct from the organic-muscular experience 
of using our eyes—being performed by us. Much of what we call 
introspection appears to be only a speaking or naming of a subjectivity. 
All introspection may imply a naming of the subjective but all naming 
of it is not introspection. 

21. We have no consciousness then of a subjectivity that is not 
consciousness of a content with intentional reference. Intentional 
reference is a believing or disbelieving reference and disbelieving 
reference involves a believing reference. Thus if we are conscious 
of the subjective, we are conscious of a belief. 

22. The consciousness of a belief has been shown to involve dis- 
belief in its content. As to be conscious of any subjective fact is to 
be conscious of a belief, all reflective consciousness may be said to 
involve disbelief in the content of the corresponding unreflective cons- 
ciousness. Thus the consciousness of the false is the conscious- 
ness of the subjective and vice versa. We are necessarily aware of 
the false and the subjective together. 


SOME ASPECTS OF NEGATION 


ANALYSIS* 


(1-5) The problem is to formulate the logic of the view that 
truth is manifold. There are many radically different types of logic 
based on incommensurable views of negation. What is not, viz., the 
illusion may be regarded (1) as having some kind of abstract being 
or (2) as contradiction itself. Illusion may be (i) a being only to be 
denied, (ii) a being as positive as fact but different from it and posi- 
tively related to it, (ili) identical with fact, relation being but identity, 
or (iv) no being at all but negation transcending all being. 

(6-10) These four views indicate four distinct attitudes towards 
truth, four stages of attention. The positive direction of attention 
is alone emphasised in the first three views. Pragmatism which recog- 
nises the fourth view in one form does not yet suggest a definite dis- 
cipline of attention in the negative direction. This negative attention 
is very like introspection, being the consciousness of the absence of 
object and as such implying cognition of the object as well. The 
faculty is explicitly recognised in the fourth view of negation which 
accordingly brings out the need of an intensive discipline of it. 

(11-15) The analysis of the meaning of ‘not illusory’, of negation 
of negation shows the concrete shapes which the above four views 
assume. In (i), ‘not illusory’ means ‘not merely subjective’, and all 
relation being illusory or merely subjective, there arises the notion of the 
self-identical reals. Self-identity or self-conservation as a function, and 
what is opposed to it, viz., the thinking function of the subjective ideas 
are only grades of illusion, each of which is indifferently one or mani- 
fold. In (ii), ‘not illusory’ is what is different from the positively sub- 
jective and coordinate with it, viz., the objective. Each side of the 
difference is a relation of terms, subjective relation is distinct from 
Objective relation, and while there is one object-system, there are 
many idea-systems connected with many substrata. In (iii), the truth 
that is ‘not illusory’ is the necessary identity of the subjective and ob- 
jective, of the known and the unknown. In (iv), this necessary iden- 
tity is not positive at all. To say that the limiting unknown 1s neces- 
sary is not to know the unknown. Nor will it do to make any positive 
use of it as a transcendent negation, to take it, e.g., either as positively 
conditioning the known or as negative matter in relation to (Platonic) 
Ideas. ‘Not illusory’ in this view can only mean the unknown of 
which we are aware through the absence of positive knowledge. The 


206 ANALYSIS 


principle is uncertainty itself, the uncertain alternation between the 
unknown and this awareness of the unknown. 

(16-18) The feeling of this alternation is a religion in three 
forms: (i) an absolute dissatisfaction with the definite dualism of 
truth and untruth, (ii) an absolute condemnation of the attitude in 
which any religion is taken to be false, and (iii) a faith that all reli- 
gions are not only true but identical. These are bound up with the 
views (i) that the negation of negation is negation, (ii) that the nega- 
tion of absolute negation is the absolute truth of all affirmations, and 
(iii) that absolute negation and absolute affirmation are mutual nega- 
tion in indentity. Such is the absolute, as distinct from the subjecti- 
vistic, interpretation of the view that truth is manifold. 


SOME ASPECTS OF NEGATION 


1. The aim of this paper is to bring out the fact that there are 
certain ultimate modes of logical thought embodying types of negation 
which are really incommensurable and that all philosophical dispute 
resolves itself in the final analysis into a conflict between such types. 
Every system of philosophical thought or religion has its own logic 
and is bound up with one or other of the fundamental views of nega- 
tion. Each furnishes its distinctive criticism and orientation of the 
others: it is impossible to refer them all to a single court of trial and 
probably the only demand should be that a philosophy or religion and 
its distinctive logic justify each other. Not that, however, subjectivism 
Or scepticism is the necessary consequence: all the types may be true 
and truth itself may be manifold. It is necessary to formulate, if pos- 
sible, the logic of this view of the manifoldness of truth. 


2. Negation is intelligible as illusion. When an object is known 
to be illusory, what kind of being or non-being do we attribute to it? 
We answer the question too easily when we say that it has a subjective 
being but no objective being. The antithesis between subjective and 
objective has only been reached very gradually in the history of thought 
and there is every reason to regard it as contingent. There is a too 
facile falling back upon psychology as a secure anchorage, although 
it should be an open question whether psychical fact is fact at all. 


3. To say ‘this object is not existent’ is to imply either that 
this is no object but something else is, or that this object is no object. 
In the former case, ‘this’ is something which can be spoken of without 
being object; it has a being which is not objective being, and so nega- 
tion means only a difference between this peculiar being and objec- 
tive being. This peculiar being need not at once be spoken of as 
subjective being: that would be to identify without sufficient proof 
yet a mental state with the content of it i.e., with what it refers to. 
Such an abstract being would be the starting point of a view which 
interprets negation as mere difference: concrete being would be only 
a determination of it—determination in a sense which will appear 
presently. In the latter case where the illusory object is regarded as an 
object which is no object, negation does not mean mere difference: 
contradiction itself which is no abstract being is the starting point. 
We begin then by distinguishing these two starting points—abstract 


208 SOME ASPECTS OF NEGATION 


being and contradiction and these we expect to indicate a deep line 
of cleavage throughout philosophy. 

4.‘ The different shades of views in the first type of thought 
require to be developed in order to be brought into definite relation 
to the second type. 

(i) Negation emerges only when an illusion has been corrected, 
when, for example, we say ‘A is real, not X’. Has X here anything to 
do to determine or define A? It may be held that A is here by its 
own right and that it owes nothing to X which is simply to be rejected 
or outgrown. ‘A’ which is wholly given is not X: it gains or loses no- 
thing by rejecting X. There is no relation between A and X to define 
A: truth is never determined by relation, truth is not relation, i.e., all 
relation is illusory. Negation is always difference in this type of 
thought; all relation implies difference, and the primal relation is the 
difference between fact and illusion. Hence the relation between two 
facts A and B is itself no fact: each of them is a fact by its own right 
and each rejects the other as illusion. Positive relation between A and 
B is only this mutual rejection by two given beings: what are only 
rejected are not related at all, are neither identical nor different, and 
so the region of negation is the region of the indefinite. 

(ii) If, however, A and B are negations of each other and yet 
facts, it may be said that an illusion X, by the correction of which A 
is posited, is only the name of another fact; only, this is not X, this 
is A. Something else is X, X is not nothing, and the illusion is only 
in the inherence of X in this. The illusion is not in the ‘that’ or in 
the ‘what’ of the given content but in their particular relation: a judg- 
ment alone can be false, not any term of the judgment, nor the bare 
relation apart from the terms. The false judgment however has a 
definite form, as definite as the corresponding true judgment; and the 
relation between these judgments is expressed in the definite negative 
judgment. ‘This is X’ is the false judgment corresponding to ‘this is 
A’, the true judgment; and their relation is ‘this is not X’. In fact the 
primal judgment is simply the opposition between two terms like ‘this 
A’ and ‘this X’ expressed as ‘this A is not this X’, through which there 
emerge the affirmative judgments ‘this is A’ and ‘this is X’ and the 
concepts of truth and falsity as applied to them. The simple negation 
appears as a difference between two terms but is really an opposition 
between two judgments and in fact the judgments are judgments be- 
cause of this simple negation. All relation is at bottom this simple 
negation or difference, the opposition of truth and falsity is the oppo- 
sition of a true and false relation, and so relation is not necessarily 


SOME ASPECTS OF NEGATION 209 


an illusion as in the previous view. Truth, however, in this view is 
the relation of two beings as set against some other relation: not the 
abstract beings but these as related constitute the true startirfg point. 
This relation is never without the terms, nor the terms without the 
relation; and yet neither side is constituted by the other. This relation 
which keeps up the difference of the terms and is itself different from 
them is inherence. So we have as facts not only particular given beings 
but also particular relations of these beings, illusions being included in 
such particular relations. In this view then, illusions are particular 
and definite relations: the relations of terms, which are facts are 
not constituted by these illusions and so terms too are not constituted 
by their relation. 

(iii) It may be asked however, if terms and their relation are 
inseprable, if in the primal negative judgment, ‘this A is not thisX’, 
the illusion is inseparable from the fact, and if both the illusion and the 
fact are particular and definite, by what criterion are illusion and fact 
distinguished at all? In the view just considered, cach negation is at 
once the distinction; but then as there is no universal negation, so 
there can be no universal fact-character also. This means that fact 
and illusion are not distinguishable by any gencral character at all. 
A particular fact is not the corresponding illusion and it is not also 
another fact: there is nothing to distinguish these two negations, So 
the conclusion should be that a particular fact and the corresponding 
illusion are identical and that the positive relation of inherence, there- 
fore, is reducible to this identity of position and negation. 

Particularity in the first two views as above considered is ulti- 
mately given. In the present view however, the particularity of a 
position is constituted by that of its negation and vice versa. Each 
position is different from an infinity of other positions and is thus 
constituted by an infinity of differences, by infinite negation. Each 
negation too would thus be the negation of infinite position i.e., a 
negation identical with infinite position. There would thus emerge 
the conception of the identity-in-difference of the finite and the infinite, 
and of infinite negation and infinite position. Every term, however, is 
not only constituted by its negation of other terms but it is also, as 
explained in the previous view, through such negation turned into a 
judgment, relation, or negation opposed to i.e., negating other judg- 
ments, relations or negations. A whirl of negation then alone remains 
but it is still regarded as the positive. 

(iv) There is nothing however to distinguish such a positive 
from negation. Here then we definitely leave behind abstract being 


14 


210 SOME ASPECTS OF NEGATION 


which was our first starting point and start with contradiction itself or 
transcendent negation as our first principle. We may next take being 
as only ‘posited by this negation. The uniqueness of particularity is 
then not removed and need not also be removed. It is not taken in- 
deed as ultimately given: it is held as free determination by this nega- 
tion but yet as inexplicable or unpredictable. From the vortex of nega- 
tion any particular may spring and so particulars have only to be 
accepted as they come and related into a world, positive for all parti- 
cular purposes but with an absolute inexplicability as the ground of 
it all. We have accordingly equal right to take particular being as 
superseded by this inexplicability or retracted into this whirl of nega- 
tion. 

5. Being then is progressively reduced to negation in these four 
views. In view (i), the particular simple beings are ultimately given 
and are not in any way determined by negation or the indefinite. In 
view (ii), both the beings and their negations are given as particular 
and so all relations are also given as facts. In view (iii), particularity 
is not given but posited or constituted by definite absolute negation. 
This however does not abolish their dualism: their identity and their 
difference remain as inexplicabilities, though not as given beings. In 
view (iv) finally, being is abolished and absolute negation alone re- 
mains, not only as inexplicably definite but also as inexplicably self- 
related or self-negating i.e., as a free function or activity. 

6. The true value of these views of negation appears in the 
concrete types of philosophy and religion in which they take shape. 
They indicate certain distinctive temperaments or attitudes towards 
truth, certain familiar modes of handling a given content. One’s first 
impulse is to attend to what is confusedly given, to break up its con- 
tinuity, to single out its elements, to analyse. It is the attitude of posi- 
tive attention to the elements and although it means the withdrawal of 
the mind from the given confused content, this negative direction of 
attention is not itself attended to. The given confused aspect also is 
not attended to, it is simply forgotten or left behind. The next stage 
is that in which the given aspect is remembered along with the elements 
analysed out, is distinguished from them and is recognised to contain 
them. The elements are separated and also related. The given com- 
plex and the relation of the elements alternate in the mind, though the 
alternation itself is not attended to. In the next stage again, the given 
complex is taken as identical with the related elements and so the 
elements themselves are felt to be identical. When thus however al- 
ternation is stopped and difference superseded by positive attention 


SOME ASPECTS OF NEGATION 211 


to this identity, the identity has lost the placid being of the given: 
it is felt to be an inexplicability, a dream, a being that is ypegation 
through and through—a perfect revel of negation. Positive attention 
denies itself utterly and the denial itself is known, not by positive 
attention to it but by attention directed to the positive object alone. 
Positive attention is recognised as a withdrawal from its own with- 
drawing activity; in other words, negative attention is known by nega- 
tive attention to it. 

7. In all accounts of attention, the positive direction is alone 
emphasised: it alone is taken to be under control and capable of being 
cultured. To try to know or to do something is to positively attend: 
and even to try to forget it or avoid is to attend to something else. 
And yet in all knowing and in all doing, one has a consciousness of 
the problem before the effort to solve it, a very peculiar kind of cons- 
ciousness rousing and regulating the effort, containing in fact both the 
solution and the effort already within it. It is the ‘aching void’ of 
James, of which all determinate knowledge and action are the mate- 
rialisation. This materialisation is ordinarily left to chance and it is 
never suggested that negative attention which is the very heart of all 
mental process can be controlled or cultured by any intensive discipline. 

8. The modern pragmatist resolution of truth into will means 
a recognition in one form of this fourth type of negation. The will 
that constructs all truth and therefore denies the right of all absolute 
truth is nothing but this creative negation. Not that pragmatism has 
suggested any system of discipline for this truth-constructing will: it 
has not yet told us how to construct any particular truth. In this respect 
it is on a par with absolutism which pronounces reason to be creative 
of truth but cannot present any method of obtaining a particular truth 
other than the method of experience. So too the neo-Hegelian formula 
of self-realisation furnishes no ethical discipline other than that pre- 
sented by positive morality. When Hegel and others sought to deduce 
physics or history, they recognised the legitimacy of this demand for 
a method other than experience for obtaining particular truths, though 
they did not satisfy the demand. This method cannot be other than 
a discipline of negative attention, the process of accentuating the 
‘aching void’, the deliberate endeavour to see what we want to see 
i.e., to know the want itself or the particular ignorance. 

9. We know the absence of an obejct, say of a book on the 
table by a faculty which is neither perception nor inference. It is not 
perception, for the absence gives no sensation; and it cannot be in~ 


ference, for inference must be based on perception. The faculty 


212 SOME. ASPECTS OF NEGATION 


however being there, it may be helped out by the perception or in- 
ference. It is nearest to psychological introspection, though it knows 
objective non-existence and not subjective existence merely. The 
non-existence of a book on the table is an objective fact known by 
negative attention, defined by relation to the facts obtained by positive 
attention. Through this negative attention then, we also know a par- 
ticular negation or absence of knowledge, know the want of a solution 
and therefore the solution itself. Negative introspective attention 
accordingly is the faculty that requires to be controlled. 

10. The first type of negation which we have considered implies 
no recognition of the necessity for this control. It leaves the dis- 
covery of truth entirely to chance. It suggests nothing but the anxiety 
to escape the given. It is a mode of self-will in the intellectual region: 
let only attention assert itself and some truth will come. Still the escape 
here is nothing but negative attention which however does not know 
itself. The will is unregenerate here, uncontrolled, capricious: it 
wants to possess or to rest in the positive, wants anyhow to discharge 
itself only. In the second type, there is already some sort of recognition 
of negative attention. There is the positive eagerness still to catch the 
truth but there is no satisfaction or rest in what is caught and hence 
there is the positive anxiety to return to the given. The consciousness 
of the possession of a truth is accompanied by a haunting sense of the 
truth left behind and so each truth is alternately possessed and left 
behind. Nothing is rejected, everything is only distinguished, and all 
judgments are taken to be true but different. This haunting sense 
of the truth left behind, this positive attention to difference is nega- 
tive attention itself turned inside out. The unregenerate assertive 
tendency is still regnant but it is the negation that is asserted as a 
positive difference. The difference is however not taken as constitu- 
tive of the position, as it is taken in the third view. This would be 
the next stage then where positive attention and negative attention are 
employed as one process, where what is known and what is unknown 
are viewed as in one necessary system of truth which however is still 
only positive. This truth in which the will finds rest—for it is still 
anxious for rest—is not dull being but a free play, a moving identity. 
So the dream of the construction of truth arises here: truth appears at 
least as a play of reason, as a music which the mind follows and feels 
it can reproduce but cannot reproduce. The will cannot construct a 
particular truth, for it has not faith enough in its omnipotence, though 
there is an irresistible feeling of omniscience i.e., of truth being abso- 
lutely transparent. Hence arise on the one hand the absurdities of 


SOME. ASPECTS OF NEGATION 213 


Natur-philosophie and the indolent acquiescence on the other in all 
given reality as rational. The newness or uniqueness of intuition re- 
mains over after all dialectic which proves at best that intuition must 
be unique. The experience of quality is still utterly unpredictable and 
religion mocks all attempts to trace its evolution. Faith lours ahead 
as a dark cloud that refuses to be transparent to reason. The free and 
undoubting play of reason, the facile dream of the transparency of 
truth gives place to the absolute abruptness of quality and the deathlike 
seriousness of faith. Negative attention refuses to be positive: it denies 
its assertive tendency utterly. All truth is retracted into this self- 
denying negative attention and what remains over is but the demand 
for its intensive discipline. 

11. We began with a discussion of illusion as a clue to the ascer- 
tainment of the several types of negation. To bring out their nature 
in more concrete terms, it is necessary to consider the illusion of an 
illusion. It involves a double correction or negation. Something is 
believed to be real, it is next taken to be illusory, and then again on 
closer observation it may be pronounced to be not illusory. The ques- 
tion is what ‘not illusory’ means. In the first view, illusion which is 
the name of the utterly indefinite gets some kind of definition in this 
connexion. Negation being negated becomes definite though not posi- 
tive, being set against a positive. This definite negation or ‘definite 
indefinite’ is the subjective, the merely subjective, which the corres- 
ponding positive is not. The subjective not only does not constitute 
the positive, it does not determine it in any way. It means a double 
triumph for the positive alone: it is not merely by its own right, it 
asserts this right explicitly. So to say ‘this object is not illusory’ is to 
say that this object is not merely subjective but is self-identical. There 
emerges then against the notion of the subjective the notion of the 
self-existent simple which explicitly rejects all relation and all complex- 
ity and is the self-conserving real or monad. So then a double series 
comes out, the series of the reals as rejecting the subjective series, real 
atomism versus psychical atomism. The self-conserving function of 
the real is only the function of rejection, for which the real is neither 
the better nor the worse and so it is nothing real by itself. Yet here it gets 
a pseudo-objective character: it is the activity or energy of the real. On 
the other side the subjective is rejected i.e., the definiteness of the idea 
is proved to be nothing and this predicament of being rejected, like 
the function of rejecting, gets a pseudo-definiteness as the conscious 
activity of the idea. This conscious activity of the idea would be called 
‘thought’, being more unreal than the idea and yet on that very ac- 


214 SOME ASPECTS OF NEGATION 


count nearer the positive as the cognition of truth. In this negative 
or illusory region lies the concept of identity-in-difference. The reals 
are distinct as rejecting all relation and each idea is distinct as being 
rejected by a distinct real. But the energies of the reals, which are 
essentially illusory, have not the distinctness of the reals and hence 
would arise the notion of one energy or self-activity turning up many 
different energies. This objective self-activity again would be taken 
as negating a corresponding subjective self-activity, viz., a self-cons- 
cious self determining all cognitions of truth. Such then would be the 
illusory emanations of negation, the implications of the illusion of 
illusion in the first view. 

12. In the second view, negation being negated becomes not 
only definite but also positive. Only, this positive would be of a 
different order from the positive of which it is the negation. This posi- 
tive being of illusion is our ordinary subjective idea which is not to be 
disparaged as the merely subjective i.e., as nothing at all. Here too 
this idea does not constitute the object: each of them is self-identical 
by being distinguished from the other. We have nothing but particular 
negations in this view and the relations among these neagtions are of 
a different order from the relations among the positions. Not-A and 
not-B are like A and B distinct but not-A rejects A in a way different 
from that in which A rejects not-A. The idea is conscious of not being 
object but the object distinguishes itself from the idea by not being 
conscious. Hence arises the circumstance that an object is definitely 
related to other objects only. In the subjective region, two ideas are 
not the same though they know, i.e., consciously distinguish themselves 
from, the same object and so the definite objective relations need not 
be reflected in correspondingly definite relations of ideas. The ideas 
may have orders of their own which do not reflect the objective order 
at all: hence the distinction between true and false cognition. False 
cognitions would be relations of ideas without the definiteness of the 
relations of things. Hence while we have the notion of a single system 
of objects, we cannot speak of the system of ideas as single, which as 
distinct from the single object-system must be regarded as many systems, 
many minds each definitely related to other minds but indefinitely 
within itself and to the object-system. Yet the indefinite as such has 
no place in this view: definite cognitions and indefinite cognitions are 
alike definite as ideas, definitely connected with the selves as uncons- 
cious substrata. 

13. In the third view, the illusion of an illusion is not only de- 
finite and positive subjective being but as the original illusion which 


SOME ASPECTS OF NEGATION 215 


was pronounced subjective is turned objective, the given is taken to be 
the identity of the subjective and objective. The distinctness of a parti- 
cular given position and the corresponding negation vanishes alto- 
gether: what is now taken as objective may appear to be subjective 
and this subjective again may turn out to be objective and so on in- 
definitely. It may be said that the objective at which we stop at any 
stage is only possibly subjective and has not yet been actually correc- 
ted. But every stage is believed to be contingent because there is no 
ground to believe that it is final. One may be uncertain whether it 
will turn out to be illusory but uncertainty or indefiniteness has no place 
either in this view or in the previous view. The uncertainty itself is 
here a definite negation of knowledge: the stopping at any object is a 
definite illusion or definite subjective being which is identical with the 
corresponding reality of absolute knowledge. Limit itself is posited 
by reason. All truth is hypothesis and all hypothesis is true: the parti- 
cular truth which is not yet turned into hypothesis is only a hypothesis 
in relation to the absolute truth. Thus there emerges the identity-in- 
difference of the given truth and its explanation. The given by itself 
is abstract thing-in-itself and the explanation by itself is abstract 
reason. Each is the negation of the other and their synthesis is the 
concrete positive, the absolute Idea. 

14. In the fourth view, this synthesis of mutual negation is not 
positive at all. The manner in which the present actual stage of 
knowledge is resolved into a contingency in the previous view may not 
be accepted as satisfactory. The difference between the problematic 
and the assertory statements—that the present object may be illusory 
and that it /s illusory—may be felt to be an absolute difference; and 
to cover the defect by saying that all particularity must be resolvable 
into universality may sound very much like a bravado. That uncer- 
tainty whether or not what is now believed to be real will turn out to 
be illusory either appears not to affect the belief at all or if it does, it 
points to a feeling of certitude about the unknowable which is stronger 
than all knowledge. To say that the feeling is itself the highest know- 
ledge, that this uncertainty is what is reasonably to be expected will 
not remove the uncertainty itself. The uncertainty in fact deepens: it 
is uncertain whether we should begin philosophy with the assurance 
that uncertainty is necessary or with the uncertainty itself. 

15. This deeper uncertainty about the starting point of philo- 
sophy should, for all we know, be itself the starting point; but mean- 
while there may be attempts at compromise. The assurance of reason 


may be accepted along with the inexpressible negation of it. The posi- 


216 SOME ASPECTS OF NEGATION 


tive may be taken along with the negative but as transcending it. On 
the one hand, Ideas of Platonic type may be believed to transcend a 
negative matter and yet to work with it, or on the other the unknow- 
able or unknowables may be regarded as transcending all knowables 
and yet as positively conditioning them. In either case a positive use 
is made of negation: it is either the matter that is formed or the real 
cause, never a bare nothing. There are those who object to all such 
positive use of negation, although they do not bring out the real im- 
plication of their objection viz., that a negative use is to be made of 
negation. In the fourth view of negation then, what is ‘not illusory’ 
is the unknown of which we are aware by the absence of positive know- 
ledge. Here the principle is uncertainty itself, the uncertain alterna- 
tion between the unknown and this awareness of the unknown. 

16. It is this alternation which takes the form of the uncertainty 
whether philosophy is to start with the faith that all our finality or 
positiveness, all unique quality, all our present truth in fact is ex- 
plicable or necessarily to be expected in respect of us as merely finite 
beings—with this very halting and withal very assured form of omnis- 
cience, or with these inexplicabilities themselves. Neither the given 
nor the explanation, no positive in fact is the beginning or the process 
or the goal of philosophy. The identity of the given and the expla- 
nation, or of the objective and subjective is the last thinkable posi- 
tive which alternates with negation. This identity (or reason) is a 
process and as such is itself a negation opposed to a transcendent 
negation. This latter negation may be indifferently called subjective 
will (or interest) constructing all truth, or vital impulse moulding 3 
matter known only as its negation, or absolute will determining at 
once reason and Ideas. It is not the merely subjective of view (i), 
nor the subjective co-ordinate with the objective of view (ii), nor the 
absolute reason of view (iii). The negative use of this transcendent 
negation is religion which is the negation of philosophy and therefore 
also the true philosophy. 

17. Here also in the final stage, the first three views of nega- 
tion may alternate. The first type would be the religion of nirvana, 
consisting in an absolute dissatisfaction with the definite dualism of 
truth and untruth. The negation of negation is itself negation, the 
dualism of true and false is itself false. ‘The second type would be 
the religion of absolute toleration, which is a dissatisfaction with all 
negation, an absolute condemnation of the attitude in which any reli- 
gion is declared to be false. The negation of any religion is absolute 
negation and the negation of this absolute negation gives the absolute 


SOME ASPECTS OF NEGATION 217 


truth of all particular affirmations, all particular religions. The third 
type would present the faith in all religious being not only true but 
identical. The absolute negation and the particular absolute affirma- 
tions are mutual negations in identity. This identity and this mutual 
negation are then the terminal points of all philosophy. Either side 
is beyond the dualism of definite truth and untruth. 

18. Such is the logic of the manifoldness of truth. The prag- 
matist interpretation of this manifoldness makes philosophy subjec- 
tivistic and logic temperamental. We have endeavoured here to give 
an absolute, instead of a subjectivistic, interpretation. 


PLACE OF THE INDEFINITE IN LOGIC 


ANALYSIS* 


(i) Logic which ordinarily deals with the definite refers to the 
indefinite (i) as only subjective, (ii) as an epistemological element 
of the definite, or (iii) as the dialective function of negation construc- 
tive of the definite. Should not logic find place for the absolute in- 
definite, in view especially of the metaphysic of the irrational? 

(2-5) Logic as dealing with the form of all thought-content 
should consider primarily if there is any form which is not matter i.c., 
which is prior to all determinate doctrine and controversy, scientific 
and metaphysical. Epistemology, as it is, presupposes determinate 
principles supposed to be above criticism and hence it lapses into 
metaphysics. Logic should criticise the basis of this science and start 
with an absolutely abstract first principle which can be neither a self- 
evident axiom nor a contingent law, viz., with the bare dualism of the 
definite and the indefinite, to deny which is to admit it. All dualisms 
except this admit of a third something beyond. If stated as a law at 
all, the principle would be ‘the definite is not and is the indefinite’, 1.¢., 
the line between the definite and the indefinite is itself indefinable. 

(5-7) It is different from the dialectic principle of the identity 
of being and non-being which lays more stress on identity than on 
difference. Against dialectic, it urges that there is an alternative— 
unreason—beyond the identity of being and non-being which is reason; 
against conceptualist logic, that there is the indeterminate beyond de- 
terminate affirmation and negation; and against empirical logic, that 
the positive object of experience is a determination carved out of the 
indeterminate. It not only thus extends but modifies the logic of the 
definite: it brings out the indefinite given character of determinate ex- 
perience, of relation (including contradiction), and of systemic or 
necessary unity quite as much as it emphasises their character as de- 
terminate negations of the indefinite. 

(8-10) Logic starts neither with pure being and non-being nor 
with determinate being and non-being but with ‘this determinate’, 
where determinateness or ‘this-ness’ is being or negation or their iden- 
tity and the ‘this’ a transcendental indefinite. This indefinite is de- 
termined into the relation in a judgment—identity and difference; and 
so of affirmation and negation, neither is prior to the other. The neces- 
sity in reasoning, again, is in reference to this indefinite, whether taken 
as a given system of position as in empirical logic, as a given system of 


‘ 
222 PLACE OF THE INDEFINITE IN LOGIC 


analytic relations as in conceptualist logic, or as a given self-creating 
system of functions as in dialectic. 

(11-16) Dialectic only shows that a given category was neces- 
sary: it does not create it and yet somehow such prophecy after the 
event is synthetic knowledge. As, however, the inferential expectation 
of material truth is only probable, the ideal form of inference has to 
be distinguished from the material process. To conceptualist logic, 
this form of analytic necessity is given and is somehow applied to the 
matter of experience. To empirical logic, the material process—from 
particulars to particulars—which is really indefinite is somehow de- 
finite. Kant shows that the forms of conceptualist logic are not merely 
given but are synthetic necessities, they being necessarily applicable to 
experience which, however, in its particularity is unanticipable. So 
Spencer shows against empirical logic that inference is not only a 
psychological transition but implies a consciousness of necessity or 
justification and that the given definite experience is but the unknow- 
able breaking forth into the relation of difference. Both bring out the 
transcendental indefinite but both take it uncritically to be real. But 
the indefinite is really a third category, beyond reality and negation, 
and thus not a transcendental implicate only but a content of positive 
logic. It may be called unknowable negation or reality and so meta- 
physically we may deny the knowable world, not only in absolute 
intuition but in logical thought and admit at the same time determinate 
noumena or phenomena or both as real specifications of the indefinite. 
We may make a metaphysical use of the indefinite in either way; and 
in reference to this indefinite, the distinction between necessity and 
fact, negation and position itself becomes indefinite. 

(17) Two applications : (i) all and some. In ‘all A’, the deno- 
tation determined by the definite connotation is definite as denying 
the indeterminate differences of the particulars which are still implied; 
and ‘some A’ means not only this indefinite but also a definite, sug- 
gesting that the connotation of A is indefinitely modified by a deter- 
minative x. So sub-alternation may or may not be opposition. 

(18-26) (ii) Negative conditional propositions. In logic of the 
definite, conditionals are admitted only as intending a definite element 
explicitly against a mass of indefinite implication; and negation (i.e., 
indefinite negation) of this definite element is supposed only to yield 
abortive propositions. Yet such negation may be practically useful 
and so the negative hypothetical should be a definite form in logic. 
The indefinite disjunctive ‘A is either B or not-B’, where not-B stands 
for a definite or an indefinite positive or for nothing at all, is really 


ANALYSIS : 223 


negative in relation to the definite ‘A is either B or C’ and is in fact 
the very form of ultimate alternation between knowledge and ignorance, 
between the definite and the indefinite. 


PLACE OF THE INDEFINITE IN LOGIC 


1. The purpose of this paper is to examine what modifications 
of logical doctrine would be necessitated by the admission of the in- 
definite in logic, side by side with definite position and definite nega- 
tion. In logic which ordinarily deals with the definite content of 
thought only, the indefinite is considered in at least three ways. It 
may be regarded explicitly as extralogical, as only something subjec- 
tive or psychological which it is the purpose of the science to outgrow 
or supersede. Sometimes it is treated as provisionally definite; both 
the uncertain and certain relation of the knowing faculty to the object 
is taken to yield definite forms of positive logic, the indefinite in fact 
being admitted as only an epistemological element of the definite con- 
tent of logic." In dialectic, it is taken as definite function of truth 
itself, as the function of negation which is neither a mere epistemo- 
logical element nor a static truth by itself but still a constructive factor 
of definite truth only. Our inquiry is whether and how logic should 
find place for the absolute indefinite as distinct from the indefinite 
that is only constitutive of the definite and our prima facie justification 
for the inquiry is that there is such a thing as a metaphysic of abso- 
lute doubt—at least a philosophy of the irrational—and that logic as 
the prolegomena to all science and metaphysics should not commit 
itself to the particular metaphysical faith in the finality of a definite 
system of truth. The indefinite has found in fact a place in meta- 
physics in many forms. To mention only a few at random, there is 
the ‘negative’ matter of Plato, the maya of the Vedantists, and the 
Sinyam or ‘void’ of the Buddhists. There is the notion of objective 
chance in Aristotle and of the inexplicable change of direction of the 
atoms of Lucretius. There is the conception of the indeterminate will, 
specially in the extreme form of unmotived or irrational activity, as 
presented by a Duns Scotus, a Schopenhauer, or a Bergson and there 
is finally the Unknowable whether of Kant or of Spencer. These 
notions are at present homeless in logic; there is no category to ex- 
press them and disputes arise in connexion with them in metaphysic 
which properly should have arisen in logic itself. 

2. It is necessary to begin by clearly defining the scope of logic 
as conceived here. Whatever may have been the origin of the science, 
in its present state it can hardly be treated except mainly as a positive 

*See ref. to Venn § 19. 

15 


226 PLACE OF THE INDEFINITE IN LOGIC 


science distinct alike from psychology and the objective sciences and 
concerned with the most abstract principles, not only of all science, 
but of all philosophy. It deals with the object or content of all 
knowledge claimed as such and in this sense is an objective science, 
though the object here means all thinkables, subjective, objective, and 
absolute. It considers only the form of the object, not the matter and 
so its primary problem should be whether there is any form which is 
not matter, which is not determinate, which is undeniably presupposed 
in all determinate concrete thought, accepted or disputed, which in 
fact—paradoxical as it may sound—is not affected even by the un- 
certainty of this problem. It is not the primary purpose of logic to 
develop this form, if it can be discovered, into the ground-principles 
or categories of the several concrete departments of thought. That 
would be committing oneself to a particular system of metaphysic; and 
logic, as prior to all metaphysic, can only indicate these by way of 
bringing out all that it does not deal with. For purposes of logic, in 
other words, it should be assumed that all intuitions that are claimed 
as such and all sciences and philosophies may be true; it must be uni- 
versal in the sense not only of presenting the form common to all that 
is claimed as knowledge but also as presenting the form of all doubt 
and dispute. 

3. This view of logic is forced upon as by the circumstance that 
it has to take account not only of the positive sciences but also of 
metaphysics. Metaphysics in re-opening the fundamental questions 
assumed to be settled in the sciences presents many alternative solu- 
tions of which it is not for logic to accept or reject any on the ground 
of commonsense, for the whole purpose of the science is to replace the 
rough and ready rule of the thumb. A similar problem gave rise to 
epistemology as a prolegomena to all branches of knowledge claimed 
as such but there is this difference from logic as we conceive it here 
that it itself represents a body of knowledge that is determinate or un- 
criticised, resting as it does either on the authority of introspection or 
on that of traditional logic for the solution of the critical problem 
without a prior criticism of these authorities themselves. This prior 
criticism, if undertaken, would yield us logic proper, with its abso- 
lutely abstract or fundamental character. If epistemology has not 
been able so far to maintain its role of a prolegomena and has come 
to be a mere chapter in some metaphysical system, dialectical or 
other, it is because it has not stripped itself, to start with, of all 
determinate presuppositions, because in fact it has not been funda- 
mental enough. That the transcendental logic of Kant, for example, 


PLACE OF THE INDEFINITE IN LOGIC Z27 


led to the positive dialectic logic of Hegel only shows that the anti- 
thesis between the transcendental and positive is not absolute in the 
sphere of the determinate. In both, the abstractions with which logic 
is taken to be conversant are taken to be constructive functions: 
they are viewed as at once analytic and synthetic. In Kant, the 
analytic moment indeed remains transcendental in view of a cons- 
ciousness of a limit to reason, of an indefinite thing-in-itself; but this 
consciousness of the indefinite is not taken seriously to affect the epis- 
temology itself. The definite unity of the self and its synthetic speci- 
fication into a definite system of categories are obviously suggested 
by the presuppositions of a particular system of metaphysic, viz., the 
developmental, and the indefinite itself is taken to be real without 
criticism. Logic in our present conception, however, in endeavouring 
to supply the abstract form of epistemological knowledge itself would 
stand on a height of abstraction where the distinction of the trans- 
cendental and the positive is obliterated. The synthetic developmental 
principle has no necessary place in it any more than the principle of 
determinate identity, for it has no right to build on a determinate 
metaphysical presupposition: the principle of logic should be abso- 
lutely abstract. 


4. Can we have such a science at all? If we demand a criti- 
cism of epistemology, should we not demand a criticism of the criti- 
cism and so on ad infinitum? Epistemology starts with a principle 
that it believes to be self-evident or necessary. If however, a real 
doubt is cast on the principle, if the basis of intuition or axiom in 
general is challenged as it has been challenged, logic as such has no 
right to enter into the dispute and to take sides; and so on in criticising 
epistemology, it cannot stand on any so-called necessary or self-evi- 
dent principle. To start with a determinate contingent principle 
would be equally absurd and so it can only stand on an indeterminate 
principle which can indifferently be called necessary or contingent. 
This principle can be no other than the bare dualism of the definite 
and indefinite, in which neither has even the specific implication of 
reality or unreality. A further criticism of this dualism is unintelli- 
gible, for the negation of the principle is nothing other than the prin- 
ciple itself. 

5. To explicate this principle. The most abstract and com- 
prehensive dualism that can be conceived is that between the definite 
and the indefinite. It is possible to show in the case of any other 
dualism that can be proposed that there is a third something beyond it, 
Even in the case of being and non-being, one can cite an indefinite 


228 PLACE OF THE INDEFINITE IN LOGIC 


that is neither, call it the unknowable or freedom or whatever else. 
It is not necessary to present the dualism of definite and indefinite 
in the form of a judgment as a law of thought, for the law-form is only 
a form among forms: the judgment is not the necessary logical unit 
in such logic as is conceived here. But if a law-form is demanded 
for this principle—the word ‘principle’ is sufficiently general in philo- 
sophical usage, it may be presented in the paradoxical form—the 
indefinite is not and is indefinite at once. It is similar to the dialec- 
tical principle of the identity of being and not-being but there is the 
difference that in the latter, more stress is laid in the last resort on the 
identity than on the difference between the opposed terms: the syn- 
thesis of position and negation is uncritically taken to be only positive, 
and the final synthesis viz., the absolute is taken as a positive system 
of truth. In the principle we have presented, equal stress is laid on 
the identity and difference of the opposed terms; what it amounts 
to is that the line between the definite and the indefinite is itself 
indefinite that the minimum of difference from the indefinite that 
constitutes the abstract definite is a vanishing quantity. 

6. The difference from the dialectical principle can be stated in 
another way. The ground principle of logic has been formulated in 
at least three ways—in the form of system or reason, in the form of 
relation or judgment, and in the form of an irrelative term, intuition 
or experience. The identity of being and non-being points to the 
conception of system as the ruling conception of dialectic. In con- 
ceptualist or intuitionist logic, the fundamental principle is best 
conceived as a relation between positive terms i.e., as an ordinary 
judgment like ‘this being is not another being’. In empirical logic, 
an experience is the test of its own truth and so the basal principle 
may be formulated as ‘this determinate being (Mill) or this determi- 
nate becoming (Bain) which is not non-being.’ In the principle 
proposed for the logic of the indefinite, no preference is implied for 
any of these three forms. It is best put as a mere dualism or opposi- 
tion, definite and indefinite, the ‘and’ expressing apparently the very 
form of illogicality or the despair of knowledge. It really however 
expresses the inadequacy of the three forms aforesaid. As against 
the form of reason, the dialectical principle, it indicates an alternative 
—unreason—beyond reason: position and negation are not neces- 
sarily the moments of the positive absolute. As against the form of 
judgment, the conceptualist principle as we may call it, it suggests 
that beyond determinate affirmation and negation, there is the inde- 
terminate (though it may be practically useful) form of doubt or 


PLACE OF THE INDEFINITE IN LOGIC 229 


ignorance. As against the form of the irrelative determinate term— 
we call it the experimental principle provisionally—it points out that 
the positive object of experience is always a determination carved 
out of the indeterminate. It suggests, in fact, that the indefinite has 
to be recognised as standing outside the term, the judgment, and the 
inference, that one should go beyond ordinary logic which simply 
turns its back on the outlying indefinite and looks to the definite as 
the sole content of thought. 

7, Such recognition of the indefinite implies not only an ex- 
tension of logical doctrine: it involves also a material modification 
of the logic of the definite. With regard to the term, for example, 
the determinate object of experience, our principle shows that the 
boundaries that demarcate it from the surrounding indefinite are 
themselves indefinite or indefinable, that the particularity of ‘this 
determinate’ is something unique which can neither be taken as a 
separate definite category nor as a necessary determination of the 
universal and accordingly the ‘this’ may be indifferently taken as 
cither being (Mill) or as transition (Bain).* With regard to the judg- 
ment-form, it is pointed out that definite relation, affirmative and nega- 
tive, is itself indefinite, that if relation is given fact, the ‘givenness’ is an 
indeterminate which can be regarded either as an abrupt positive or 
as a negation of the indefinite and that the negation of the indefinite 
is indifferently affirmative or negative i.e., the distinction between affir- 
mative and negative is indefinable or in other words, contradiction 
is just as conceivable as otherwise.” With regard to the form of 


reasoning, our principle would indicate that system or necessary relation 
is as much a given fact as a negation of negation and that this negation 


* Within empiricism in fact is reproduced the opposition between the con- 
ceptualistic and dialectic views of the principium individuationis. To conceptualist 
logic, individuality as such is properly a unique category of thought, a simple 
ultimate thought, and there is sometimes a tendency to abolish it altogether. To 
dialectic, it is a construction through thought as a function. (i) In the empiricism 
of Mill, corresponding to the simple thought of ‘this’, appears ‘this’ individual 
experience, this given simple being. (ii) In Bain however, experience is taken 
to be a transition; properly no term is given but only a passage, a differentiation 
between terms. Individuality is only an arbitrary point in this transitional pro- 
cess; it is a conflux of relations or generalities. Existence is admitted as a 
separate category, distinct from co-existence, sequence, and resemblance by Mill 
but not by Bain. These conflicting views only show that the unit-term or the 
individual is at once definite and indefinite, the latter aspect being systematically 
ignored in ordinary logic. ae 

’ Here within conceptualism is reproduced the opposition between empirical 
and dialectical views of relation. To empiricism, relation is a given experience ; 
the elementary relations of likeness and difference are taken as ultimate feelings. 
To dialectic, it is the function of negation, the negation of immediacy, the self- 
distinction of the given. The conceptualist view splits up into at least two types: 
(i) relation is an ultimate given thought and here the ultimate difference between 
empiricism and intuitionism is a vanishing one. All relation in fact is positive; 


230 PLACE OF THE INDEFINITE IN LOGIC 


of negation may be taken as equivalent to position or negation in- 
differently.* 

8. With the Hegelians then, we admit the identity of being and 
non-being or necessity but hold that this necessity is itself a contingent 
fact. So the contradiction between being and non-being is to us as 
much an object of thought as their non-contradiction; a contradic- 
tory judgment is neither inadmissible nor is merely a moment in the 
necessity of dialectical identity. So, too, the determinate this has not 
simply being and negation in its constitution but also the indefinite 
or the Unknowable. 

9. The indeterminate being or non-being with which Hegel 
starts is not the same as our indefinite. In the term, ‘this determinate’, 
‘this’ is something unique to which neither the terms, ‘being’ or non- 
being can be applied, though ‘thisness’ or determinate being may be 
taken as an identity of being and non-being. As constitutive of ‘this- 
ness’ then, the indeterminate being or non-being of Hegel is still 
definite in our sense: ‘this’ as transcending ‘thisness’ is unanalysable, 
indefinable, or indefinite. ‘This determinate’ may thus be analysed 
into the three principles—the indefinite, being, and non-being. In 
reference to the criticism of the Hegelian position that logic should 
start with determinate being rather than with pure being, we hold 
that the indefinite, being, and non-being can all be taken as the starting 
point indifferently, these being all implied in ‘this determinate’. 

10. With reference to the judgment, our contention is that it 
is equally true to say that the terms are or are not constituted by their 
relation, that in it a given matter of fact, a ‘this’ which is neither 
definite being not definite non-being is determined into a relation of 


negation itself is but positive difference. (ii) Positive relation and negative 
relation are co-ordinate: absence or void is a category side by side with existence. 
The given positive stands over against its definite negation: the primary differ- 
ence is not difference between two positives but between position and negation, 
this negation being thus a sort of being or position. Thus the distinction between 
affirmation and negation becomes indefinable. Negation is not being and yet 
a sort of being. These conflicting views show again that what is taken to be 
definite relation in ordinary logic is really indefinite. 

“The opposition between empiricism and conceptualism has to be traced as 
affecting the integrity of the dialectic view of system or necessary relation. To 
empiricism, system is no given heing: the past does not erist in the present and 
ist the present is what it is because of the past. The ground of present know- 
edge is always non-existent. To conceptualism, the relation of ground and 
consequent is an eternally existent thought. The dialectic movement presents 
both these tendencies without reconciling them. As the ground of itself (natura 
naturans), it is a transition, negation of negation, freedom—no existent being. As 
the consequence of itself (natura naturata), it is the eristent absolute, the truth 
that is thought through and through. This alternation of the dynamic and static 
aspects in dialectic points to the fact that system or reason is indefinite in its 
very constitution. 


PLACE OF THE INDEFINITE IN LOGIC 231 


terms, that the relation is at once identity and difference in reference 
to this indefinite, and that apart from this indefinite, it is just as true 
to say that there is as that there is not necessary mutual iniplication 
between identity and difference, that the affirmative relation is and 
that it is not prior to the negative.* As to reasoning, the necessity 
implied in the ‘therefore’ is taken by Hegel as the self-creating dialec- 
tic of truth itself, as the position created by the negation of negation. 
In empirical logic, it is taken to be the position contingently reached 
through other positions, as a particular reached through particulars; 
and in conceptualist logic, it is the mere explication of a position by 
negation, as a rendering of a universal premise analytically definite 
by an individualising minor premise. We, however, hold that the new 
something reached in the conclusion is really a definition of the 
indefinite matter to which reasoning has reference and that the 
necessity is but a contingent fact in this reference. 


11. Hegelian Logic does not admit the indefinite but holds 
instead that dialectic necessity is creative. Its strength lies however 
only in seeing that a real category of given experience was necessary, 
not really in yielding any new category or creating it. Hence where 
it has sought to create, critics have only seen a dismal failure or found 
that it was a sort of prophesying after the event. This inability to 
create is, in fact, the implicit admission of the indefinite. What the 
critics do not bring out however is that this retrospective prophecy, 
this seeing that a stage which has emerged was necessary is a true 
seeing: they have yet to explain why the dialectic exposition which 
is not at least explicitly analytic fits the category deduced, how an 
apparent continuity between an old and a new category is at all estab- 
lished by the mere process of negation of negation. It is a form of 


the old question how what is anticipated by inference comes to be 
verified by experience and to call it a mere accident or to understand 


*The judgment ‘A is B’ has been understood in at least three ways: (1) A 
does not exist when A B exists. (ii) A exists when A B exists, (iii) A exists 
because A B does not exist but is a function—the empirical, conceptualist, and 
dialectic views respectively in typical form. Taking ii, A is in the limit the unique 
‘this’, transcending the determination A B. As indeterminate, it is as much 
definite being as negation and thus (i) is justified along with (ii). So in (iit), 
A B, the function or negation, is i.e. constitutes A, the existent. Thus A or 
‘this’ is negation, being, and their identity in i, ii, iii respectively: it is in (i) 
the not-given (not-now-given), in (ii) the given and in (iii) the existent 
through not being given. A B then is (i) not A, (ii) is not A and yet in A, 
and (ii) is A by being not A; in other words, the negative relation is after 
the affirmative, co-ordinate with the affirmative and before the affirmative in the 
three views.—All these variations of view point to the circumstance that relation 
is at once definite and indefinite: the admission of the indefinite justifies and 
falsifies all these views. 


232 PLACE OF THE INDEFINITE IN LOGIC 


a preestablished harmony is simply to give up the problem of expla- 
nation. 

|2.. At the same time it is true that such anticipations of in- 
ference are not sometimes verified, that only probable truths are 
reached actually by inference and hence the justification for taking 
the inferential form as only an ideal and for distinguishing it from the 
material process of inference itself. This amounts on the one hand 
to the admission of the analytic necessity within this ideal form as 
itself given and as somehow applicable to the indefinite matter of 
experience and on the other to the view that the synthetic material 
process is a definite necessity inexplicably emerging out of the inde- 
finite. In conceptualist logic, the definite analytic necessity within the 
syllogism is understood as the given or intuited ideal and error or 
uncertainty is taken as only the accident of application. In empiri- 
cal logic where the ideal is nothing and the material process is all, 
it only amounts to saying that somehow as a matter of fact we pass 
from particulars to other particulars which are sometimes verified. 

13. As against conceptualist logic, Kant holds that the forms 
of positive logic are not merely given but are synthetic apriori neces- 
sities at bottom, that their applicability to experience is not accidental 
but necessary, that however although matter in general is necessarily 
demanded by form, what specifically the matter will be is unknow- 
able. The Kantian view thus brings out the latent implication of the 
indefinite in the intuited character and applicability of the forms 
admitted in conceptualist logic. As against empirical logic, Spencer 
points out that unless logic is to lapse into psychology, the ideal form 
has to be taken as necessarily presupposed in the material process, 
that inference is inference only as implying the consciousness of justi- 
fication or necessary ground, that this necessary ground or axiom 
is not only the consolidation of contingent experiences but has the 
implication of the inconceivability of the opposite and that experience 
taken as the given definite in empirical logic is really the indefinite 
breaking forth into the relation of difference. 

14. Both Kant and Spencer thus bring out the transcendent 
character of the indefinite but both uncritically take this indefinite 
to be the unknowable reality. Against this however we hold that the 
indefinite may as well be called the unknowable negation, that in 
fact it is a third category side by side with position and negation, that 
it is as much immanent in the definite as transcendent, and that there- 
fore it is not simply the transcendental implicate of definite logic but 
the content of positive logic itself. 


PLACE OF THE INDEFINITE IN LOGIC 233 


15. Our logic thus finds categories for widely different meta- 
physical notions of reality, for the notion of the knowable world as 
unreal in the last resort as well as for the notion of it as a real evolute 
in all different senses in which it has been taken. Logic as here con- 
ceived renders intelligible the denial of the unique positive reality of 
the given, not only in the sense in which Hegel understands it who 
admits the reality and takes it to be constructed by negation, but also 
in the absolute sense. The assertion of the ultimate falsity of the 
world—falsity not only to absolute intuition but to logical thought 
itself—is thus conceivable. In positive logic itself, not only is position 
to be conceived as negation of negation as it is conceived in dialectic: 
it is to be admitted also that negation of negation may be indefinite 
negation. At the same time we recognise that the indefinite may be 
regarded as real and as embodied in the definite axioms and expe- 
riences that we start with as positively given. We admit the truth 
both of conceptualist and empirical logic or—what is the same thing 
—we can conceive the metaphysical view that determinate noumena 
or phenomena or both side by side constitute the knowable world. 
There is nothing finally to prevent us from conceiving that this im- 
manent being is to the transcendent real indefinite a real mode, effect, 
or objectification, that the definite is a real specification of the indefinite. 
We thus frankly make a positive use, logical and metaphysical, of the 
indefinite, unlike Kant and Spencer who while deprecating such posi- 
tive use of the indefinite view it implicitly as the real. Conflicting 
epistemological notions are also thus logically conceivable: both 
necessity and fact can be understood alike as an emanation and evo- 
lute of the indefinite, and each may be regarded as the other—i.e., 
necessity may be taken as an inexplicable fact, as the positive stress 
of the indefinite real and given fact may be viewed as implying nega- 
tion of an indefinite negation. 

16. The general implications of our principleMthe indefinite 
and definite are and are not one—have been brought out as demar- 
cating the logic of the indefinite from other types of logic. The bear- 
ing of it on some details taken at random may be discussed by way 
of further elucidation. 

17. Conception of ‘all’ and ‘some’. Logic as dealing with the 
most abstract content of thought, definite and indefinite, has no 
direct interest in developing the determinate categories of the seve- 
ral departments of knowledge. If it refers to quantity then, even in 
the vague form of ‘all’? and ‘some’, it is only by way of bringing out 
what it does not deal with. The primary question is whether it starts 


234 PLACE OF THE INDEFINITE IN LOGIC 


with the determinate or the indeterminate and our answer is that the 
starting point is ‘this determinate’, where ‘this’ is the unique indefi- 
nite. The difference of the definite and indefinite being itself inde- 
finable, the difference of the determinates from one another is also 
indeterminate in the last resort. From the side of the definite as 
fixed by language, we deny this indeterminate difference which we are 
conscious of, by using the word ‘all’: the connotation is primarily 
meant as definite, in view however of the indeterminate differences 
of the particulars constituting the denotation. The word ‘some’ on 
the contrary primarily means this indeterminate difference in view of 
the definite connotation. The secondary accompaniment in each case 
is affected by the primary intention. We have said that the definite 
and the indefinite are not only different but identical and so the in- 
definite denotation of ‘all A’—indefinite as fixed by connotation 
and not by enumeration—is itself a definite function or form in logic: 
and the definite connotation of ‘some A’—viz., the connotation of 
A—is itself rendred indefinite, ‘some A’ being equivalent to ‘all A x’ 
where x is an indefinite determination of A. In so far then as we 
say that the definite is not the indefinite, subalternation may be re- 
garded as an opposition and not so in so far as we admit their iden- 
tity: the truth of ‘all’ both denies and admits the truth of ‘some’." 
This only means that quantity-difference which is the object or content 
of thought and not merely psychological is itself indefinite and that 
these contradictory views about ‘all’ and ‘some’ may be both true. 
Logic should consider this fact of alternation only: it should not be 
its business to develop the quantitative doctrine itself into some sort 
of logical algebra or geometry. Nor is it its business to settle the 
psychological or metaphysical question of the concept, although in thus 
defining its own business, it would indirectly indicate the germs of the 


concrete solutions of the question that have been presented. 


* There ar e two ordinary views: (i) ‘some’ means nof ‘all’; (11) some 
does not deny “Al'—i.e. (i) some is a definite negation of ‘all’, (ii) ‘some’ is 
indefinite. In both views, ‘some’ is taken as both definite and indefinite in a 
sense eg. in (i) though it means ‘not all’, it is indefinite which individuals and 
how many are meant.—Still it is held that this indefiniteness is only subjective: 
to logic, it means the definite ‘not all’, definite because ‘not all A’ means ‘all Ax’ 
—i.e. the connotation of A as qualified by an unknown but real adjective x. In 
(ii), though ‘some’ is indefinite as not denying ‘all’, it means definitely at least 
one individual having the connotation of the class: the indefinite is thus provi- 
sionally treated as definite in logic. The second view does not assume what the 
first does that ‘some A’ is necessarily equivalent to another universal, viz., A+; 
and the first does not assume what the second does that any individual A 1s 
definitely known to have the predicate B in the judgment ‘some A is B’. The 
first would assert ‘some A is B’ on the two definite grounds (1) that at least one 
individual A has been found to be not B and (2) that therefore the real connec- 
tion of B is not with A but with Ax. The second would assert it on the ground 
(1) that at least one A és B and (2) that other A’s are either B or not B. 


PLACE OF THE INDEFINITE IN LOGIC 235 


18. Negative conditional propositions. Can conditional pro- 
positions be negative? (1) There are the opposite views about the 
hypothetical proposition—(a) As distinct from the categorical, its 
sole furiction is to express the logical or objective dependence of one 
relation on another. Non-dependence is no objective relation af all 
‘and requires no logical form to express it. The consciousness of it 
is purely privative: that I cannot connect a consequent with an ante- 
cedent is a mere subjective incapacity. There is therefore no negative 
hypothetical. (b) It may be contended however that in any case the 
negative categorical is allowed in this view (we need not discuss the 
extreme view according to which no negative relation is admitted in 
logic) i.e., the negative relation is admitted as objective, though with 
the implied assumption that it is equivalent to a definite affirmative 
which may not be known yet. As a logical form then, the negative 
categorical is admissible where subjectively there is the ignorance of 
its affirmative equivalent. Now there should be a difference between 
the dependence of an affirmative consequent and that of a negative 
consequent on a given antecedent. The quality of the dependence 
itself varies with the quality of the consequent and hence a negative 
hypothetical should be admitted if a negative categorical is admitted. 
To be negative the hypothetical need not express non-dependence 
but only dependence of a negation. 

19. The dispute here really turns on whether the quality of 
the dependence is affected by the quality of the consequent. Where 
we do not know yet what affirmation is equivalent to the negative 
consequent, should we say that the hypothetical proposition itself is 
negative? Should we express the state of knowledge there by a 
hypothetical form at all? We take the example—‘if the keys cannot 


be found in this room after so much search, thcy are not here’. I 
do not know where the keys are then and still it may be useful to 


The first emphasises the defect of connotation (A should be determined into Ax), 
i.e. the indefiniteness of the connotation which is taken to be definite im all Zi 
and the second emphasises the indefiniteness of the denotation in ‘some A’ which 
is already indefinite in ‘all A’, though the point is provisionally ignored there. 
‘All A’ in fact is both definite and indefinite, definite in connotation and indefinite 
in denotation. ‘Some A’, as indefinite in connotation (A—Ar) is a negation 
of ‘all A’: but ‘some A’, as indefinite in denotation, is no negation of ‘all A’, the 
indefinite being indefinitely related to the indefinite—The recognition of the 
indefinite as a logical and not merely a subjective, element brings out the truth 
of both the views of ‘some’ and ‘all’. The logic of the indefinite thus not only 
makes conflicting logical doctrines intelligible: it points out the essential indeter- 
minateness of the concept, and the really extralogical character of quantity— 
showing that logic is here uselessly racked with disputes about what as outside 
its scope must be disputed and indicating that the doctrine of quantity is capable 
of being developed, not only from the side of the determinate but also from that 
of the indeterminate. 


236 PLACE OF THE INDEFINITE IN LOGIC 


express the circumstance in the negative hypothetical form: I need 
not waste time searching for it in this room for the reason stated. 
But it is urged in the first view that what is expressed in this propo- 
sition is only something subjective: there is no objective connexion 
between the antecedent and the consequent, the absence of the keys 
here being not conditioned by the fruitless search. But this only 
means that the keys have not been removed from the room in con- 
sequence of the fruitless search. The absence of the keys need not 
however mean this positive removal and may yet be a useful truth that 
is inferred from i.e., is conditioned by the fruitless search as its reason 
or ground. It is not the content of mere ignorance. Mere ignorance, it 
may be said, need not be expressed in logic: what is called the pri- 
vative judgment in logic is useless. The proposition about the keys is 
useful and yet is not the expression of an objective dependence of a 
positive fact. Should this intermediate state of consciousness between 
mere ignorance and positive objective knowledge be expressed in logic? 
Venn has pointed out the fallacy of over-objectification in logic: to 
him, logic deals with the passage from the subjective to the objective. 
We hold that logic as dealing with object in the abstract sense of 
content of thought can never over-objectify and that the real truth 
of Venn’s view is that logic deals with the passage from the inde- 
finite to the definite in the object. The useful knowledge about the 
keys which is not yet positive objective knowledge has a content or 
object distinct alike from the absolutely indefinite and useless con- 
tent of ignorance and from the definite object of the positive know- 
ledge of the whereabouts of the keys: it is at once indefinite and defi- 
nite and as such should have a logical expression. The logic of the 
indefinite would therefore admit the negative hypothetical and point 
out that its logical status is indefinite—somewhere intermediate between 
the forms of positive knowledge and absolute ignorance, and a stage 
removed in point of definiteness from the negative categorical judgment. 
The negative categorical is already the explicit objective embodiment of 
partial ignorance: it assigns a provisional being to negation in rela- 
tion to a position. In an affirmative hypothetical also, the contingent 
being of the relation in the consequent is such an explicit objective 
embodiment of partial ignorance: the assertory being of the categori- 
cal relation is modified by a negation into a possibility. The negative 
hypothetical then is an objective embodiment of a double ignorance 
or negation but is still in view of a position and therefore useful. 

20. It may be noted in passing that the issues here are similar 
to those which arise in the Vedantic discussion of the illusion of illu- 


PLACE OF THE INDEFINITE IN LOGIC 237 


sion." An illusion being positively given has an ‘indescribable being’ 
according to Vedanta, even when it is corrected. Has the illusion of 
illusion such a being also? A compromise between plain yes and no is 
given by some Vedantists viz., that the illusion of illusion is given in a 
way different from i.e., more indefinitely than illusion itself, A simi- 
lar difficulty may be pressed against Bradley’s view of the negative 
judgment. It presupposes, he says, not a full-formed affirmative 
judgment but only a question. What is the nature of the question? 
He himself takes it to be only psychological, an ideal suggestion, a 
floating idea, Bosanquet however would take it as a logical content, 
a rudimentary disjunction. Sigwart would call it a rudimentary posi- 
tive judgment—i.e., a merely given relation. They all admit that a 
full affirmative judgment need not be presupposed by the negative 
and yet what precisely do they contend about? It is really somewhere 
intermediate between the content of thought and the mere psycholo- 
gical fact of thought. This transitional something between the defi- 
nitely psychological and the definitely logical can only be taken cog- 
nisance of in such logic as has been conceived in this paper. 

21. (2) As to the disjunctive proposition, the ordinary view 
is that it cannot be negative in the disjunctive form. The definite ele- 
ment in ‘A is either B or C’ is that A is in B and C taken together 
and sometimes the definite side is pushed further to imply the mutual 
exclusion of B and C. There is indefiniteness then at least as to which 
of the two, B and C, is predicated of A: the disjunctive is so far an 
explicit embodiment of partial ignorance. It would be held then that 
‘A is either not B or not C’ is not the logical denial of ‘A is either B 
or C’, for if the ignorance-element in both is considered, there is no 
denial, an indefinite being only indefinitely related to an indefinite, and 
if the knowledge-element in both is considered, B plus C is either the 
same as or a part of not-B plus not-C. In reference to the know- 
ledge-element however, we intend to point out as in the case of sub- 
alternation that if the connotative side as distinct from the denota- 
tive side of B and C is considered, there is an intelligible sense in 
which B plus C may be taken as the negative of not-B plus not-C. 

22. Those who hold that ‘A is either B or C’ do not deny 
that A may be both really point to this connotative side: the precise 
relation between the denotations of B and C may remain indefinite 
according to them when the disjunctive is asserted. From this stand- 


“Something is believed to be real it is next taken to be illusory, and then 
again on closer observation it may be pronounced not illusory. What does ‘not 
illusory’ mean? 


238 PLACE OF THE INDEFINITE IN LOGIC 


point then ‘either not B or not C’ would be doubly indeterminate. 
In ‘A is either B or C’, it is only affirmed that the connotations of B 
and C are compatible with that of A. This compatibility is a definite 
logical content but the mutual relation of B and C understood con- 
notatively is indefinite; the mutual relation of not-B and not-C then 
would be doubly indefinite. The problem is to find out the value of 
this double indefiniteness. 

23. We may distinguish our position here from at least four 
positions that may be conceivably advanced. (1) It may be held that 
the negation of the indefinite ‘either B or C’ in the form ‘either not-B 
or not-C’ has nothing definite in it and is absolutely useless. (2) 
There is just the opposite view that ‘either not-B or not-C’ is the same 
as ‘either B or C’, B and C being already exclusive. (3) Or it may 
be held that the mutual exclusion of B and C is indefinite in ‘either 
B or C’, and that ‘either not-B or not-C’ makes this definite, that it 
amounts to a more definite affirmation and is therefore no negation 
at all; it is extra affirmation, an added truth side by side with the 
definite truth of ‘either B or C’. Or (4) it may be urged that this 
extra affirmation is a development of ‘either B or C’ rather than an 
accretion, that it is undoubtedly a negation but amounting to an affir- 
mation. ‘Either not-B or not-C’ is taken as (1) no logical form at 
all or (2) as identical with ‘either B or C’ or (3) as different from it 
but not a denial of it or (4) as a denial of it that amounts to a de- 
finite affirmation which is at once same and different. Our posi- 
tion however is that ‘either not-B or not-C’ is the form of the indefi- 
nite denial of ‘either B or C’. It is denial of the definite element in 
it—viz., the compatibility of B and of C with A: that the compatibi- 
lity itself is partial or indefinite, is not definite is pointed out by ‘A 
is either not B or not C’. As the denial of what is believed to be 
a definite element in ‘A is either B or C’, it is itself believed in and is 
not dumb ignorance: it has a useful content which yet is not posi- 
tive, not the same as the given affirmative nor something co-ordinate 
with it, nor a negation amounting to a definite positive. 

24. That ‘A is either not B or not C’ is the negation of ‘A 
is either B or C’ may be shown in another way. The ordinary form 
given of its negation is ‘A is neither B nor C’. This however states 
more than the mere negation which should be simply ‘A may be 
neither’. If not-B and not-C are understood as the negation of the 
connotative side of B and C, ‘A is either not-B or not-C’ is equival- 
ent to ‘A is either B or C or neither’, which means precisely that A 
may be neither. 


PLACE OF THE INDEFINITE IN LOGIC 239 


25. In speaking of a logical form being useful, we have assumed 
only for the sake of the argument that the merely privative pidgment, 
the expression of mere ignorance is useless. It is necessary now to 
point out that the word ‘useful’ is itself a question-begging term: it 
dogmatically assumes that the knowing self ought to move towards 
more and more determinate truth. This assumption itself may be 
questioned and the logical impulse may be taken to be satisfied in the 
correction of the given error of determinateness, not in the attainment 
of new determinations, in getting rid of the limitation of the definite 
and not in securing increase of definiteness, in the direction of the in- 
definite and not in that of the definite,—freedom or the absolute state 
being reached either way. In this ‘undefining’ process, as we may 
call it, it is not even necessary that empirical truth should be held 
fast provisionally. All doubt, including what is taken to be the most 
irresponsible form of it—viz., absolute scepticism, would be useful in 
this connexion, though there might be grades of usefulness here 
also. Logic, conceived to deal with the bare dualism of the definite 
and indefinite can make room for either kind of usefulness or truth. 

26. This may be presented in terms of the disjunctive propo- 
sition. The proposition ‘A is either B or C or neither’ may be taken 
as equivalent to ‘A is either B or not-B’, the bare form of the Exclu- 
ded Middle. Now this form may be taken (1) as absolutely useless, 
a joke, the mere form of ignorance; (2) as the limiting form of dis- 
junction, and therefore a particular case of disjunction, giving us the 
form of truth i.e., of the universe as constructed by thought out of 
the unique given; (3) as the form of the determinate— determinate 
position and negation as co-ordinate—present in all particular dis- 
junctions; or (4) as the abstract form of truth developed in all con- 
crete disjunctions, in all grades of determinate knowledge. Not-B in 
these views is (1) nothing logical at all, (2) logical only in relation 
to the unique but definite ‘givenness’ of B, (3) a positive logical 
content side by side with B and (4) the logical implication of B, as 
B is of not-B. In conformity to what we have said above, we hold 
that not-B is something logical, though not definite: it is the logical 
useful indefinite. ‘A is either B or not-B’ is a logical negative of ‘A 
is either B or C’; utterly indeterminate in contrast with it but deter- 
minate as expressing the fundamental logical principle of the disjunc- 
tion of the definite and indefinite, the form of the knowable-unknow- 
able, the form of mystery rather than of absolute truth, the limiting 
mystery of all philosophy. 


PLACE OF THE INDEFINITE IN LOGIC 239 


25. In speaking of a logical form being useful, we have assumed 
only for the sake of the argument that the merely privative pidgment, 
the expression of mere ignorance is useless. It is necessary now to 
point out that the word ‘useful’ is itself a question-begging term: it 
dogmatically assumes that the knowing self ought to move towards 
more and more determinate truth. This assumption itself may be 
questioned and the logical impulse may be taken to be satisfied in the 
correction of the given error of determinateness, not in the attainment 
of new determinations, in getting rid of the limitation of the definite 
and not in securing increase of definiteness, in the direction of the in- 
definite and not in that of the definite,—freedom or the absolute state 
being reached either way. In this ‘undefining’ process, as we may 
call it, it is not even necessary that empirical truth should be held 
fast provisionally. All doubt, including what is taken to be the most 
irresponsible form of it—viz., absolute scepticism, would be useful in 
this connexion, though there might be grades of usefulness here 
also. Logic, conceived to deal with the bare dualism of the definite 
and indefinite can make room for either kind of usefulness or truth. 

26. This may be presented in terms of the disjunctive propo- 
sition. The proposition ‘A is either B or C or neither’ may be taken 
as equivalent to ‘A is either B or not-B’, the bare form of the Exclu- 
ded Middle. Now this form may be taken (1) as absolutely useless, 
a joke, the mere form of ignorance; (2) as the limiting form of dis- 
junction, and therefore a particular case of disjunction, giving us the 
form of truth i.e., of the universe as constructed by thought out of 
the unique given; (3) as the form of the determinate— determinate 
position and negation as co-ordinate—present in all particular dis- 
junctions; or (4) as the abstract form of truth developed in all con- 
crete disjunctions, in all grades of determinate knowledge. Not-B in 
these views is (1) nothing logical at all, (2) logical only in relation 
to the unique but definite ‘givenness’ of B, (3) a positive logical 
content side by side with B and (4) the logical implication of B, as 
B is of not-B. In conformity to what we have said above, we hold 
that not-B is something logical, though not definite: it is the logical 
useful indefinite. ‘A is either B or not-B’ is a logical negative of ‘A 
is either B or C’; utterly indeterminate in contrast with it but deter- 
minate as expressing the fundamental logical principle of the disjunc- 
tion of the definite and indefinite, the form of the knowable-unknow- 
able, the form of mystery rather than of absolute truth, the limiting 
mystery of all philosophy. 


ANALYSIS 


(1) An attempt is made here to establish a definition of ‘relation’ 
in objective terms on the assumption that ‘relation’ of objects is not 
a mere mode of knowing them but is as definite and objective as the 
terms themselves. (2) Two terms A and B may be presented together 
to thought (a) either as mere distincts or (b) one may be thought 
as distinct from the other. (b) again has two varieties: the distinction 
may be thought (i) either in both ‘directions’ or (ii) only in one 
direction. (3) On the alternative a, distinction ts not thought at all and 
the thought of the ‘and’ cannot be said to be definite like that of A 
and B. On the alternative b (i), we get either the reinstatement of 
a and so of the indefiniteness of and or the indefiniteness of A and B 
which, however, would be contrary to the starting assumptions. (4) 
The alternatives a & b (i) thus getting eliminated, it is only b (ii) that 
remains over to be examined. In ‘A distinct from B’, there is no 
confusion between the thinking of B and the distinguishing of A. The 
distinction of A is together—not with the thinking of B but—only with 
B. Thus ‘A distinct from B’ represents a distinct act of thinking. 
(5) Is it also definite as a content? Now, B here may be said to be 
given as distinct or the intrinsically distinct and A is only distinct from 
or the extrinsically distinct content. The togetherness of the 
extrinsically distinct and the intrinsically distinct is more definite than 
the togetherness of two mere distincts, for the concepts ‘extrinsic’ and 
‘intrinsic’ distinction serve to fix the relative positions of A and B. 

(6-7) Relation has sometimes been taken to be definite but 
holding between terms one of which is indefinite. But the indefinite 
is what we are barely acquainted with and cannot be described and 
used as aterm. (8) Mere togetherness of two distincts has sometimes 
been taken to be a relation. But this ‘togetherness—-A and B—is 
not distinctly thought. (9) There is, again, the infinite regress if 
‘A and B’ is taken as a single definite thought. This regress can be 
avoided on the theory of ‘pure togetherness’. (10) But ‘pure together- 
ness’ as what is common to the definite whole and the definite disjunction 
of A and B amounts to ‘either both or not both A and B’ which is 
nothing but an indefinite alternation and is no definite relation at all. 
(11) Not ‘pure togetherness’ but togetherness in a unity may be taken 
to be the relation of A and B. This unity may be (i) a disjunction 
or (ii) a whole. (12-13) (i) Now, disjunction of A and B, even 


244 THE DEFINITION OF RELATION 


if it be taken to be a definite unity, is a standing cycle AB A. But 
this cycle is hardly a relation being just an indetermination of term and 
relation. (14-15) (ii) Neither can the relation of A and B be taken 
to be a static whole of the two. That would be only to invite an 
indefinite regress. (16) The notion that elements are related by the 
fact of their being in a whole may be replaced by the theory that 
relation is always between element and whole. The whole may be a 
substance (or unity of attributes) or it may be a unity of such 
substances. The two relations are incommensurable and appear to 
be only nominally described as the same relation of element and whole. 
(19) The difference may be expressed by saying that though attribute 
is spoken of as in a substance and part as in a whole, in the former 
what is in is dependent and in the latter it is independent. (20) We 
have thus to avoid the concept of ‘whole’ in trying to characterise 
‘relation’ in general. 

(21-23) ‘Relation’ is to be understood in terms of ‘dependent’ 
and ‘independent’ which are intelligible as characters of terms without 
reference to relation. A term is said to be a ‘dependent’ when it is 
not only intrinsically distinct but necessarily so. It is said to be an 
‘independent’ when it is thinkable as object apart from a given depen- 
dent. When then a dependent is thought as an object along with and 
distinct from an independent, the former is said to be objectively related 
to the latter. (24) This definition avoids the petitio of using the concept 
of relation. The use of the term ‘along with’ is harmless, for it is 
understood as not objective but only as a character of subjectivity. 
The definition amounts to saying that if we think in a certain way, we 
think of objective relation. (25) It is to be noted that relation like 
distinction is irreversible. Mutual relation is not objective relation: 
mutual contact is only an attribute. (26-29) Elaboration of the 
distinction between attribute and relation. (30) Objective relation 
implies a reference to thinking on the one hand and to the objective 
fundamentum on the other. The reference to thinking must not be 
more than the bare thinking together of objects. The objective 
jundamentum, again, must not be the mere distinctness of each object. 


THE DEFINITION OF ‘RELATION’ AS A CATEGORY 
OF EXISTENCE 


|. The paper starts with the postulate that objects exist as 
distinct from the knowing of them and that knowing itself exists as 
an object for a further act of knowing. It assumes that objects includ- 
ing knowing may both be related and unrelated and that relation of 
objects is not a mere mode of knowing them bat is as objective as 
the terms. The question has arisen whether such relation is definitely 
intelligible and can be defined in objective terms that do not presuppose 
the concept of relation so as to be distinguished from other categories 
of existence. It is the purpose of the present paper to establish such 
a definition by a criticism of certain conceptions of relation that claim 
to keep within the above assumptions. 

2. Relation involves at least two distinct terms. Assuming that 
the terms stand for contents that are definite and objective, our first 
question is if two such distinct terms can be said to be the object of a 
single thought unconfused with other thoughts. Now two terms A and 
B may be presented together to thought as mere distincts, or one may 
be thought as distinct from the other. Again, the distinction of A and 
B may be thought in both directions at once—A distinct from B, and B 
distinct from A; or it may be thought only in one direction. In what 
sense, if at all, is the content ‘two terms as distinct’ said to be definitely 
thought? 

3. If A and B are mere distincts and distinction is not thought 
at all, the thought of the ‘and’ cannot be said to be definite like that 
of A and B. Each of the two terms can by the hypothesis be separately 
thought, but ‘A and B’ is not thought separately from the thought of 
each (4, foot-note). ‘And’ here means no whole, distinction, or rela- 
tion but simply ‘togetherness’, the claim of which to the status of 
relation will be refuted presently (8-10). Neither is mutual distinction 
of A and B capable of being definitely thought. We can conceive 
‘A distinct from B’ and ‘B distinct from A’ to be different thoughts, 
but are these two directions together present to a single distinguishable 
thought? If they are, as together, fused into the mere distinction 
between A and B, such distinction is nothing more than A and B as 
distincts together (13). If they are not so fused, we have the 
indefiniteness of the mere ‘and’ or togetherness of the two distinctions. 
If finally, mutual distinction alone is taken to be definitely thought, 


246 THE DEFINITION OF RELATION 


each direction of distinguishing being an indefinite abstraction mixed 
up with the other, the terms A, B would be themselves indefinite, 
contrary to our original assumptions. The consequences of dropping 
the assumption will be considered later (12). 

4, Is then the content ‘two terms as distinct’ definitely thought 
only as a single direction of distinction, say as ‘A distinct from B’? 
Whatever B may be distinguished from, the distinguishing of A from 
it is a single act of thinking. The distinguishing of B from something 
else, if presupposed, is presupposed as a separate act. But since B 
is thought in the distinguishing of A, is not there confusion, it may 
be asked, between the thinking of B and the distinguishing of A? 
That depends on the value of B when not thought as distinct from 
something else. B then is still a distinct, and presupposes the dis- 
tinguishing of it as an act that is finished and no longer there. There 
are, in fact, two modes of thinking a content. The content may be 
thought to be distinct from the thinking of it as continuing or from 
the thinker of it as ended. In the latter case, it is still together with 
another thinking, the content of which is distinct from it. In the 
present instance, B—a distinct presupposing a past act of distinguishing 
—is together with the thinking of A, A being distinct from it. The 
distinguishing of A is together—not with the thinking of B—but only 
with B, is in fact the thinking of B as an implication. But what is B 
as an implication as distinct from B thought on its own account? A 
content as other than itself is not indeed definite as content but can 
yet be said to be definitely thought. B as implied in the distinguishing 
of A is here definitely thought as other than itself—viz., as the B that 
was distinguished in a previous act.* 

5. We conclude then that ‘A distinct from B’ represents a single 
distinct act of thought. Is it also definite as a content? The dis- 
tinguishing of B from something else in a previous act has bequeathed 
only the term B to the present act of distinguishing A: B in the present 
act is distinct only from the indefinite and is as such nothing but the 
distinct B. But the present act has to do with two distinct terms, 
A and B, B being its implication and A the direct content. B here 
may be said to be given as distinct and A is only distinct from it. 
They may be designated intrinsically distinct and extrinsically distinct 
contents respectively for this particular act of thought. Now the 

"The distinguishing of B and the distinguishing of A are here two separate 
thoughts in spite of B being the implication of the latter. This cannot be said 
of the thought of ‘A and B’ and the thought A (or of B) in 3, for A there is 


not the mere implication of the former but is thought on its own account while 
the former is there. 


THE DEFINITION OF RELATION 247 


togetherness of the extrinsically distinct and the intrinsically distinct 
is at least more definite than the togetherness of two mere distincts. 
Anything that is spoken of is by the very fact a definite; even the 
indefinite is definite in this sense. Mere ‘A and B’ is also so far 
definite, but the extra definition through the concepts of intrinsic and 
extrinsic distinction consists in the fixing of what we may call the 
relative positions of A and B. Not that complete definition of the 
content Is yet attained, for we can still speak of ‘A distinct from B’ 
and B, where the ‘and’ points to the uncertainty whether the distinction 
is objective or merely a distinguishing. The extent of definiteness 
attained may be brought out by a criticism of certain current views 
of relation. 

6. Relation has sometimes been taken to be definite without 
both the terms being definite. One term may be indefinite, the other 
term being definite either only as distinguished from it or as with an 
intrinsic or given distinction. In the former case, the definite term 
is said to be the same as or to be constituted by the relation. In the 
latter case, the relation is additional to it, being like a line or an interval 
extending away from it. Either way, it is taken to be definite as a 
function. 

7. But should the indefinite be regarded as a term of a definite 
relation? Something may indeed be definitely thought as indefinite, 
but there ‘indefinite’ is only a term in a factitious sense. It is in fact 
a problem: a whole may be presented to thought through language 
where the elements and even the abstract form of the whole are 
definite, but the form as applied to the elements is not yet capable of 
being thought and is only sought to be thought. If the particular 
combination of definite thoughts at all yields a definite content which 
is not known, that content is the indefinite formulated in advance as 
a term. In any other sense, the indefinite is what we are barely 
acquainted with and cannot be described, far less used as a term. The 
factitiously or problematically definite term ‘indefinite’-—in a proposi- 
tion like ‘this is indefinite-—-cannot be said to be either denied or 
affirmed as a character or predicate of this; and there is no question 
of its being used as the subject of an assertion. We can indeed have 
a negative assertion like ‘this is not indefinite’; but it only amounts 
to the thought of the definite term ‘this’, the negation or distinction 
being here no relation but only the subjective act of distinguishing 
viewed as finished. 

8. We may conclude then, what we assumed at the beginning, 
that relation must be between two definite terms. Is the mere 


248 THE DEFINITION OF RELATION 


togetherness of two distincts a relation, as it has been taken by a 
school of writers at the present day? We have already seen that 
mere togetherness—A and B—is not even distinctly thought. Can 
it be then a definite content? But it may be said that a content may 
be definite, even if it has to be fixed by more than one definite 
thought." So without raising the psychological issue of the thinking 
here being single or manifold, we may consider the strictly logical 
aspect of the content ‘A and B’, 

9. If the content ‘A and B’ be distinct from A and from B, 
it is yet together with them. If it be called C, then C is C and A and 
B, for ‘and’ is here the symbol of togetherness. But C and A and B 
may be taken as D—distinct from and together with each of the terms 
and so on indefinitely. Can this indefinite process be avoided? 
Togetherness of A and B, it may be answered, is just what is common 
to ‘A and B’ as a definite whole and ‘A or B’ as a definite disjunction; 
in both cases we have A, B as purely together. In both, however, C 
together with A and with B is but C, not a further content D; and thus 
the indefinite process is avoided. 

10. But is there anything common to the whole and the disjunction 
of A and B? Is pure togetherness in fact a legitimate abstraction? 
Whole and disjunction agree in the circumstance of involving two 
terms but this circumstance can as little be regarded as a common 
object of thought as table can be said to be common to the maker of 
it and the price of it. If there be anything common, it would be either 
of them minus its speciality. The speciality of the definite whole of 
A and B—what it is as distinct from their disjunction—is that it is 
both A and B. So the speciality of the definite disjunction of A and 
B is not both A and B. Pure togetherness of A and B then would 
mean abstraction from both and not both at once, which would leave 
nothing behind. We can only abstract from one at a time and then 
togetherness amounts to ‘either both or not both’, which as a disjunc- 
tion without a standing universe is but an indetermination or indefinite 
alternation of one and many and is therefore no definite relation. 

11. Shall we then reject pure togetherness and take togetherness 
in a unity—as whole or disjunction—to be the relation of A and B? 
The mutual distinction of two terms of which neither is intrinsically 
distinct is regarded in an influential school of thought as the primordial 


*When a content is made definite by two thoughts, there is a single thought 
of the two thoughts as finished, the contents of which make a single implication 
for it (4). This implication of the single thought is here a construction (27) by 
the thought. If togetherness be such a construction (say, an abstraction from 
the thoughts of whole and disjunction—9), it must be still shown to be definite 
as a construction. 


THE DEFINITION OF RELATION 249 


relation through which the terms become definite, the relation itself 
getting defined again through the terms. The view takes two forms 
according as the relation is admitted to be definite prior to the defini- 
tion of the terms or is regarded as definite only after the definition. 
In the former, mutual distinction is definite as disjunction of alternating 
and therefore indefinite terms, In the latter, such disjunction is 
rejected as merely subjective, relation being definite only as the whole 
of the terms as elements. 

12. To begin with disjunction. Disjunction of A and B, it may 
be said, is a definite unity, being the standing cycle ABA which 
means that A is definite as distinct from B which again is definite as 
distinct from A. Is this cycle a relation? If ABA is definite when 
A as well as B is indefinite, then, as a relation, it is indistinguishable 
from a term; and each term too, so far as it is defined by the relation, 
is indistinguishable from the relation. In other words, the cycle is 
but an indetermination of term and relation. If A and B as defined 
are thought along with the defining cycle, the alternation ceases and 
the cycle becomes indistinguishable from a static whole. But why 
should A and B, as alternating, be taken to be indefinite? Could we 
not take disjunction as the alternation of definites? Why should 
alternation cease when the terms are definite and taken along with the 
cyclical unity? 

13. The reply is that the alternation of definites cannot be taken 
along with their unity. Each of the two thoughts—of alternation 
and of unity—presupposes the other as a finished act and, therefore, 
the content of it as only an implication. As we said in 3, the implica- 
tion is definitely thought as other than itself, though ‘other than itself’ 
is but an indefinite content. It is, at best, the problematic ‘definite 
indefinite’ of 7. The alternation of definites, so far as it is a definite 
content, means either nothing more than the togetherness of mere 
distincts, or if it means more, it means the precipitation of the abstract 
content—extrinsic distinction—as an attribute of each of the distincts. 
That each distinct has a distinction may be regarded as a relation, but 
it does not mean a relation of the distincts. The extrinsic distinction 
of the one may be correlative with that of the other; but, as will appear 
later (27), this does not oblige us to admit that the terms are related. 

14. Is then the relation of A and B a static whole of the two? 
Here, by the hypothesis, A, B, and their whole C are all definite. 
Wherein is C different from A, B that it should be called ‘relation’, 
while the other two are called ‘terms’? It is no use saying that A, B 
may be separately definite, but not C; for C also, with A, B yet 


250 THE DEFINITION OF RELATION 


unanalysed, may be definite. We are besides concerned here with 
A, B as definite in C and not with the previous history of the situation. 
In the given situation, A and B are by hypothesis mutually distinct, 
but are C and A (or B) mutually distinct? To understand the mutual 
distinction of A and B, we have recourse to their whole C, and if C 
and A (or B) are also distinct from one another, should we have a 
further whole and so on ad infinitum? 

15. There appear to be two alternative ways of avoiding the 
difficulty. Either C is only a distinct and is not distinct from A or 
from B, or C and A (or B) make a whole which is C itself. The 
first alternative amounts to saying that the togetherness of C with A or 
B is no distinct thought at all and that C is but a third term and is no 
relation between A and B. The second alternative admits that C and 
each element are mutually distinct but holds that C is not only a term 
of the distinction, but also the whole comprising itself and what is 
distinct from it. The contradiction in the last phrase is sought to be 
avoided by saying that it only verbally analyses the meaning of ‘whole’ 
which as perfectly simple cannot be really analysed. But the verbal 
analysis does not appear to be arbitrary. A whole may be thought 
with its elements unanalysed and indefinite, or with its elements defi- 
nitely emergent. The difference of the latter from the former is not 
merely subjective. Analysis or emergent difference of elements 1s 
a character of the latter content and is not simply analysing or dis- 
tinguishing thought. The whole of distinct elements is, in fact, no 
mere third term like the whole with elements unanalysed. As a 
relation it must mean a cyclical triplicity of relations. If C is but 
the equivalent of the mutual distinction of A and B, the equivalent 
of the distinction between C and A should be taken as B and not as 
C and that between C and B as A. But is this triplicity of relations 
a definite content? As before, we argue that either the relations are 
each indefinite, their whole being alone immediately definite or the 
relations are all definite, the and joining them standing for indefinite 
togetherness. 

16. But why not drop, it may be suggested, the notion that 
elements are related by the fact of their being in a whole? In the 
first alternative above, the whole is an unrelated term and has no 
extrinsic distinction from the elements. In the second alternative the 
whole is both intrinsically and extrinsically distinct. Why may not 
there be a third alternative viz., that the whole has only extrinsic 
distinction? When A and B are each intrinsically distinct, their whole 
C is not intrinsically distinct but only distinct from them. Relation 


THE DEFINITION OF RELATION 251 


then would still involve the whole and the only relation, it would be 
said, is between an element and a whole, though the whole is not the 
relation between the elements. The indefinite triplicity of relations 
then would define itself out as two relations between C and A and 
between C and B, A and B, being unrelated. Where A and B are 
related, one being an element of the other, C would not be the whole 
of A and B only but of a third element as well, say, X. If A be an 
element of B, C—if distinct from B—would be the whole of B and X. 
In the sense in which we use the word ‘whole’—viz., as the static 
equivalent of the mutual distinction of the elements, the whole of 
A, B, X is not also the whole of A, B. So where C and A, C and B, 
and A and B are all mutually distinct, they do not make up a cyclical 
system; for if C and A make B, and C and B make A, as understood 
in 15, A and B do not make C but only some unanalysed element 
of B. 


17. In this third alternative then, where relation is understood 
as between element and whole, not between elements in a whole, the 
whole as the equivalent of mutual distinction is but a term and a 
further mutual distinction between this and the elements is a meaning- 
less supererogation. But the relation of element and whole appears 
to cover at least two incommensurable relations. The whole may be a 
unity of attributes, a substance or it may be a unity of such unities or 
substances—e.g., a spatial whole of parts. Whether the substance is 
simply the whole of its attributes or an underlying something, it is 
still a unity of the attributes in some sense. Now, the addition of a 
new attribute to a substance does not disturb its identity while the 
addition of a new part or extra bit to a spatial whole makes a new 
whole. So the two relations—that of an attribute to a substance and 
that of a part to a whole appear to be only nominally described as the 
same relation—viz., of element and whole. 


18. This difference may be sought to be whittled away by saying 
that extensity is but a character of every quality and that substance 
is only a synthesis of the extensities of many qualities. But that 
substance is not disturbed in its identity by the addition of a new 
quality should imply that the extensity-synthesis here differs from that 
in the addition of a new part to a whole. The difference would be 
some qualitative equivalent of the difference between spatial super- 
position and side-by-side arrangement. The term ‘extensity-synthesis’ 
implies in the two cases no common logical content that is distin- 
guishable; it means either the one or the other. The difference, 


252 THE DEFINITION OF RELATION 


therefore, between the two forms of the relation would still stand out 
as absolute. 

19." We may express this difference by saying that though we 
speak of attribute in a substance and part ina whole, in the 
former what is in is dependent and in the latter independent. An 
attribute is never thought except in a substance but what is conceived 
as a part in a given whole need not be so conceived elsewhere. A 
space, it may said, is always part of a larger space but the spatial thing 
need not be part of a bigger spatial thing. In this sense, then, attri- 
bute is always dependent whereas part may be independent. But why 
should the substance be taken to be independent? It is independent 
in the sense that without the particular attribute given as dependent, 
it would still mean something. But how if the particular attribute be 
what is called an essential attribute? Without an essential attribute, 
substance would not indeed be anything actual, but would still mean 
either the underlying unity, the hidden something, or if that be not 
admitted, the persistent extensity-measure of the given substance from 
which the abstraction is made. The spatial whole however, unlike 
substance, is dependent on a part, since without that part it would not 
mean the same whole. 

20. It appears then that to characterise relation in general, we 
have to avoid the concept of ‘whole’ altogether. It was shown in 5 
that relation of A to B, whatever else it means, implies that A is dis- 
tinct from B given as distinct but not vice-versa; or, in other words, 
for the single thought of A, B, they have fixed relative positions as 
extrinsically and intrinsically distinct respectively. The view that the 
sole relation is that of an element to a whole has to be rejected, be- 
cause the relative position of the terms varies in the two cases of the 
whole—viz., as substance and as spatial whole. Incidentally the criti- 
cism of the view has suggested that in both the cases the relation is 
properly of a dependent to an independent. Dependent and inde- 
pendent, however, while satisfying the condition of fixed relative posi- 
tion appear to go further, and there is the prima facie doubt if they 
make up the content of a single thought. 

21. Do the extrinsically distinct and the intrinsically distinct to- 
gether make up a unitary objective content? We said in 5 that the 
fixing of the relative position of A and B does not secure complete 
definition of the content. We have still two positions; we can still 
speak of ‘A distinct from B’ and B. Relative position here is the 
content of a single thought but is not yet more than an abstraction to 
characterise the particular thought. It is not objectively unitary in the 


THE DEFINITION OF RELATION 253 


sense in which A or B has been assumed to be at the outset. The 
distinction of A from B need not be objective, because A and B are 
each separately objective. When we say ‘whiteness is distinct from the 
Soul’, we mean that the thought of whiteness only is distinct from the 
thought of the soul, though each of the terms, taken separately, is 
objective. The question therefore arises: under what circumstances 
if at all, the relative position of A and B may be regarded as objective 
relation. In other words, is the content of the thought of relative 
position distinguishable from the particular thought? . 

22. That depends on whether the position or extrinsic distinc- 
tion of A can be thought apart from the position or intrinsic distinc- 
tion of B, or what is the same thing—apart from the thought of the 
abstraction, relative position. Can A be known to have necessary 
extrinsic distinction, i.e., to be always together with and distinct from 
something else which may not be B? Now whether there are any terms 
that are thinkable as only intrinsically distinct or absolute; never extrinsi- 
cally distinct, may be disputed. But there are at least some terms, viz., 
those which stand for attributes and wholes that must have an extrinsi¢ 
distinction. When A is always thought as together with some other term 
(not necessarily B) which is however thinkable apart from A (though, 
it may be, still together with a third term), A is said to have necessary 
extrinsic distinction without specific reference to B. Now if such a term 
A is thought together with B in any particular case where B need not be 
thought together with A, their relative position is said to be distin- 
guished from the particular thought of it, or in other words, said to 
be objective. 

23. We are now in a position to understand relation of a depen- 
dent to an independent as a definite and objectively unitary content. 
Dependent and independent are intelligible as characters of terms 
without reference to relation. A term is said to be a dependent when 
it is not only extrinsically distinct but necessarily so. It is said to be 
independent when it is thinkable as object apart from a given dependent. 
This reference to a given dependent is no dependence, but only the 
thought of the absence of dependence. When then a dependent is 
thought as an object along with and distinct from an independent, the 


former is said to be objectively related to the latter. 
24. In thus defining relation, we have avoided the petitio of 


"When A as object is thought as distinct from B as object, if B is also 
distinguished from A, it only means another co-existing thought of the thought 
of B as distinct from the thought of A (21). B as object is then thinkable how- 
ever apart from A ie., not as distinct from or together with A but as by itself 
or as the content of a past or finished act of thinking of, say "B distinct from X’. 


254 THE DEFINITION OF RELATION 


using the concept of relation. The terms we have used in the defini- 
tion are distinct objects together, one of them always distinct as to- 
gether with some other which is either distinct by itself or as together 
with something else. Distinct is here the character of a term, and the 
only relational word used—viz., ‘together’ is understood here as think- 
ing together, as not objective but only as a character of subjectivity. 
We begin in fact with a confusion of subjectivity and objectivity, of 
thinking with the object of it. Our definition is only an attempt to 
distinguish the object from the thinking and practically amounts to 
saying that if we think in a certain way, we think of objective relation. 
The reference to this thinking together is indeed necessary to the 
thought of the objective but it does not on that account prejudice the 
independence of objectivity. The thinking together of two contents 
we take to be a unique experience which we somehow symbolically 
describe by an objective term. Whatever account may be given of this 
symbolism, it does not affect objective logic. 

25. We note also—as about distinction, so about relation—that 
objectively it is irreversible. If A is related to B, B cannot be said to 
be related to A: mutual relation is not objective relation. When, for 
example, A and B are said to be in mutual contact, contact is no rela- 
tion but an attribute that is related to both of them. Why it is ordi- 
narily called ‘relation’ will be explained below (26-27). But why 
offer violence to ordinary usage, it may be asked. The reply is that 
the categories of attribute and relation have to be distinguished. An 
attribute, whatever else it means, is understood as that which has neces- 
sary extrinsic distinction. Relation, we have seen, is the togetherness 
of an object with necessary extrinsic distinction with another object 
that in reference to it is intrinsically distinct. Relation cannot be said 
to have a further necessary extrinsic distinction, for then relation would 
be a term and there would be a demand for a further relation between 
relation and its terms and so on ad infinitum. If what can be regarded, 
like contact, as having a necessary extrinsic distinction be called a rela- 
tion, there would be nothing to differentiate the category of attribute. 

26. That an attribute like contact is plausibly called relation is 
due to the circumstance that two relations having such an attribute as a 
common term sometimes yield an inference involving the other two 
terms. It happens in fact that certain characters of an object can be 
inferred from the characters of an object in contact with it. But this 
inferribility need not mean an objective relation between the two 
objects. In some cases, indeed, inference is possible through an objec- 
tive relation, as for example, when an attribute or spatial whole is given, 


THE DEFINITION OF RELATION 255 


we infer a substance or spatial parts. There are other cases where if 
we infer a predicate about B from a predicate of A, it is because the 
predicates are the same attribute or substance, there being no’ reason to 
suppose that it does not persist. An attribute of a part may ordinarily 
be inferred to be an attribute of a whole constituted by it; and given 3 
concomitance of attributes we can under certain circumstances infer 
a single substance underlying them. In such a case the given objects 
are not related; they are either each related to a third object or have a 
third object related to each of them. There is a more complex case— 
covering most of our really productive inferences—where what is in- 
ferred about B is either directly or remotely correlative with, but not 
the same as, the given circumstance about A from which it is inferred. 
This case demands special investigation. 

27. If the given circumstance be X and the inferred circums- 
tance, Y, X is either directly correlative with Y or there are inter- 
mediate circumstances M....P such that X and M,....P and Y are 
correlative terms. Correlatives need not always be in a pair: some- 
times more than two terms may be directly correlative with one another. 
The principle, however, is that inference is possible through groups 
of correlative terms. Does the admission of correlative terms imply the 
admission of correlation as an objective relation? How else, it may 
be asked, could we have objective correlations? Object is indeed dis- 
tinct from the thought of it but such thought also is an object to the 
further thought of it. The cause of an object other than thought may be 
other than thought, or it may be in some cases a thought regarded as 
an object. In the latter case, the object is said to be a construction of 
thought, meaning by it nothing mystical but only the objective effect 
of thought which is itself an object to some other thought. Now cor- 
relative terms stand for such an objective effect, for the joint effects 
of the same causal thought. The effects are objective though they 
have no objective relation to one another. Though each is objective, 
two correlatives are not together as objective: the thoughts of two cor- 
relatives can alone be said to be together. The cause of an object need 
not be a part or element of it and there is no objection to starting with 
effects as data of inference, whatever their causal history might be. 
We can then start with correlative objects as our data without admitting 
any objective relation between them. That they have the same thought 
as their cause does not mean that they are objectively related. 

28. The inferibility of Y from X then does not necessarily 
mean that X is related to Y. The contact of A and B is no relation 
because contact is capable of being regarded as an attribute. It is 


256 THE DEFINITION OF RELATION 


ordinarily called a relation, becauce A and B in contact have correla- 
tive positions X and Y which are indeed objective but are only 
unrelated‘ effects of the same mental cause. To speak of a relation 
between A and B when they have a common circumstance or correla- 
tive circumstances is to confuse a mere subjective attempt to relate 
or infer with a unitary objective relation. A and B are here 
objectively unrelated, there being relation only between each of them 
and the common circumstance or the correlative circumstances. 
29. Although such a complex situation is no single object, 
there may be a single thought of it, and this thought may have a 
special working value. It sometimes happens that the form of the 
thought enables us to infer a new truth with other given terms. 
Taking for example the symbolism A X—Y B, where there is a 
relation between A and X and also between B and Y, X and Y being 
correlative terms, we find that by arranging given terms A, X, Y in 
that form, B which is not given can be imagined and is sometimes 
verified as a fact. In such a case Y may on subsequent verification 
be found to have the same relation to B, as Y has to B. Sometimes, 
especially in complex cases, this subsequent verification is not forth- 
coming: the symbolism anticipates B without bringing to light its 
objective relation. The symbolism stands for a mode of imagining 
and thus a subjective activity discovers, by a leap as it were, a new 
truth the objective relation of which to the data may yet be unknown. 
There is ground indeed for regarding this mode of imagining as more 
than mere subjective play, if it happens to uniformly hit a new truth. 
It cannot be by a mere accident that the symbolism happens to be 
so systematically useful. But the mystery is not removed by taking 
the symbolism to be a single objective relation. The commonsense 
description which we find verified in simple cases of inference—viz., 
unrelated terms related each to each with correlative terms, the com- 
plex being nothing objective but only a unitary act of thinking— 
should not be rejected in complex cases merely because the constituent 
details of the situation cannot be completely exhibited. Still less 1s 
there excuse for rejecting it in favour of the conception of relation 
as a living objective function, which as altering the fundamental 
meaning of objectivity cannot at least claim to be justified on ordinary 
objective grounds. To exclude this conception from objective logic 
is not to deny the subjective mystery of the inferring imagination. 
30. Objective relation, as we have defined it, implies a reference 
to thinking on the one hand and to an objective fundamentum on 
the other. The reference to thinking must not be to more than the 


THE DEFINITION OF RELATION 257 


bare thinking together of objects. Many apparent relations alleged 
to be objective will accordingly have to be ruled out as involving a 
reference to a more complex subjectivity. Again, the objective 
fundamentum must not be the mere distinctness of each object, for 
then we would only have unrelated objects. Nor are objects 
necessarily related when they have a common circumstance or 
correlative circumstances. Nor are correlative terms themselves 
objectively related, for though they have an objective ground, there 
is a ncessary reference to a single thought as the cause of them, a 
reference thereore to much more than the terms, but in the objective 
not like that of correlatives in a complex thought. The objectivity 
is secured only where the complementariness is in a single direction, 
or in other words, where the thought of relation has an unshiftable 
starting point in a term having necessary extrinsic distinction. The 
thought of such complementary objects is alone the thought of 
objective relation. There are other more complex unitary thoughts 
of an objective manifold which are useful for inferring objective truth, 
but it is only in a figurative sense that they are called ‘thoughts’ of 
‘objective relation’. 


OBJECTIVE INTERPRETATION OF 
PERCEPT AND IMAGE 


ANALYSIS 


(1) Percept is a spatial object as perceived and the image is 
the spatial object as cognised but as unperceived. An attempt is 
made here to translate the subjective terms ‘perceived’ and ‘un- 
perceived’ into objective terms. (2) A spatial object is sometimes 
perceived with its outside indefinite and so un-perceived, e.g., an 
emerging flame. (3-4) An object is perceived as existent when it is 
perceived as defining an outside. Two cases: (a) where the object 
emerges in time but not in space, ¢.g., a scar coming to be perceived 
on a man’s face; (b) where the object is perceived to cease in space, 
e.g., a fire perceived to go out. (5) In (a) the object is not per- 
ceived to happen. It is known only to exist. It is known to emerge 
in time only and not in space. Its outside or spatial negative is 
perceived as definite, though not as emergent either in time or in 
space. It is perceived only as constituting the existence of the object. 
(6) In (b) the ‘fire is noticed to exist in being seen to go out. The 
spatial negative of the fire (to wit, the field) is perceived to emerge 
in time only. This emergence of the field is the perceived existence 
of the fire in space. (7) The spatial negative of a perceived object 
is the whole of space in which the object is distinguished. The limit 
of the bounded space is not set by the object occupying it but by the 
sensed matter that fills space and is not itself spatial. Space that is 
outside the limit has nothing spatial outside it and is as such the whole 
of space. (8) The perception of the object as existent or emergent 
in time only is the consciousness of the percept which is not anything 
other than the perceived object. Percept is a mental object not in the 
sense of being a datum for introspection but in the sense that it is an 
external object as perceived explicitly to be existent. (9) Two kinds 
of percept—the non-cessant and the non-emergent. (10) To 
know perceived space as non-emergent is to know it as having been 
and to know it as non-cessant is to know it as continuing to be. There 
is thus knowledge of persistence either in the form of having been 
or in the form of continuing to be. (11-12) This knowledge of 
persistence is not, however, perceptual. 

(13) To know a perceived object as persistent is to be aware 
of an image which, like the percept, has two varieties—the non- 
emergent and the non-cessant. (14) The image is nothing other 
than the perceived object as persistent. (15) The objective equivalent 
of the unperceived character of the object is its non-existence in time. 


OBJECTIVE INTERPRETATION OF PERCEPT’ 
AND IMAGE 


1. To be conscious of a spatial object as perceived is to be 
conscious of a percept and to be conscious of it as unperceived is 
to be conscious of an image. ‘Perceived’ and ‘unperceived’ are 
subjective terms and the problem is to translate them, if possible, into 
objective terms. 

2. To perceive is to perceive a spatial object with a spatial 
outside or the spatial outside of a spatial object. It is to be conscious 
of a definite shape and of an outside that may or may not be defined. 
When we perceive an object emerging in space e.g., a flame emerging 
as a match is struck, the outside of the object as emerging does not 
appear with a definite boundary. As it is only a definite shape that 
can be said to be perceived, the outside of the flame is not perceived 
but is only the content of an indefinite sensational awareness. The 
emerging flame is perceived with an outside that is not perceived. 

3. When an object and its outside are perceived together, the 
former defines the latter but not vice versa. The object is definite 
in itself while the outside is definite through it. The definite object 
is perceived as existent, its definite outside being its perceived exis- 
tence. But the outside may not itself be perceived as existent, 
though it is perceived as definite. An object emerging in space like 
the flame is also perceived as only definite and not as existent. But 
the flame is perceived as definite in itself while the perceived outside 
is definite through the object of which it is outside. 

4. An object is perceived as existent when it is perceived as 
defining an outside. There are apparently two cases where an object 
is perceived as defining its outside. The first is the case where the 
object emerges in time but not in space and the second is where the 
object is perceived to cease in space. A scar comes to be perceived 
on a man’s face as he draws near. The scar here begins to appear 
at a certain moment but does not then begin to exist. It does not 
like the flame appear or emerge in space but emerges in time only. 
There is explicit perception of the scar as there, as existent: to come 
to be perceived without being perceived to happen is to be perceived 
as existent. Again a fire is perceived to go out, the going out or 
cessation being, unlike the emergence of the scar, a perceived happen- 


ing in space. The fire need not have been explicitly perceived as 


264 PERCEPT AND IMAGE 


existent before its cessation is perceived. Its existence, however, is 
perceived as involved in the perception of its cessation. The fire 
may be for the first time perceived to exist in being perceived to 
cease. To see it ceasing is not to cease to see it but to notice its 
existence, 

5. In the first case, the scar is seen to exist in the face but not 
to emerge in it. To emerge in space is to happen and the scar is 
not perceived to happen. Its outside or what may be called its spatial 
negative is perceived as definite but not as emergent in space or in 
time. To know that the scar emerges in time only and not in space 
is to know that it exists in space. But its spatial negative as being 
not known to emerge at all is not known as either existent or non- 
existent. It is perceived only as constituting the existence of the 
scar. Existence to perception is spatial existence and the spatial 
negative of the perceived object here is its perceived existence. 

6. In the second case, the fire is noticed to exist in being seen 
to go out. To see the fire ceasing is to see it as existent against its 
outside or spatial negative perceived not as not emerging at all like 
the outside of the scar, but as emerging in time only like the scar 
itself. To see the fire going out is to see the field in which it exists 
getting defined without happening, such definition being emergence 
in time only. The emergence of the field in time only is the perceived 
existence of the fire in space or—what is the same thing—the emergent 
non-existence of the fire in time. The scar, as emerging against a 
field that emerges neither in space nor in time, is perceived as existing 
both in space and in time. ‘The fire as ceasing is perceived, against 
a field that emerges only in time, as existing in space only. 

7. The spatial negative of a perceived object is the whole of 
space in which the object is distinguished. The object indeed 
occupies some space but the outside or the negative of this space has 
not this space outside it. The limit of the bounded space is not set 
by the object occupying it, for then there would be a clrcle, since 
to occupy space is to have so much space constitutive of it. The 
limit is set by the sensed matter that fills space and is not itself spatial. 
Space that is outside the limit has then nothing spatial outside it and 
is as such the whole space that might be filled. The existence of 
an object to perception is space defined as outside the object but not 
having the object as its outside. Space is defined as outside the 
object when either the object emerges in time only or ceases in space. 

8. The object is perceived to exist when it emerges in time only 
or when its spatial negative emerges in time only. The perception 


PERCEPT AND IMAGE 265 


of the object as thus existent is the consciousness of the percept. 
The percept is not other than the perceived object, not a ghostly 
or diaphanous object—as it is sometimes conceived to be—appre- 
hended in psychological introspection. There is no introspective 
awarenesss of the percept, although it has to be taken as a ‘mental’ 
object. The mental object is nothing but the external object as 
perceived explicitly to be existent. The object is said to be perceived 
as existent when existence is seen in the object without being reflec- 
tively known as seen. Its emergence in time only or its cessation in 
space is its existence unreflectively seen as an objective predicament 
of the object. The external object in this objective predicament is 
the percept. 


9. Such is the objective interpretation of the percept. 
Corresponding to the two kinds of perceived existence viz., that of 
the scar in both space and time and that of the fire in space only, 
there are two kinds of percepts. The scar is perceived as beginning 
to appear but not as disappearing while the fire is perceived as dis- 
appearing but not as beginning to appear. The percept scar is non- 
cessant while the percept fire is non-emergent. The scar must indeed 
disappear to the observer as the scarred face recedes from him but 
the beginning of the disappearance is never perceived. The fire 
again begins to be perceived in the perception of its cessation but 
this beginning is not itself perceived. Unlike the scar, the fire is 
perceived to exist only and not to emerge at all. 


10. The spatial negative of an object perceived as existent in 
space is perceived as not existent in space. As pointed out, the out- 
side of a perceived object has not the object outside it; and it is the 
outside of an object that constitutes its perceived existence. The 
outside of an object then is perceived along with the perception of 
the object but not as with the object as its outside i.e., not as existent 
in space. It is perceived as space itself and this perceived space 
differs according as the object, perceived as existent i.e., as in space, 
emerges in time only or ceases in space or, in other words, according 
as the percept is non-cessant or non-emergent. Space as the outside 
of the scar is known as non-emergent against the scar as emergent 
in time only and space as the outside of the fire is known as non- 
cessant against the fire perceived as cessant i.¢., existent in space only. 
To know perceived space as non-emergent is to know it as having 
been and to know it as non-cessant is to know it as continuing to be. 
In the perception of space then as the outside of an object perceived 


266 PERCEPT AND IMAGE 


as existent, there is the knowledge of persistence either in the form 
of having been or in the form of continuing to be. 

I1. The perceived outside of an object is presented as a definite 
extending away into the indefinite. What is known to persist is the 
definite—e.g., the face on which the scar emerges or the glowing 
ember that may be taken as perceived to survive the fire. When the 
scar is perceived as existent, the face is known as having existed and 
when the fire is perceived as existent, the ember is known as continu- 
ing to exist. The face and the ember are both known to persist but 
while the former is known as non-emergent, the latter is known as 
non-cessant. Both are perceived as the definite outside of a perceived 
object but is the knowledge of their persistence in the two forms to 
be called perception? 

12. The outside of an object is known as what the object is 
not, not as what is not the object. The face and the ember are known 
as what the scar and the fire are spatially and temporally demarcated 
from. The perceived content that is known as persistent is as much 
a percept as the perceived content that is known as existent. The 
distinction of the scar from the face or of the fire from the ember is 
perceived, for there is a single perception of an object as in its field 
or outside. The distinction of the face from the scar or of the ember 
from the fire is really the distinction of the percept of the outside 
from the percept of the object of which it is outside. The distinction 
of the former percept viz., percept of the persistent from the latter 
percept viz., that of the existent is however no percept, being known 
as definite but neither as existent nor as persistent. A persistent is 
known as persistent when what is known as existent is distinguished 
from it or—what is the same thing—when the percept of the per- 
sistent is distinguished from the percept of the existent. There is 
thus no perception of a content as persistent. 

13. To know a perceived object as persistent and not as exis- 
tent is to be incipiently aware of an image. The persistent is not 
non-existent, but to be known as persistent is not to be known as 
existent. A perceived content may be known as persistent or 
existent but while to know it as existent is to be aware of a percept, 
to know it as persistent is to be aware of an image. Just as 
corresponding to the perceived object as emerging in time only and 
ceasing in space, there are the non-cessant and non-emergent per- 
cepts, so corresponding to the knowledge of the perceived object 
persisting as what has existed and as what continues to exist, we have 
respectively non-emergent and non-cessant images. 


PERCEPT AND IMAGE 267 


14. The image here is still, like the percept, nothing other 
than a perceived object. The percept is the perceived. object as 
existent and the image is the same as persistent. The persistent per- 
ceived object is the outside of the existent perceived object, which 
however as persistent is not perceived though immediately known. 
As thus immediately known as persistent, it is the incipient image. 
The awareness of such image is the knowledge of an object as what 
the existent is not though not yet as what is not existent. The know- 
ledge of an object as non-existent is the awareness of an image proper, 
where the object is no longer a perceived object. 

15. For the interpretation of the image proper, the objective 
equivalent of the unperceived character of the object has to be found. 
The scar, we said, disappears as the face recedes from the observer 
though the disappearing is not perceived. The face still perceived 
is immediately known to be different without the belief in its identity 
being disturbed. The difference is known to be the scar itself as 
non-existent in time only, which is known as much in the unrefiective 
objective attitude as the scar emerging in time only. Again, varying 
the example of fire, we may imagine seeing black charred wood instead 
of the glowing ember directly as the fire goes out. Here, too, there 
is the undisturbed belief in the identity of the charred wood with the 
ember in the fire but a discontinuity is immediately known without 
being perceived of the wood from the fire such as is not known when 
the glowing ember is seen to survive the fire. It is known in the 
objective attitude as an emergence not, like that of the surviving 
ember, in time only but also in space. The emergence of the charred 
appearance is known as the non-existence of the fire not only in space 
but also in time, the fire being here not what is ceasing but what has 
ceased. Thus the objective equivalent of the unperceived character 
of the scar and the fire is their non-existence in time as contrasted with 
the persistence of the face in the case of the former and with that of 
the ember (that glowed in the fire) in the form of charred wood in 
the case of the latter. 


REALITY OF THE FUTURE 


ANALYSIS 


(1) The object of this paper is to discuss whether the reality 
of the future expected on a known ground can be said to be an object 
of ‘knowledge’. (2) That which is believed on a known ground 
and is not directly known may comprise two cases: (a) ‘if A, then 
B’; (b) ‘since this A, therefore B will be’. (3-4) (a) may be 
admitted to be known, (b) is claimed to be a case of inferential 
knowledge, but what we really may claim to know is that B can be. 
That B will be is only a matter of non-cognitive expectation. (5) 
The future as real is thus a real contingency or an indeterminate 
potentiality. (6) But objective indetermination has no accomplished 
being and we cannot claim to know it. (7-8) Belief in the future 
is expectation either as initial willing or as faith. The future is 
real but as what might not be and what is being brought into existence 
or being revealed. 

(9) The ordinary view that the past, the present and the future 
are facts of the same status seems to be an oversimplification. The 
time-positions differ in factual status and are not mutually distinct. 
The past is distinguished by itself, the present is distinguished only 
from the past and the future is distinguished only from the present. 
(10-11) The past may be remembered without being known to be 
remembered and as such it is known as that existent and thus as fact. 
The belief in the that is direct and does not involve a conscious- 
ness of its present non-existence. The past is in this sense dis- 
tinguished by itself. The present may not be distinguished at all 
and may only be felt and not known. When it is at all distinguished 
as this, it is only known as beginning to be. It may not, again, be 
so known. But in either case the past is an accomplished fact. The 
present is only half-known and is known simply as not the past. (12) 
The present is known only as beginning and not as ending. It 1s 
not distinguished from the future, though what is now believed to 
be the future is distinguished from the present. This distinguishing 
is not, however, knowledge. The future is a fact to faith which the 
present only symbolises. (13) The future then, if distinguished at 
all, is distinguished from the present and taken either as being 
actualised or as being looked for. (14) The process of actualisation 
is an imaginary movement from the present towards the future: the 
other process is an imaginary defining out of the future towards the 


2/2 REALITY OF THE FUTURE 


present. Neither process reaches its end. The apparent knowledge 
in the former case takes the form of inference and in the latter case 
the form of justification of inference. (15) The consciously willed 
future is not really inferred. What is really inferred from the present 
is the potential future. The interpretation of this potentiality as a 
fact is not inference but ungrounded expectation. (16) The future 
that is real to faith can be justified by the present only in the sense 
that faith is extra-logically confirmed by an inference from the present. 
It is not logically justified as is a conclusion by its premise in retrospec- 


tive explication. (17-22) The future is real to us in two ways—to 
will and to faith. Elaboration of this distinction. 


REALITY OF THE FUTURE 


1. The future, if expected without a ground, cannot be said 
to be known as real. If expected on a known ground, it is believed 
to be real. Is this belief knowledge? 

2. What is believed on a known ground may be also directly 
knowable or it may be intrinsically unintuitable. The latter com- 
prises two cases—(a) a conditional relation—‘if A, then B’; and (b) 
‘since this A, therefore B will be’. 

3. The conditional relation may be admitted to be known, 
though the point is open to dispute. From the joint perception of A 
and B in the past, we may claim to infer ‘if A, then B’ where the 
dependence is independent of the time-position of A and is timeless 
in this sense. 

4, On the ground of this timeless relation and of the percep- 
tion of A as present, we are said to infer that B will be. Really, 
however, we infer at least that B can be and only expect non- 
cognitively that B will be. We infer that B will be, if there is nothing 
to counteract it and we never know that there is nothing. That there 
will be no counteraction is but a faith. What we may claim to know 
or infer is that B can be, that there is a tendency for B to be. 

5. The future then, so far as it is real to us now, is not what 
actually will be but only can be. It may not be actual at all and yet 
it is believed to be real, It is the real contingent, real in the sense 
in which a possibility which is willed or, if not willed, can be willed 
is real. The future or the anagata as real is taken by Patafijali to 
be avyapadesya just in this sense. With this we may connect the 
present day notions of reality in the making and of the intrinsic 
unpredictability of the future. The mechanical conception of the 
real being determinate and of the future being what must be, the 
present being what it is has considerably lost its hold on the modern 
mind. The principle of objective indetermination or real contingency 
is now-a-days presented with assurance in many forms. 

6. Our question is if this principle can be said to be known. 
What is known is the complete or accomplished being, the parinisthita 
or bhutartha. The unaccomplished in the sense of what is real 
without being actual cannot be said to be known. It may be that in 
God’s consciousness, the real future is accomplished or determinate: 
it is the old conception of God knowing our free action beforehand. 


18 


274 REALITY OF THE FUTURE 


It may be also that we can rise by yoga to some kind of transcendental 
intuition of the future as future. As it is however, the future as rea] 
is-only an indeterminate potentiality to us: we cannot claim to know 
it. 

/, We may now state our position briefly. Belief in the future 
is not knowledge but expectation. Expectation is either initial 
willing or faith. Will and faith are antithetical attitudes, their 
dualism being ever sought to be overcome but never actually overcome. 

8. The future is not eternally existent or necessary. It is real 
but as what might not be. The contingency itself is real, being 
believed and not merely imagined. The future is what is inexplicably 
being determinate as being and as meaning: it is either being brought 
into existence or being signified or revealed. Here, too, is a dualism 
that is only being overcome. ; 

9. The past, the present and the future are ordinarily taken 
to be all facts of the same status, disposed in an imaginary time-line 
and mutually distinct like facts in different space-positions. It is 
an illusory simplification of a complex situation. The time-positions 
differ in factual status and are not mutually distinct. The past is 
distinguished by itself, the present if distinguished is distinguished only 
from the past and the future is distinguished only from the present. 

10. To explain. The past fact may be now remembered 
without being known to be remembered and hence may be said to be 
believed as a distinct fact without being distinguished from the present. 
When the past is known to be remembered, it is not distinguished by 
itself but from the present. As so distinguished, however, it is the 
non-existent which is no fact at all, its non-existence being a fact that 
is present. Fact or what is believed is either an existent or the non- 
existence of an existent: the non-existent is only imagined and is not 
fact. The past that is merely remembered without self-consciousness 
is known as that existent and thus as fact. The belief in the that 
is direct and does not involve a consciousness of its present non- 
existence. The past is in this sense distinguished by itself. The 
present, however, if believed without reference to the past is not distin- 
guished at all, is felt but not known. That or the past, though 
psychologically prior is logically posterior to this or the present. That 
means not-this but this does not mean though it is not-that. The 
present may not be distinguished at all but only felt. But if after the 
past is known, there be any occasion to distinguish the present as 

this, it is known only negatively as not the past, as beginning to be. 
11. There are cases in which no break appears between the 


REALITY OF THE FUTURE 275 


past and the present, and the present is not known as beginning. But 
the past here is just as complete or accomplished a fact as the past 
from which the present is marked off, the only difference being that 
in the latter case, the present non-existence of the past is also known. 
The past is the type of the existent: the existent is the accomplished. 
The present is only half-known, known simply as not the past but 
not as existing by itself, as beginning but not as ending. Where the 
past does not consciously cease, it is not incomplete as fact like the 
present. It is at once complete and continuing, unlike the present 
existent which is only continuing. There is no incompatibility between 
complete and continuing. The past is not distinguished from the 
present, the latter being only distinct from the former. Hence the 
past does not lose its pastness or accomplished character, if it is 
also present. The past can be present though the present cannot be 
past. 

12. The present is known only as beginning, not as ending. 
So the present as fact is not distinguished from the future. What is 
now believed as future is however distinguished from the present. Is 
such distinguishing knowledge? If the present is not known to end, 
the break between it and the future cannot mean a known distinction. 
The future cannot begin as the present begins. If it is believed at 
all to begin, it can begin either in the present without being present 
or actual or begin absolutely without any adjacent past. In either 
case, its distinction from the present amounts only to unrelatedness. 
If the future now begins without actually being, it means that its 
existence is being brought about, that it is now willed. Known rela- 
tion implies an existent continuity but the will-continuity of the 
present and the future is nothing that exists now. If, again, the 
future is believed to begin absolutely, there is no continuity at all— 
known or willed—with the present. There is awareness of the present, 
not as the past of this future, but as its symbol, the signifying function 
of which is no factual relation. The future is here a fact to faith 
which the present only symbolises, which is helped somehow to get 
defined as a meaning by the present. 

13. The future then if distinguished at all and not merely 
implicitly expected is distinguished from the present and taken either 
as being brought about or as being looked for—the content of will 
or faith. As explicit, either content takes the appearance—but only 
the appearance—of the known fact. The future as beginning to 
become without actually existing is symbolised as a potential existent 
actualising itself; and the future as absolutely beginning which is only 


276 REALITY OF THE FUTURE 


timelessly set against the believed contingency of its non-emergence 
tends to be pictured as having this contingency temporally before it, 
as heading backwards in time towards its actual present non-existence, 
as presupposing the present. The symbolisation in either case means 
an imaginary transformation of the discontinuity between the present 
and the future into a continuous process. 

14. The process of actualisation is an imaginary movement 
from the present towards the future but never reaching the future. 
The other process is an imaginary defining out of the future towards 
the present, a magic development of the future as a meaning and 
may be called the process of idealisation. Neither process reaches 
its end because the farther it goes, the more does the interval become 
indefinite: we become only less and less aware of the gap and do 
not see it getting filled up. The apparent knowledge in the former 
case tends to take the form of inference and in the latter case the 
form of justification of inference, of the explication of presupposition. 

15. The consciously willed future appears to be inferred from 
the present but is not really inferred because what is inferred is 
necessary ie., is not temporally related to the data at all. What is 
inferred from the present is at best that something tends to be, can 
happen, will happen if there be no counter-acting circumstance. The 
interpretation of this potential future as factually future is not inference 
but only ungrounded expectation. 

16. Again, the future that is real to faith may appear to be 
justified by the present, as a fact already known is retrospectively 
justified—or explained—by the explication of its reason. Such 
retrospective explication is already a strange process within logic. 
But there is difference between the justification of a known conclusion 
by its premise within an inference and the justification of a fact that 
is expected by an inference. The future as a fact to faith is justified 
by the present only in the sense that the faith is non-inferentially or 
extra-logically confirmed or strengthened by an inference from the 
present. This subjective (not merely psychological) confirmation 
of faith by an inference outside it is ordinarily confused with the inverse 
justification of a conclusion by its premise within an inference. 

17. The future is real to us in two ways—to will and to faith. 
Reality to the will-consciousness is a current conception, some going 
so far as to say—what we may deny—that even the past and the 
present are real as somehow ideally willed. The future alone, we 
hold, requires this pragmatic interpretation. But the future may be 
real not to any ideal willing but to faith which is utterly distinct from 


REALITY OF THE FUTURE 277 


it. A voluntarist will ordinarily reduce faith to ideal willing. What 
I believe will come, I either actually will, or imagine I can will, or 
imagine as willed by some other will I imagine myself energising. If 
faith be an ideal willing, it would be this imaginary willing of another's 
willing. Whether this reduction is correct or not, reduction in the 
Opposite direction is also equally conceivable. My consciousness of 
willing may be sought with equal justice to be resolved into the faith 
that my will is coming. If I can imagine another’s willing as being 
brought about by my willing, I can also look for my willing to come 
with absolute spontaneity. As a matter of fact, neither of these 
reductions is really accomplished or believed: we only aspire to believe 
either way. 

18. We may start from actual willing—say, willing to move 
a limb—and trace the steps by which we extend it ideally and aspire 
even to incorporate faith in willing. We may start also from implicit 
faith in the free rationality of persons and trace how the faith is 
extended downwards, how faith in the behaviour of the object is 
justified by this faith and how my own willing comes to be imagined 
in faith as the last link of this object-behaviour. 

19. When I will to move a limb, I implicitly expect this move- 
ment will be brought about. The movement need not even emerge 
in a conscious anticipative idea. Where I will to bring about an 
extra-organic change through my limb-movement and cannot at once 
bring it about, I have an anticipative idea of the object, though I 
may not be conscious of the movement that is a means. Where again 
an objective change is willed through another objective change 
brought about by my movement, I have a conscious idea of the 
objective means which however is undistinguished from my initial 
willing. I have a sort of feeling of ‘double touch’ with the objective 
end. This is the sense in which I go on ideally extending my will. 
Mechanical causality is thus imagined as an extension of my bodily 
willing. 

20. A difficulty emerges when the objective means appears 
unpredictable in its behaviour, cannot be believed as simply trans- 
ferring its motion to the object in which the end-change is to be 
brought about. The feeling of this discontinuity affects the belief in 
the future which thus appears only probable. Still the will asserts 
itself in imagining a continuity: we believe there must be continuity 
though we do not visualise it. There are cases however where this 
general belief in necessary continuity is pulled up—e.g., where the 
means is a living thing or a person, where the unpredictability of its 


2/8 REALITY OF THE FUTURE 


behaviour is felt to be due not to my subjective uncertainty but to 
its objective uncertainty. We need not ask why this belief in objec- 
tive indefermination comes, but it is a fact that we sometimes cannot 
believe even generally that there must be some continuity of motion 
between the means and the end. Here we only imagine with a definite 
abandonment of the will-claim to bring about the end of right. 

21. .This is just where the attitude of faith should come in, so 
far as I still believe that the end will come though the behaviour of 
the means is intrinsically unpredictable. Not that the will-attitude 
always gives place to the faith: it may persist as a satanic or Asurika 
will-aspiration. I may choose to exploit the living or free object as 
a means, though I feel I have no right to use it as means. I.do not 
identify my will with it as I do with a dead objective means. I seek 
not only to take advantage of its behaviour so far as it is mechanised: 
I employ it much as I make an evil spirit by incantations do my 
bidding. It is like hypnotising the means: I command, for example, 
a person to act and make his own will lapse. It is through such a 
hypnotising will that one feels making history—the culmination of the 
asurika ambition. 

22. Thus we may trace the ideal extension of willing including 
the stage in which faith itself which ought to mean surrender of will 
is incorporated in aspiration with willing. We do not trace here the 
other process of the ideal extension of faith and its aspirational 
incorporation of willing. 


THE CONCEPT OF VALUE 


ANALYSIS 


(1) We speak of the value either of a known object or of a 
willed content. (2) A known object is valuated in the form of a 
judgment—'The object has this value’, (3-4) Here the object is 
known and the value is felt. The judgment apparently means that 
there is a single consciousness of the object and the value, The 
knowing and the feeling do not, however, make up one consciousness. 
They are the objects of a single reflective consciousness. In spite of 
the judgment-form, this consciousness is not reflective knowing. It 
is primarily reflective feeling. Value cannot be said to be reflectively 
known though the object to which it is referred may be said to be 
reflectively felt. (5) Valuation implies a feeling-consciousness both 
of the felt content as such and of the known content as such. ‘The 
known content does not cease to be known by being reflectively felt 
and the felt content, though not known, is endowed with a kind of 
objectivity by reflection. Both being objective, they can be spoken 
of as though they were related in a judgment. (6) The felt content 
is objectivised in reflective feeling in a peculiar manner. The content 
of a reflective feeling as the fecling of the impersonal feeling of the 
same content is definitely objectivised through the mediation of the 
impersonal feeling. (7) Though the felt content is thus objectivised, 
it is not turned into a known object. Though value is referred to a 
known object, it is not known as a character of the object. (8) To 
speak of the relation of the known content and its value would be 
really to speak the reflective feeling and not to speak of it. When 
we speak of a value in an object then, we only indirectly express as 
information what we should only speak exclamatorily. 

(9) That the known object is in a manner ‘subjectivised’ is not 
so obvious as that the felt content is objectivised. We may feel that 
something is only known in the sense that we feel it as unfelt or 
neutral. In valuation, we are feelingly aware of the known object as 
unfelt even when the object is being felt. (10-11) It is possible for 
the same content to appear at once as felt and unfelt, in the valuating 
reflective feeling. The known object is not felt as one with the value, 
though the value is felt as one with the object. The known or unfelt 
character is not the felt value though the latter has the former involved 
in it. Value is thus referred to the object which is understood as not 
really having it and may in this sense be called a floating or free 


282 THE CONCEPT OF VALUE 


adjective of the object. (12-13) Strictly speaking, however, value 
cannot be, taken as an adjective of the object like red, green etc. In 
‘red flower’, though the substantive is one with the adjective, the 
adjective is not one with the substantive. In an object that is felt 
to have value, the value is not felt as other than the object, but the 
latter is felt as other than the value. (14) Value, however, appears 
to be necessarily referred to the object and to be subordinated to the 
object. But this notion of subordination can be got rid of and it 
can be shown that value is independent of valuation. (15) Value 
is not appreciated as such until the object to which it is referred is felt 
as known. When the known object is so felt, it is felt to be sub- 
ordinate to the value. (16) It is not enough to understand that value 
is felt to be objective but not known as such. We have to appreciate 
that value is absolute and that the speakability of value as information 
is a necessary illusion. (17-19) There are cases of feeling a possible 
feeling and feeling the want of a feeling. They indicate the possibility 
of the feeling of an actual feeling. Valuation as reflective feeling is 
of an imperfectly distinct content, viz., the possibly felt and the felt 
unfelt. We have also a feeling of feeling in which there is not even 
this imperfect distinguishing. The value of an object gets freed as 
a substantive from the object of which it appears as an adjective and 
acquires the status of an absolute only in this feeling beyond reflec- 
tive feeling. (20) The expression of this absolute feeling is not 
only no information, it is not even a speakable valuation. The term 
‘value’ should properly be confined to this absolute; value is nothing 
if not absolute. 

(21) The valuation of a willed content is not, like the valuation 
of a known content, a pure feeling but is a feeling with willing some- 
how involved in it. Moral valuation is to feel the sacredness of the 
‘ought’. It is properly expressed as an exclamation of the ‘practical 
feeling’ of respect for the ‘ought’. (22) Aesthetic valuation is the 
type of valuation. (23) To be valuated, what is valued should be 
a finished content. Willing, then, as simply the process as distinct 
from willing as completed is no content of consciousness and the 
rightness of willing as a process is no value at all. (24) The moral 
valuation of an object as clean or sacred occurs when the purity 
or holiness of an. impersonal will is felt to be embodied in the object. 
(25) A willed act is the content of willing only and is distinct from 
the willing through the willing itself. It has an embodiment which 
is no content at all apart from the willing. (26-27) The judgment 
on an embodied willing is aesthetic relatively to the judgment on ideal 


ANALYSIS 283 


willing which determines it, though the value depends on or involves 
the moral value of the ideal willing. (28) Valuation ranges from 
the pure aesthetic valuation of an object to the moral valuation of an 
act. All valuation is expressed in an informatory sentence, though 
as feeling it should be primarily expressed as an exclamation. (29) 
Valuation—whether aesthetic or moral—is no judgment. Aesthetic 
valuation is not judgment because the subject here is subordinate 
to the predicate. Moral valuation is not judgment because it is not 
even literal information. (30-33) Analysis of the form of the moral 
judgment that is furthest removed from the aesthetic judgment. (34) 
Valuation in its different forms may be conceived to be a process, 
intermediate between knowing and willing. 


THE CONCEPT OF VALUE 


1. We speak of the value either of a known content or of a 
willed content. Value is itself a felt content and so the value of a 
felt content is but a higher grade of the value of a known or willed 
content. 


I. VALUE OF A KNOWN OBJECT 


2, A known object is valuated in the form of a judgment—‘The 
object has this value.’ The difficulty about the judgment is that the 
object is known and the value is felt and there can apparently be no 
relation between the incommensurable contents. One may evade the 
difficulty by saying that value is only symbolically spoken of as con- 
tent, the real judgment here being ‘we thus feel the object.’ But this 
form also is not easy to understand. What does ‘feel’ as a transitive 
verb mean in reference to the object? It cannot mean simply ‘we 
thus feel when we know the object’; and even if it does, there is the 
further difficulty how one speaks of ‘we’ having the feeling in respect 
of the object. Probably it is one and the same circumstance that 
is expressed by ‘feeling the object’ and ‘we thus feeling about the 
object’; and to speak of value as a content is apparently to symbolise 
the same mystery. It is as well therefore that we accepted the judg- 
ment-form—‘The object has this value’ and tried to find out its 
implications. 

3. How is any relation sopken of between the known object 
and the felt value? The relation may be only symbolical but it is 
not obviously unintelligible. What is at least meant literally is that 
there is a single consciousness of the two terms—the object and the 
value. We cannot say, however, that the knowing and the feeling 
make up one consciousness. We are aware of what is known as 
completely distinct from the knowing and of what is felt as only 
imperfectly distinct from the feeling. We cannot speak of the object 
as content of the single consciousness for then it would be at once 
known and felt, at once completely and incompletely distinct from 
the consciousness. 

4. The knowing and the feeling cannot make up one conscious- 
ness but it may be that there is a single reflective consciousness of 
both. Is such consciousness the consciousness of the content of the 


286 THE CONCEPT OF VALUE 


knowing and the feeling making some sort of unity? It depends on 
what is meant by reflective consciousness. There are apparently two 
kinds of reflection on a conscious process: it is either the distinguishing 
of the conscious process from the content or the distinguishing of the 
content from the process. The former is what is usually called 
psychological introspection in which attention is withdrawn from the 
content of the conscious process and fixed on the process itself which 
is thereby sterilised and turned into a ghostly temporal event. In 
the latter, it is the content of the conscious process that is attended 
to as in the unreflective stage, though it is defined by being distin- 
guished from the conscious process which we thus do not distinguish 
but only distinguish from. The reflective consciousness of knowing 
and feeling that we postulate to understand the so-called value- 
judgment is reflection in the latter sense. It is consciousness not 
directly of the knowing of the object and the feeling of the value but 
of the object and the value as known and felt respectively. Reflection 
in this sense is consciousness of the conscious process not 
as an event but as a function implied in the content. It is not 
necessarily cognitive: reflection on the knowing or feeling or willing 
of a content may be but need not be the reflective knowing or reflec- 
tive feeling or reflective willing of the content respectively. To 
understand the so-called value-judgment then, the object and the value 
should be taken as the contents of a reflective consciousness of knowing 
and feeling. Is this consciousness, reflective knowing or reflective 
feeling? The judgment-form would suggest that it is reflective know- 
ing but we contend that the form is here only artificial, if not symbolic 
and that the so-called value-judgment is primarily refiective feeling. 
Value is here spoken of as though it were known but the object is 
not here spoken of as though it were felt. The known object in fact 
is actually felt in the reflective feeling. Its knownness is felt: there 
is a feeling of the object as in space and time being merely known 
in the sense of being unfelt or indifferent. In the reflective Stage we 
may feel that something is only known but we do not know that some- 
thing is only felt. To know is to know a definite content but to know 
that a content is only felt would be to be aware of it as indefinite. 
In other words, value cannot be said to be reflectively known though, 
like value, the object to which it is referred may be said to be 
reflectively felt. 

3. The so-called value-judgment then is not reflective knowing 
but reflective feeling. The judgment-form or the form of knowing 
here is only an indirect if not symbolic expression of the reflective 


THE CONCEPT OF VALUE 287 


feeling of valuation. Valuation implies a feeling-consciousness both 
of the felt content as such and of the known content as such. The 
known content does not cease to be known by being reflectively felt 
and the felt content, as will be shown presently, though not known, 
is endowed with a kind of objectivity by reflection. Both being objec- 
tive in a sense to the same reflective feeling, they can be spoken of 
as though they were related in a judgment. 

6. How is the felt content objectivised in reflective feeling? 
When I am conscious of my own past feeling or of another’s feeling, 
the consciousness is a feeling and not a spectator’s consciousness, 
though the feeling of which I am conscious is in some sense alien to 
me. The content of this alienated feeling is not however consciously 
distinguished from it in my reflective feeling of it. Now when I say 
that a person feels in a certain way towards an object, I say it on 
some evidence over and above the mere evidence of my feeling. But 
sometimes I am aware without any such evidence that one must or 
should feel in the way I feel. When I take something to be beautiful, 
for example, I feel implicitly that any one will find it so, as I believe 
when I take it to be of the colour red. I do not say that it is red 
to me but only that it is red; and so I say it is beautiful. If asked 
how I know it is beautiful to others, I would say it must or should be 
so and if it is falsified, as it well may be, I would doubt as I would 
doubt my senses. I am, in fact, here implicitly aware in my feeling 
towards the object that it is not my feeling only, that the object would 
be so felt by any one, or—what is the same thing—that the felt content 
is somehow in the object. To believe unquestioningly without 
evidence that we feel in a certain way in respect of an object and to 
believe that the felt content is in the object are one and the same 
belief, neither being prior to the other. Here then the feeling that I 
reflectively feel is not taken as any one’s feeling in particular: it is 
unappropriated or impersonalised rather than universalised. The 
content of it also is consciously distinguished from it and taken to 
be on a level with the object to which it is referred. Thus the content 
of a reflective feeling as the feeling of the impersonal feeling of the 
same content is definitely objectivised through the mediation of the 
impersonal feeling. 

7. The felt content is thus objectivised but it is not therefore 
turned into a known object. Value is objective and is somehow 
referred to a known object but it is not known as a character of the 
object. The word ‘objective’ here is wider than the word ‘known,’ 
Whatever can be spoken of as information may be said to be objective. 


288 THE CONCEPT OF VALUE 


Now the objective may be either capable of being spoken of without 
reference to the consciousness of it or not so capable. It is only 
in the former case that it is said to be known. Value which js 
objective to reflective feeling is not speakable without reference to the 
feeling. It is unintelligible without reference to the impersonal feeling 
which is not speakable without reference to the reflective feeling. 
Value accordingly is not said to be a known content. 

8. We can speak of the known content and this value together 
as both objective to the reflective feeling. To speak of their relation 
would be really to speak the reflective feeling and not to speak of it. 
In exclaiming, we speak our feeling and not speak of it; and when we 
command, we speak and do not speak of the command. What we 
thus speak may be, however, spoken of in a symbolical or periphrastic 
way. When we speak our feeling in the way of exclamation, we may 
also artificially speak of it or express it as information in the form 
‘this is my feeling about the object’ or ‘the object has this value’. 
When we speak of a value in an object then, we only indirectly express 
as information what we should speak exclamatorily in a form like 
‘how fine is this object’. Why do we thus express ourselves? It is 
to mark the objectivity of the feeling-content induced by the imper- 
sonalisation of the feeling, to indicate in fact that it is not arbitrarily 
that we thus valuate the object. 

9. That the knownness of the object is felt in reflective feeling, 
that the known object is thus in a manner ‘subjectivised’ is not how- 
ever so obvious as that the felt content is objectivised. As pointed 
out, we may feel that something is only known in the sense that we 
feel it as unfelt, neutral or indifferent. To the extent a known object 
appears flat and uninteresting is it felt as merely known. We speak 
of truth as beyond our likes and dislikes: the feeling of the truth of a 
content is the feeling of its being independent of our feeling (and of 
being no value at all). To be aware of a content being known is 
not necessarily to be aware of the content as unfelt but to be feelingly 
aware of the known as such is to be aware of it as unfelt. In valua- 
tion, we are feelingly aware of the known object as unfelt even when 
the object is being felt. 

10. How is it possible, it may be asked, for the content to 
appear at once as felt and unfelt, as interesting and as neutral in the 
valuating reflective feeling? We may put it in some such formula: 
the known object is not felt as one with the value, though the value is 
felt as one with the object. In feeling at least if not in knowing, if 
a content A is one with a content B, B need not be one with A. 


THE CONCEPT OF VALUE 289 


Something, for example, may be felt to be pleasurable and painful 
at once: one may enjoy a tragedy with a breaking heart and one may 
grieve over the loss of one’s beloved in the enjoying reminiscence of 
the love. The pleasure and the pain are not really mixed here, the 
feeling being either pleasure or pain, one of them with the other 
somehow within its content and not side by side with it. The enjoy- 
ment of the tragedy is undistinguished from the pain that is felt, the 
pain itself being enjoyed; but the pain is distinguished from the enjoy- 
ment in the sense that it does not detract from the enjoyment. So 
in the other case, the pain through the pleasure and not vice versa. 
Likewise we say about the valuated object that its neutral or unfclt 
character is distinguished from its felt character or value which 
however is not distinguished from it. The known or unfelt character 
is not the felt value though the latter has the former involved in it. 
Value is thus referred to the object which is understood as not really 
having it and may in this sense be called a floating or free adjective 
of the object. 

11. Unless the known object is appreciated as unfelt at the 
time we feel towards it, the felt content cannot be called value. The 
value of a known object is a content felt to be one with the object 
which is however felt as other than the content. The oneness of 
the content with the object or the objectivity of value is through its 
being felt as the content of an impersonalised feeling in respect of 
the object. The object is felt as other than the content through its 
being felt as unfelt. The reflective fecling of the value as felt and 
the object as known is the feeling of the objectivity of value and of 
the unfelt character of the object. 

12. We have spoken of the value as a free adjective of the 
object. But is value an adjective at all> We say about a red flower 
that the flower is red flower but the red colour is not the flower, 
implying in this sense that the substantive is one with the adjective 
which however is distinct from it. Here however we have said that 
the value is not felt as other than the known object but the known 
object is felt as other than the value. So properly speaking, value is 
no adjective of the object. 

13. We may elaborate the argument. A substantive need not 
be distinguished from its adjective to be known as a distinct. But 
an adjective to be known as a distinct must be distinguished from or in 
the substantive. When an adjective has been distinguished in a 
substantive, the substantive is not distinguished from the adjective at 


19 


290 THE CONCEPT OF VALUE 


least in the sense of being taken to be without it. But when value 
is distinguished in object, the object is distinguished from it in the 
sense that it is felt to be intrinsically without value, felt as unfelt or 
merely known. Value accordingly cannot be taken as an adjective 
of the object. 

14. Apparently however we are still unable to deny that value 
is in some sense subordinate to the object, that while the object does 
not imply value, value has necessarily to be referred to the object. 
We have to get rid of this notion of subordination, of this necessary 
reference of value to the object. Value as such is not understood 
unless we clear our mind entirely of intellectualist prejudice. We 
speak of value indeed in connexion with the valuation of a known 
content, which though a feeling is necessarily symbolised as a 
judgment. But a critical examination of valuation shows not only 
that it is no judgment (amounting to knowledge) but also that value 
should be independent of valuation. 

15. Value-judgment, we have seen, is primarily an exclamation 
somehow toned down into information. Exclamatory speech is like 
an impersonal proposition: the predicate is all and the subject seems 
to be nowhere. A person exclaims ‘grand’ and so he can say ‘lightning’ 
or ‘rains’. There is a difference however, for when the exclamation 
‘srand’ is completed into a sentence, we should say ‘how grand is this 
scene’ and not ‘this scene is grand,’ the predicate still retaining the 
principal position. This indicates the relation between object and 
its value: the known content is here subordinate to the felt content. 
‘How grand is this scene’ means that grandeur—the value—is expressed 
or embodied in the scene. In the Platonic way we may say, the scene 
partakes of grandeur as the individual partakes of the Idea. Expression 
appears to be the least mystical description of the relation: value is 
expressed in the object as a feeling is expressed in the face. Both the 
terms here—object and value—are here substantive and both are 
interesting though we are interested in the object because of the feeling 
or value embodied in it and not in the latter because of the former. It 
may be, the object as expressive is as interesting as the value expressed 
but the object as merely known is in any case subordinate in the so- 
called value-judgment to the value expressed in it. Value, we said, 
is not appreciated as such till the object to which it is referred is felt 
as known or unfelt or neutral. When the known object is so felt, it 
is felt to be subordinate to the value, being so felt because of the value. 
The neutral character of the object is, as we pointed out, within the 

content of the feeling that is felt. 


THE CONCEPT OF VALUE 289 


Something, for example, may be felt to be pleasurable and painful 
at once: one may enjoy a tragedy with a breaking heart and one may 
grieve over the loss of one’s beloved in the enjoying reminiscence of 
the love. The pleasure and the pain are not really mixed here, the 
feeling being either pleasure or pain, one of them with the other 
somehow within its content and not side by side with it. The enjoy- 
ment of the tragedy is undistinguished from the pain that is felt, the 
pain itself being enjoyed; but the pain is distinguished from the enjoy- 
ment in the sense that it does not detract from the enjoyment. So 
in the other case, the pain through the pleasure and not vice versa. 
Likewise we say about the valuated object that its neutral or unfclt 
character is distinguished from its felt character or value which 
however is not distinguished from it. The known or unfelt character 
is not the felt value though the latter has the former involved in it. 
Value is thus referred to the object which is understood as not really 
having it and may in this sense be called a floating or free adjective 
of the object. 

11. Unless the known object is appreciated as unfelt at the 
time we feel towards it, the felt content cannot be called value. The 
value of a known object is a content felt to be one with the object 
which is however felt as other than the content. The oneness of 
the content with the object or the objectivity of value is through its 
being felt as the content of an impersonalised feeling in respect of 
the object. The object is felt as other than the content through its 
being felt as unfelt. The reflective fecling of the value as felt and 
the object as known is the feeling of the objectivity of value and of 
the unfelt character of the object. 

12. We have spoken of the value as a free adjective of the 
object. But is value an adjective at all> We say about a red flower 
that the flower is red flower but the red colour is not the flower, 
implying in this sense that the substantive is one with the adjective 
which however is distinct from it. Here however we have said that 
the value is not felt as other than the known object but the known 
object is felt as other than the value. So properly speaking, value is 
no adjective of the object. 

13. We may elaborate the argument. A substantive need not 
be distinguished from its adjective to be known as a distinct. But 
an adjective to be known as a distinct must be distinguished from or in 
the substantive. When an adjective has been distinguished in a 
substantive, the substantive is not distinguished from the adjective at 


19 


292 THE CONCEPT OF VALUE 


then is consciousness of the value of the value, feeling of reflectively 
feeling the value. 

20. Such is the feeling of an actual feeling to which the feeling 
of a possible (impersonal) feeling and the feeling of the unfelt (merely 
known) alike point. It is a stage of feeling beyond reflective feeling, 
an absolute or transcendental feeling, the expression of which is not 
only no information but not even a speakable valuation. It is a pure 
exclamation in which we do not speak of anything or rather in which 
we symbolically speak of the unspeakable as such. It is the expression 
of what is undeniable yet unintelligible, of the absolutely unique or new, 
or of the absolutely contingent—what is believed as might-not-have- 
been while it is there or as might-have-been while it is not, what is 
perpetually being lost or wanted when attained and being attained 
when it is lost or wanted. What is spoken but not spoken of in the 
pure exclamation may as much be called value of value as feeling of 
(actual) feeling, being in fact a form of the absolute. The term value 
should properly be confined to this absolute; value is nothing if not 
absolute. Loosely however we speak of absolute value and relative 
value, the former as the value of the latter. 


II. VALUE OF A WILLED ACT 


21. Valuation of a willed content is not like the valuation of a 
known content a pure feeling but feeling with willing somehow involved 
in it. Both the valuations are expressed as information but while the 
latter is properly expressed as an exclamation, the natural formulation 
of the former is an exclamation that is at the same time an imperative. 
To say that an act willed is good is a periphrasis for ‘how good is this 
act’ which again means ‘how we should all act thus’. To say simply 
‘we should act thus’ is no valuation or exclamation, being only an 
imperative. But to say ‘how we should act thus’ is to wonder at this 
universal or impersonal obligatoriness, to feel the sacredness of the 
ought. Moral valuation is thus properly expressed as an exclamation 
of the ‘practical feeling’ of respect for the ought. 

22. Aesthetic valuation is the type of valuation. Moral valua- 
tion is valuation as approximating to aesthetic valuation, there being 
intermediate valuations. There is the feeling, for example, of an 
object being clean or sacred, which may be called moral or spiritual 
valuation of the known object. Again, we feel admiration for a willed 
act as noble or magnificent, this being a sort of aesthetic valuation of 


the look of the act. Moral valuation proper would be the valuation 


THE CONCEPT OF VALUE 293 


of the act—not as it looks but as the inner willing that is finished— 
as good or evil. This again may be distinguished from the conscious- 
ness of right or wrong willing in the willing itself, which is not the 
valuation of the willing as finished and therefore not valuation at all. 

23. For valuation it is apparently necessary that what is valued 
should be a content having the form of being. It may be a known 
object that is definitely distinct from the consciousness of it or it may 
be indefinitely distinct from it in different degrees, the minimum dis- 
tinction being that of the willing as completed from the willing as 
process. Willing as simply the process without the form of being is 
no content of consciousness and cannot be valued. The rightness of 
willing in process as distinct from the goodness of willing as completed 
is not felt and is like truth no value at all. 

24. To begin with the valuation of an object as clean or sacred. 
Cleanness is a simpler value than sacredness. Dirt may be matter in 
the wrong place but the wrongness is what is felt as such in a specific 
feeling and does not admit of objective definition. So the clean is 
what appears as such to a specific organic feeling which has a close 
affinity with the feeling of moral goodness. Cleanliness is next to 
godliness and the feeling of having sinned is the fecling of being 
polluted. The clean suggests purity as the beautiful suggests joy. The 
sacred object has a further mystic significance: it is not merely clean 
in itself—what one dares not pollute—but what will clean the soul by 
its touch or presentation. Cleanness or sacredness of an object then 
is the purity or holiness of an impersonal will felt to be embodied in 
the object just in the sense in which the beauty of an object may be 
taken to be an impersonal joy embodied in it. This valuation then is 
an aesthetic feeling of a moral or religious value, of a will-value or a 


soul-value. 
25. A willed act is the content of willing only and is distinct 


from the willing through the willing itself, having indeed an empirical 
embodiment which however apart from the willing is not even a known 
content. By ‘embodiment’ is here meant not an already distinct 
empirical ‘body’ into which the will somehow enters but what is made 
distinct by the willing alone. Taking for example the act at the lowest 
level—viz., the bodily act as willed, the embodiment of the willing is 
not some objective attitude of the physical body but some internal 
motor experience which cannot be described even as a given internal 
sensation. It is doubtful whether the motor experience—experience 
of moving a limb or even of having it moved—should be called 
muscular sensation. There is no consciousness of its being given to 


294 THE CONCEPT OF VALUE 


willing i.e., of being other than willing when we are conscious of the 
willing. This applies even to the consciousness or having one’s limb 
moved, for it is only imperfectly distinguished from the experience of 
moving and is only appreciated as a partial privation of the latter 
experience. This motor experience is apparently nothing but bodily 
willing that one is conscious of in reflective willing. Tactual and 
other sensations bound up with motor experience are adjectival to it in 
the content of reflective willing and cannot be regarded as independent 
facts that are only mixed up with it. A similar consideration will 
apply to willing at higher stages of consciousness. The embodiment 
then of a willing is no content at all apart from the willing. 

26. There is a distinction between the embodied willing at any 
stage and the next higher willing that constitutes it. Each may be 
morally judged but the judgment on the embodied willing will be more 
of an aesthetic valuation than the judgment on the higher willing. 
Mere bodily act e.g., an acrobatic feat is almost like an object and is 
valuated almost wholly in the aesthetic way. Yet the fact that it is 
willed makes some difference. It is not merely the outward look of 
the act that is judged; the look as expressing the success of the willing 
is judged, its value being the efficiency of the psychic effort put forth. 
To say that the acrobatic feat is splendid is to say that the will is wonder- 
fully efficient though the will is judged because of its triumphant 
expression in the body. So at a higher stage we speak of a splendid 
act of bravery, the psychic act being here judged more or less aesthetic- 
ally, though its value consists in the measure of freedom of the willing 
behind it which however would not be judged as splendid but for its 
expression in the psychic act. Everywhere then the judgment on an 
embodied willing is aesthetic relatively to the judgment on the ideal 
willing that determines it though the value depends on or involves the 
moral value of the ideal willing. 

27. When we speak of a splendid act of bravery, we judge the 
look of the act to have the aesthetic quality of splendour. What does 
look mean here? It is the empirical being of the free willing, meaning 
not only the bare being of the willing as a finished process but also an 
entire objective situation as conatively incorporated in it. The look 
of the act is judged aesthetically according to the moral value of the 
willing behind it. This willing too is judged as good or evil only as 
it is taken to have some kind of being. It has to be understood at least 
as this act in order to be valued even morally. 

28. Valuation then ranges from the pure aesthetic valuation of 
an object to the moral valuation of an act considered simply as the 


THE CONCEPT OF VALUE 295 


finished being of free willing without any further empirical determina- 
tion. All valuation is expressed in the form of an informatory sen- 
tence, though as feeling it should be primarily expressed as an 
exclamation. The informatory expression of aesthetic valuation, 
though not primary, cannot be said to be merely symbolical. Beauty 
has an objective though not known being, the objectivity being 
mediated through an impersonal feeling. Moral valuation is not only 
not judgment; its expression as information is symbolical and not literal. 
Moral value is indeed objective in the sense of being mediated through 
an impersonal willing; goodness, as will appear presently, consists in 
being eternally or impersonally willed. But it is not objective being 
but objective negation or freedom that is eternally willed. Negation 
is information when the subject of which a predicate is denied is not 
itself denied at least as a possible existent. But when it is so denied, 
there is nothing about which the information is given and the expression 
of it as information is only symbolic. Now to say that an act is free— 
and that is, as will be explained, what is meant by saying that it is 
morally good—is to deny the being, the bare temporal being or other 
empirical being of the act. In the sphere of knowing, the subject of 
an apparent judgment which is denied absolutely in the judgment 1s 
just the unreal in some form. In the sphere of willing, the act of 
which the being is taken to be nought by being felt to be free is under- 
stood to be real beyond all being or empiricality. The statement 
therefore that the act is free is no information and is only symbolically 
expressed as information. 

29. Valuation, whether aesthetic or moral, is no judgment. 
Aesthetic valuation is not judgment because the subject here viz., the 
object valued, is subordinate to the predicate ‘beauty’ which appears 
at best as a floating character and is really no adjective but a substan- 
tive that is expressed in the substantive subject. Moral valuation is 
not judgment because it is not even literal information. 

30. Moral valuation of the form that is furthest from aesthetic 
valuation is that in which the subject is an act of willing considered 
as a being in the sense simply of being finished or of having a bare 
position in time. The value of it viz., goodness, we have suggested, 
means only felt freedom. This requires explanation. It is clinched 
best on the negative side: to say that an act of willing is evil is to 
imply that it was not willing at all, that there was an illusion of willing. 
An illusion of a particular subjectivity means no denial of subjectivity 
itself but only of its particularity or specification. The specification 
or naming of a subjectivity is however vital to introspection: one is 


296 THE CONCEPT OF VALUE 


said to be introspectively aware only of a subjectivity that is named 
or specified at least as different from named forms. Now we are 
said to have an illusion of willing when we somehow will but do not 
will the particular content that we claim to will. We may think we 
are running of our own accord when we are being mainly dragged 
along a slope or that we are speaking to a person for his good when 
we are really speaking to him in anger or that we are acting on prin- 
ciple when really some unavowed selfish motive is operative. What 
does such an illusion imply? 

31. The consciousness of not having willed a content is always 
consciousness of having positively willed not to will it and not simply 
of having willed some other content. In the moral valuation of an 
act of choice, we consider not simply the content that we have not 
chosen but also the fact of having positively rejected or willed not to 
will it. So generally we cannot be conscious explicitly of the subjective 
fact of not having willed a content unless we are conscious of having 
rejected it. Unless we are so conscious, we should only say that 
another content was willed but not that there was no willing of this 
content. The fact of willing or no-willing is not known but is only 
conatively believed. So the correction of the illusion of an act of 
willing means awareness of having willed not to will it. But then it 
may be said we are not actually conscious in the valuation of an act 
as evil of having willed not to will the act. There is however an 
unspecified consciousness, in all retrospective consciousnes of an act 
as evil, of having willed not to will in the form of willing to remain 
what one is, the will to spiritual indolence. That is the general willing 
of omission that is bound up with all consciousness of willing—even 
of good willing: it is the consciousness of not having sufficiently ex- 
ercised one’s freedom. The consciousness of freedom in fact is belief 
in it as not completed, as having no being. 

32. Moral self-approbation is not complacency but the con- 
sciousness of having exercised our freedom which could have been 
however further exercised. To exercise our freedom is always to work 
against the radical evil in us of the will merely to be or the will to 
indolence, against the downward current—what has been called 
papavaha nadi—which however is still will or freedom and not nature, 
the freedom to be not free, freedom to suicide. Moral self-condemna- 
tion is the feeling of not having exercised our freedom against this will 
to be, of not having shaken off the will to indolence, of having willed 
to drift or not to will, of having only had an illusion of willing other- 
wise. All consciousness then of having willed wrongly— as distinct 


THE CONCEPT OF VALUE 297 


from that of the willing in operation—is consciousness of having had 
an illusion of willing. The consciousness of wrong willing in the 
willing itself is however not being aware of the willing as illusory. 
In fact it is to be more explicitly aware of it as willing, aware of indivi- 
dual freedom, than in the case of right willing. To the retrospective 
valuating feeling however, what was believed as a specific wrong willing 
was not that specific willing but only the radical will to indolence. 
What we are conscious of as right willing in the willing itself appears 
to the valuating feeling as a finished act that is good. It is the valuat- 
ing feeling that on the one hand turns the process of willing into a 
finished act with bare position in time and distinguishes its freedom 
on the other as its constitutive reality. To say that an act is good is 
to say that it was free; that it was genuinely willed. Moral value is the 
reality of the act willed and does not even appear as its character. 
While the subject of the so-called moral judgment gets bare objectivity 
through it, the predicate viz., good is not objectified into a being at 
all, being only freedom that is felt as negation of the objectivity of the 
subject and yet as its constitutive reality. We have pointed out that 
it is not for the same reason that aesthetic valuation and moral valua- 
tion are denied to be judgments. 

33. We have discussed the form of the moral judgment that is 
furthest removed from the aesthetic judgment. Still it is valuation 
so far as it is aesthetic, so far in fact as free willing 1s aesthetically 
represented as an act with the form of being. The aesthetic character 
is more prominent in the valuation of an empirically embodied willing 
as noble or magnificent and still more so in the valuation of an object 
as clean or sacred. In the aesthetic judgment proper, the joy that is 
embodied as beauty in the object completely loses its naked subjecti- 
vity. We have here in fact the least mystical and the most self-forgetful 
mode of embodiment of subjectivity. In the judgment of an object as 
sacred, the spiritual value retains a raw subjective character though 
mystically referred as a character to the object. In the judgment of 
empirically embodied act of willing as noble or splendid, not only the 
value but also the substrate of it has an clement of subjectivity. In 
moral judgment proper, the substrate of value has only bare being as 
its objectivity and the value itself is felt as freedom or subjectivity 
and not objective being at all. 

34. Valuation means aesthetic valuation which though not 
judgment may still be regarded as information and as such the least 
removed from logical judgment which is no valuation. On the other 
side, the consciousness of willing being right or wrong in the willing 


298 THE CONCEPT OF VALUE 


itself is no valuation and the moral valuation of a finished willing as 
good may be taken to be just on this side of purely subjective willing, 
Valuation then in its different forms may be conceived to be a process 
intermediate between knowing and willing. 


STUDIES IN KANT 


CHAPTER I 
IDEA OF TRANSCENDENTAL PHILOSOPHY 


1. Kant’s critical philosophy is a form of transcendental philo- 
sophy, and is avowedly only the first sketch or ‘architectonic plan’ of it. 
The ‘transcendental’ may be taken provisionally to mean what we are 
certain about as not objective. By ‘object’ is meant a content that is 
other than the consciousness of it. The transcendental then would be 
a content that is not distinct from the consciousness of it. One may 
be conscious of a content as simply distinct or as distinct from the 
consciousness of it or as not distinct from the consciousness of it. 
Instances of the last would be negation as the content of disbelief and 
the self as the content of self-consciousness, variously called conscious- 
ness, pure being, pure act or freedom. To Kant, the transcendental 
is the self as conscious act or freedom. He does not conceive it as 
quiescent consciousness or undifferenced being like the Vediantist, 
and he vigorously denies intuition of the self. The self is to him an 
active consciousness or conscious act, whether as knowing or as will- 
ing. The primitive act is not unconscious, as it is conceived by Fichte, 
but conscious freedom in willing and conscious apperception in know- 
ing. The thinking act in knowing is to him not only conscious in 
reflection but conscious also as constructive of the object. He does 
not also admit a primitive act in the Fchtean fashion as the common 
prius of knowing and willing. Knowing and willing are to him entirely 
different acts, and although each implies thinking, it implies it in 
different ways, and in any case thinking is not to him an act that 1s 
fact by itself prior to knowing and willing. Willing as free is the reall- 
sing of thinking, practical assertion of reason; while knowing or the 
theoretic assertion of reason is thinking not as realising itself but as 
dealing with reality as given in intuition. Willing is real as realising, 
while knowing is only true and not real by itself, being real or existent 
only so far as its thinking form is realised in willing. Knowing is not 
willing but fits in with willing, being dependent on willing for its ex- 
istence and not for its truth. Speculative thoughts which as lacking 
intuition do not amount to knowledge may indeed be turned into cer- 
tainties in being realised in willing but certainty is not truth. (“Pri- 
macy of practical reason in its union with speculative reason’) One 
of these thoughts, however, is the thought of the self itself, which is 


302 STUDIES IN KANT 


turned in moral willing not merely into certainty or faith but into 
knowledge. The self then would appear to be at once reality and 
truth. Still it is neither as real nor as true that the self is taken as 
formative of the object known. It is formative only as the thinking 
form or the purely logical unity of the object. All the transcendental 
constants of knowledge are the possibility of object and this possibility 
is only the form of truth and not a truth that is known. This form of 
truth is indeed real as the thinking act involved in willing, but it is not 
therefore as real or realising or willing that it is said to determine the 
object that is known. Thus Kant’s theory of knowledge is neither 
voluntarism nor intuitionism of the Vedantic type. To the former, will- 
ing or realising which may be called the reality of the subject is cons- 
titutive of the object known, and to the latter, it is the self as truth 
that is so constitutive. To Kant, the subject as constitutive of the 
object known is only the form of truth and is conceived neither as an 
existent nor as a truth. 


2. Transcendental or critical reflection may be supposed to 
arise through the necessity of adjusting two different kinds of certitude 
-—practical and theoretic. We have in moral willing a certitude about 
the reality of the self, and we have in our theoretic consciousness a 
certitude about the existence of the object. The former is faith, the 
self as freedom being one of the postulates of moral consciousness. 
There is a difference, however, between freedom and the other two 
postulates, freedom being an immediate implicate of the consciousness 
of the moral law. The belief in freedom accordingly is called cogni- 
tion* and not merely faith, cognition of the practical and not of 
the theoretical kind. Knowledge then to Kant need not be theoreti- 
cal knowledge and need not imply intuition : it is only theoretical or 
objective knowledge that has intuition as a necessary factor. Both 
practical knowledge and theoretical knowledge imply thinking, the 
former being thinking in categories and the latter thinking under the 
categories’. In neither form is belief induced through thinking. 
In theoretic knowledge of the object belief comes through the intui- 
tion or the sense-givenness or blind pressure of the thing-in-itself, the 
matter that is brought under the categories. In practical knowledge 
of the self, there is the thinking of the self as cause, as in the category 
of causality, but the belief in the self is through the willing or the 
realising of the thought. Willing is free as thinking of itself as cause 

* Critique of Practical Reason p. 200 (Tr. Abbott). 


» Critique of Pure Reason (Tr. Maxmiiller) p. 324, and Critique of Practical 
Reason (Abbott), p. 233. 


IDEA IN TRANSCENDENTAL PHILOSOPHY 303 


and realising the thinking. Free willing is known as real in the willing 
itself, not in introspection; known therefore not as an object but only 
as not empty concept, as form to which ‘object belongs’, thowgh what 
the object is is not understood. In theoretic knowledge of the object 
too, there is the thinking of the object as causally constituted and 
related, which is taken to be fact because the thought is found to 
apply to sense-experience. There is the common thought of causa- 
lity and the practical cognition is of the self as not object. The 
cognition of the self as free in moral willing has reference to sensibility 
as what “affects but does not determine” the will and also as that 
on which a rational system is to be imposed. Free will is determined 
by reason in conscious rejection of sensibility; and to realise the 
rational idea or the idea of the good is to have faith in the sensible 
world being changed in response to it. To will or freely cause is 
in fact to think and expect a causal change in the world, and the ex- 
pectation is at least partially fulfilled. Thus there is a fitting of free 
causality with objective causality, a meeting of practical cognition of 
the self and theoretic cognition of the object in the thought of causa- 
lity. It is difficult however to understand how a change in the 
object is caused at once by another object and by the self, and thus 
arises the necessity of adjusting the two kinds of cognition. The 
adjustment is effected by the view—to be explained presently—of the 
known object as only phenomenal. To critical reflection that is roused 
by the meeting of practical cognition with theoretical, the object 
becomes suspect in its determination or form, though—as given—its 
reality in point of matter is undeniable. This brings in the problem 
of transcendental analysis of the object into matter and form, matter 
that is undeniably given and form that is indistinguishable from the 
self. 

3. That critical reflection is roused through the practical cons- 
ciousness may not be readily admitted. It is ordinarily assumed that 
the critique of knowledge is an independent enquiry and that it re- 
fers to willing only at the end when it takes the Ideas of the Reason 
to derive their reality from the moral consciousness. Many passages 
in the Practical critque however, and especially the elaborate discus- 
sions of the relation of freedom and necessity suggest that the relation 
between the theoretic and the practical reason is much more inti- 
mate. The entire conception of apriori thinking as a factor of know- 
ledge appears to be connected with the moral apprehension of free 
causality. All the transcendental constants of knowledge are com- 
prised in the category of causality. The last category—nedessity—is 


304 STUDIES IN KANT 


but causality on a reflective level, and necessity not only comprises 
all the other categories but is also an anticipation of the forms of 


sense—time and space. Now this causality in the known object js 


intelligible only in reference to free causality as practically cognised, 
That the object or knowledge of the object is constituted by the self- 
functions would not be an assertory proposition at all, unless the 
functions were believed to be real and not mere Jogical entities, If, 
as Kant says, the self is not theoretically known as real, the entire 
conclusion of the theoretic critique that the self constructs the known 
object would be but a metaphor of speech and no assertion meant for 
acceptance. 

4. In fact, the very problem of the first critique—how know- 
ledge and object of knowledge are possible—would be gratuitous and 
almost meaningless unless the object were already suspect in the light 
of a certitude higher than that about the object, and that certitude 
can only be a spiritual certitude which in Kant amounts to the certi- 
tude of the moral consciousness. The idea of the phenomenality of 
the object must have already been suggested from the practical side 
to start the enquiry—if certain contents that are claimed to be known 
as objects are really so known and if what is known as object is known 
as noumenal. The standard of reality can only be suggested by the 
apprehension of the self in the subjective or spiritual attitude. It 
might be supposed that the distinction of phenomenon and noumenon 
is suggested by our objective apprehension of appearance and illusion. 
But that only implies a distinction within the object between the ment- 
al and the external, the mere appearance of the external object being 
somehow conditioned by the mental object. The suspicion that the 
mental object is itself phenomenal would never emerge so long as 
one knows in the objective attitude. By far the most important pro- 
nouncement of Kant is that about the transcendental ideality of time or 
the mental world, implying a distinction between self and mind. It is 
doubtful whether this is really proved in the Transcendental Aesthetic 

alone without the assumption of or faith in a real self that is utterly 


unobjective. 
5. That brings up the question: in what sense is the object 


taken to be phenomenal? Phenomenon has to be understood from the 
standpoints of all the three critiques, from the practical, theoretic and 
aesthetic points of view. In the first critique, the objective is taken 
as phenomenal because its forms, space and time, are taken to be not 
objects, not given in experience but apriori as supplied by the self. 
They are taken to be, if not the self, at least indistinguishable from 


\DEA OF TRANSCENDENTAL PHILOSOPHY 305 


the self. Causality including other relations constitutive of the object 
is understood as the thinking or apperceiving act of the self, but the 
forms of time and space are taken as the receptivity of the self and not 
its act. As constitutive of the object, the self is logical form. This 
form is real as the implicate of the act of freedom and is itself ac- 
cordingly called the act of thinking, apperceiving or understanding. 
The knowing self being thus an act, what is its receptivity? If the 
act has to be understood to be real as free will, the facthood of the 
receptivity—of time and space—has to be understood also from the 
practical standpoint. Moral willing involves the certitude that free 
causality is being realised in the sensible world. The certitude has 
two forms—that free causality is being realised in internal sense as a 
temporal or mental series and in external sense as causality in the 
spatio-temporal world. The first certitude is that free choice will be 
expressed as sensible life ie., a necessary chain of mental appearances’ 
and the second is fulfilled in its objective as an objective rational sys- 
tem or nature’. The former is time and the latter space (-time) 
to practical consciousness. Thus we may understand time and space 
or the pure receptivities as the expectations involved in the act of 
freedom, as not acts of the self but as their fulfilment in knowable ob- 
jectivity. Willing involves thinking of itself as ‘successful’ or objec- 
tively realised, realised as time and space, as mind and the world. If 
freedom could be known in intellectual intuition, as it is not known, 
it would be known to put forth time and space. As a matter of fact 
we only know freedom practically and know time and space prac- 
tically as what must be and not as what is. Freedom is known in moral 
willing as not the object, not in time and space. To know the real 
self to be not in time and space and to know time and space to be not 
fact but only necessary is to know the object as less real than the self. 
Thus we practically know the object to be an emanation of the self 
as freedom. 

6. From the practical standpoint then, the object is phenomenon 
in the sense of being an emanation of the self. The temporal world or the 
mind is not theoretically known as distinct from the self which how- 
ever is practically known to transcend it. Thus the mind is known 
to be a phenomenon of the self. But the spatio-temporal world is 
theoretically known as distinct from the self as thinking and is not 
merely mental or mere idea of the self. How it can be an emanation 
of the self and yet not an idea is not theoretically understood and 

*“CPrR—pp. 192-3. 
*Ibid.—p. 161. 
20 


306 STUDIES IN KANT 


hence it is taken to imply an unthinkable given element and to be 
indistinguishable from an unthinkable but believed—i.e., an unknow- 
able reality or thing-in-itself. Yet it does not itself appear indefinite: 
it appears as definitely known. This definite appearance has to feel- 
ing or imagination an intrinsic value and is thus appreciated to be 
self-subsistent. The object thus appears as a contradiction—an ema- 
nation of the self and yet not mere idea, unthinkably real and yet 
having the definiteness of the idea; and the contradiction is resolved 
in aesthetic consciousness into a self-subsistent value. Though prac- 
tically indistinguishable from the self as real and theoretically indis- 
tinguishable from an unknown reality, the object is not known as real 
nor therefore known as unreal, being aesthetically apprehended as a 
self-subsistent emanation from reality. Mind however,—the merely 
temporal object is not apprehended in aesthetic consciousness. 

7. In transcendental reflection then the free self alone is known 
to be real and the object is known to be phenomenal. This may be 
regarded as the simple teaching of Kant’s transcendental philosophy. 


CHAPTER II 
MIND AS PHENOMENON 


8. Mental facts unlike external facts which are spatio-temporal 
are in time only. What is in time is change. A change in the external 
world is perceived or understood as a persisting spatial object in 
change. Mental fact has to be taken as a change but it cannot be 
objectively known to be in a persistent. The persistent can be either 
a spatial object or the self. The mind is not spatial and the self is 
not objectively known. A change in a spatial object is as real as the 
object, the reality of the object being primarily known through the 
matter of sensation being given to space. About mental fact as 
change then, which is not objectively known to be in a persistent, the 
question arises for the first time how it is fact, though that it is fact 
of some kind cannot be doubted. The question whether the spatial 
object is real or phenomenal does not arise in the first instance. It 
arises only after the mental fact is known to be phenomenal. Hence 
though in the order of exposition in the Transcendental Aesthetic, the 
phenomenality of space is presented before that of time, in the order 
of truth the former is dependent on the latter. 

9. The question, in what sense the mental is to be regarded as 
fact is suggested by its contrast, as explained, with external fact. As 
a change for which no persistent is known and yet of which the fact- 
hood is undeniable, the mental appears as a problem, The solution 
that it is a phenomenal fact and that it is a phenomenon of the self 
could not have been reached on objective grounds. It is, as was 
suggested in the previous chapter, because we practically know the 
self as free causality with a negative and positive reference to a life 
of sense, know that the self is free only as refusing to be determined 
by the temporal and yet as having its causality realised in the tem- 
poral that the mental which is the purely temporal is understood as 
the phenomenon of the free or the noumenal self. The proof of the 
phenomenality of time in the Transcendental Aesthetic on the ground 
of time being an apriori notion must be taken as already assuming 
the reality of the free self, all apriori theoretic function being under- 
stood as emanating from free causality. 

10. If the apriority of space and time proved the pheno- 
menality of the external and mental object, why should the former 


308 STUDIES IN KANT 


be taken as phenomenon of an unknowable reality and the latter as 
phenomenon of the self as real? Both the objects are presented: we 
do not know object except as affecting us, though we may conceive 
an infinite spirit knowing (and creating) object entirely by think. 
ing. Now the mental object unlike the external object is not pre- 
sented through sensation: it is the self that affects itself in its form 
of receptivity called time." Why the self has the forms of re- 
ceptivity is to our theoretic knowledge an ultimate fact and no 
necessity. The question how the self ‘affects the mind’ cannot be 
answered; we are only assured that it does. Apparently this is not 
theoretic assurance. 


11. That we are affected in our external sense may be ad- 
mitted to be theoretically known in our internal sense. But that we 
are affected in our internal sense cannot be said to be known in the 
internal sense again. We can only be apperceivingly aware or aware 
in the subjective attitude that we do not know the self as object, i.e., 
as mind by mere apperception. Such subjective awareness of our 
inner sensibility in the negative way is apparently involved in the 
practical cognition of ourselves as free cause. 

12. There is a good deal of obscurity in Kant’s conception of 
the internal sense, and the exposition of it presented here is to a cer- 
tain extent tentative. The external sense is said to be affected by the 
object, the form of the sense being space and the matter the sensa- 
tions. If the object affects, it is not as spatial but as given, 1e., as 
the unknown reality phenomenalised in space. The internal sense is 
also affected by its object, viz., a mental object, not by the object so 
far as it is temporal (for time is the form of the sense) but by the 
real self phenomenalised in time as mental. The mental object has 
a form and a matter, the form being time, the form of the internal 
sense or the internal sense itself, but what is the matter? ‘The re- 
presentations of the external senses’-—the percepts as we may call them, 
rather than the perceived things—are the matter of the internal sense.” 
In the case of the external object, the matter (i.e., sensation) is only 

understood in reference to the form (i.e., space) as what fills 
space, although space is not understood in reference to the matter, 
being imaginable as empty. Sensation means what is involved in 
space, this involution of content being apprehended in the internal 

* ‘Tf the faculty of self-consciousness is to seek for i.¢., to apprehend what lies 


in the mird, it must affect the mind and can thus only produce an intuition of 
itself’ —Critique of Pure Reason (Tr. Max. Miiller)—p. 733. - 


* Critique of Pure Reason (Tr. Max Miiller)—p. 732. 


MIND AS PHENOMENON 309 


sense. In the case of the internal or mental object, the matter— 
spatial percept—is similarly understood only as the filling of ‘time, as 
involved in time. How is this involution apprehended? Not by the 
internal sense but by apperception. The reference of the image to 
the percept may be taken as the type of involution here. This refer- 
ence is not itself presented: there is awareness of it only in the sub- 
jective attitude, in the form of ‘I refer’. This awareness or apper- 
ception is only self-feeling, not knowledge of the self." The matter of 
the internal sense is thus the spatial percept as floated in time, as 
involved in time, as referred to in an image. The mental object is the 
image which is not so much in time as time itself, time figured as 
variously as the image varies. So the external object is not so much 
in space as a determination of space. The varying determinations of 
space or space-figures are through timing, through the imagination of 
possible motion in space. Similarly the varying time-figures—each 
image being a time-figure—are through the working of apperception 
or understanding in time, of the self or the mind,” this working 
being called the transcendental synthesis of the imagination or figura- 
tive synthesis. 

13. The mental is thus understood by Kant to be time as 
figured by the self and as involving or engulfing percepts, to be image 
constructed by the self in time (as pure intuition) and referring to 
spatial percepts. We have spoken of the work of the self on the in- 
ternal sense in connection with knowing. We may now generalise it 
and understand the work of the self on the internal sense as willing 
or feeling also after the analogy of the schematic imagination in 
knowledge. The internal sense as thus figured is the empirical mind. 


The images belong to the internal sense, while the feelings of pleasure 
and pain and the will do not belong to it except as bound up with 


the images and as thus representing the work of the self on time. The 
mind then will mean the images as figured—cognitively, conatively 
and affectively—by the self. A mental fact is thus an image as form- 
ed out of time by the self and as informed by the self. An image, 
we said, is not so much in time as time itself as figured, so that that 
mental facts are in a series is only a verbal proposition while that 
external facts are in time is a synthetic proposition. If mental facts 
being in time be taken as implied by the very concept of the mental, 


*Prolegomena (Tr. Mahaffy & Bernard)—p. 97, ft.n. 
» Critique of Pure Reason i Max Miiller)—p. 758-9—where the internal 
sense is distinguished from the faculty of apperception, the mind from the self, 


Critique of Pure Reason (Tr. Max Miiller)—p. 732. 


310 STUDIES IN KANT 


Kant’s view even of the (empirical) mind would be very different 
from the Humian view of the mind as a mere series of mental states, 
To Kant, mind would be time itself as a unity, as a permanent or 
duration, not mere succession, and so in sundry passages he speaks 
of mind and its modifications. Only this permanent mind cannot be 
pictured: it is on the one hand presented with the self-feeling and on 
the other symbolised by the spatial world (as gathered up in body— 
a point which Kant did not bring out), time being symbolised by 
space. The symbolism is necessary and adequate because the body 
felt as referring to (or in specific response to) the external world is 
the content of the mind as self-feeling. 

14. The time-relation of mental facts (images) though not a 
succession within a spatial permanent and therefore not a causal suc- 
cession is yet an objective fact and not a merely imagined content or 
image. The paradox requires to be explained. Empirical Psychology 
is taken by Kant as a descriptive but not an explanatory science. ‘It’ 
(Empirical Psychology) ‘can never... be anything more than a histo- 
rical and as such, as far as possible, systematic natural doctrine of 
the internal sense i.e., a natural description of the soul but not a 
science of the soul...’.* It cannot be a science because, as pointed 
out in this connection, ‘mathematics is inapplicable to the phenomena 
of the internal sense’. These may no doubt be represented in time 
symbolised as a line, but the inapplicability of mathematics means 
really inapplicability of causality which is known only in the spatio- 
temporal world. The applicability of mathematics makes science 
proper only because such applicability means precision of causal 
explanation. 

15. This is brought out in another way. The object of the 
internal sense, unlike that of the external sense, has no ‘quantity as 
substance’ ‘consisting of parts outside one another’. Not that it has 
no intensive quantity or degree but its ‘increase or decrease is pos- 
sible, notwithstanding the principle of the permanence of subs- 
tance’. The intensity of an external object increases or decreases, 
only when substantial units are added to it or taken away from it. 
But when a mental state decreases in intensity, we do not know of 
its losing any parts or substantial units so that a total annihilation of 
a conscious fact unlike that of a material fact is intelligible. This is 
practically saying that the law of conservation of matter or energy 
is inapplicable to the mind; and it amounts to the statement that the 
category of causality is inapplicable to mental phenomena. 


* Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Science (Tr. Belfort Bax)—p. 141. 


MIND AS PHENOMENON 31] 


16. Succession, says Kant in connection with the second Anas 
logy of experience, is objective only as causal. Now if, as shown, the 
succession of mental states is not causal, must it be taken as only sub- 
jective? Must we say only that we are aware of one mental state 
after we are aware of another and not that one mental state is after 
the other? No: the succession of mental states is to Kant as much 
a fact as the succession of external events, the same time being the 
form of the mental object and of the external or spatio-temporal 
object bound in causality. How is this possible? We may imagine— 
for I am not aware of any actual passage of Kant in support—that it 
is because each mental state is, as pointed out, necessarily and ade- 
quately symbolisable by an external situation (as gathered up into a 
felt bodily state), is non-distinct from it (though it is distinct from 
the mental state). The time-relation of two mental states is then the 
time-relation of the external situations with which they are bound up, 
and it is only thus that it is objective fact without being causal. 

17. It may be asked: if there is no causal relation among men- 
tal facts, why does Kant hold in connection with freedom and neces- 
sity that the self as noumenal is free and as phenomenal i.e., as men- 
tal is causally determined? The answer is that causality within men- 
tal phenomena is not theoretically or objectively knowable, being only 
a practical expectation. Moral or free willing involves the belief that 
it is being realised in the empirical world—mental and spatial. The 
belief is only partially realised theoretically: we may see the effect in 
the objective without being able to see the modus operandi, to under- 
stand how the effect so far as it is seen is brought about, how e.g., an 
inclination is weakened and rendered impotent on the occasion of 
moral willing by the free act or by some mental antecedent, though 
neither alternative is excluded, and an adjustment of the two causali- 
ties is conceivable. The belief in the operation of causality within 
the mind is only practical, being bound up with the practical belief 
in or knowledge of free causality. 

18. The external world as phenomenal is felt, heuristically 
imagined or reflectively judged to be self-subsistent. The mental 
world cannot be similarly imagined to be self-subsistent. It may be 
suggested that the self-feeling in the mind can be symbolised by the 
external world imagined to be teleological i.e., to be a self-subsistent 
mind (not self). The mental world would then only be symbolised, 
not judged, as self-subsistent phenomenon. 


CHAPTER III 
SENSE AND SENSATION 


19. Kant speaks of ‘sense’ not only in connection with knowing 
but also in connection with willing and feeling. Inclination, for ex- 
ample, and pleasure and pain are taken as belonging to sense, though 
they are not like sensation matter of knowledge. Sense generally is 
thus understood in a spiritual or transcendental reference rather than 
in a psychological or physiological connection. ‘Sense’ is taken by 
Kant as a mode of the faculty of representation. It is defined as ‘the 
faculty of receiving representations according to the manner in which 
we are affected by objects’. The primary dualism apparently is of the 
thinking act and the faculty of representation, sense being the latter 
with the further attribute of being ‘affected’. 

20. The self is, to Kant, essentially the conscious thinking act 
which has three incommensurable ‘interests’ or directions—theoretic 
practical and aesthetic. We have representation in each of these 
directions of thinking. Representation is received in knowing, put 
forth in willing and entertained in feeling. In none of these is re- 
presentation a mere floating image, the self having certitude of some 
kind about its content. Representation is apparently nothing to Kant 
apart from the thinking act, though distinct from it; and the think- 
ing act means to him a necessary act or an act with immanent cer- 
titude about its content. Pure thought, to him, has no content distinct 
from it: the so-called logical entity is either not purely logical or is no 
content of thinking but the thinking act itself. The first content of 
thinking is representation. 

Z|. To confine to representation as the content of cognitive 
thinking. Here the representation is received or is given. As given 
it is intuition and the receiving of it is intuiting. There is no reflec- 
tive consciousness of intuiting as distinct from the intuited and so 
somehow representation is at once the object and has the object given 
to it. Thinking, however, is reflectively distinguished from repre- 
sentation, though in knowing it is not distinguished from the repre- 
senting. Thinking as undistinguished from representing is Kant’s pure 
productive imagination. Representation as distinguished from think- 
ing in reflective knowledge is the image, not floating image but image 
of the believed or existent object which is not other than the object. 


SENSE AND SENSATION 313 


It is at once imaging and image of the existent and comprises mem- 
ory, apprehension (internal perception of external perceptien) and 
perception (external perception of external object). The faculty 
may be called reproductive imagination and its function is to Kant as 
much apriori as the productive function, being an anticipation of the 
given. 

22. Representation in knowing is then imagination of the ex- 
istent and the faculty may be taken as the mind itself as distinct from 
the self. Thinking as undistinguished from representing—pure pro- 
ductive imagination is as much the self as the mind. How in it the 
self retains the thinking activity and how the mind as image of the 
existent is distinct from the self and is given to it is what we do not 
know. To Kant, the self is somehow the mind and the mind is some- 
how not the self—a mystery that can be only exhibited in transcen- 
dental reflection but cannot be understood. It is probably the same 
mystery as the practical self being somehow at once free and not- 
free, free as good willing and unfree as the ‘intelligible character’ 
behind wrong willing, free as act and unfree as being. 

23. The mind as the faculty of representation is sensibility wher 
the representation emerges through the self being affected by the 
object. A ‘pure’ mind is conceivable in which the image of the ex- 
istent emerges to the self without an affection of the self; but as a 
matter of fact an image of the existent arises in us human _ beings 
through affection or in other words, we have sense-intuition only. How 
are we conscious of the affection? We are conscious not merely of 
receiving i.e., not thinking but also of the thinking act being arrested, 
of a positive limitation of thinking or, more accurately, of productive 
imagining. We may conceive a clairvoyance of the object, a veridical 
image of the existent floating up before the mind as a spontaneous 
fulfilment and not as a limitation of our productive imagining. Actually, 
however, we receive such an image as a limitation i.c., through an 
affection. The veridical image comes in memory, apprehension and 
perception as a check to our free imagination. 

24. Sensation is to transcendental reflection the conscious 
limit to free imagination. It is defined by Kant as ‘the effect produced 
by an object upon the faculty of representation, so far as we are 
affected by it’. If the image of the existent emerges—as it always 
does as a matter of fact—through an affection of the self ic., as a 
limitation of the free imagining act, it is a sensible or empirical represen- 
tation. To be aware of a limitation of free imagining ‘is to be 
aware of something positive and not of a mere privation, aware of 


314 STUDIES IN KANT 


something other than the free act—viz., a given object—as positively 
limiting the act and as thus conditioning the emergence of the 
conscious representation of the object. This conditioning is under- 
stood as the causality of the object towards the mind. The representa- 
tion—call it the percept here—is an event that emerges in the mind 
as the object is given. The percept is not other than the perceived 
object and cannot be said to be the effect of the object. It is in fact 
the mental object or event as reflecting the external object or as one 
with it. But the emergence of the event is not an event or representa- 
tion. Not the event but the conscious emergence of it is the effect 
of the object and this emergence, as meaning a conscious arrest or 
limitation of the free imagining act, is sensation. 

25. Sensation is not a representation but the emergence of it 
(as percept) on the one hand and the arrest of free imagining on the 
other. The causality of the object in respect of sensation is a condi- 
tioning, though it does not mean temporal succession. The causality 
of the phenomenal object in respect of the sensation which is not 
an object at all is not phenomenal or temporal causality. It is like 
the causality of the self in respect of a phenomenal event or the 
problematic conditioning of a phenomenal causal sequence by a 
noumenal ground. The emergence of a percept as mental event is 
not itself an event, nor is it a mere abstraction, being a state or 
affection of the self that is timelessly or transcendentally real, as real 
as the free imagining act of which it is limitation. 

26. It may be asked how the object which to Kant is only a 
phenomenon constructed by the self can be said to cause the affection 
of the self called the sensation. The objection implies a misconcep- 
tion about the status of the phenomenal object. Representation 
received or given is intuition and it is empirical intuition as received 
or given through sensation. “The undefined object of . . . an 
empirical intuition is called phenomenon’. Now, consciousness of 
sensation as an affection of the self is consciousness of a positive 
something that affects i.e., of a given that is transcendentally real. 
The phenomenal object is this given real as represented in the mind. 
The representation or percept or perceived object is not a mere idea 
other than this given real or thing-in-itself. The mental view of the 
thing-in-itself is the thing-in-itself as viewed. Not falsely viewed, 
for there is question of falsity only where the truth is knowable. The 
consciousness of the thing-in-itself is indeed a certitude involved in 
the certitude of the self being affected, but it is certitude only about 
the affecting positive somewhat and is not knowledge. It is certitude 


SENSE AND SENSATION 315 


involved in phenomenal knowledge and running beyond it. The 
certitude is not falsified in phenomenal knowledge, for it is reached 
only in the latter and never in isolation from it. We may say that 
the phenomenal object is the thing-in-itself as symbolised and given 
only in the symbolism. Thus to say that the phenomenal object 
causes the affection of the self is to say that the thing-in-itself causes it. 

27. The sensation is not a mental event in time. Nor is it a 
quality of the spatial object. ‘Colours’ says Kant, ‘are not qualities 
of a body, though inherent in its intuition . . . . but are modifica- 
tions only of the sense of sight as . . . . affected by light’. In ‘the 
table is red’, the table as perceived is so much occupied space and 
this space is not red, even as the image of red is not red. The so- 
called quality of the phenomenal object is to transcendental reflection 
only the filling or content of the space occupied by the object. 

28. Apparently to Kant, the relation of thing and quality has 
no application to objective existence. Thing is understood as a simple 
existent unity with a manifold of qualities and not as a whole of the 
qualities. How a simple can have a manifold in it is objectively 
unintelligible and is understood only in the case of the self as the 
subject of conscious states. Taking ‘quality’ in the proper sense as 
what the thing is and what yet is not the thing, we understand (though 
we do not know) the relation of thing and quality literally only in the 
case of the subject; and in the case of the object, we should take it 
merely as though it subsisted in it. The object or—what is the same 
{hing—the space that is the object or is occupied by it has the apparent 
quality as its content or filling—as matter within it much in the sense 
in which the mirror has the image within it—and not as its real deter- 
mination which quality proper should be. 

29. The sensation then is neither mental object nor external 
object (as it would be, if it were quality) but what is mystically 
‘involved’ in the external object or occupied space. Not that it is 
unreal like the image ‘involved’ in the mirror, but it is real not as 
object but as an affection of the subject and is known as such in the 
emergence of the percept as a mental event. The content of the 
" external object, the emergence of the (percept as) mental object and 
the affection of the subject are one and the same real fact, viz., 
sensation, The content of the external object is (the degree of) its 
affecting causality; the consciousness of the affection of the self is 
the consciousness of the affecting causality of the object; and it is 
in the reflective consciousness of affection that the external object is 
known as the emergent mental ohject—the percept. 


316 STUDIES IN KANT 


30. The external object is ‘involved’ in the percept as sensa- 
tion is involved in the external object or occupied space. The external 
object is analysed into space as the form and sensation as the matter 
given by the thing-in-itself. The corresponding internal object—the 
percept—is similarly analysed into time as the form and the spatial 
matter which is paradoxically taken by Kant to be given by the self. 
The material for the internal sense to him is the external object which 
fills time as its content as sensation fills space as its content. The 
percept occupies time (i.e., emerges in time) as the perceived object 
occupies space; and the perceived object is the matter or content of 
the percept, internal sense or time as the sensation is of the perceived 
object. 

31. How to understand however that the spatial object is matter 
given to internal sense by the self, as the sensation is matter given to 
external sense by the thing-in-itself? The affection of the self as 
internal sense is the spatial object and the cause of the affection is 
taken to be the self. It is only as the spatial object is reflectively 
known by the self that the mental object —percept —emerges in the 
mind. . To reflectively know the object is to judge the object, to 
categorise it, or in other words to know it as externally and internally 
related. It is only of the explicitly related object that we have a 
conscious mental representation. The percept emerges to conscious- 
ness as mental (and not merely as the perceived object) only in the 
context of a judgment where one is aware of the relation in the object 
as undistinguished from the relating activity of the subject. The 
mental as mental emerges only as the matter of a judgment. The 
relation explicitly constituting the matter is known here to be given 


to the self (as internal sense) not from without but by the self as 
judging or relating. Precisely then in the sense in which the thing- 


in-itself is the excitant of the external sense is the self the excitant 
of the internal sense. 


32. Sense to Kant is an apriori or transcendental receptivity, 
being the self itself (which is essentially active) as somehow passive. 


The forms of sense are just this apriori sense or receptivity. Sensa- 


tions are the affections of the sense by the thing-in-itself. Sense as 
the transcendental ground or potentiality of sensations is called the 
apriori form of the sensations. 


CHAPTER IV 


SPACE, TIME, AND CAUSALITY 


33. The analysis of known object into matter and form emer- 
ges in the transcendental consciousness only : matter and form are not 
empirical abstractions. The analysis is understood as self-evident : 
that the object has a given factor and an ungiven factor is taken by 
Kant as not requiring proof." That the ungiven factor is Space, Time 
and Causality has indeed to be appreciated and exhibited step by step, 
but it is not really inferred or argued out. The formal arguments that 
are presented to bring out the apriority of space, time etc. are more 
directions for transcendental reflection than logical demonstration. 
This reflection may be described as a sort of experimentation with the 
knowing activity, a subjective exercise that can be specifically regu- 
lated. Objective reasoning is only a seeing of objective connections 
and does not involve an explicit introspective exercise. Transcendental 
knowledge—epistemology, to take a form of it—is not reached by 
logical reasoning without this conscious introspective deepening. In 
fact,-reasoning is here one among other indications of the kind of sub- 
jective exercise that is demanded. The knowledge that we get through 
‘Such introspective exercise does not come after the exercise (as in 
the case of reasoning) but is an aspect of the exercise itself. So will- 
tng is in itself knowledge of the willing or the willed content. Like the 
knowledge of willing epistemological knowledge is self-evident without 
being intuitive. 

34. The external world under transcendental reflection i.e., in 
such introspective exercise with the knowing of it along the line of 
logical reasoning gets stratified into sensed matter and the forms of 
Space, Time and Causality. It is stratification rather than analysis into 
co-ordinate factors. The sensed matter is apprehended as involved in 
space, the spatial matter as involved in time and this spatis-temporal 
matter as further involved in causality. Causality as known fact implies 
change, change as known fact implies the spatial object in change and 
Spatial object as fact implies a given matter. The matter at every 
stage is known only as the filling of its form : whether apart from the 
form, it is anything is not known though it cannot be denied. The 
form however is understood everywhere as what can be empty, empty 


*CPR—p. 16. 


318 STUDIES IN KANT 


form being not fact but a possibility i.e., transcendentally Known. We 
have an anoétic consciousness of matter apart from space (manifold 
of intuition’), of spatial object not in time and of non-causal suc- 
cession of spatial objects. A spatial object may not be explicitly 
known to be in time, but we may have explicit consciousness of such 
object as not in time’—a sort of aesthetic consciousness which does not 
amount to knowledge. So a succession of spatial events may not be 
known as causal but there may be consciousness of their succession‘ 
as non-causal which is not knowledge of it as fact. The spaceless mani- 
fold of sense, the timeless spatial object and non-causal succession 
are not known as fact, though apparently they may be content of a 
non-theoretic consciousness. Empty form, however, is transcendentally 
known as a possibility. Empty space can be imagined as the possi- 
bility of sensed matter, empty time can be symbolised as the possibility 
of spatial object, and empty causality can be schematised as the pos- 
sibility of an objective succession. The three empty forms are imagined 
in three stages. Empty space is picturable ie., imaginable by itself. 
Empty time is only vicariously imagined or symbolised, being not 
picturable but representable (necessarily and completely) by the 
analogy of space; while empty causality is not only not picturable but 
not even symbolisable by any space-picture, being only sketched out 
or schematised by a half-formed time-figure or a direction of timing. 
None of these are known as facts but are not therefore chimeras; they 
are imagined and imagination here is knowledge of an objective possibi- 
lity. This possibility is a kind of subsistent entity which to Kant is. 
distinguished from mere chimera by being identified with a transcen- 
dentally evident subjective function. Empty space is the receptive 
function of the self called the external sense, empty time the receptive 
function called the internal sense, and empty causality the active func- 
tion called thinking. All these functions are evident to transcendental 
or critical reflection. 

35. The external object as being perceived is imagined, viewed 


*The manifold is known as implied in perception, but whether it is psycholo- 
gically given prior to perception is not denied by Kant. 


» What is not known to be in time may yet be fact but sof what is known 
not in time. A caacr spatial object is contemplated in an aesthetic intuition 
without being claimed to be fact.” It can however be known as implied by time, 


in the knowledge of change. 


* Whatever succession is believed to be objective fact is explicitly or impli- 
citly believed to be causal. Even causal sequence is causal, the terms being 
members of a pervasive causal context. It is only what is taken as merely causal 
sequence between the terms taken by themselves that we are aware of as not 
objective fact. This will be discussed in the next chapter. 


SPACE, TIME, AND CAUSALITY 319 


through the internal sense [‘apprehended*], such viewing from 
within being transcendental relatively to the positive (or forward) per- 
ception. As thus viewed, the object shows itself as space which might 
be empty as involving or engulfing sensed matter. Space, in other words, 
detaches itself from the spatial object and becomes a distinguishable 
content of the apprehension, which may be called the possibility of 
spatial objects. This subsistent form of space — which may be now 
called an image or mental object —is next viewed from within i.e., 
sought to be thought as it is being imagined, and presently it shows 
itself as time detached from the mental object, time that can be empty 
but is filled with the matter of the mental object, viz., the spatial object. 
This detached time as the content of thought appears as a reference to 
space, only as though it were space, as space in the making, as the 
tracing out of space. Time as such symbolic space is again viewed 
from within, i.e., sought to be apperceived as it is being constructed 
and thus itself appears as in the making, as the sketching out or figur- 
ing of a possible image. Picturing, symbolising and schematising are 
the three consecutive grades of imaginative viewing of the external 
object, of viewing it from within or transcendental reflection on it 
through which its forms space, time and causality get successively de- 
tached from it and show themselves as the subsistent possibilities of 
the object. The grades of imaginative viewing are respectively the view- 
ing of the object of the external sense from the level of the inner sense, 
of the object of internal senses from the level of thought and of the 
object of thought from the level of the apperception itself. 

36. Form in the wide sense as comprising space, time and 
Causality means qualitative unity or self-identity of the objective world, 
being just its known aspect or knownness. Space is this unity as pre- 
sented, time as imagined to be presented and causality as thought to be 
presented. Space is pictured as object, time symbolised as object and 
Causality schematised as object. Everywhere the form is taken 
as a single content, the world being understood as a_ unity 
and is contemplated as a detached subsistent. The detach- 
ment is transcendental and may be likened to aesthetic detach- 
ment. The object is in the first instance what is practically 
dealt with, intended for use. To the mind in the aesthetic, ima- 
ginative or contemplative attitude, the object floats up like an appear- 
ance and gets loosened from the practical context. Still the aesthetic 
attitude is objective; there is no suggestion of the appearance being 
in point of truth internal to the practical reality, being more essential 


*CPR—p. 98-99. 


320 STUDIES IN KANT 


than, or constitutive of this reality. In transcendental reflection, there 
is this suggestion: the form by being detached from the object contem- 
plated appears constitutive of the object. The detached form is under- 
stood in the first instance as standing by itself as empty, and then it is 
appreciated as having formed or constituted the object, contained or 
engulfed the matter. The formative form next appears as self-limiting 
and self-constructing and as thus self-repeating. 

37. To illustrate it in respect of space. The first grade of trans- 
cendental reflection is that in which space gets detached from the 
spatial object. The arguments for the apriority of space are really 
modes of this reflection on the spatial object, of viewing it from within, 
of imagining it as being perceived. The aim is not so much to prove 
the apriority of space as to some to see space as a detachable form, 
that form is apriori being taken to be self-evident. The five arguments 
point out the character of space as a detachable form paraphrased in 
different ways. The aspect of detachable space that first emerges is 
its conceivable emptiness, the ground relied on in the second argument. 
Emptiness is the negative aspect, and the corresponding positive aspect 
is what is brought out in the first argument, viz., space as having cons- 
tituted the object, space as the mutual externality of objects (including 
one’s body) to the internal sense, as a single all-comprehensive system 
of their positions, blown out in anticipation from the internal centre’. 
To be transcendentally aware of space as detached from objects is to 
be aware of its being their pervasive location and to organically feel 
oneself pervading them. To appreciate space as what can be empty 
i.€., a pure percept (intuition) is to appreciate it as a pure perceiving 
(form of intuition) or to feel oneself pervading out. Space as at once 
intuition and form of intuition (intuiting) appears as a living entity 
limiting or contracting itself into finite shapes, constructing or expand- 
ing itself also into finite sizes and thus perpetually reproducing itself. 
The argument about the oneness of space asks one to view space as 
having finite spaces emerging in itelf through self-limitation. Finite 
space is a shaped size. Shape rather than size should be taken to be 
meant by this argument as appearing through limitation, for there is 

‘no question yet of the spread of space out of which finite sizes are 
carved out, the limitation being thus a contraction of the one formless 
space rather than a division of one pervasive spread. In the argu- 
ment about infinity, the size-aspect is pointed out as emerging 


"An object is nothing without a perceivable position. To perceive an object 
in a position is to perceive—or (imaginatively) apprehend—its relativity to every 
other position including the position of the percipient’s body. It is to apprehend 
the entire system of positions as constituting the object. 


SPACE, TIME, AND CAUSALITY 321 


through expansion. ‘Infinity’ of space here means not a helplessly 
pervasive spread but “infinity in the progression of intuition”, every 
finite size presenting this infinite progression or construction through 
an infinite number of expansive spurts. 

38. Whether in the contraction or in the expansion, space is 
understood as reproducing itself, and thus each finite space-size may 
be said to be a repetition of every other, to be a type or paradigm 
of the whole of space. This character is brought out in the argument 
presented in the transcendental exposition of space. The typical or self- 
reproducing character of space which might be objectively viewed 
after Plato as the process of an Idea is understood in the subjective 
or transcendental way by Kant “as a form of the external sense in 
general”, as an external intuition “having its seat in the subject only” 
“anterior to the objects themselves.” The apodictic character of geo- 
metric propositions implies the assurance that the properties of any 
parts of space hold good of all space. Thus the arguments for the 
apriority of space amount to a seeing of space as a form in its varying 
aspects. 

39. As time is necessarily and adequately symbolizable by 
space, the arguments for the apriority of time are exactly parallel to 
the arguments for space and indicate similar modes of transcendental 
viewing of time as a form. What difference there is between the forms 
of space and time is intelligible as the difference in the mode of ima- 
gining empty space and empty time. Empty space, we said, is pictur- 
able while empty time is only symbolizable. The former is represented 
as possibility of spatial objects and is subjectively evident as the 
external sense itself (form of intuition) or as one big image (intuition). 
The latter is representable by actual spatial object as simply persis- 
tent or “continuant” and is evident as internal sense, felt duration or 
what may be called self-feeling. 

40, We have, for the sake of convenience, used the term ‘form’ 
to indicate not only space and time but also the categories as com- 
prised under the one heading, causality. Kant uses the term of space 
and time only, of the former literally and of the latter analogically or 
symbolically, restricting the term to such unity or self-identity of the 
object as is presented. Causality is also a mode of unity but is not 
presented. Of space and time, it is said that they are not only forms 
of intuition but also intuitions. As forms of intuition, they are indeed 
transcendentally felt as subjective, but as subjective receptivity and 
not as subjective activity. “The form of .... intuition may lie apriort 
in our faculty of representation, without being anything but the man- 

21 


322 STUDIES IN KANT 


ner in which a subject is affected” (C.P.R. p. 744). The manner 
of being affected is not even an implicit act of the subject.” It 
would in fact be taken only as unconscious capacity (a bodily func- 
tion—organic or internal and special or external sense) but for the 
fact that space and time are themselves conscious intuitions (images 
as we may call them directly or indirectly referring to experience). 
Causality is a ‘connection’ or ‘synthesis’ of presented objects (p. 744 
above) that is not presented or intuited, though the objective fact as 
we believe it necessarily implies it. This necessary implication is not 
inferred but is evident to transcendental reflection (on time) as a cons- 
cious act of the subject and not as a sense or receptivity or the man- 
ner of being affected. 

41. The forms of sense have sometimes been loosely character- 
ised as subjective acts. They are indeed apriori conditions of objec- 
tive knowledge and as such anticipations of experience. But the anti- 
Cipation is subjectively a feeling rather than an act. From the prac- 
tical standpoint they may be regarded as expectations of the fulfilment 
of moral willing and not as moral self-assertion. They would be evi- 
dent as practical assertion or as put forth by the will if, as was pointed 
out previously, we had intellectual intuition. As we have no such in- 
tuition, we have to take them as passive expectations of sensuous in- 
tuition. We may connect it with the Kantian statement that space 
and time are only known as the forms of human intuition : if we have 
to know, some form of intuition is necessary but that it should be 
Space or time i.e., in reference to sense-experience only is no neces- 
sity but an ultimate transcendental fact for us. Space and time are 
as a matter of fact constitutive of the object that we know, necessary 
only in this sense and not necessary in the sense in which category or 
apperception is necessary, i.e., as self-justifying like willing which is 
indubitably real to itself. Even apperceptive consciousness of the 
object— that we should know object at all—is not a certitude like that 
of willing. As we practically expect a knowing of the fulfilment of 
willing and as we therefore happen to know object, the categories are 
self-evidently necessary to knowledge of object. 

42. Causality is an unpresented act and as such no ‘form’ in 
the Kantian sense, although we may take it as ‘form’ in the wide sense 
of form of unity of the object. As Kant says” ‘the concept of 
connection includes, besides the concept of the manifold and the 


“Kant, admits implicit act, not in the sense of unconsciousness (for apper- 
ceptive act is to him self-evident) but only in the sense of faint consciousness 
connected with oe effect only and not with the act itself (C. P. R. p. 8). 


CPR—p. 745 


SPACE, TIME, AND CAUSALITY 323 


synthesis of it, the concept of the unity of the manifold also’. Syn- 
thesis is the act of relating, relation as a transition from one intuitable 
object to another. But the external world that we know is not merely 
a related plurality but is a standing unity. It is in this sense that 
causality can be called a form. 

43. As in the case of space and time, we may understand the 
form of causality as empty. Connection as empty is the form of unity, 
being variously called ‘qualitative unity’, ‘synthetical unity of the mani- 
fold’ and ‘objective unity of self-consciousness’. Apperceptive unity by 
itself is but ‘self-identity: ‘the principle of the necessary unity of ap- 
perception’, ‘says Kant* ‘is itself identical, and therefore an analy- 
tical proposition’. ‘But’, he continues, ‘it shows, nevertheless, the 
necessity of a synthesis of the manifold which is given in intuition, 
without which synthesis it would be impossible to think the unbroken 
identity of self-consciousness’. As the possibility of such synthe- 
sis, the apperceptive unity is called objective as ‘distinguished from 
the subjective unity of consciousness which is a form of the internal 
sense’. Transcendental reflection on the object of the understanding 
viz., causal succession dissociates its form of causality as the empty 
form of unity which as empty is but the subjective unity of conscious- 
ness or what we have called self-feeling (of the mind or internal sense). 
But the empty form is now recognised as the positive possibility of the 
objective world or the unity of experience. “The same transcendental 
unity of apperception constitutes, in all possible phenomena which may 
come together in our experience, a connection of all these representa- 
tions according to laws’.” [Cf. the relation of the second argument for 
space to the first argument—the general principle being that in the 
reflective detachment of a form (which is the representation of it as 
empty) there is the recognition of the positive constitution or cons- 
tructive character of the form. The whole of the theoretic critique 
may be regarded as the recognition of the possibility of the object, i.¢., 
of the construction of the object in and through the reflective disso- 
ciation of form from the object]. 


* Ibid—p. 747. 
® Ibid. —p. 89. 


CHAPTER V 
CAUSALITY 


44, Kant enunciates the second Analogy of Experience in the 
Second Edition in the form : “all changes take place according to the 
law of connection between cause and effect”. By “change” here he 
means objective change, change in the spatial world, as distinct from 
the mere succession of mental states which cannot, except symbolically, 
be said to be in causal connection. In fact, not merely the laws of 
succession among the objects of the internal sense, but apparently any 
specification in it e.g., the distinction of the succession of two mental 
objects A and B from that of A and C or of the order A-B from 
the order B-A would be taken by him to be known only through 
the knowledge of causal dependences in the spatial world. Space to 
Kant is, as has been pointed out, known before time is known; and 
connected with it is the fact that causal change—in the spatial world, 
for causality is (theoretically) known nowhere else—is known prior 
to mental change* Succession as imagined’ presupposes  suc- 
cession as perceived, objective succession, or succession as fact— 
factual or given (perceived) succession being the same as causal suc- 
cession. Given succession is irreversible succession, irreversibility 
being not the criterion but only the analytic description of causal suc- 
cession. When one looks from one end of a house to another and 
back again, one is not aware of a given succession of two perceived 
objects; but only of the succession of their apprehensions. Every 
perceived succession in the spatial world is at the same time a suc- 
cession of apprehensions of two objects but the perceived succession 
is not necessarily a fact as between those objects. What is called a 
causal sequence of A and B is indeed a given or causal sequence, but 
of X and Y (which may be undiscovered yet), not of A and B, A and 
B being somehow bound up with X and Y so that the causal se- 
quence is represented subjectively as between the apprehensions of A 
and B.“ There is no question here of reversibility, so that causality 
—as here between A and B—is not denied on the ground of rever- 


$ * Critique of Pure Reason (Tr. Maxmiiller)—pp. 161-62. 
» Sucgession of images (internal presentations) is—apart from succession of 
spatial ons ects—imagined succession. 
Y may, as succession of presentations be called indifferently succes- 
tion A-B, AY, X-B or X-Y; as of spatial objects it is only X-Y. 


CAUSALITY 325 


sibility. A given or perceived sequence then is always causal and 
irreversible though the precise terms of the sequence may not be the 
terms, the apprehensions of which we are aware of as successive in 
the internal sense. All perceived succession is irreversible succession 
of two (spatial) facts which may not be known and which can be 
ascertained by the criterion that the antecedent among them should 
contain the condition of the rule by which the consequent follows at 
all times and necessarily. Thus two characters are given of causal 
succession—irreversibility and inevitability, each a sufficient character 
—the former presenting the problem of finding the precise terms of 
the succession through the application of the latter as a criterion. 

45. That every given or perceived succession is causal succes- 
sion of some objective facts is not capable of objective proof. It, 
however, follows immediately from the transcendental reflection that 
if succession which should not be perceived (by the external sense) 
is yet perceived, it can only be through the imaginative production of 
the perception.*. The internal sense is necessarily anticipative of the 
continuous extension onward of time, and since whatever is to be 
known would be represented in the internal sense as presentable to 
external sense, it would necessarily be known as a series of pheno- 
mena in space in which each succeeding necessarily depended on the 
preceding. 

46. To explain. Time is not externally perceivable and yet 
we apparently perceive a change in the external or spatial world. 
Succession is believed as an intuited fact and is not taken as an ima- 
ginary content. It cannot be intuited by the external sense nor by 
the internal sense which can intuit only an external percept. So suc- 
cession in the external object and the intuition of the succession in 
the mind must be apriori or timelessly constructed by the sense. 
Apriori construction of succession is timeless construction of time in 
space. ‘Time is not given before this synthesis. 

47. But it may be asked, why may not a change be perceived 
in the ordinary way? To apprehend a change as change, it is neces- 
sary not only to have the idea of different states together but 
to have the idea of their being in order of succession. The 
time-order cannot be said to be remembered unless it was per- 
ceived. Now it cannot be said to be perceived for the first time at 
the time of sensing, for then it would be perceiving without a sense- 
basis. Elsewhere e.g., in the visual perception of the orange where 
the colour is sensed and the touch aspect ideated, the latter is sup- 


*CPR—p. 171. 


326 STUDIES IN KANT 


posed to have been sensed along with the colour in the past. Here, 
however, the prior and the posterior moments of the change could 
not have been sensed together. If the succession is taken to be only 
perceived now, it is non-sensuously intuited by the mind. The mind 
then has to be credited with an original power to know the pastness of 
the external object without the help of sense. One has to choose 
between this view and the Kantian view of the mind’s construc- 
tive anticipation of the posterior moments of a change at the 
time of sensing the prior moments—or—what is called “pro- 
duction of the perception” of change—which, we may suppose, is 
completed in the sensing of the posterior moments. The latter would 
be consonant with the view that the mind (internal sense) can ap- 
prehend only what is or appears given to sense perception (external 
sense). The anticipatory apprehension of the coming moment of the 
change is possible through the apprehension of the direction of the 
change or motion that is presented in space. This initial direction 
appears at least to be externally perceived. In the other theory there 
is no such apparent external content to guide us from the present to 
the past, and one has to admit a purely internal intuition of the past- 
ness of the external object. 

48. The production of the perception of change is anticipative, 
starting from the sense-perception of the external state on which the 
change supervenes. To apprehend the state in the internal sense is 
at once to expect and to perceive a state of depending on it, to neces- 
sarily produce the percept of it in advance. Now, since we can know 
the external world only by floating the representation of the external 
sense in the internal sense—that being the condition of apperception, 
the external world is known as intrinsically involved in change, as a 
continuous succession of spatial facts in which the consequent followed 
the antecedent necessarily, that is, according to a rule. 

49. It is thus that Kant transcendentally deduces the possibility 
of the factual world being spatio-temporal. On our ordinary notions 
of space and time, of perception and imagination, spatio-temporal 
facts as well as the perception of time would be a mystery. The 
mystery has been sought to be made intelligible in other ways—e.g., 
by the conception of a single entity that is somehow both space and 
time, though called either space or time. But apparently such a 
conception is not feasible except as a mere problem, being unrepre- 
sentable as presented or intuited, since the distinction of space from 
time is the inalienable distinction of perception from imagination." 

“The very condition of perception is a distinction of space from time. 


CAUSALITY 327 


Yet, since as a matter of fact we do believe in the world being spatio- 
temporal—without which belief too, the merely temporal (or mental) 
cannot be believed, we have to overcome the ordinary notion of space 
and time as a duality of co-ordinate entities in a different way. Kant’s 
solution is apparently that space is involved in time and yet distinct 
from it—or to put it otherwise, space is distinct from time but not 
‘vice versa. The solution he presents in the transcendental or epistemo~ 
logical way rather than as an objective metaphysical view. Space and 
time are no doubt to him transcendentally ideal but the identity is 
understood in contrast with the transcendental reality of the free self 
as practically apprehended. Within phenomenal objectivity, they are 
real and we can have apriori a metaphysical view of the relation of 
space and time, such metaphysic being never repudiated by Kant but 
‘only postponed after the critical enquiry. Now his metaphysical view 
as indicated by his epistemology of the perception of change may be 
imagined to be that space is within time but is not time; the external 
world is real within the mental but is not itself mental. The object is 
within the mind in the sense that while the object appears given to, 
and therefore distinct from the mind, one is aware of the mind not 
.as distinct from the object but as constituting the object in so far (pri- 
marily) as it appears in change (and motion, and secondarily as a 
determinate shape-size). Change is an explicitly equivocal presenta- 
tion: it is not spatial and yet it is in space. To distinguish space from 
time and yet to perceive time in space as change is to be transcen- 
dentally aware of this immanence as the immanence of the mind in 
the object." So one is aware of the changing object as what has mind 
immanent in it and aware of it, yet as perceived by the mind and as 
such distinct from it, and reflected in a mental presentation. 

50. Thus apparently the law of causality as presented in the 
Second Analogy of Experience is legitimated by the epistemology of 
the perception of change. The concept of objective change requires 
to be elucidated. Change is a transition from one mode of existence 
to another mode of existence of the same object. Further ‘every 
transition....from one mode of existence into another takes 
place in a certain time between two moments, the first of 
which determines the state from which the thing arises, the 
second that at which it arrives. Both..... are the temporal 
limits of a change or of an intermediate state between two states and 
belong as such to the whole of the change. Every change, however, 
has a cause which proves its causality during the whole of the time in 


* Cf. Alexander on time as the mind of space. Only take mind literally and 
all within phenomena. 


328 STUDIES IN KANT 


which the change takes place. The cause, therefore, does not produce 
the change suddenly (in one moment) but during a certain time... , 


All change, therefore, is possible only through a continuous action of 
causality which so far as it is uniform is called a momentum. A 
change does not consist of such momenta but is produced by them as 
their effect’.* 

51. Change then means change of state, and not merely difference 
of certain relations which we have even in a uniform movement which 
is no change.” It does not mean the state which arises (or an event) 
but the passage from one state to another of the same object. Between 
the states, there is always an intermediate state: ‘neither time nor a 
phenomenon in time consists of parts which are the smallest possible; 
nevertheless, the state of a thing which is being changed passes through 
all these parts, as elements, to its new state’’, this being the law of con- 
tinuity in all change. The ‘thing’ or the spatial object in change 
emerges out of a state which is apparently at once the initial 
state of the object and the terminal state of another object. ‘Arising or 
perishing absolutely, and not referring merely to a determination of 
the permanent, can never become a possible perception’... But a 
spatial thing would not be said to arise out of a state that belonged to 
it only. ‘Every substance .... must contain in itself the causality of cer- 
tain determinations in another substance’’,’....according to the prin- 
ciple of causality, actions are always the first ground of all change of 
phenomena and cannot exist therefore in a subject that itself changes’.° 
Now the action through which a change or a changing thing arises can- 
not belong to the same thing. This action or influence of one thing on 
another implies ‘a relation of the subject of the causality to the effect.’ 
The ‘subject of the causality’ is a substance other than that in which 
the effect is produced. The relation of the two substances must 
appear in a single mode of their coexistence in space, this being the 
state out of which the spatial object in change, which is the presented. 
form of the substance influenced, arises. 

52. The question may be asked about the status of these subs- 
tances and of the causality of which the influencing substance is said to 
be ‘the last subject’.* These substances cannot be metaphysical in: 
the sense in which the free self is metaphysical, nor are they unknow- 


*CPR—p. 170; 
*Thid. p. 169n; 
* Ibid. p. 170; 
* Tbid. p. 153-4; 
* Ibid. p. ; 
* Ibid. p. 167. 
© Ibid. p. 167; 


CAUSALITY 329 


able things in themselves. Kant calls them substances in phenomenon: 
they are not presentable in external or internal sense and yet are the 
contents of perceptions, perceptions that are produced by imagination 
only. They are metaphysical in the sense of not being given in 
sense, in the sense the fundamental principles of natural science are 
called by him metaphysical. These substances are embodied in spatial 
object in change, are indicated by them, but are not themselves spatial. 
As to the causality of which the acting substance is said to be the last 
subject, it is not the temporal action but what is embodied in it and 
is determinative of the change that follows it. It is what he calls 
“real powers, which can be given empirically, .... motive powers” 
which “certain successive phenomena (as movements) indicate”.* 
These then are the causes: the previous spatial event, the last state 
of the influencing substance is not the cause. The effect too is not an 
event in the sense of a stage of change, but the whole change 
which may be called a unitary continuous series of events. The 
cause that is said to operate “during the whole of the time in which 
the effect takes place” is thus a motive power or force, a metaphysical 
entity in the sense explained. Thus Kant’s conception of causality 
differs from Hume’s not merely in the recognition of necessary con- 
nection, but also in the recognition of the metaphysical entities of 
substance and force as necessarily in phenomena. (So too, as was 
pointed out previously, he admits not only mental phenomena but a 
substantial empirical mind in which a pure self is embodied). 

53. It is important to note here that why one substance should 
cause a change in another we do not know; and it is permissible here 
to suppose that the ground of the causality is something noumenal.” 
The connection of such “metaphysical entities in phenomena” with 
free causality is thus easily suggested as a problem. 

54. Causality to Kant implies the category of substance though 
substance need not imply causality. Causality is understood in respect 
of a change of a substance, of change as implying a static permanent. 
But after the recognition of causality, there arises the concept of action 
which implies again the concept of the “subject” of the action, the 
“last subject of the causality” which must be permanent. As time 
necessarily refers to space which without reference to time is not 
known as fact, and cannot yet be denied, so causality presupposes 
substance which as a merely static permanent cannot be denied. 
Thus though, according to Kant, nothing is known as objective fact 


“Ibid. p. 169; 
* Ibid. p. 441. 


330 STUDIES IN KANT 


unless it is causally related, the terms of this relation are not therefore 
taken to, be constituted in their facthood by the relation: causality 
is a regulative and not a constitutive category. The effect must be 
outside the cause and dependent on it: causality means an order of time, 
a rule of succession. There would, however, be no rule or necessity 
represented in phenomenon if there was a lapse of time between the 
cause and effect. The effect must be co-existent with the causality 
of its cause, though the cause cannot produce its whole effect in one 
moment." The dependence of effect on a co-existent in which the 
causality resides—or action which is the same thing in another way— 
is symbolically, necessarily though, represented spatially e.g. by a 
line of motion. This symbolizing is a constructing so that we may 
say that causal influence is the construction of a pure motion: The 
subject of the action and the subject of the change that follows are 
understood as two substances. The time-order of the action and 
change can be only known as an objective fact if the corresponding 
substances are embodied in co-existent spatial objects. But spatial 
co-existence is fact only if each object acts on the other i.e., if the sub- 
ject of the change also acted on the subject of the action. In other 
words, causality as a fact entails reciprocity between two substances, i.e., 
phenomenally presented as a spatial co-existence of spatial objects. 
Time is an objective fact only as a change in space and space is a fact 
only as changes dependent on each other which would be a contradic- 
tion unless understood as substances acting on each other and having 
a change in each dependent on the others. Change is only of the un- 
changing and is accordingly only a sensible phenomenon of an intell- 
igible reality. Here we have an analogue within the knowable object 
of the practical dualism of the self as free and determined, as noume- 
nal and phenomenal. 

35. The Second Analogy of Experience states only that change 
takes place according to the law of causality or in other words, that it 
does not happen by chance. It does not exclude the possibility of a 
causal transition (from an action to a change) being itself only a fact, 
being conditional on nothing else, or—as it may be put—being unintelli- 
gibly fated. This fate is excluded as a knowable object by the Third 
Postulate of Empirical Thought. There might be, one can argue, un- 
connected causal laws (or reciprocity system) in which the cause is not 
caused and at least the effect does not cause. The Third Postulate 
may be taken to assert that uncaused cause and uncausing effect can- 
not be known objects, that whatever is known as object is knowable 


“Ibid. p. 166. 


CAUSALITY 331 


as at once the effect of something and the cause of something else. 
No object is known that is not in change and no change that is not 
caused. This may indeed be taken to be implied even in the Second 
Analogy, (though it is explicit only in its formulation in the first edition 
—“everything that happens presupposes something on which it follows 
as a rule”). But in any case an uncausing effect is not excluded by 
it. An effect or rather the last stage of a change, that terminates of 
itself may be still admitted, for its existence or its cessation after the 
last moment of the change would be no happening and, therefore, does 
not fall under the Analogy. But, as has been shown at the beginning, 
the perception of a change is anticipatory: given a perceived situation, 
one apriori expects some existence (in change) to emerge out of it." 
Since the last stage of a change is a perceived situation, the anticipation 
of the perception of a change after it is necessary. Some such deduc- 
tion of the impossibility of an uncaused effect (as an empirical object) 
may be supposed to be implied in the Third Postulate, though it is not 
explicitly stated. 


* Ibid. pp. 184-185. 


CHAPTER VI 
JUDGMENTS OF FACT, VALUE, AND OQUGHT-TO-BE 


56. Kant discusses the judgment in all the three critiques. 
Theoretic judgment is judgment of fact, and there is no theoretic 
knowledge to Kant outside the judgment. But judgment to him need 
not be knowledge: the third Critique is of judgment considered as a 
faculty co-ordinate with knowing and willing and identified with feel- 
ing. This is judgment of value or, as he calls it, of purposiveness, pur- 
posiveness being value in its relational aspect. Moral judgments such 
as he deals with in the second Critique are judgments of something being 
‘good’, the good being understood as presupposing the ‘ought’ or the 
moral imperative. A judgment is expressible as a sentence indicative 
and so prescriptions of ‘ought to will’ are not judgments. But ‘good’ 
means what ought to be: to say that an action is good is to state a judg- 
ment, to assert that it fulfils the moral law or the ‘ought to will’, is 
such as ought to exist as an object. Neither ‘ought-to-will’ nor ‘ought- 
to-be’ is a value: value is nothing if not at least partially actualised in 
an object, while ‘ought’ means what completely transcends the actual. 
In Kantian ethics at any rate, there is no moral value, for the ‘good’ 
means nothing apart from ‘ought to will’, no self-subsistent value which 
the will is to realise. Value, however, may be possessed by what is moral- 
ly, good, beauty or teleology being explicitly taken by Kant in the third 
Critique as symbol of morality.“ Fact as a concept would be to Kant 
positively opposed to value, and goodness too is not value, though it may 
be symbolised by value. 

57. Judgment in all these cases refers to a phenomenal object 
and is the appreciation of a concept or an intelligible being somehow 
immanent in it. The appreciation amounts to theoretic or practical 
knowledge about the object in judgments of facts and of ought-to-be, 
which accordingly are called determinative judgments. It does not 
amount to knowledge but. only to an imaginative or subjective satisfac- 
tion in judgments of value which are called by contrast reflective judg- 
ments. In all judgment, however, the content viz., the immanence of 
the intelligible in phenomenon is actual or accomplished to imagina- 
tion, though it is assertorially believed only in reflective judgment, not 
in determinative judgment where it is only taken to be necessary. It 


“CJ. p. 248, p. 370. 


JUDGMENTS OF FACT, VALUE, OUGHT-TO-BE 333 


is (in any case) what is imagined with certitude and not merely what 
is sought to be or might be imagined. | 

58. The subject of a judgment is always a phenomenon and the 
predicate an intelligible. The phenomenon may be actual or possible, 
perceived or perceivable, but never what we are conscious of as imagi- 
hary or illusory or problematic (might be imagined). The possible 
phenomenon means here that which is imagined as what can be, not 
merely might be. The subject again is not nothing without the predicate, 
though it may be nothing known; and as having the predicate immanent 
in it, it is still phenomenon and not phenomenon-cum-noumenon. 
The subject must be presented in intuition, empirical or pure: there is 
no judgment about the purely intelligible. The immanence of the 
predicate in the subject also cannot be purely rational, the copula being 
apprehended in an apriori imaginative synthesis as phenomenon in the 
making, as the forming of the subject phenomenon. 

59. Phenomenon is at once the other of the intelligible and 
what is constituted by it, a term of the relation of immanence and the 
relation of immanence itself. In the first chapter, phenomenon was 
explained from the moral standpoint as less real than the (free) self, 
from the theoretic standpoint as somehow mixed up with the self, and 
from the imaginative (reflective) standpoint as yet self-subsistent. 
These three aspects of phenomenon are brought out in the three types 
of judgment—moral, theoretic and reflective—, and in the three types 
of imagination that they involve. It may be stated in advance that 
the moral judgment takes the subject as a symbol (typic) of the pre- 
dicate (ought, ‘final purpose’, good), the theoretic judgment under- 
stands the predicate (concept) as approximation to (or schematically 
figured by) the subject, and the reflective judgment regards the subject 
as the expression (self-specification) of the predicate (reason, ‘pur-- 
posiveness’). 

60. To begin with the theoretic judgment. Every judgment is 
understood in the form ‘S is P’, where S is a perceived content, actual 
or possible, P a thought-content or concept, and the copula is the im- 
manence of the concept in the percept. The subject is an object of the 
external sense or of the internal sense, and each may be actual or 
possible. An actual object of the external sense is a spatial (spatio- 
temporal) object, and a possible object is some pure determination of 
space as mere form (external object in general), the judgment being 
either physical or geometrical (phenomenal-mathematical). An 
actual object of the internal sense is a temporal presentation-of a spatial 
object, actual or possible; and a possible object of the internal sense 


334 STUDIES IN KANT 


is some pure determination of time as mere form, of presentation in 


general. A judgment about the former would be psychological or pure— 
mathematical (according as the subject is presentation of an actual or 
of a possible spatial object); and a judgment about the latter would 
be transcendental—what Kant called ‘principle of the understanding’ 
(comprising apparently two grades—the metaphysical principles of 
natural science making up what is called ‘pure Physics’ and the trans- 
cendental principles dealt with in the first Critique). The predicate is 
a concept which may be empirical (like ‘dog’), pure-intuitional or 
mathematical (like ‘triangle’) or a category (form of concept or neces- 
sary connection). The different grades of the subject may be grouped 
conformably to the predicate into the three heads of individuals— 
empirical object, particular determinations of space—time and space- 
time; the corresponding judgments being called physical, mathematical 
and metaphysical judgments in a generalised sense. 

61. The transcendental equivalent of the copula in these three 
classes of theoretic judgments is the schema, a generic form in the 
making as half-presented form of the spatial (spatio-temporal), vicari- 
ously or symbolically presented form of the (purely) temporal and un- 
presented (but intended to be presented) form of the intelligible. The 
schema is not a complete image but is what is intended to be completed 
in an image. It is not image at_all in the case of the category, but 
in the case of the other concepts, there is some actual indefinite image 
whith is sought to be further defined. The defining out of the image 
is in every case a conscious act and not merely an unconscious process 
in which one finds the image progressively defined. The schema being 
of a universal is a generic or typical image which is only in the making 
and unlike.an individual image which is found complete so far as it goes 
and found, it may be, to be presented with increasing definiteness, is 
being defined by a conscious continuous act. The act is with a definite 
intention ie., thought of the perceived object to be comprehended or 
apperceived. The manifold of sense as received primarily in space 
and secondarily in time is only arranged, not yet related, is only a 
given whole of elements which are not yet necessarily connected, con- 
nected in such a way that each is known to be a fact only as implying 
the whole, that the implication itself is believed to be as real as the 
given whole. When a given or perceived whole is thus known to be 
interconnected, it is said to be comprehended or apperceived. Impli- 
cation is the universal form of objectivity which being unknown, the 
given wholé is only undeniable but not assertable as objective fact. 
The categories are the different modes of logical implication, the primary 


JUDGMENTS OF FACT, VALUE, OUGHT-TO-BE 335 


differentiations of the universal form of objectivity or of the appercep- 


tive unity. These again comprise the modes of mathematical and phy- 
sical implication which may be regarded as secondary universals, 
Schema in general then may be defined as implication in the conscious 
process of being imaged. 

62. Judgment as a transcendental function implies the schema- 
tisation of the universal. The universal in Kant is understood in a very 
wide sense. There are universals of quantity, quality, relation and 
modality, each including category, mathematical concept and physical 
concept. The ultimate universal in the theoretic sphere is objectivity, 
implication or apperceptive unity. In both theoretic and non-theoretic 
judgment, the universal is the self as asserting itself in reference to the 
phenomenal object. In the theoretic sphere, the self in such reference 
is logical implication or the implication called truth; in the practical 
sphere, it is the good or the objective obverse of freedom; and in the 
imaginative sphere, it is self-subsistent value. In all spheres, the self 
in reference to the given phenomena is a thinkable which is in the pro- 
cess of being phenomenalised as an anticipatory image of the pheno- 
menon. In the theoretic sphere, the self thus becoming flesh is called 
schema. 

63. In theoretic judgment, the concept to apply to the percept 
seeks to imaginatively anticipate it. The question has been asked if 
this is not a gratuitously mystical account of the judgment. We start, 
it is said, with the fact of knowledge which is judgment, the concept 
and the percept being only unreal abstractions from it. To Kant, in the 
practical sphere at any rate, the free self and the inclinations with which 
the known objective world is bound up are no mere abstractions, the 
dualism being of two hard concretes. The latter is, no doubt, a phe- 
nomenal reality, less real than freedom, which, if holiness could be 
attained and intellectual intuition were possible, would be realised as 
an emanation from the one reality of the self. As a matter of fact, 
holiness is an absolute imperative and we have no positive conception 
of intellectual intuition, though the being of the former and the fact- 
hood of the latter, cannot be denied. In actual consciousness then, 
phenomenal reality has to be admitted as opposed to transcendental 
reality. Some sort of unification is taken to be attained in the reflective 
concept of value, but the unity is self-subsistent only as phenomenal 
object or nature, not as a beautiful soul; and even in nature, the union 
of mechanism and teleology is not actually imagined but only what may 
be imagined, being no content of reflective judgment. The dualism of 
spirit and nature then remains and in the theoretic sphere, it appears 


336 STUDIES IN KANT 


as the dualism of the infinite (Idea of Reason) and the finite (content 
of judgment), and as its shadow within the judgment—the dualism 
of concept and percept. Had the sphere of object-knowledge (theoretic 
judgment) stood by itself, the view of concept and percept as mere 
abstractions would be plausible, and the two unknowns at the back- 
ground—viz., the self as a pure logical entity and the thing-in-itself 
might have been dismissed as chimeras. As a matter of fact, we 
have actual belief in, though not knowledge, of the self and the thing- 
in-itself as concretes, in the setting of which belief the transcendental 
analysis (which is knowledge) of the judgment into concept and per- 
cept is understood. Hence it is that there is a problem as to how 
the concrete concept and percept meet in the judgment. The cognitive 
questions ‘what is it? (the given)’ before a judgment and ‘Is this judg- 
ment true?’ after a judgment point to the judgment as a union of 
factors that can be dissolved. If it can be dissolved, the uniting has 
to be recognised as a function. 

64. The uniting function is constructive imagination, imagination 
that produces belief, produces the perception of the given spatial 
object as figured by it. The figure is not given in passive or receptive 
perception but it appears consciously as though it were given i.e., as 
the content of perceptual judgment. The spatial object as passively 
perceived is still distinguishable from this content which however ap- 
pears one with it. In contrast with the passive percept, the figure 
appears in the internal sense as in the making and is from the point 
of view of thought or apperception the conscious making or 
figuring. This figuring that is at the same time an incomplete figure 
is called a schema. In the case of concepts lower than the category, 
the incomplete figure is partially or symbolically pictorial, but in the 
case of the category, the figure is purely temporal, just barely intended 
to be pictorial. In the former case, the judgment is not purely 
theoretical but partly reflective or aesthetic, there being a feeling of 
actual or realised immanence of the concept in the percept. In the 
case of the category and the purely theoretic judgment, this feeling 
is absent, the percept being accordingly completely distinguishable 
from the judgment. The schema proper is a process of the concept 
that barely touches the percept i.e., is represented in the internal sense 
as what is not but is to be or must be represented in the external sense. 

65. Since the schema is intrinsically non-pictorial (at least 
partly) or in other words the percept is distinguishable from it, the 
theoretic judgment or object-knowledge is realised only in an internal 
percept in figured apprehension. The concept thus only approxi- 


JUDGMENTS OF FACT, VALUE, OUGHT-TO-BE 337 


mates to the percept, its immanence in the external or spatial object 
being only intended, not accomplished. Such knowledge, therefore, 
as we actually have is always unsatisfying, is only necessary and not 
self-evident. The known phenomenon is only a mixture of concept 
and percept, of thought and the given and is not self-subsistent like 
the phenomenon of the reflective judgment or judgment of value. To 
the reflective judgment, the phenomenon is living nature, external per- 
cept inter-penetrated with the concept, a sort of spatialised mind. But 
just because the concept is here spatialised, there is no longer know- 
ledge. The perceived phenomenon is no longer apprehended in inner 
sense and therefore no longer apperceived. Knowledge implies ap- 
perception of the apprehended or internally perceived phenomenon. 

. 66. To elaborate the account of the reflective judgment or judg- 
ment of value. The phenomenon to it is self-subsistent, a spatialised 
mind that specificates itself. Its figuring by the concept appears as its 
own elaboration or expression. The union of the concept and the 
percept is not here a schema, a presentation in the making but the 
accomplished presentation of expression—what is called ‘specification 
of nature’.*. The concept here appears immanent in nature as its pur- 
posiveness, the specification being of the purpose. In the theoretic 
critique, the understanding is said to make nature: the object is no 
known fact unless it is figured through the schemata by the categories. 
But what is thus constructed by the understanding is the bare form of 
nature, the object so far as it can be apriori anticipated in the principles. 
The object must have some extensive or intensive quantity, some 
causal law etc., but we do not know the particular quantity or law 
apriori. We know this by experience i.e., nature gives it. There is no 
necessity that nature should give us specific forms and forms that are 
connectable into a system. As a matter of fact, however, nature does 
give us such. Each specific form or specific connection of forms is 
such as can be known by us, fits in with our general apriori anticipa- 
tion or principles, appears purposively designed not for our desire 
but for our cognitive faculty. It is as though there was an objective 
mind speaking to our mind in a language intelligible to us. That we 
can know aposteriori, that the matter of knowledge which we could 
never anticipate happens to wear the apriori forms of our knowledge 
is a wonder that we can never theoretically explain—for that would 
be apriori knowing the given particular. We have only to accept it as 
a fact and feel the problem and reflectively interpret it as the pur- 
posiveness of nature. Such interpretation would be a judgment of 


*CJ—p. 26. 
22 


338 STUDIES IN KANT 


impersonal value—an altogether new kind of judgment. A judgment 
of personal value or purposiveness for desire would be only a theoretic 
judgment. 

67. The purposiveness of nature is purposiveness to our know- 
ing, not to our desire, and is imagined as such in the expression or 
interpretation of an actual or given feeling of pleasure of a disinterested 
kind. The imagination is, as compelled by an actual feeling, neces- 
sary, and the principle of purposiveness (to knowing) is a transcen- 
dental principle of the faculty of judgment. Judgment has to be 
recognised as a faculty distinct from knowing, for this imaginative 
interpretation of a feeling of knowing as purposiveness is necessary 
without being inferential. It is necessary for reflection or understand- 
ing of the subjective faculty of knowing, of the union of the two factors 
of knowing—apriori and aposteriori—reached in transcendental re- 
flection but not necessary for the understanding of the object known, 
for the union is not given as a perceivable character of the object but 
only a felt content. Judgment such as we have within cognition is not 
other than the faculty of understanding which is indifferently described 
as a faculty of conceiving (categories) and of judging (principles or 
rules), the two being distinguished at all in view of this extra-cognitive 
reflective judgment which has a specific transcendental principle. 
Within knowing, concept that is not for judgment is but subjective ap- 
perception and has no objective meaning. At the same time it may 
wait for application in a judgment and is in this sense prior to it. 
This reflective judgment however is prior to the concept of purposive- 
ness; the immanence of the concept (of purpose) in the percept,— 
the judg@wenit function—is given in feeling in the first instance, and the 
concept is then sought to be formulated through the reflective elabora- 
tion of the feeling. In judgment of fact, the concept seeks application. 
but in judgment of value, the application seeks the concept. 

68. The purposiveness of nature is felt and imagined in two 
ways—the aesthetic and the logical (teleological). In the former, the 
purpose is imagined in reference to the cognitive faculty in general 
while in the latter, it is imagined in reference to the cognition of some- 
thing objective. | What the specific purpose is we do not know in 
either case: but while in the teleological judgment, it is known as some 
intrinsic purpose of the object that is yet to seek, in the aesthetic judg- 
ment, it is not so known, the object being only imagined as fitting 
the apriori conditions of knowability. In the teleologic judgment, the 
purpose-or the ideal is not merely imagined but thought as objective, 
being imagined as the completion of some thinkable and not merely 


JUDGMENTS OF FACT, VALUE, OUGHT-TO-BE 339 


felt character of the object. In the judgment of an object as living 
i.e., with “an inner end” the end is explicitly thought as formative of 
the object’, though it is not known in specific detail. In other words, 
while the aesthetic judgment starts with an empirical percept, the 
teleologic judgment starts with an empirical judgment, the start- 
ing cognition being reflectively sought to be specificated in either 
case. In both, the purposiveness is imagined as an interpretation of 
empirical knowability, of what is only felt to be knowable in the former 
and of what is both felt as knowable and partly thinkingly known in 
the latter. 

69. The judgment of ought-to-be like the judgment of value 
is the expression of a felt immanence of the concept of the good in 
perceivable object, though the feeling is a practical feeling, not one of 
enjoyment. At the same time it is a determinative judgment amounting 
to practical knowledge. The predicate as in theoretic judgment is. 
fully formulated and transcends the subject, determining only the 
apprehension or the internal perception of it. Its immanence in 
external nature is indeed felt: nature is felt as the body of the holy 
law, though a mystic and not a manifest body, not as informed by 
the law of freedom, but as its distant symbolism (typic). In the theo- 
retic judgment, the transcendence of the concept is expressed by its 
indefinite approximation to the percept in the schema. In the practi- 
cal judgment however, the transcendence is expressed as the approxi- 
mation of the percept to the concept, of the felt perceivable nature to 
freedom, such approximation being understood as symbolism or 


“typic’. 


* Judgment of external end is not reflective but theoretic judgment. 


CHAPTER VII 
FREEDOM AND MORALITY 


70. Kant starts with the appetitive faculty (which to him is life 
itself), being the faculty of desire and aversion, which he understands 
as ‘the faculty of being by means of one’s ideas the cause of the objects 
of those ideas’. Desire (or aversion) is an act (as distinct from a 
sensible state) of the appetitive faculty, an effort (nisus) to be and is 
a causality at least within the subject. It is conscious as idea of an 
object to be caused and may or may not be conscious in the actual causa~- 
tion, and even where it is so conscious, may or may not pass out to 
the object itself. In any case it is conscious as an anticipation of 
causality. Where it is conscious in the actual causation, it is called 
will or wish (both being sometimes called will), according as it 
passes out or not to the object. Free will is taken as a particular form 
of the will." 

71. Desire is connected by a subjective rule with pleasure either 
as its cause or effect, such connection by rule being called interest. 
Pleasure that is so connected is practical pleasure as distinct from con- 
templative pleasure. As the cause of desire, it is called appetite, the 
habitual form of which is inclination. Desire is said to be caused by 
pleasure or the interest of inclination when the causal idea is of plea~ 
sure to oneself.” But the causal idea may be of an object only 
irrespective of pleasure: one may desire an object for its own sake, in 
which case the desire is said to be caused by an interest of reason, 


which as habitual may be called interest of sense-free inclination. 
There is, however, pleasure here as the effect of desire which is ap- 


parently not the pleasure of gratification but pleasure felt in the idea 
of the object to be caused, the ‘felicific aspect’ of the object ideated. 
72. Pleasure as the effect of desire in this sense appears in the 
process, where it is conscious, of the causality of the idea of the object 
desired in the form of pleasing or choosing to act.” The causal process 


"Kant uses the term will in two senses—(1i) elective will which may be free 
or unfree, (ii) free or rational will. Sometimes will means also wish: the most 
general sense would be pleasing to act (or forbear). 

>Tts connection with desire being by a subjective and not objective rule, 
pleasure causes only an idea of pleasure and hence there is no question of an 
actual feeling of pleasure taking form as desire for more pleasure. 

© Pleasure as necessarily and subjectively connected with desire determined 
by the interest of reason as its effect cannot be the pleasure due to the objective 


FREEDOM AND MORALITY 341 


of the idea is conscious when the desire depends on concepts; when, 
in other words, one is conscious of the object as desired on a general 
ground, as a case of a subjective rule or maxim of action. To be cons« 
cious of desiring an object because of a maxim is necessarily to be 
conscious of pressing towards gratification, of pleasing or choosing to 
act. Desire or aversion as such, ‘doing or forbearing as we please’, is 
called wish, and it is called elective will when there is the further 
‘consciousness of the power of its action to produce its object’, cons- 
ciousness of its causality passing out to the object. 

73. This pleasing or choosing need not be choosing between 
alternatives. It is not necessary for willing that one should be cons- 
cious of an alternative course of action, and even where one is so 
conscious, that the idea of it should be an effort or misus towards 
materialisation, conflicting with the idea of the object chosen. The 
rejected alternative may be an idea that only might be acted on without 
actually soliciting the will. In good willing, for example, there is the 
consciousness of the wrong course rejected; but this conscious- 
ness is not a rueful contemplation of a good opportunity of gratifica- 
tion being missed." Choice need not mean conflict: the bearing of this 
on Kant’s rejection of indeterministic freedom will appear presently. 

74. The elective will is not necessarily free. There is animal 
elective will which is determined by inclination. Man in individual 
elective will is conscious of being only affected by inclination, being 
not determined by it. Both are determined by the subject, choice’ 
being an act of the subject, the subject as embodied in the empirical 


fruition of the desire. The effect here comes before the objective fruition which 
may or may not come. Because an object is desired, the contemplation of it is 
a pleasure. Desire in such a case cannot directly pass into objective action: 
it must develop first into a consciousness of causing, a subjective activity. This 


conscious activity can be only a choosing 1.c. adoption into a maxim. Such_adop- 
tion cannot but be a pleasure. All fitting of an object into a general subjective 


rule is a pleasure, and since the fitting 1s here practical, the pleasure is a 
pleasing. To find an object pleasant as the result of desiring it is to please to 
adopt it into one’s general will-attitude. 

“Where there is such contemplation, the choice is determined not by pure 
reason but only by a ‘sense-free inclination’, is not properly free. Kant’s morality 
is not reluctant choice but only choice not determined by feeling though accom- 
panied by feeling in the form of a pure pleasing to act. In the case of willing 
that falls short of good willing, the choice is determined by feeling (as in wrong 
willing) or by reason incorporating feeling in it (as in being honest by policy) ; 
and the pleasing to act is not a pure pleasure of self-approbation, where the 
rejected temptation still retains its tempting character, the pleasing to reject 
cannot be pure pleasure and cannot have been motived by the law but at best 
by the habit of acting according to it. 

"Even the animal chooses, though apparently the concept or maxim of the 
choice can be only an attitude of specific adaptation to a class of cifcumstances 
in the environment, the adoption of an object into this attitude being represented 
by a pleasing to act. 


342 STUDIES IN KANT 


mind. The animal subject does not distinguish itself from the mind 
or inclirfation, i.e., is not self-conscious." The human subject is self- 
conscious, aware of itself as only solicited by the inclination. The 
human will may be still determined by inclination, but the subject is 
then conscious of letting the inclination determine it. But even this 
act of letting on the part of the subject does not mean free willing. 
Human elective will is said to be free when the subject that determines 
it is not only self-conscious or aware of the inclination being distinct 
from it but does not also let the inclination determine the will, and is 
conscious of itself as pure reason determining it. ‘Freedom of the 
elective will is just that independence of its determination on sensible 
impulses: this is the negative concept of it. The positive is the power 
of pure reason to be itself practical’.” 

75. Even in free willing, the determining subject is embodied 
in a mental attitude, motive or maxim which as distinct from the trans- 
cendental or ‘objective’ law of reason (moral law) is said to be a 
subjective principle of action, which the subject makes a rule to himself 
(viz., ‘how he chooses to act).° Free will is still elective will: moral 
willing though proceeding from pure reason is still a conscious rejection 
of inclination and has, therefore, a necessary reference to the life of 
sense. Kant conceives a rational will beyond free will. “The rational 
will which is directed to nothing but the law cannot be called either 
free or unfree, because it is not directed to actions but immediately 
to the legislation for the maxims of actions (and is therefore practical 
reason itself). Consequently it is absolutely necessary and even incap- 
able of restraint. It is therefore only the elective will that can be free’.* 
The rational will here means the super-moral holy will which is beyond 
freedom and to which the human will as free is a perpetual approxi- 
mation, being presented to man only as the moral law. ‘... Holiness 
of will is practical Idea which must necessarily serve as a type to 
which finite rational beings can only approximate indefinitely and which 
the pure moral law which is itself on this account called holy constantly 
and rightly holds before their eyes’.° 

76. This freedom is not indeterministic. ‘Freedom of elective 
will however cannot be defined as the power of choosing to act for or 
against the law (libertas indifferentiae) as some have attempted to 

* Apparently there is a lower stage of animal desire not amounting to will, 
where there is no choice but only an idea of the object, not only not self- 
consciously but not even consciously, causing its existence. 

Ted a Practical Reason (Tr. Abbott), pp. 268-9. 


“Thid. p. 282. 
“Ibid. p. 121. 


FREEDOM AND MORALITY 343 


define it, although the elective will as a phenomenon gives many 
examples of this in experience’.* Choice in itself is only phenomenon, 
while freedom of choice is noumenal. Empirical causality is necessary 
connection between phenomena. Why there should be a causal 
Jaw connecting two particular phenomena we do not theoretically 
know, and it is quite permissible to suppose that the law itself has its 
ground in a noumenal cause.” Such a supposition of noumenal causa- 
lity which would in no way conflict with phenomenal causality but 
which cannot be verified elsewhere is turned into a certainty in our 
moral consciousness. Free causality may or may not be the only form 
‘of noumenal causality but it is the only form that is known. It is known 
to us only through the moral law: ought implies can. A person acting 
from the moral law as motive and not merely according to it is practi- 
‘cally cognisant of being a free cause, noumenal i.e., independent of 
sensible elective will and yet inexplicably constraining it. The pheno- 
menal will’ theoretically known as cause of the outward action is here 
practically known to be itself caused by or grounded in noumenal 
freedom. This is known only in good willing or willing of the moral 
law. We are not aware of being free cause in wrong willing so that there 
is no neutral or indeterministic freedom known to be a cause choosing 
to obey or disobey the moral law. We are indeed theoretically cognis- 
ant of obedience or disobedience as alternatively possible phenomenal 
directions of the elective will. But we know obedience only as free 
noumenal causality which cannot accordingly be defined as the power 
to choose between alternatives. 

77. Wrong willing requires further discussion. Wrong willing 1s 
‘choosing to act from a maxim of inclination and consciously against 
the moral law. Choice is an event in time, a phenomenal causation, 
and human choice may be between reason and unreason (sense or 
inclination) as possible motives. Where the choice is of reason Or 
ought or the moral law as motive, the phenomenal causality itself 18 
known to be noumenally determined or caused by the supra-mental 
free subject. | Where the choice is of inclination in rejection of the 
law, it must also be noumenally determined by the subject but as 
not supramental or free. Inclination is a mental phenomenon, and the 
-gubject as choosing it is aware of being identified with or embodied in 
the mental, is consciously unfree. The subject is noumenal cause but 
it is not aware of becoming unfree by any act of freedom but only knows 


"Ibid. p. 282. ; 
Critique of Pure Reason (Tr. Maxmiiller), p. 441. 
© Not as merely mental but as involving body. 


344 STUDIES IN KANT 


itself to be unfree. It lets itself be embodied in the empirical motive 
in the sense that it is aware of not acting independently of it, such 
inaction being itself a known phenomenal fact. At the same time, since 
the subject is self-conscious, the inaction or unfreedom is known to 
belong to the noumenal self and constitutes a noumenal and not merely 
a phenomenal evil. Wrong willing though not a noumenal act is a 
noumenal fact embodied in a phenomenal fact. The self as the noumenal 
but consciously unfree determinant of the wrong choice is the intelligible 
character. It is to our practical knowing a being and not an act: the 
self is practically aware of itself as essentially moral act and yet some- 
how as a determinate being also, just as it is theoretically aware of itself 
as essentially apperceptive and accidentally (though inalienably) recep- 
tive at the same time. This duality within the self is to Kant an ultimate: 
fact presupposed by transcendental philosophy. 

78. Like freedom, this intelligible character is known only practi- 
cally as the implication of the moral quality of willing (as good or evil). 
The noumenal or transcendental duality of the self as free act and the: 
self as intelligible being or character is known in self-conscious good 
willing and evil willing. This intelligible character, though actually evil, 
may have potentiality for good, originating, it may be, from previous 
good or free willing. There may be accordingly a willing that is not 
good or free i.e., from the moral law but not also against the law; one: 
may be honest, for example, not because honesty is commanded but 
because it is the best policy. Here one not only knows theoretically 
that his action conforms to the moral law but also practically ie., in 
spirit conforms—though only conforms—to it, is practically aware of 
not dropping respect for the law though not acting out of respect for it. 


Kant would say in such a case that ‘the empirical character is good but 
the intelligible character is bad’.* Strictly speaking, to him the intelli- 


gible character is perverse rather than morally bad. Moral badness to: 
him would imply evil not only in the intelligible but also in the empiri- 
cal character, evil passing from the noumenal self to the phenomenal 
choice or elective will. Although the transcendental evil is still imput- 
able—being therefore called innate guilt’—it is still not an imputable 
choice. The man is evil, not his willing. Kant speaks of three degrees 
of transcendental evil or rather propensities to evil’—frailty (1.e., not 
following adopted maxims), impurity (not distinguishing between good! 
and evil springs) and perversity; a man being properly called evil when: 
* Critique of Practical Reason (Tr. Abbott), p. 344. 


*Thid. p. 345. 
*Tbid. p. 344. 


FREEDOM AND MORALITY 345 


frailty and impurity mature* into perversity, the perversity of subordi- 
nating reason to sense’, the moral motive to inclination, of ‘reversing 
the moral order in respect of the springs of elective will.’ The case of 
a person acting from the maxim of honesty being the best policy is a 
case of transcendental perversity which has not vitiated the phenomenal 
choice or elective will. Here there is a subjective mixture of two 
motives—rational and sensible, although the will is objectively deter- 
mined by one only—in this case, the sensible motive. The willing here 
is not wrong though not good also: good willing as well as wrong willing 
implies the passing over of the transcendental determinant—adoption 
of a motive or maxim in the spirit—into the empirical choice. 

79, The intelligible character is practically known in the first 
instance in (transcendental reflection on) wrong willing where there is 
a consciousness of rational motive as antagonised by sensible motive. 
The adoption in spirit of the sensible motive in transgression of the 
moral law implies a determinant other than but co-ordinate with free- 
dom and therefore transcendental. The intelligible character is next 
known as operative in the case considered of willing that is right but 
not good where there is transcendental evil which does not vitiate 
the empirical will, That the empirical character here is good shows 
that although the intelligible character is actually evil, it is still poten- 
tially good. This potential goodness may be taken to have matured 
into the actual goodness of the empirical character. In fact, even in the 
case of wrong willing, one has to admit a potential goodness in the 
intelligible character which however does not mature or matures only 
as acceptance of natural law. There may be however a diabolical 
willing in which though there is no free transgression, there is non- 
acceptance of natural law through the stress of inclination. Belief that 
my inclination has a claim superior to that of reason implies disbelief 
not only in moral but also in natural law, disbelief in all constraint to 
inclination. This is conscious acceptance of insanity or ‘stupidity’. 
Here the potential goodness of the intelligible character does not mature 
at all. ‘Man (even the worst) does not in any maxim, as it were, 
rebelliously abandon the moral law.” There is no free transgression, 
so far as we practically know, obedience to the moral law being alone 
practically known to be free. Why the self is sometimes free and 
sometimes unfree, and why the unfree condition or evil of the noumenal 
character sometimes passes over to the empirical character and some- 

‘Ibid. p. 344. 
> Ibid. p. 343. 


* Ibid. p. 336. 
“Ibid. p. 343. 


346 STUDIES IN KANT 


times not we do not know: the fact is however practically known, 
known only assertorially. At the same time the question why cannot 
be stifled and there is the faith (not practical cognition and much less 
theoretic cognition) that, ‘what man is or ought to be in a moral sense 
he must make or must have made himself." What is to our cognition 
an ultimate transcendental fact demands explanation by an antecedent 
free act: the evil or good in the noumenal character, as imputable, 
cannot be simlply given but must be somehow through one’s free 
causality, though it need not be through an act in time. This freedom 
cannot be a freedom appearing in an empirical choice and as such 
cannot be known (the freedom that we know—good freedom—appears 
in choice). Nor do we know how evil antecedent to free or good 
‘choice leaves a trace (in the form of a potentiality for good) in the 
noumenal character:” we only know that it does. The freedom 
that does not appear in a choice is a matter of faith, the being or 
character of the self being to us not only an ultimate fact but also a 
mystery to our practical consciousness. This freedom is not only 
the ground of the intelligible character which is itself the ground of 
wrong willing and right willing that is not good: it is also the ultimate 
ground of good willing. Even in good willing, reason determines the 
‘choice in conscious supersession of inclination. That the inclination 
should at all emerge as an alternative motive to reason to be rejected 
shows that the intelligible character (from which the inclination rises) 
is a necessary condition of the causality of reason. Our free will is 
not holy will: holiness is in us not in will but in the moral law as the 
transcendent determinant of the will." The freedom which is to our 
faith behind intelligible character and behind even good freedom of 
which this character is a condition is what Kant calls the radical evil 
in human nature, a mystery co-ordinate with holy will (being the same 
as the primal viparyaya as avidya which to the Yoga is even behind 
viveka and which matures into the more concrete degrees of evil like 
asmita etc.) It is the free principle of evil which like the holy will is 
a matter of faith, not of practical cognition. As such it is not 
co-ordinate with our good freedom and hence it is that within moral 
philosophy proper as founded on practical cognition, we have to deny 
a bad freedom and therefore also a neutral freedom. 


*Thid. p. 352. 
* Compare the question how asathprajfiata-samadhi leaves a sarhskira. 
©We could conceive a divine will which would be holy but not a choosing 
phenomenal will—what can not be called free or unfree. It would be freedom 
creating its own being and not having it somehow given to it, an intelligible 
character that never gets phenomenalised. It would be like the Igvara of Yoga 
philosophy, sadaiva mukta and with prakrsta-sattva. 


FREEDOM AND MORALITY 347 


80. We can have a metaphysic of morals only on the basis of 
practical cognition, not of faith. Practical cognition is consciousness 
of the reality of freedom and of moral law in one process of good 
willing. The master principle of Kant’s transcendental philosophy is 
good will or free will which is necessarily self-cognisant, knowing itself 
as free in the knowledge of the moral law and as the condition of the 
moral law. Ought is known as real, not merely thought or felt—as 
the rational self actually constraining the sensible self, freedom being 
this actual act, not a may nor a theoretic can but a practically asser- 
torial can. Freedom is the condition of the ought in the sense that 
ought is real only in being acted, not in being merely felt or thought‘ 
(before good willing or wrong willing): ought is only as it is causal, 
being not an eternal truth or value. There is to our faith freedom 
beyond ought, the freedom to sin, the radical evil in man, although 
it is not known. There is no faith however in ought beyond freedom. 
The faith in holiness is faith in holy will, no faith in ought, which is 
only the holy /aw as that is known by us (and not as a matter of faith) 
as being acted. Thus in the single cognition of good willing, freedom 
is known as the (transcendent) condition of the moral law. 

81. Ought is known only as being knowingly (freely) acted and 
as therefore wearing the form of knowability or reason. The form 
of reason is universality and so ought is known as the law and is 
formulable as a prescription to act only on the form of universality. 
Reason is primarily practical or imperative, and theoretic reason may 
be taken to presuppose it not as constitutive of objective knownness, 
but as constitutive of the fact of knowing. Hence if we started with 
theoretic reason, how it becomes practical would be unintelligible. 
Practical reason then is the form of universality or imperative in general 
as causal (categorical imperative). The form as causal is real: it is 
not merely a thought-possibility. 

82. It has been sometimes objected that Kant gives us only a 
formula of morality, the mere form and not the content of morality. 
As will be presently seen, in his three-fold formulation of the moral 
law, the last two give some kind of matter, though it is pure matter. 
In the Groundwork and the Critique, again, he is mainly concerned 
with the form:” he reserves the division of concrete duties for a future 
metaphysic of morals. The main reason why he deals with the form 
in the Groundwork and the Critque appears to be that to him 


the form of morality is not mere form but the essence, the real spiritual 


* Ought felt or thought as real without being acted is not (practically) known 
and may be taken to be imaginary. 
© CPrR p. 93. 


348 STUDIES IN KANT 


attitude that matters, morality being to him noumenally real only as 
this attitude. 

83. The attitude is differently formulated as that of one legis- 
lating for all or treating humanity as the end or regarding oneself as 
a member of a possible kingdom of ends, i.e., regarding every person 
to be a universal legislator. The formulae refer primarily to the atti- 
tude: it is not meant, for example, that one should before acting try 
to find out the consequence of his maxim of action being followed by 
all. The consequence cannot be and need not be fully known: one 
has only to assure oneself that there is no contradiction in the inner 
spirit, no making of an exception in one’s favour, no treatment of 
other persons as less than a person and a universal legislator. The 
rationality of the attitude prescribed is practical rationality which is not 
merely the implementing of a principle known first theoretically (i.e., 
in the consequence) to be generalisable without contradiction. The 
form of practical rationality unlike that of the theoretical is concrete 
and real in itself independently of application, ‘The imperative uni- 
versal is the concrete Idea of humanity as the legislative self of every 
individual self. Practical reason is of itself concrete as a person: the 
concretion or matter is here not other than the form and is called pure 
matter. The universal in the moral sphere is the real rational 
self which is real not as found common to many _ individual 
selves but as the noumenal individuality of every individual self. The 
self knows itself as a real individual only by practically asserting itself 
as legislative towards itself as somehow embodied in empirical inclina- 
tion; and to be in this legislative attitude is to recognise other such 
individual legislators and to be in conscious harmony (and not iden- 
tity) with them. To be in the attitude is to be aware of oneself as 
not consciously ignoring other individuals as in wrong willing. Good 
willing is conscious repudiation of wrong willing ie., of conscious ex- 
clusion of other individuals: it is the practical apprehension of harmony 
with other individuals. Inclination is the principle of exclusiveness 
which is not however, the principle of real individuality, being itself 
only known by a moral self as unaccountably its body, a moral self 
that already knows itself as individual in harmony with other individuals. 
So the practical universal—humanity—means many individual selves 
in harmony, a society of spirits (‘kingdom of ends’) which is in inner 
attitude asserted by every individual spirit. The self that is free is, 
indeed, universal, but the universal self is not, as undertood by some, 
the singular Absolute or divine self working in us but is each individual 
self as in harmony with other selves. 


FREEDOM AND MORALITY 349 


84. The moral formulae can all be reduced to the form; act 
as if the maxium of the action were to become by the will a universal 
law of nature. Nature is theoretically known as the sphere of univer- 
sal (causal) law. The practical idea of a kingdom of ends is neces- 
sarily symbolised as nature—necessarily, because to will morally ice., 
to will the kingdom of ends is to have faith that the kingdom is being 
realised in a life of sense and in sensible nature. The as if here is a 
make-belief so far as this realisation in nature is not known even prac- 
tically, but it is practically real not only as an attitude, but also as a 
contemplative act. The imaginative contemplation is not indeed pres- 
cribed but free willing as self-conscious is in itself a theoretic thinking 
(that is not knowing) of the form or meaning of the willing. The 
contemplation is practical in the sense of the willing being self-expres- 
sing, using theoretic thought as the medium of its expression, its self- 
consciousness being not a theoretic self-knowing but a self-symbolising 
by the theoretic concept of law of nature. 

85. The imperative is called a law by way of symbolism, being 
envisaged as though it were a judgment indicative. The moral judg- 
ment of an object e.g. an action being good is a literal judgment, but 
the object here symbolises the concept ‘good’ through the typic of sys- 
tem of nature. Moral good means sensible nature as realising the 
moral law, as what ought to be corresponding to the ought to will. 
If a particular action is judged to be good, it is so far as it is known 
to realise the ought-to-be or rational or purposive system of nature. 
Such a system is understood as an infinite time or perpetual life in 
which the good will may be perfected into holy will (immortality) 
and as a nature organic to the happiness of the virtuous (and the op- 
posite)‘. The good as the predicate of moral judgment—this system of 
nature—is here envisaged as though it were the prescribed ‘kingdom of 
ends’ realised. The particular object, judged to be good is so practically 
known but the good itself or the ethico-teleological system of nature 
ts not known but is necessarily entertained in faith. Such a system 
involves the concepts of immortality and of God (as the cause of the 
synthetic connection of virtue with happiness embodied in nature). 
This faith means a further symbolism: to believe in the reality of the 
ought (ought-to-be corresponding to ought-to-will) is to believe as 
though immortality and God were facts. Thus there are three stages 
of practical symbolism or consciousness of as though: in the formula- 
tion of the moral law, in the concept of the good, and in the postulates 
of God and immortality. , 


* The ‘good’ is understood as my own perfection and the happiness of others. 


ANALYSIS 
CHAPTER I 


IDEA OF TRANSCENDENTAL PuiLosopHy (Sec. 1-7) 


(1) The Critical philosophy is a form of Transcendental philo-. 
sophy. The ‘transcendental’ may be taken to mean the non-objective 
or that which is not distinct from the consciousness of it. To Kant, 
the transcendental is the self as conscious act or freedom—whether in 
knowing or in willing. This self is, according to him, formative of the 
object known but it is formative only as the purely logical unity of the 
object. The Kantian theory is thus different both from Vedantism and 
Voluntarism. 

(2) There are two different kinds of certitude or knowledge, viz., 
the practical and the theoretic. The former which is about the reality 
of the self is found in moral willing and the latter which is about the 
existence of the object is found in theoretic consciousness. In theo- 
retic knowledge of the object, belief comes through the factor of in- 
tuition; but in the practical knowledge of the self; intuition is not 
present and the belief is through the willing or the realising of the 
thought. To will or to freely cause is to think and effect a causal 
change in the world. There is thus a fitting of free causality with 
objective causality and a meeting of the two certitudes in the thought 
of causality. It is difficult, however, to understand this. The diffi- 
culty arouses critical or transcendental reflection which effects an ad- 
justment by taking the known object as only phenomenal. 

(3) The relation between the theoretic and the practical reason 
ig much more intimate than what is ordinarily assumed. The concep- 
tion of apriori thinking as a factor of knowledge appears to be con- 
nected with the moral apprehension of free causality. Causality in the 
known object is intelligible only in reference to free causality as prac- 
tically cognised. (4) The very problem of the first Critique would be 
gratuitous unless the object were already suspect in the light of a cer- 
titude higher than that about the object. That certitude is, to Kant, 
the certitude of the moral consciousness. The standard of reality car 
only be suggested by the apprehension, in the subjective attitude, of 
the self as utterly unobjective. (5-7) When Kant describes the object 
as only a ‘phenomenon’, the word has to be understood from three 
points of view—the theoretic, the practical and the aesthetic or reflec- 


ANALYSIS 351 


tive—elaborated respectively in the three Critiques. From the theoretic 
standpoint, the objective is taken as phenomenal because its forms— 
space, time and causality—are taken to be not objects but indis- 
tinguishable from the self : from the practical standpoint, the object is 
known to be an emanation of self as freedom; from the aesthetic stand- 
point, the spatio-temporal object is just a self-subsistent value. 


CHAPTER II 


MIND AS PHENOMENON (Sec. 8-18) 


(8) A mental fact is in time only and what is in time is change. 
A mental fact is thus to be taken as change. But this change is not 
like a change in a spatial object and is not objectively taken to be in 
a persistent. This contrast suggests the question as to how it is to be 
regarded as a fact. (9) As a change for which no persistent is known. 
and of which the facthood is undeniable, the mental appears to be a 
problem. The solution of the problem lies in the theory that it is a 
phenomenal fact. That the mental as the purely temporal is known as 
a phenomenon of the free self is grounded in the fact that we practi- 
cally know the self as free causality. (10) The external object is 
taken by Kant to be the phenomenon of an unknowable reality and the 
mental object of the self as real. As objective knowledge depends on 
the affection of our sensibility, the knowledge of the mental fact must 
depend on some affection of the mind. But the question as to how the 
self ‘affects the mind’ cannot be answered. We are assured, however, 
that it does and this cannot be theoretic assurance through inner sense. 
(11) That we are affected in our external sense is theoretically known 
in our internal sense. But that we are affected in our internal sense 
cannot be known in the internal sense again. 

(12) The internal sense, like the external, has its form and its 
matter, time constituting the form and the ‘representations of the ex- 
ternal senses’ the matter. This matter involves time and the involu- 
tion is apprehended not by the internal sense but by apperception. The 
matter of the internal sense is thus the spatial percept as floated in time 
or as referred to in an image. The mental object is the image which 
is not so much in time as a figure of time. Just as the different space- 
figures are through the imagination of possible motion in space, 80 
are the varying images or time-figures through the working of apper- 
ception in time of the self or the mind. (13) The ‘mental’ is thus 
understood by Kant to be image constructed by the self in time and 


352 STUDIES IN KANT 


referring to spatial percepts. The internal sense as thus figured not 
merely in knowing but also in willing and feeling is the empirical 
mind. A mental fact is thus an image as formed out of time by the 
self and as informed by the self. Kant’s view of the empirical mind 
as time itself as a permanent unity would thus be very different from the 
Humian view of the mind as a mere series of mental states. 

(14-15) The time-relation of mental facts is not a succession 
within a spatial permanent and, therefore, not a causal succession. 
It is yet an objective fact and not a merely imagined content. For 
Kant, Empirical psychology is not a science of the soul only because 
mathematics is inapplicable to mental facts. The inapplicability of 
mathematics means really inapplicability of causality. (16) Ac- 
cording to Kant, succession is objective only as causal. The suces- 
sion of mental states is not thus objective. But it is not, therefore, . 
merely subjective. The paradox can be resolved only by imagining 
that, to Kant, the time-relation of two mental states is the time-relation 
of the external situations with which they are bound up. It is only 
thus that it is objective fact without being causal. (17) There is no 
causal relation among mental facts. Kant, however, held that the 
self as phenomenal is causally determined. This would be intelligible 
on the assumption that the belief in the operation of causality within 
the mind is only practical, being bound up with the practical belief 
in or the knowledge of free causality. (18) The external world as 
phenomenal is reflectively judged to be self-subsistent. But the mental 
world would only be symbolised and not judged to be so. 


CHAPTER III 
SENSE AND SENSATION (SEc. 19-32) 


(19) Kant defines ‘sense’ as ‘the faculty of receiving represen- 
tations’ by being ‘affected’, and the primary dualism is of the think- 
ing act and the faculty of representation. (20) The self is essentially 
the conscious thinking act having three directions—the theoretic, 
the practical and the aesthetic. We have representation in each of 
these three directions. Representation is received in knowing, put 
forth in willing and entertained in feeling. Representation is the first 
content of thinking. (21) In cognitive thinking, the representation is 
given. As distinguished from thinking in reflective knowledge, it is 
at once imaging and the image of the existent object. (22) Repre- 
sentation as the faculty of imagination is the mind as distinct from the 


ANALYSIS 353 


self. (23) The mind is the faculty of sensibility when the represen- 
tation emerges through an affection of the self. We are conscious of 
this ‘affection’ not merely as receiving but also as a limitation to 
free imagination. (24) To be aware of a limitation of free imagin- 
ing is to be aware of something other than the free act—viz., a given 
object—as limiting the act and conditioning the emergence of the 
conscious representation of the object. The emergence of the mental 
event, which is not an event or representation, is just the sensation. 
(25) Though it is not an event, it is not therefore a mere abstraction. 
It is a state or affection of the self that is timelessly real. 

(26) There is no harm in saying that the affection of the self 
is caused by the phenomenal object, for to say that is really to say 
that it is caused by the thing-in-itself. (27) The sensation is 
neither a mental event in time nor a quality of the spatial object. The 
so-called sense-quality is only the content of the space occupied by 
the object. (28) To Kant, the relation of thing and quality has no 
application to objective existence. The object has the apparent quality 
as within it much as the mirror has the image within it and not as 
its real determination. (29) The sensation then is neither men- 
tal object nor external object but what is ‘involved’ in the external 
object. (30) The external object is ‘involved’ in the percept as sensa- 
tion is involved in the external object. (31) The self is the excitant 
of the internal sense precisely in the sense in which the thing-in-itself 
is the excitant of the external sense. (32) Sense as the transcen- 
dental ground or potentiality of sensations is called the apriori form 
of the sensations. 


CHAPTER IV 


SPACE, TIME AND CAUSALITY (SEc. 33-43) 


(33) The analysis of known object into matter and form emer- 
ges in transcendental reflection which is a form of introspective acti- 
vity and which is quite other than the act of reasoning. The know- 
ledge that we get through such introspective exercise is an aspect of 
the exercise itself and does not come after the exercise as in the case 
of reasoning. (34) Under such reflection, the external world gets 
stratified into sensed matter and the forms of Space, Time and Causa- 
lity. The sensed matter is apprehended as involved in space, the 
spatial matter as involved in time and this spatio-temporal matter as 
further involved in causality. The matter at every stage is known only 


23 


354 STUDIES IN KANT 


as the filling of its form, but form is understood everywhere as what 


can be empty. Matter without form is not known, but it may be the 
content of a non-theoretic consciousness, Form without matter is, 
however, transcendentally known as a possibility. This possibility is a 
kind of subsistent entity which is distinguished from mere chimera by 
being identified with a transcendentally evident subjective function. 
(35) There are three consecutive grades of transcendental reflection 
or imaginative viewing of the external object: (a) Picturing—where 
the object as being perceived is imagined through the internal sense 
and shows itself as the space-form which might be empty; (b) Symbo- 
lising—where this subsistent form of space as being thought is viewed 
from within and shows itself as the time-form which can be empty. 
Here time appears as symbolic space or space in the making; (c) Sche- 
matising—where this detached time, as viewed from within, appears. 
itself as the figuring of a possible image. 

(36) In the non-reflective attitude, the object is what is practi- 
cally dealt with; in the aesthetic attitude, the object floats up like an 
appearance; in the transcendental attitude, the form by being detached 
from the object appears constitutive of the object. The detached 
form is understood in the consecutive stages of transcendental reflec- 
tion (i) as standing by itelf as empty, (ii) as having constituted the 
object and (iii) as self-limiting and self-constructing and thus self- 
repeating. (37-39) The three grades illustrated in respect of space 
and time. (40) Unlike the forms of space and time which are pre- 
sented, the form of causality (comprising all the categories) is never 
intuited, though objective fact necessarily implies it. (41) The forms 
of sense are not subjective acts. Though they are anticipations of ex- 
perience, the anticipation is subjectively a feeling rather than an act. 
(42) Causality is a form in the wide sense of form of unity of the 
object. (43) Transcendental reflection on the object of the under- 
standing, viz., causal succession dissociates its form of causality 
as the empty form of unity. This empty form is recognised as the 
positive possibility of the objective world. 


CHAPTER V 
CausaLity (Sec. 44-55) 


(44) Causal succession possesses two characters—irreversibility 
and inevitability. The former presents the problem of finding the precise 


terms of the succession through the application of the latter. (45) 


ANALYSIS 355 


Every perceived succession is causal succession of some objective 
facts, but this is not capable of objective proof. It follows only from 
the transcendental reflection that if succession which should not be 
perceived (by the external sense) is yet perceived, it can only be 
through the imaginative production of the perception. (46) Succes- 
sion in the object is believed as an intuitable fact, but it cannot be 
intuited either by the outer or by the inner sense. It follows that the 
apparent intuition of succession is only an apriori or timeless construc- 
tion of time. (47) The only alternative to this Kantian view would 
be to admit that succession is nonsensuously intuited by the mind. 
But the Kantian theory would be consonant with the view that the 
mind can apprehend only what is given to sense-perception. 

(48) The production of the perception of change is anticipative 
and the exiernal world is known as intrinsically involved in change. 
(49) On our ordinary notions of space and time, of perception and 
imagination, spatio-temporal facts and the perception of time would 
be a mystery. The mystery has been sought to be solved by the con- 
ception of a single entity—space-time. That conception is, however, 
inadmissible. But since the ordinary conception of space and time 
as a duality of co-ordinate entities cannot be maintained, the true solu- 
tion appears to lie in the Kantian view that space is within time but 
is not time. Space is thus distinguished from time and time is yet per- 
ceived in space as change. In the transcendental consciousness, this 
immanence of time in space is nothing but the immanence of mind in 
the object. (50) Thus the law of causality is legitimated by the epis- 
temology of the perception change. 

(51-53) Kant’s conceptidfi of causality differs from Hume’s not 
merely in the recognition of necessary connection but also in the re- 


cognition of the metaphysical entities of substance and force as neces- 
sarily in phenomena. (54) Causality presupposes substance. Accord- 


ing to Kant, nothing is known as objective fact unless it is causally re- 
lated; but the terms of the causal relation are not, therefore, taken 
to be constituted in their facthood by the relation. Again, causality as 
a fact entails reciprocity between two substances. 

(55) Uncaused cause and uncausing effect cannot be known 
objects. Whatever is known as object is knowable as at once the 
effect of something and the cause of something else. 


CHAPTER VI 
JUDGMENTS OF FACT, VALUE AND OUGHT-TO-BE (SEc. 56-69) 
(56) Kant recognises three types of judgments. A_ theoretic 


356 STUDIES IN KANT 


judgment is a judgment of fact and embodies knowledge. A feeling- 


judgment is a judgment of value and embodies imaginative satisfaction. 
A moral judgment is a judgment of ought-to-be and like the theoretic 
judgment it embodies knowledge. (57) Judgment in all these cases 
refers to a phenomenal object and is the appreciation of a concept 
somehow immanent in it. (58) The subject of a judgment is always 
a phenomenon—whether actual or possible—but never the imaginary 
or the illusory or the problematic. The predicate is always an intelli- 
gible. The copula represents the immanence of the predicate in the 
subject and is apprehended in an imaginative synthesis as phenomenon 
in the making. 

(59) The three types of judgment bring out the three aspects of 
phenomenon mentioned in Chapter I. (60) The different grades of the 
subject in the theoretic judgment may be grouped conformably to the 
predicate into the three heads of individuals—empirical objects, parti- 
cular determinations of space and time and space-time. The corres- 
ponding judgments are called physical, mathematical and metaphysi- 
cal. (61) The transcendental equivalents of the copula in the three 
classes of theoretic judgments are respectively the schema or the 
half-presented form of the spatial, the symbolically presented form 
of the purely temporal and the unpresented form of the intelligible. 
The nature of schema elucidated. 

(62) Judgment as a_ transcendental function implies the 
schematism of the universal. In both theoretic and non-theoretic 
judgments, the universal is the self as asserting itself in reference to 
the phenomenal object. In the theoretic sphere, the self in such re- 
ference is truth; in the practical sphere, it is the good; and in the 
imaginative sphere it is the self-subsistent value. In all spheres, the 
self in reference to the given phenomena is a thinkable which is in 
the process of being phenomenalised as an anticipatory image of the 
phenomenal. (63) In theoretic judgment, the concept to apply to 
the percept seeks to imaginatively anticipate it. The objection that 
the concept and the percept are only unreal abstractions from the 
concrete fact of judgment cannot be accepted in the light of the trans- 
cendental analysis of the judgment into concept and percept. There 
is a problem as to how the concrete concept and percept meet in the 
judgment. The judgment is a union of factors that can be dissolved. 
If it can be dissolved, the uniting has to be recognised as a function. 
(64) This uniting function is constructive imagination or the imagina- 
tion that produces the perception of the given spatial object as figured 
by it. The figure is not given in passive perception. In contrast 


ANALYSIS 357 


with the ‘passive percept, the figure appears in the internal sense as in 
the making. © (65) Since the percept is distinguishable from. this 
schematic figure, object-knowledge is realised only in an internal per- 
cept in figured apprehension. The concept only approximates to the 
percept and its immanence in the spatial object is not accomplished. 
Such knowledge-'as we actually have is, therefore, only necessary and 
not self-evident. | 

(66) To the reflective judgment, the phenomenon is self-sub- 
sistent. Its figuring by the concept appears as its own expression. 
The union of the concept and the percept is not here a schema but 
the accomplished presentation of expression. The concept here 
appears immanent in nature as its purposiveness. (67) The pur- 
posiveness of nature is purposiveness to our knowing and is imagined 
as such in the interpretation of an actual feeling of pleasure of a dis- 
interested kind. The reflective judgment is prior to the concept of 
purposivenesss. The immanence of the concept of purpose in the 
percept is given in feeling in the first instance, and the concept is then 
sought to be formulated through the reflective elaboration of the feel- 
ing. In judgment of fact the concept seeks application; but in judg- 
ment of value, the application seeks the concept. (68) The pur- 
posiveness of nature is felt and imagined in two ways—the aesthetic 
and the teleological. In both the purposiveness is imagined as an 
interpretation of empirical knowability—of what is only felt to be 
knowable in the former and of what is both felt as knowable and part- 
ly thinkingly known in the latter. 

(69) The judgment of ought-to-be, like the judgment of value, 
is the expression of a felt immanence of the concept of the good in 
perceivable object, though the feeling is a practical feeling amounting 
to practical knowledge. The predicate is fully formulated and trans- 
cends the subject. The transcendence is, however, expressed as the 
approximation of the percept to the concept, of the felt perceivable 
nature to freedom and the approximation is understood as symbolism 
or ‘typic’. 


CHAPTER VII 


FREEDOM AND Mora.ity (Sec. 70-85) 


(70) Desire is conscious as an anticipation of causality. Where 
it is conscious in the actual causation, it is called will or wish. Free 
will is a particular form of the will. (71) Desire is conngcted by a 
subjective rule with pleasure either as its cause or as effect. As the 


358 STUDIES IN KANT 


cause, it is called appetite or inclination. As the effect it is the ‘feli- 


cific aspect’ of the object ideated. (72) Desire or aversion as such 
ie., doing or forbearing as we please, is called ‘wish’. When there 
is the further consciousness of its causality passing out to the object, 
it is called ‘elective will’. (73) This pleasing or choosing need not 
be choosing between alternatives and choice need not mean conflict. 
(74) The elective will is not necessarily free. Human elective 
will is said to be free when the subject that determines it is conscious 
of itself as pure reason determining it. (75) Free will is still elective 
will. There is, however, a rational will beyond free will. This ratio- 
nal will is the supermoral holy will. (76) Freedom.of elective will 


is not indeterministic. Choice in itself is only phenomenon, while 
freedom of choice is noumenal. The phenomenal will which is theore- 
tically known: as cause of the outward action is practically known to 


be itself caused by noumenal freedom. This is known only in good 
willing or willing of the moral law. 

(77) Wrong willing is choosing to act from a maxim of inclina- 
tion and consciously against the moral law. In both good willing and 
wrong willing, the phenomenal causality is known to be noumenally 
determined by the subject. But while in good willing the subject 
that noumenally determines the choice is the supra-mental free subject, 
in wrong, willing the subject is consciously identified with the mental 
and is consciously unfree. In the latter case, the subject is not, how- 
ever, aware of becoming unfree by any act of freedom. ‘The self as 
the consciously unfree determinant of choice is the intelligible character. 

(78-79) This intelligible character, like freedom, is known only 
practically as the implication of the moral quality of willing. There 
is to our faith a freedom behind this intelligible character, and behind 
even good freedom of which this character is a condition. This is 
what Kant calls the ‘radical evil in human nature’. (80) Practical 
cognition is consciousness of the reality of freedom and moral law in 
the single process of good willing. (81) ‘Ought’ is known only as 
being fully acted and as weaving the form of reason. Practical rea- 
son is the form of universality or imperative in general as causal. 

(82) The charge of ‘formalism’ is not wholly justified. In his 
three-fold formulation of the moral law, the last two give some kind of 
matter. The main reason, again, why he deals with the form appears 
to be that, to him, the form of morality is not mere form but the 
essence as well. (83-85) Kant’s standpoint and his moral formulae 
analysed in detail. 


APPENDIX 


“TRANSCENDENTAL METHOD’ 


Kant’s method of philosophic investigation is a method of trans- 
cendental reflection. Ordinarily in philosophy, we reason or argue 
as in science from data to conclusion. Kant also seems to reason, but 
a closer consideration shows that his procedure is very different from 
objective reasoning as in science. In objective reasoning, the con- 
clusion is taken as what must be and not as what is, and the subjective 
operation of passing to it from the data is not understood as consti- 


tuting the connection between data and conclusion. The content of 
the conclusion is only expected to be perceived, experienced or realised 


and is not felt to be realised in the reasoning itself; and that the con- 
clusion follows from the data is taken to be an eternal fact no way 
depending on the work of the reasoner’s mind. In the transcendental 
procedure of Kant, there is the exhibition of data and conclusion; but 
the conclusion is not merely expected to be realised but is felt to be 
realised and felt not after the reasoning but in the very consciousness. 
of the reasoning. The reasoning is like willing, the fulfilment or 
success of which is felt in the willing itself which, in fact, is expectation 
and fulfilment in one, realisation of the end in the consciously expec- 
tant operation. Within knowledge, we have this kind of immediately 
successful operation below reasoning also in intuitive construction: 
the line is there before us as we draw it. So in the presentation of a 
motion, there miraculously emerges the presentation of the path of 
motion. Transcendental reasoning is similarly a realising of the con- 
clusion in the very operation of reasoning. Everywhere it is a sort 
of seeing in the doing: the transcendental procedure is an experimental 
knowing, the experiment being consciously made with the self itself. 
Ordinarily we take knowing as what comes to Us. There might be 
voluntary regulation before the knowing—c.g., knowing of the con- 
clusion in a reasoning where one regulates one’s thinking through a 
certain mode of arranging the data in one’s mind. But the knowing 
comes after the arranging and does not shine in the arranging itself: 
even then it does not amount to a seeing or assertory certitude but 
only to the faith that it will be verified. In the apprehension, how- 
ever, of the line emerging into being in the imaginative drawing of it, 
there is assertory certitude about the line in the consciops process 
of reaching it. So in all the apparent reasoning in the demonstration 


360 STUDIES IN KANT 


of the apriority of time, space etc. in the Critique, we have an assertory 
certitude, about the conclusion in the conscious procedure. It is not 
a matter of proving so much as of inwardising the knowledge of time, 
space etc., of what may be called an introspective knowledge of the 
object, of realising of the objective fact as being bodied forth by the 
subject. We may see a line simply as there or we may apprehend it 
as being seen by being imaginatively traced. The apprehension may 
be helped by a distinguishing of the objectivity of the line from that 
of a perceived empirical fact, and the distinguishing may be expressed 
in the form of a reasoning—because the geometric entity has such 
distinctive characters, therefore it cannot be a merely seen fact as it 
appears to be. Really however the distinguishing is the whole cogni- 
tion and the reasoning is but a scaffolding. The distinguishing here 
‘again is not a comparison, the mere consciousness of an objective 
point of distinction. It implies the emergence of a new grade of 
subjectivity, viz., imaginative seeing, the line being perceived by being 
given like the empirical object but by being imagined. The point of 
distinction between the line and the empirical object occupying it is 
not objective fact but a content corresponding to the introspective 
distinction between imagination and perception. The distinction 
between an objective fact as perceived and the same as imagined can- 
not be said to be objective nor merely subjective. The fact as ima- 
ginatively apprehended can only be described as internal to or consti- 
tutive of the fact as simply perceived, this internality being a transcen- 
dental (and not an objective) grade of the objective fact. Everywhere, 
reasoning in transcendental investigation is seeing the conclusion as 
the internality of the data through a methodical subjective deepening 
of the cognition of the data. The deepening is a doing, a specific 
experimentation with the subjective level of knowing. To adduce 
proof of the line being there through imaginative tracing is in fact a 
prescription to others to subject the perception to imagination or a 
recalling of one’s own act of thus having constructed a line. So every- 
where, transcendental proof is the indication of a subjective experi- 
ment with the knowing activity. To find the proof from oneself is to 
retrace the process by which one constructed or put forth the data. 
Transcendental reflection is the reverse of the process of transcenden- 
tal construction. It is a form of aesthetic contemplation of the object 
through which the object is seen as being or having been expressed or 
bodied forth from within. It is like reflecting on a poem and to 
retrace the steps by which the original formless feeling in the poet’s 
mind came to take its present articulated shape. 


STATE CENTRAL LIBRARY 
WE f BENGAL 
CAT EE 


