STUDIES 

m 


YEDANTISM. 



Cftfcufia: 

FXJBLtSHEB BY THE CALCUTTA UNTVEBSITY ATI^D PKINTED 
AT THE BAPTIST MISSION PBBSS. 


1909. 



CONTENTS. 

Page 

iNTBODtrCTION . . .. . . V 

I. Asr Appeoach thkoxtgh Psychology .. 1 

II. Vedahtio Metaphysics .. .. ..18 

III. Vedantio Logic .. .. .. 51 

Analysis . . .. ' .. 71 



INTRODUCTION. 

^ The following studies in Vedantism are not so much exposi¬ 
tions of the traditional Vedanta as problematic constructions on 
Vedantic lines intended to bring out the relations of the system 
to modern philosophical systems. The work of construction has, 
however, been subordinated to the work of interpretation. A 
wide latitude of interpretation has been claimed throughout. 

The studiesjollow the traditional authorities, the Upanishads, 
the Brahmorsutrasj and Bhccgavad-gltd, and confine themselves 
to the monistic interpretations of Sankara, They draw on 
treatises like Panchadakl^ VedantOrsiddhanta-muktavali, etc., 
propounding what may be called the later Vedanta, for such defi¬ 
nite views as may be regarded to be legitimate systematisations 
of the earlier but looser Vedanta. No attempt has been made 
here to trace the historical evolution of the Vedantic school. 

The historical study of a school of thought must have methods 
and aims different from those of a philosophical study, though 
the studies are mutually supplementary. The philosophical 
study should come first in the order of time; the historical 
study of an ancient system of philosophy, to be of any use at 
all, must be preceded by an earnest study of the philosophy, 
in the expositions traditionally accepted as authoritative. The 
correctness of these expositions—at any rate, the perspective 
—may be impugned afterwards by historic research. But the 
historian here cannot begin his work at all unless he can live 
in sympathy into the details of an apparently outworn creed 
and recognise the truth in the first imperfect adumbrations of 
it. The attitude of the mere narrator has, in the case of the 
historian of philosophy, to be exchanged, as far as possible, for 
that of the sympathetic interpreter. There is the danger, no 
doubt, of too easily reading one’s philosophic creed into the 
history, but the opposite danger is more serious still. It is the 
danger of taking the philosophic type studied as a historic 
curiosity rather than a recipe for the human soul, and of seeking 
to explain the curiosity by natural causes instead of seriously 
examining its merits as pliilosophy. This unfortunately is 
sometimes the defect of Western expositions of Eastern philoso¬ 
phy and religion. It springs from a tacit conviction, which, to 
say the least, bespeaks a lack of historic sense, that the common- 
sense evolved at the present day is absolutely infallible ; though 
if the history of philosophy were rightly studied, it would show 



VI 


that many of the modern speculative disooveries are but reafHr- 
pations of old truths, and that the present-day common sense 
itself is a complex structure in which arc imbedded types of 
thought which are ordinarily taken to be completely outworn 
and superseded. We have heard of Indian pessimism and fatalism 
disposed of by a sapient reference to the climatic and political 
conditions of the country'; and the very name of philosophy has 
sometimes been denied to Indian speculation on the ground, 
apparently established historically, that the Oriental intellect 
is not sufficiently dry and has not masculine virility enough to 
rise to anything higher than grotesque imaginative cosmogonies. 
When history thus’ sits in judgment on philosophy, ^n Indian 
student of Vedanta may well be excused if to him a reproduction 
of the philosophy, such as may bring it into contact with 
modern problems, appears far more important than any mere 
historical dissertation. 

^ A fair instance of how principles of historic research are some¬ 
times allowed to prejudice a right appreciation of philosophy is 
afforded by Dr. Thibaut’s otherwise valuable introduction to 
his translation of the Veddnta-sutra^, with commentary 

(Sacred Books of the East, vol. xxxiv). Eeferring to the 
attempts of Sankara and other scholiasts to evolve a complete 
philosophic system from the Upanishads, he says: On later 
generations, to which the whole body of texts came down as 
revealed truth, there devolved the inevitable task of establishing 
systems on which no exception could be taken to any of the 
■ texts; but that the task was, strictly speaking, an impossible 
one, one wliich it was impossible to accomplish fairly and 
honestly, there really is no reason to deny ” (p. cvi). The texts 
‘ ‘ do not allow themselves to be systemansed because they 
were never meant to form a system'’ (p. cxiv). ‘‘ ....But 
the task of systematising once given, we are quite ready to admit 
that Sankara''s system is the best that can be devised ’ ’ (p. cxxii). 
The contention here .apparently is that the task is not given, 
except to one who believes the texts to embody revealed truth. 

Now, what precisely is the task to which Sankara has ad¬ 
dressed himself ? It is not that of the critical historian, it is 
the task of piecing together the several texts into a philosophical' 
system, of developing a hypothesis on a necessary basis which 
^11 coyer all the texts. But it may be asked, why should it be 
assumed that all the texts should find place in a necessary system ? 
May not some of them embody false speculations altogether ? 
Here, then, we have to consider the special nature of the Upani- 
shad texts. They may or may not have been revealed; but 
as they are, they are presented not as mere guesses from the 
outside to explain the facts of the Universe, nor even as 






leisurely philosopliisings conducted on a necessary basis, but as 
embodying mystic intuitions, often the products of what has 
been called the mythologic imagination which sees philosophy in 
poetic symbols. There are sometimes attempts at reasoning, too, 
but then by themselves they are hardly logically convincing, 
having not unoften an almost infantine naivete about them. 
Now, the question here is, what should be our attitude towards 
these texts which, apparently at any rate, embody intuitions ? 
So long as no obvious mark of spuriousness is discovered, they 
are to be regarded as genuine, though even a genuine intuition 
may be false in its content. The falsity, however, is not to be 
judged a but only after a strenuous endeavour to reproduce, 
if possible, tl¥5 intuitions through such means as may have been 
laid down in the idstras, or, what we understand better, after 
an attempt to systematise all the texts into a well-rounded 
philosophy. The latter - is the task which Sankara and other 
commentators have set themselves to accomplish. Hence ad¬ 
mitting that the texts were never meant to be strung together 
into a system, it can still be held that the task of systematising 
is inevitably given to every student of the Ufanishads, 

Dr. Thibaut does not appear to have sufficiently distinguished 
the role of the philosopliic systematiser from that of the critical 
or historical scholar when he lays down the caution that ‘ ‘ we 
must refrain from using unhesitatingly and without careful 
consideration of the merits of each individual case, the teach¬ 
ings, direct or inferred, of any one passage to the end of 
determining the drift of the teaching of other passages.” A 
commentator is certainly open to severe censure when he asserts 
that a text bears a certain meaning which it cannot bear in a 
particular context. But when he simply means that the truth 
embodied in a particular text is inadequately expressed and 
should be developed or rendered more explicit in the light of 
other texts, or when he interprets a mythologic metaphor differ¬ 
ently in different passages under the conviction that it is a natural 
symbol of many correspondent truths of different potencies or 
grades, he is to be deemed as perfectly within his rights as a 
philosophic interpreter and systematiser. A philosophic corn- 
mentator, especially on unsystematised texts embodying 
speculative truths, has a far wdder latitude than a literary 
commentator. Exegetical interpretation here inevitably 
shades off into philosophic construction; and * this need not 
involve any intellectual dishonesty. We may readily admit 
that ‘^what he (the commentator) from his advanced stand¬ 
point looks upon as an inferior kind of cognition ’ ’ was not 
“ viewed in the same way by the authors of the Upanishads,^^ 
but that may have been because the teacher of the inferior 







mu 


wisdom had not in view the antithesis between it and the supe¬ 
rior wisdom. Sandilya, the teacher of the Sdndilyorvidyd in the 
Chhdndogya XJpanishad, may not have ' ‘ looked upon it as any¬ 
thing else but a statement of the highest truth accessible to man,” 
but that is no reason why Sankara may not look upon it as 
the inferior wisdom. It would appear, too, as though the dis¬ 
tinction between the higher and the lower wisdom was taken 
by Dr. Thibaut and some others to be vender than Sankara himself 
intended; to Sankara, the Saguna (determinate) Brahman and 
the Nirguna (indeterminate) Brahman were not so much distinct 
gods as the contrasted aspects of the same reality, 

A misconception of the latitude allowed to philosophic 
systematisation may be traced in Dr. Thibaut’S remarks on 
Sankara^s doctrine of Maya, He tries to demonstrate that 
Sankara'*s doctrine of Mdyd is nowhere to be found in the 
VpanisJiads except probably in an undeveloped form in a few 
doubtful passages, and contends that the doctrine should not, 
therefore, be read into other passages which are intelligible 
without it. Let it be granted for the present that the demon¬ 
stration is satisfactory. Later on he admits that the doctrine 
of ‘‘ the final absolute identification of the individual self 
with the universal self is indicated in terms of unmistakable 
plainness ’ ’ (p, cxxii) in the Upanishads, Now if the point 
were discussed as one of philosophy rather than of historical 
scholar^ip, it would not be difficult to perceive that the doctrine 
of Mdyd is a necessary corollary of this doctrine of the individual 
being Brahman in Moksha (absolute liberation) : for it is only 
in this identification that he realises that individuality was an 
illusion and that the distinction of subject, object, etc., possible 
only through this individuality, was an illusion too. 

In a reproduction of Vedantism such as we have proposed, 
no attempt need be made to distinguish the points common to 
tne Indian systems from those which are specifically Vedantic. 
bl^cial care, however,^ should be taken to develop from first 
pnnciples such Vedantic positions as being distinctively Indian 
present a marked contrast to European habits of thought. 
T ere are sundry deep-seated differences between Eastern and 
Western speculation. To European common sense, certain forms 
^^indian speculation may appear absurd or puerile at the best; 

presented heights and depths of 
all fnn % one’s breath, and which an 

mvstical designates hypersubtie and 

at least the pnnt made to show that in some cases 

afic Thought if n't European common sense or scien- 

S,Uirunder\fnf^ apparent, and that the Indian position, 
p p y nderstood, whether true or false, is a development of 



ix 

thought in an unsuspected direction, though by no means incom¬ 
patible with Western thought; while in certain other cases where 
there is real contradiction to European common sense, an analysis 
of this apparently absolute standard may, peradventure, yield 
dissolving views in which the Eastern thought is found to alter¬ 
nate with its Western counterpart with the naivete of a summer 
dream. As to what is vaguely called the mysticism of Vedanta 
a clearing-up should be attempted in a more than ordinarily 
strenuous spirit of rationalism. Only it should content itself 
with a problematic indication of the direction in which the 
dark truths lie without pretending to furnish omniscient ecc- 
flanations* 

The attitude to be borne towards the present subject should 
be neither that of the apologist nor that of the academic com¬ 
piler but that of the interpreter which involves, to a certain 
extent, that of the constructor, too. It is too late in the day to 
defend a system like the Vedanta with a theologian’s animus; 
it is hardly necessary, except probably to silence a class of 
persons whose ignorance of the system is matched only by their 
zeal in combating it; and it is, to say the least, unwise, even 
for one who has implicit faith in the system, for to drag it into 
the theological arena is to effectually scare away all open-minded 
men from it and relegate it for good to the Hmbo of oblivion. 
The Vedantic propagandist cannot do better than appeal through 
a literature wholly expository, without a word of dogmatic 
lecturing in it, which will invite readers—it may be, a select class 
of them—to contemplate with something of an aesthetic sympathy 
an ancient life-ideal animating an organised body of ancient 
thought, just to quicken, it may be for a moment, the conscious¬ 
ness, always very torpid, of the dominating ideal of the day 
being only one among many possibles ; and then if Vedanta has 
any real vitality in it, it will set them thinking till it leads to a 
real division of the spirit. A true philosophic system is not to be 
looked upon as a soulless jointing of hypotheses; it is a living 
fabric which, with all its endeavour to be objective, must have a 
well-marked individuality. Hence it is not to be regarded as 
the special property of academic philosophy-mongers, to be 
hacked up by them into technical views, but is to be regarded 
as a form of life and is to be treated as a theme of literature 
of infinite interest to humanity. 





Studies in Vedantism. 


I.—An Approach through Psychology. 

The psychology of waking, dream, and dreamless sleep con¬ 
stitutes the pivot of the Vedantic system and of certain other 
systems, like the Yoga, which may be regarded as ancillary to it. 
It is to be regarded as a clear addition to ordinary psychology, 
theimporfance of which is not a whit exaggerated if it is claimed 
that it recognises a new dimension of existence altogether. Its 
importance will be appreciated by *connecting it with kindred 
Western speculations on the one hand, and with Vedantic specu¬ 
lations in Metaphysics on the other. 

2. What would be the empirical account of a dream 1 Phy¬ 
siological speculation on the point has hardly anything to 
offer except certain platitudes which do not touch the speciality 
of the phenomenon ; and so the psychological explanation alone 
is worth referring to here. When a man goes to sleep, images 
are roused in his mind, sometimes by sensory presentations, 
but most often with apparent spontaneity, although even 
in such cases the absence of an ideal suggestion, continuous 
with a sensory presentation, cannot be absolutely proved. In 
waking perceptions, illusions, and hallucinations, the idea¬ 
tional elements are generally copies of previous percepts (some¬ 
times involving new construction also); but these do not 
appear at random, being attracted into definite grooves of 
suggestion by the presentative elements and by attention as 
determined by practical interests. In dreams, too, we have 
copies of waking percepts, but imaginative construction is here 
far freer, there being normally no restrictive and directive 
action of sensation on the one hand, and of connective attention 
on the other. Many events and combinations of events which 
would be at once deemed to be impossible in waking life would 
not be questioned at all in a dream. In waking hfe, many 
associations or constructions are ruled out, prevented from 
even appearing in consciousness, by certain beHefs determined 
by our practical necessities. Even sensations and percepts are 
occasionally so ruled out. At the same time, in waking life, 
there are different degrees of seriousness or concentration of 
attention on what directly subserves life; there are stages of 
listlessness, play, aesthetic and philosophic consciousness. So 
long, however, as the consciousness of a body is there, we cannot 
‘ become a living soul ’ ; the body always demands a measure 





2 


of attention, while outer stimuli are continually stirring it 
up and starting ever-renewed trains of association. In dreams f 
the distractions of this ' heavy ’ body are reduced to a minimum,' 
sometimes disappearing altogether; the necessity of practical, 
life is not so tyrannic, and hence there is unrestrained credulity/ 
But why should there be a belief at all ? Objectification carries 
a naive belief with it, unless it is definitely contradicted by some 
other belief. The idea of the object is not known to be a mere 


idea, unless contradicted by some perception or by a more 
vivid or coherent idea. 

3. We may conceive a stage of dream proper—there being 
transitional stages between waking and dreaming—where there 
are no sensations and the consciousness of the body is at a 
minimum. Here the object-consciousness must be purer than 
in the waking stage, Le,, freer from reference to body; the 
self, too, is notjnere idea of body but is the seer of ideas {of. 
Drislhter DrasJita or seer of seeing). So in a dream, things 
appear to come in and go out without startling or surprising 
us—they are recognised as matters of course. Space and time 
tend to lose their reference to the body, and so violations of 
continuity occasion no surprise at all. There is no tyrannic 
continuous memory,^ no rigid demand for uniformity, no com¬ 
punction for not being in a line with truth—a a’lorious life of 
thoughtless thoughtfulness. 

4. Does this account of a dream justify us in taking it to 
belong to a 7iew dimension of psychical existence ? The con¬ 
tinuous gradations from waking consciousness to dream proper 
^ed not preclude us from admitting such a new dimension. 
Dreams may be described as perceptions without sensation! 
Is there any difierence m kind between perception with sensation 
and perception without sensation ? The question would roughly 
resolve Itself into the old question about the existence of a 
qimhtative ^fference between impression and idea. The 

erentiae of inipression and idea that are ordinarily proposed 
are not reaUy satisfactory. As to the criterion of vividness it is 
cdtogether adventitious to knowledge as knowledge ; besides 

sensations only when they coexist, 
and that, too not m aU cases. The criterion of being affected 
by movement IS unsatisfactory, for in dreams, where we have 
admittedly nothing but ideas, objects are affected by ourdream- 

^*d Mel coUsT’ 4s°to* impression 

ff^mav be S^d nnf criterion, imier coherence, 

T <^hat the incoherence of a dream is not felt 
“o r.*eSli s^d tr“’ hf Ides, sensations as sensations have 
rnnirKcii A ’ wc may ha VC incoherent perceptions ridiim 
roughshod over all our expectations. There is nothing left but 



a 


the felt abruptness or g^^;e^^-ness (independence of self would be 
going too far, as self-consciousness may not have been developed) 
of the impression, as distinct from the freedom, the playlike, 
easy, unquestioning movement of attention in ideas and dreams. 
In framing to ourselves a difficult combination of ideas, in 
introspection, in the effort to recollect, a resistance no doubt is 
offered by percepts or habits of thought generated by sense- 
experience ; but as the self prevails against it^, the ideal function¬ 
ing is felt to be free, the easiest to the self. 

5. This shows that sensation and idea are not co-ordinate 
in reality, and to overlook this is a fundamental vice of Empirical 
Psychology. The idea may unconsciously animate the sensation 
(|)erception is^ a ' presentative-representative ’ cognition) ; but 
this unconscious working is absolutely different from its conscious 
existence. The conscious idea, while recognising itself to have 
been operative in the percept, absolutely disowns its unconscious 
sensuous character ; e.g., when an illusion is corrected by careful 
observation, the idea simulating a pei'cept is known to be a mere 
idea, but the illusory percept vanishes altogether without caring 
to court a comparison with the true percept. Tims we have 
three distinct mental states throwing light on one another ; 
(1) perception in which idea unconsciously works, (2) such 
perception coexisting with a conscious idea, where the idea 
is regarded as inferior in reality to the percept, and (3) the 
pure idea, hardly ever realised in waking consciousness (except 
probably in the fluid transparency of the poet’s intuition, in 
spontaneous clairvoyance, or in the settled vision of the Yogin)^ 
to which the waking world would appear unsubstantial. The 
last state is one to which all have not access, and would be dis« 
believed altogether, were it not for the fact that we have a daily 
illustration oi its fossihility in our dreams. In dreams, the 
ideas do not consciously remember the corresponding waking 
percepts, they aa'e at once pereex^ts. 

6. Not that dream is truer than waking i3ercex3t. Each 
is true within itself; but while ‘ the former is daily sublated, 
the latter is sublated only under exceptional circumstances ’ 
{Sankara). The truth of this or that waking percept may some¬ 
times be denied in a dream as it may be denied in waking life 
itself; but dreams do not deny the truth of waking life as a 
whole, for they never doubt their own waking character. 
Waking, however, always denies the truth of dreams. 

7. We have already, however, found reason to believe that 
tile dream-world is wider in possibility than tbe waking world. 
The dependence of waking perception on sensation shows its 
limitation. Sensation, far from being the final standard of 
truth, is by itself the farthest from the truth ; belief is easiest 





in self-consciousness. Internal perception is prior to external, 
logically if not chronologically. The sensation is felt to give us 
reality, only because the idea unconsdously animates it. The 
element of representation in perception is the element of in¬ 
terpretation or knowledge. But then it must be borne in 
mind that this unconscious working of the idea is known only 
when we have come to be reflective or self-conscious. Even 
then the sense-conditioned consciousness informed with the 
idea is felt to be higher in point of truth than the mere idea 
set over against it. But that is because practical attention 
or the self is not yet dissociated from the body ; anything not 
directly ministering to the life of the body is taken to be unreal. 
With the development of the mind, the self and its Interests come 
to be more and more dissociated from the body—we come to infer 
and deliberate and have abstract interests ; still, except in 
very rare cases, the imperious call of the body is not silenced, 
and the body-dissociated mental processes are still felt to be 
rational only when ministering to the bodily life, though it may 
be indirectly. A solemn, but often ineffective, protest is recorded 
by our moral, aesthetic, religious, and speculative aspirations, 
though they, too, sometimes appear to accept bribes of the 
emissaries of this body. 

8. Will is essentially a denial of the existing sense-order; 
knowledge, too, by its very nature, is an emergence from the 
body, ^.c., from sense-homogeneity. Yet both are ordinarily 
for the life of the body. But the moral will, on the one hand, 
and aesthetic intuition on the other (not to speak of other forms 
of absolute consciousness), disown tliis slavery and affirm the 
independence of the idea. The body, however, does its best to 
ignore their protest. They are felt to be only aspirations for pure 
knowledge, not knowledge ; they tell us only that the body 
ought not to be the truth, though it unhappily seems to be the 
truth. The ineffectiveness of their protest is explained from 
our present point of view by the contrast felt between the sense- 
percept and the idea when they coexist, it being erroneously 
supposed that our ideas always coexist with some sense-percept 
—with the presentation of the body at least, if no other presenta¬ 
tion is forthcoming. That with- mere idea, we may have what 
may be called a ^ feeling of knowledge, ’ the consciousness of 
knowing as distinct from thinking or imagining, is brought out, 
however, in dreams. This explains the importance that is 
attached in Indian Philosophy to this unique psychological 
phenomenon. There is no other phenomenon in our ordinary 
psychic life like it ; even in halluoination, as has been recently 
pointed out, there is some real sense-objective and some real 
peripheral excitation from within. 





6 


9. Dreams are, however, illusory. An idea is felt to be true 
so long as it is not contradicted by sense-perception. Dor 
though sensations do not produce knowledge, they signalise 
the occasions, cosmically determined, when breaches are 
effected in the leaden walls of insensibility, when the idea, in 
fact, unconsciously follows the law of truth. The ideal of know¬ 
ledge is, however, attained when the idea freely or consciously 
follows law, without being drawn down to interpret a sensation. 
Dreams, no doubt, are illusory; but then if only we possessed 
ourselves in dreams, if only we could exercise the control of 
attention over the riotous dance of the images which there 
comport themselves as percepts without sensations, if only, 
having cut a-^ay from the moorings of this oppressively constant 
presentation of this body, we could find secure anchorage in a 
freer, purer, more comprehensive self, we could assure ourselves 
of a far more complete vision of the truth than we could conceive 
ourselves to attain in this waking hfe. We could then transcend 
this space and time which have the body and the present moment 
as their points of reference, this space and time which coop us 
up and cabin us in; we could, then, not only intuitively perceive 
the distant, the past, and the future, take in at a glance what 
we have now to explore piecemeal—dimly, slowly, laboriously— 
we could aspire to know noumenon, life, self. 

10. All this may be entertained as a h35pothesis, if not as a 
demonstrated fact. That, however, it may not be deemed 
inadmissible even as hypothesis, its ‘ objective possibility ’ 
has to be exhibited by tracing its vera causa. There are three 
suppositions: (1) perception without sensation; (2) the self- 
conscious knowledge of all space as one object, and of all time 
as one unfolded panorama; (3) the self swooning into the 
realisation of noumenon, life, self. The verce causes respectively 
are (1) conscious dream, (2) self-conscious dream, and (3) dream¬ 
less sleep. That the conscious dream explains the possibility 
of perception without sensation has already been explained. 
The other two require elucidation. 

11. Most of our dreams are self-conscious. Here the self’s 
relation with tho object is peculiarly different from its relation 
in waking life. "^In waking life, as has already been indicated, 
the object reports itself by a sensational shock ; here, however, 
the object comes in and goes out unquestioned without- 
startling us. Besides, here the self is, or seems at least to be, 
free from the body; sometimes it even sees the body lying 
asleep ; it is not located anywhere and yet it looks at space. 
Violations of continuity do not surprise it at all {section 3), 
tho.ugh the objects are still in space. This could be understood 
in the merely conscious dream, where each isolated image, 





as it floats up, turns into a percept; but how can there be 
selfcomciom knowledge of such spatial objects violating the 
laws of space-continuity, unless we suppose that the self sees 
here with the whole of space as one function ? Similarly with 
time. Besides here seeing is apparently creating (for here is 
no given abrupt sensation); the self seems to freely create its 
world, its space and time, its Joys and sorrows. "No doubt 
it only seems : really these creations are the images of waking 
Ijercepts now freely accepted and so apparently created. 

12. But why should there be this or that specific combin¬ 
ation of images rather than any other ? That implies the func¬ 
tioning of certain stmthetie concepts from behind, i.e,, concepts 
on the same level as the self. We have here to admit, therefore, 
a new level or 'plane’ of consciousness. These synthetic 
concepts might have been generated by individual exj'erience 
or iiiherited as the capitalised value of ancestral experience— 
an;;&^'ay they are now timeless psychic forces ordering the 
distribution of the images. 

13. ^ A similar question may be asked with regard to sense- 
experience also. The sensations have been described as the 
cosmicaiiy determined occasions on which knowledge is permit- 

to ^ manifest itself from within. But why should the 
right interpreting idea materialise itself on the occasion of 
a sensation There must be some correspondence between 
the life witiiin that supplies the right idea and the life without 
that supplies the sensation. It reminds one of the objection 
sometimes taken to Kant’s doctrine of the forms that it does not 
explain why the manifold of intuition does not get into WTong 
forms. Dualism of subject and object has to be admitted, at 
least so long as we conceive ourselves to be individuals; only 
tins correspondence between them is m^^sterious. It will not 
do to say that the object not only gives the sensation but also 
begets tlie associarion-traces which bring the right idea to the 
mteipretation of the sensation. For so long as w^e admit that 

MnnnfT ^ assimilate it, the primum cognitum 

tmmoi be explained by the causality of the object. W4 must 

ImTtl hP itT presentation : a regressus in infinitum 

has to be accepted. So why a person should have certain sense- 

li'Eftlm understood in the 

hi man freely accepts, if not makes, 

fuw I f ■ • seed of all his 

oriSaf*So^£ff existence with instincts for action and 

LSvt Ke ht?'' ° Ti™ ^^ ognition . How these 

f generated is an enquiry which will lead 

f suffice here to indicate 

that the knowledge-seeds and the action-seeds arSt absohiteh 




7 


distinct, and that it is a community of these ^ama-seeds, as 
they might be called, of difierent persons, that gets manifested 
into this common phenomenal world. 

14. Can we rise in knowledge above these functioning 
concepts or Jfarma-seeds ? In self-conscious dream, there 
is time, though it is apparently created at every moment. But 
the hidden springs of these creations cannot themselves be in 
time. They are in timeless unity with the self. How, then, 
can knowledge transcend them 1 This, however, is shown to be 
possible by dreamless sleep or sushupti as it is called. In this 
stage, the self, dissociated not only from the body but also 
from the mind, rests in itself. It is then immediately conscious 
of itself, not<)onscious of itself as returning to itself in reflection. 
It is then identical with what Kant calls ‘ transcendental unity of 
apperception ’ ; only it is then not the mere ' fringe ’ of deter¬ 
minate empirical consciousness but is in complete isolation. It is 
not a mere thought, an unreal abstraction, but a concrete reahty. 

15. Here we meet with an objection from ordinary Psy¬ 
chology. Admitting the existence of the self as an entity be¬ 
hind the mental states, one may hold that in dreamless sleep, 
the self is unconscious, not self-conscious. Let us dwell on the 
stock Vedantic argument on the point. When a man rises 
from dreamless sleep, he becomes aware that he had a blissful 
sleep during which he was conscious of nothing. This he knows 
directly from memory. Now memory is only of a presentation. 
Therefore the bHss and the consciousness of nothing must have 
been presented during the sleep. If it be objected that only the 
absence during sleep of disquiet and knowledge is inferred from a 
memory of the state before the sleep and the perception of the 
state after the sleep, it is asked in reply, can we mfer anytliing, 
the like of which was never presented % If reasoning is only a 
manipulation of rarefied images, the images can have been 
derived only from percepts. But it may be urged that the 
negative concept, at any rate, could not have had any percept 
corresponding to it, and therefore one may justifiably hold 
the absence of knowledge and disquiet during sleep to have been 
inferred. To this it is replied that absence cannot be inferred, 
unless it be conceivable. The absence of knowledge cannot be 
referred to, unless the absence be the object of a direct conscious¬ 
ness of it during the absence. Like knowledge, the absence of 
knowledge cannot be known by external perception or any form 
of inference founded on it, but by internal perception or self- 
feehng. v No mference can ever warrant us in attributing absence 
of consciousness to any object. If the paradox were allowed, 
a psychic thing or absence of a psycliic tiling, if conceived, 
is actual: its esse m its concipi —a peculiarity of hypothesis in 



8 


Psychology which deserves to be noticed. JSTot that the absence 
of determinate knowledge need be known explicitly during 
the absence ; one who is born blind is not conscious of not seeing. 
But if such a man comes to see, like Cheselden’s patient, he will 
have an explicit perception of the previous absence of seeing 
which will at the same time be a recognition of the absence as 
that implicitly cognised during the absence. 

16. If, then, the direct consciousness during the absence 
be granted, then the consciousness of the absence immediately 
after the absence, ^.e., immediately on waking, would be called 
memory rather than inference. 'Now what is the direct con¬ 
sciousness of the absence of knowledge and disquiet during 
deep sleep ? It can only be the ^ undifferencqd knowledge 
and bliss ’ set over against negation. The mind or empirical 
consciousness lapses here altogether; we have pure conscious^ 
ness against a ‘ dark ground,’ pure consciousness of a blank 
objectivity or^ ^ object in general ’ (Kant). All sensation and 
all concrete image then lapse into a blank homogeneity. 
Through a right understanding of this sushupti state, we reach 
the conceptions of chaitanya, or the pure self, and of avidya, or 
the primal blank which is rendered definite by the self; so that 
to say that the pure seK is immediately conscious of itself in 
deep sleep is only to state a verbal proposition. 

pure consciousness, is often 
disputed, and the dispute turns on the way in which this sushupti 
IS understood. It has been variously held against the foregoing 
view that in this state, the self is (1) non-existent, or (2) un¬ 
conscious, or (3) both conscious and unconscious. All these 
views find their paraUel in the views which have been held about 
self-consciousness. To know is to recognise ; when the self first 
com^ to know itself, it recognises itself. But recognition 
thp^pl-f fA moment of self-forgetfulness. Now when 

non-existent or only non-intelligent ? 
L ^ ^ fpempj, the unknown self would 

self skmiH ‘ of the self, then the 

sezt should be taken as sometimes unconscious sometimes 

conscious—imconscious when dissociated from the empirical mind 
conscious when associated with it. (3) Or if self-consciousness 

“SSSTaf been o “S“.3 

the ili tenth to rth tCX^fheS if TJ 

sory, then it is not^onS stage was utterly illu- 

operative. but eternally 2j.coiiXu/tor^"^ consciously 



9 


18. The empiricist, of whom the dogmatic nihilist and 
the absolute sceptic are the logical descendants, holds the 
self before self-consciousness to be immediate negation. . The- 
abstract conceptuahst holds it to be immediate position, and 
that essentially, even during seM-consciousness, as to him ‘ being 
cognised ' is adventitious to the being of an object. The Kantian 
takes the self before self-consciousness to have been immanently 
operative in consciousness; yet when the self comes back to. 
itself in empirical self-consciousness, in recognising itself it still 
feels that it does not know its essential nature, for the same thing 
cannot be at once subject and object. The self, as it comes back, 
just gives a flash of recognition, but anon it shoots forward, 
by its inertial;, as it were, in a spiral rather than in a circular 
orbit. The self constantly aspires to catch itself and as con¬ 
stantly slips from itself. As long as self-consciousness is a 
process—and no determinate knowledge that is not a process is 
Aonceivable—-it is thus a spiral motion, apparently beginningless 
and endless. The rapidly intermittent flashes of recognition 
appear to give a continuous line of light or a knowledge of the self, 
which is, however, only a ‘ paralogism of the pure reason.’ The 
Hegelian takes the motion to be an eternal circular or perfect 
motion, consciousness before self-consciousness being only an 
arc of the circle setting up for itself, each minute arc itself a 
straight line; but when the circle is completed (^.e., when self- 
consciousness arises), the self recognises that these straight 
lines are only /or the circle, that the circle is the truth that con¬ 
tains in itself the ideality of the straight lines. Here the Vedan- 
tist will, however, hold that the self at each point only illusorily 
fancies itself to be moving in a straight line ; and as long as it 
moves, it can never take in the entire circle at once; and so 
even when it recognises itself, the illusion does not completely 
disappear. The blind impulse forward is real by reason of its 
very imperiousness; the flashes of self-recognition appearing 
now occasionally, now frequently, and at last continuously, 
the self feels at once in triumph and in humility that it is moving 
in a spiral inwards towards the centre of light (the true self), 
though the centre is still infinitely remote, content only to have 
more and more light; and ever as it presses forward with ac¬ 
celerated speed, it takes the past dimness as due only to his 
limitation of ignorance, till behold, it has reached the centre of 
light itself whex'e it quiescently spins a circular motion. Who 
could, have imagined that the spiral had the centre within a 
finite distance ? This quiescent circular motion was all along 
the ideal of the process of knotvledge; this was the contentless 
aspiration towards the thing-in-itself, this the formless indefin¬ 
able sense of the Beyond in all determinate knowledge. Nor was 



10 


tlie circle of light, constituted by the flashes of self-recognition, 
ever becoming more and more refulgent, altogether a 'para¬ 
logism ’ ; for though the spread-out character of the process was 
false, the light was the reflection of this central self-manifesting 
light. Thus Vedanta reconciles Kant and Hegel by admitting 
the impossibility of the self being caught in a process of self- 
consciousness, and. yet holding the process to be a self-manifesta¬ 
tion of the self. 

19, Does not, however, Hegel too admit that the self’s move¬ 
ment in a circle is illusorily self-alienated in consciousness and 
that it is self-contained in self-consciousness ? Does not Vedanta 
admit that even at the centre, the self, though quiescent, is 
spinning a circular process ? The difference, as* will be more 
fully explained afterwards, is that whereas Vedanta takes even 
this central motion to be the reflection of the self on the negation 
which falls beyond it, i.e., to be absolutely free self-creation, 
Hegel takes this reflection on the negation to be the ultimate 
reality. Not that even Hegel takes it to be necessity or God’s 
given nature. No one is a more strenuous advocate of freedom ; 
but then freedom has two sides, the quiescence of self beyond 
will and its quiescence in pure will. The former is Vedantic 
Brahman, the latter is Vedantic Isvara, a point to be cleared 
up later on. The latter is also Hegel’s Absolute Idea, to which 
will and intellect are the same. 

20. This difference between Hegel and Vedanta is connected 
with a fundamental difference regarding the conception of 
self between Kant’s synthetic unity of apperception and the 
Vedantic atnian or chaiianya. They are generally regarded 

the same, and in fact there is a good deal of similarity between 
them. Kant’s self, though transcending empirical conscious¬ 
ness, is individualised in a sense, for it is this which becomes 
practical as will, emerging as a postulate directly implied by 
morality. Even if we do not allow the conclusions of theprac- 
icai reason to prejudice those of pure reason, even if we take 

e self to be the formless prefix of all cognition, transcending 
even the categories and forms through which it works in know- 
ledge, we have y^ to admit that in Kant, this self is for knowledge 
is relative to a constant something, has 
le img-in-itself constantly before it; its very nature is aspiring 

the ^ object-in-general ’ being the 
^ n aspiration, the blank canvas on which it wants 
thing-mntself pictured (what, however, is never ac- 
i whether individualised or not, it is still agent, 
bowwf ih than of knowledge. In Vedanta, 

consciou^TiPQQ the breath of this knowledge, the light of 

, something eternally accomplished rather than 



11 


being accomplished. The accomplisMti^ self cannot be said to 
have finally triumphed over empiricism or absolute scepticism. 
This seems to be the trend of Spencer’s views also. He would 
not admit the current argument against absolute scepticism, that 
it is proving the falsity of reason by reason; that, he would 
say, at best shows that within the sphere of determinate cogni¬ 
tion, the self (or rather the dominating cohesion of the ideas of 
subject and object) is the highest truth; but then this cognition 
itself tells us that it is a cohesion generated by experience, and 
that therefore we cannot pronounce it to be absolutely necessary. 
Who knows that even this cohesion may not break down with 
further experience ? That it cannot be conceived is no argument 
for the moiment sometliing is said to be inconceivable, it is 
pronounced to be conceivable by implication. The subject of 
the proposition, ‘ this cannot be conceived ’ is in fact a cow- 
ceweZ-inconceivability. This is only a negative conceivability, 
however. It is only an ‘ indefinable sense of the Beyond,’ mere 
matter of knowledge without positive form. In the very humi¬ 
lity of accepting absolute scepticism as a possible view, there 
is the transcendence of it, in which, however, there is no differ¬ 
enced self to enjoy the triumph. 

21. Hegel does not admit the possibility of an absolute 
scepticism impugning the reality of the self or reason, and there¬ 
fore does not recognise an undifferenced consciousness. Kant’s 
pronouncements are rather uncertain on the point; but then his 
‘ Refutation of Idealism ’ may be taken as founded essentially on 
the recognition of a form of cognition other than the determinate. 
Much has been made, ever since Schopenhauer’s unfortunate 
pronouncement on the point, of the so-called inconsequence 
in Kant of taking causality to be a category of the self and yet 
riding out on this category beyond the self to the thing-in-itself 
as the cause of our sensations. Kant, it should be remembered, 
expressly points out a fundamental difference in apphcabihty 
between the dynamical and the mathehaatical categories. The 
difference comes but again in the different solutions he has given 
of the first two cosmological antinomies on the one hand and 
the last two on the other. The mathematical categories have 
no reference except to phenomena in space and time, but the 
dynamical categories while referring to phenomena refer es¬ 
sentially beyond them to the free and the self-existent, although 
this reference cannot be concreted by intuition. The thing- 
in-itself in Kant is not, however, to be confounded with his nou- 
mena or Ideas of the Reason, which are only the reason-pictures 
of the essentially unknowable. The self, as causality imbedded 
in all determinate cognition, asks for the cause of itself. Ex¬ 
perience demands its own cause; the causal aspiration is like a 



12 


flame informing the fuel of experience and yet freely existing 
by itself. This demand of the self is not satisfied by the Idea of 
the Reason, for that is only the way in which the cause of the self, 
of causality, of experience would be known, if it could 
be known at ali. This difficulty with regard to causality applies 
more or less to the whole of the understanding, le., the self as 
knowing objects ; for even when the self recognises itself, it is 
puzzled to find itself unconsciously informing objects. It 
^ks ‘ Why did I know object at all,' just as it might ask in 
another connexion, ‘ Why did I sin at all.’ It feels the ground 
insecure beneath its feet. So Spencer finds that the cohesion 
within our knowledge of subject and object demands itself 
an object beyond knowledge, the Unknowable, from both thfe 
points, object-consciousness and subject-consciousness. Now 
this demand, alike in Kant and in Spencer, is indeterminate 
but none the less real. 

22. Neither Kant nor Spencer has brought out in full the 
implications of this indeterminate consciousness. They have 
not made it clear whether it is a subjective process only or 
the absolute reality. As indeterminate, can it be said to be 
different from the thing-in-itself or the Unknowable ? It 
seems to have equal relations with the self and the Unknowable. 
The self itself becomes real in it. It is the undifferenced con¬ 
sciousness that plays on all determinate cognition. Beyond 
the will, there is the self-affirmation of the intellect; but beyond 
this self-affirming pulsation, there is the pure undifferenced self 
ox OJimtanya. The thing-in-itself cannot be said to be different 
from tliis undifferenced Chaitanya, cannot be said to be its 
reference. Yet it is a significant fact that neither Kant nor 
Spencer calls this undifferenced self-doubting consciousness 
the self or the subject. This vacillation on their part is explained 
by the fact that when this consciousness and the determinate 
consciousness (which is always accompanied by the former) 
coexist, the former, though felt to give all the reality that the 
latter has, still appears to be a formless shadow in comparison 
with the latter, which is informed by it. It is in fact the old 
difficulty about the percept and idea reappearing on a higher 
plane. Schelling and Hegel disregarded the contrast and 
imagined they found, in the sesthetic and religious consciousness 
especially, the consciousness negating individuality to be much 
more real than determinate experience. Kant, however, would 
have ^gued against them that these coloured consciousnesses, the 
^tnetac and the religious, can never warrant us in taking the 
de-inoi'^duahsed consciousness as more than a mere aspiration, 
t.e., as knowledge, as the absolute self, as an eternally accom¬ 
plished cognition. If Hegel argues that his Absolute Idea is not 




13 


accomplished only—for then there would be no difference between 
him and Sclielling—but that it is eternally accomplishm^ itself 
also, that it eternally mediates itself through that absolute 
consciousness which.denies individuality, it is replied that this, 
too, is only thought, only the shadowy fringe of determinate con¬ 
sciousness. 

23. It may, accordingly, be asked, does not this argument of a 
Kantian against Schelling and Hegel press against Vedanta, too ? 
Knowledge, according to Vedanta, is not only different from the 
knowing activity, it cannot even be described as the (contingent) 
result of the activity. Its essential character is its eternity, 
its self-manifestation {svayam-prakaiatva). The mental mode, 
however, in wiiich knowledge manifests itself is contingent, being 
the result of mental activity. So, too, in the case of such knowledge 
as leads to mofeAa or ‘liberation,’ there is first a hearing of 
the Scriptural texts, a reflecting on them, a refutation of doubts, 
and a final fixing of the mind on the texts—all this repeated times 
without number, till the transparency of the mind is secured, 
and then knowledge shines through and is recognised to have 
been eternally complete. So, too, the Moksha that is reached is 
taken to be Brahman itself, ‘ unchangingly eternal ’ (Kutastha- 
nitya) ; it is not only quiescence itself : as just passing into it, 
one feels all the past strife after it to have been utterly illusory, 
and, what would sound paradoxical, the feehng of illusion 
itself lapses, there being nothing left but the self shining by 
itself. Of knowledge, not of Brahman only, but of any object, 
the object is not the cause in any sense. The knowledge, as it 
shines forth, is felt to shine as it were in free grace. So neither 
the activity of the self nor the activity of the object can be said 
to be a means to it; as Sankara characteristically declares there 
is no claim to knowledge. All this is expressed in another way 
by saying that perception as an (apparently) processless accom¬ 
plished cognition is Brahman or the self itself—of course in the 
murky atmosphere of sensation which, however, is only our 
limitation. Yet so long as we seek to know this self, this 
breath of knowledge, as a determinate object, it necessarily 
eludes our grasp. It is only to be characterised as n^eti n^eti, 

‘ not that,’ Vnotthat.’ 

24. Yet is not this suicidal, one might ask, to call this breath 
of knowledge the absolute self and yet to deny its positive con- 
oeivability 1 One feels as if the triumph gained over absolute 
scepticism was more imaginary than real, only a fond hope, not 
an accomplished reality. But here Vedanta points out that as 
the objective possibility of ‘ perception without sensation ’ and 
of knowledge of noumenon was demonstrated by dream and 
dreamless sleep, so the objective possibility (which is here 









1l 


14 

indistinguisliable from actuality) of this unclifferenced conscious¬ 
ness of the absolute lies in a concrete psychological state called 
the tunya or samadhi state where this consciousness is isolated 
and is not a mere fringe of determinate consciousness. 

25. The discussion of sushufti or dreamless sleep has thus 
brought us over to the consideration of this samadhi or ecstatic 
consciousness. Waking, dream, and dreamless sleep are intelli¬ 
gible facts easily performing the role of vercs causes, but this 
samadhi seems to explain obscurum per ohscurius. It accord¬ 
ingly requires an elucidation. In the sushupti the mind 

is dissociated wholly from, the self which is then in the imme¬ 
diately conscious attitude. It is conscious, but conscious of a 
blank only. It has then the direct cognition of tke absence of 
specific cognition, the consciousness of a positive nothing, and 
hence it flashes back on itself. It is the light flashing in cir¬ 
cumambient gloom, revealing nothing but the gloom. The 
suslmpti state, however, gives the possibility only but not the 
actuality of the knowledge of noumena; the self does not here 
swooninto the knowledge of noumena. Like the dream-state, it 
is a state in which the self has no control over itself, not a state to 
which the self rises by a continuous eflort. So if we could control 
ourselves in this state, we could promise ourselves the attain¬ 
ment of a far more potent and comprehensive species of know¬ 
ledge than we could attain even in the actualised dream-state. 
The progress of knowledge in the waking state might be con¬ 
ceived to be in a line stretching away from us to infinity, and 
the end is the knowledge of ail finite phenomena in their rela¬ 
tions to one another. The progress of knowledge in the actual- 
ised dream-state as distinct from the passive uncontrolled 
state, is in infinity, though the knowledge is still phenomenal ; 
the end here is the loiowledge of the infinite of phenomenon 
getting determined into finites. The progress of knowledge 
in the actualised sushufU-stSiiio is from infinite to infinite and 
not phenomenal. The phenomenal infinite is turned by nou- 
menal screws which are fixed like the axle of a revolving wheel. 
We may distinguish thi’ee stages here (1) the objective possibi¬ 
lity of the self being isolated in suslmpfi, (2) the actualised but 
determinate self-isolation in what has been called savikalpa- 
samadhi OT determinate ecstasy, (3) the actualised indeterminate 
self-isolation in niy'vikalpa-samddhi or indeterminate ecstasy. 
These stages are often not distinguished, especially in earlier 
Vedantic literature. They are all absolute stages where the 
sense of duality is non-existent. • 

26. Now what is the difference between sushupti and savi-> 
halpa samadhi? The difference, as ordinarily given, is that 
in the former the (empirical) mind with all its modes lapses 




15 


altogether, whereas in the latter it does not lapse but only o*ets 
concentrated into one absolute irrelative mode whicli thus\e- 
comes actualised in the highest degree. The one represents the 
greatest dispersion of attention, the other its utmost concen^ 
tration. In both, the consciousness of duality lapses ; in both, 
the self enjoys undifferenced bliss; in both, the timeless seeds | 
of knowledge and action {vidyd-Jcarma) persist, accounting for 
the recognition of the past on awaking from them. Eut where- S 

as on awaking from sushupti, the self remembers that it was in | 
the attitude of knowing object though the object was there a 
blank, on rising from samddhi it ought to remember it ivas the 
object in that state and not in the object-knowing attitude at 
all. In the farmer, the self as always limited was simply iso¬ 
lated ; in the latter, it burst its bonds, destroyed the barrier 
between subject and object, and became the absolute. 

27. The ecstasy, far from being unconsciousness or bare 
consciousness, is supra-consciousness. If Hegel’s ‘ sx^ecula- 
tive consciousness ’ or ‘ notion ’ be the truth of discursive 
understanding, this intellectual or ecstatic intuition of Vedanta 
is the truth of the speculative consciousness. If Hegel’s thought 
is concrete and creative, it is not so as thought but as reality 
or being, ix., as ecstatic identity of thought and being. 

2<S, The method of attaining this ecstasy is not the method 
of scientific investigation, A phenomenon has not only a rela¬ 
tional aspect but also an intrinsic cesthetic aspect merging into 
a mystic aspect. The former aspect is caught b}^ our discursive 
reason, the latter by imagination wdiich is in fact intuitive 
reason. Here, too, as in the case of the moral intuition, it has 
been objected that the notions reached through this imagina¬ 
tion are ‘ ‘ heuristic rather than determinative” (Kant). But 
the consideration of the dream state has afready demonstrated 
the possibility of these notions being isolated and so turned 
into eternal percepts. This imaginative isolation is effected by 
prolonged attention. Discursive thought about the relations 
of an object may no doubt help in tliis imaginative isolation, 
for it means a detaining of the aspects of the object in the mind, 
an oscillation of the mind round it, though it may not always 
be followed by a definite settling of the mind on it. Generally 
the mind buzzes round an object, and then moves on to another 
and then returns to it; and thus if making progress at all, it 
moves in wider and more complicated figures, but still never 
effectually settles on any object. While science or philosophy 
is thus ever and anon moving in its figures, with or without a 
consciousness of the whole, one quite loses sight of the other 
discipline, viz,, that of contemplating an individual object, of 
getting glued down to it, of sinking into the heart of it, by 


^VL. 





16 


suppressiim within us the urgency of distracting desires and 
the sutitlel'aprices of thought, and by tranqinhsing the surface 
of the mind wliile holding before it a symbol of the object^we 
are seeking to know, instead of straggling to catch the object 
witli" a self-stultifying eagerness. , 

29. There are different grades of noumena (devata)^ wliicn 

the seif may realise in ecstasy. From the ecstatic intuition of 
all other determinate objects, there is waking ; but there is no 
wakiiis from the ecstatic intuition of God, for the simple reason 
that so long as there is limitation or the shghtest trace ^of indi- 
vidualitv, there can be no intuition of this Infinite Determination, 
no becoming infinite. This is the highest stage of savikal'pa- 
mmadhi. The mind-capsule of the seK, persistiflg in all such 
sumMlii, and ever expanding, reaches here its utmost tension and 
utmost tenuity. This perfectly transparent envelope still con¬ 
stitutes the determinateness of God as Isvara. He is the actual- 
ised " Ideal of Pure Beason ’ of Kant, the VAbsolute Idea ’ of 
Hegel, self-realised not in thought but in ecstasy. Although, 
said Kant, tMs is the most adequate reason-picture of the thing- 
in-itseif, the thing-in-itself is the real, negating even this picture ; 
of the thing-in-itself, as Spencer would ha^ve put it, there is 
only an indeterminate consciousness, an ' indefinable sense.’ 
Vedanta’s addition to this is the suggestion' that both the 
reason-picture and the indeterminate consciousness are cap¬ 
able of being isolated and actualised in the concrete states, 
mvikalpa samddhi (intuition of determinate noumena), and 
nirvikalpa (intuition of the reality transcending all 

determinateness). The latter is undifierenced not only in the 
sense that the consciousness of duality is absent, as it is even 
in smhupti, not only in the sense that the unconscious ring of 
the Unlmown constituting the limitation of all noumena lower 
than Crod is removed, as it may be in 5awWpa .5amadM, but 
also in the sense that even the consciousness of this removal 
is absent. This is the highest stage, this is the truth, this is 
BraJiman, 

30. Waking, dream, dreamless sleep, and ecstasy with the 
intermediate stag^ constitute, then, a^iew? dimension of the mind. 
This is not only a ^mension of the mind but the one dimension 
of existence in which even the deepest of all distinctions, viz., 
that between the subject and object, has place. The ordinarily 
conceived duality between them gives place in Vedanta to the 
conception of a gradation of existences, one pole of which is the 
lowest waking stage in which the self completely forgets itself, 
the stage of the mere object, and the other pole, the ecstatic 
stage in which the seM not only denies the existence of every¬ 
thing else but denies the denial itself, the stage of the pure 




17 


subj ect. The gradation is not eternally spread out; the samadhi 
state is not only a stage among stages, it is the truth of the other 
stages. So, too, in the series, each stage is the truth of the pre¬ 
ceding stage. The gradation between subject and object is also 
the gradation between truth and untruth, between good and 
evil. The self, as identified with any stage, feels the stage below 
it to be illusory; thus there is a reconcihation between the 
absolute distinction of truth and untruth on the one hand, and 
the continuous gradations of truth on the other. The final 
duality of Brahman and Avidyd (illusion) which at the same 
time is no duality of positives, is the exemplar of the relation 
between truth and untruth. 

J 31. It reijiains to recognise the fact that each stage is not 
only present in its isolation but also unconsciously informs the 
lower stage. In fact on the waking plane we can trace the 
projections of all the other planes. Psychology recognises the 
stages, perception, imagination (reproductive and productive), 
thought (understanding) with the explicit consciousness of 
subject and object, and the indefinable consciousness of the 
beyond (Spencer). Now the last three, as we have pointed out, 
might be regarded as the projections of dream, dreamless sleep, 
and ecstasy on the waking plane. Of these, the earlier stages 
adumbrate the later, and the later react on the earlier. This is 
the empirical counterpart of Kant’s a 'priori psychology. In 
the perception of object, there is the given matter of the sensa¬ 
tions, fitted, partly as reproduced ideas, into the forms of space 
and time (generated, it may be, out of ideas), this time again 
shooting forth the rays of productive imagination, the schemata, 
to touch the categories, the eyes of the self or the synthetic 
unity of apperception; this self* all the while feels the pressure 
of the thing-in-itself and so tliinks the object under the form of 
infinity, i.e,, in relation to the infinite world, to the subject, and 
the ms realissimum, still failing, however, to catch the thing-in- 
itself and having only a contentless aspiration towards it. 
Vedantism finds the concretes of these a priori elements, which 
all operate in waking perception, in the distinguishable internal 
characters of the several stages, waking, dreaming, etc. The 
general correspondence between the Vedantic stages and the 
Kantian elements, has been sufficiently made out; a more de¬ 
tailed correspondence can be exhibited only after a modified pre¬ 
sentation of Kantianism. This, however, space will not permit. 


2 






j|^_Vedantic Metaphysics, 


32. The position of the pure subject and the material object 
in tiie Vedantic system has been indicated. The primary 
duality of self and negation, which is no duahty of positives, has 
been found to transfigure every stage of existence. As a conse¬ 
quence of this unconscious transfiguration, each stage in the 
serim, waking, dream, etc., in its unconscious form, becomes 
e&-ordimMi€ with the lower stage. This is particularly apparent 
in the waking stage where the distinctions among* the several 
^pects of existence, adhydtma, adMhhuta, adhideva, adhiloha, 
etc., come out explicitly as co-ordinate with each other. These 
distinctions are intelligible only in the light of a metaphysical 
view which is dimly traceable in the Upanishads and which can 
liardly be said to hWe been completely brought out even by the 
commentators. The exposition of it, to be attempted presently, 
would therefore require to be justified by an elaborate discus¬ 
sion of all passages in the Upanishads which lend colour to it. 
For the present it is set forth only as a hypothesis. 

33. Ill the waMng stage, the sentient body is the adhydtma 
or subjective aspect, and the objects of sense-experience consti¬ 
tute the adkibhuta or objective aspect. They are so distinct 
here that language is strained in calling them aspects of the 
same thing. But they are related to one another. The self 
as identifi^ with the body takes the object to be useful,’ to be 
subservient to its pleasure and pain. The experience of the 
object rouses desire, desire again begets experience—a restless 
whirl of relation. In the sesthetic consciousness, however, such 
as is roused in rapt contemplation oi up^sand, one rises to a 
universal standpoint from wMch is witnessed the identity of the 
different sentient elements of the body with the different aspects 
of the object. The restless relations, the attractions and repul¬ 
sions between the body and the object, are then felt to be illu- 
so^ differentiations of quiescent unities. The eye and the 
visible aspect of things, for example, constitute a unity. The 
Upanishads bristle with sssthetic intuitions of such unities, 
ranging from the most profound to the most superficial, viewed 
as dewMs or objects for updsand. This updsand consists in a 
camMnmms. direction of the attention to an esthetic symbol 
revealed by the kastras, f.e., by some sesr. The attitude in it 
IS quite the reverse of the attitude of that cheap rationalism 
which makes a parade of its independence of authority: the 



19 


existence of the devata or the aspect of the object worshipped 
may not have been proved by reason or may not have at once 
appealed to one’s leaden sesthetic sensibility, but through the 
will to believe or iraddhd, through prolonged contemplation, 
the devata may be seen to be gradually shining out. 

34. The adhideva aspect is to be understood in relation to 
the adhiloka aspect, which requires an elucidation. Every 
devata demands a loJca, Psychologically put, an absolute unity, 
to be real, must be not only thought but reaHsed in some sort 
of dntmtion. In assthetic (visual) intuition, for example, we 
realise a devata^ like the sun, the unity of seeing and the visible 
world. Now as here the realised object ceases to be an object 
and gets manifested as the absolute identity that it eternally 
was, though unrecognised because of the individual’s limitations, 
so the intuition, too, is divested of its merely subjective aspect and 
appears as an eternal shining world [div) with wliich the hmited 
subject is raised to identity. The distinction between the sub¬ 
ject and object in ordinary knowledge appears in the absolute 
sphere as a distinction between loka and devata. Only in ordinary 
knowledge, the subject takes the lead, whereas here the devata, 
which corresponds to the object, is the higher reality. What 
is from the lower standpoint my intuition of an object is from 
the higher standpoint, a devata shining, revealing himself in a 
loka. 

35. It may be urged, however, that the distinction between 
subject and object is altogether annulled in the absolute sphere 
and therefore a devata must be conceived to shine by itself. The 
demand for a locus for such intelligible entities springs from a 
feebleness of the mind which will have sensuous symbols where 
it ought to entertain pure concepts of the reason; it springs in 
fact from that hypostasising tendency with which Plato has 
been charged with regard to his Ideas. 

36. To this it is replied that an existence that is nowhere is 
unintelligible and that the demand for a locus even in the sen¬ 
suous sphere springs from a necessity of the reason. The locus 
of an extended object involves the conception of the attribute 
of extension (wMch is nothing but the whole of space) being in 
space. The sensuous conception of an object in space would 
thus be utterly unintelligible unless a relation be conceived to he 

—a being and a process —the being transcending the pro¬ 
cess and yet resting on the process. 

^ 37. This necessity of the reason applies not only to such a 

sensuous relation, it applies to the liighest relation, the relation 
of subject and object. To Absolute Idealism, the Self' is the 
absolute identity of subject and object. It is self-relation, the 
being and the relation being here identical; and so for it as 




20 


self-existeat, it might be deemed absurd to demand any locus 
or external relation. To this, Vedanta wiU reply that such an 
absolute or irrelative reality is, or is reahsable only in, an ecsta¬ 
tic consciousness (which Hegel does not admit) and that to us 
who have not reached it, who only think of it, this has to be 
thought of as resting on the relation to an individual. To 
ecstatic consciousness, such relation is not; but mere thought 
hm to postulate a dual absolute—the absolute for the absolute 
consciousness as resting on the absolute for the individual, the 
unknowable absolute on the knowable absolute. The Self tliat 
excludes the object as absolute negation is at once the same as 
and higher than the self that has the negation within it as a 
moment. If the seK be but relation, as Hegel takes it, it must 
taken to depend on the nature or the Hmitation of the terms 
of the relation; even in the seK-relation of the self , the seifs 
that are related to each other are bounded by nega^tion and 
hence their relation cannot be wholly free. If it be said that 
the relation is prior in reality, that it is the universal which 
freely particularises itself, it is replied that such a particularising 
is inexplicable in the last resort and therefore the universal 
that is in and through particulars is a fact to be accepted, not a 
free function of the reason. The last principle of pliilosophy 
for us must be a fiecessity of the reason founded on a given fact, 
though the aspiration of philosophy must ever be to reach a 
principle that is wholly rational. Brahman, the self-existent, 
must therefore be conceived by us to rest on His own glory 
mahimni iisthati). So lower down, every devata is to be 
conceived to be in a loka. 

38. The necessity of the several aspects, adhydtma, etc., has 
been vindicated at what might appear to be a disproportionate 
length, were it not for the fact that these are just the 
conceptions wdiich require to be raised above the mythologic 
region in wMch they are supposed to be. Given a loka or intui- 
tion-ground, we have against it a devata or an absolute unity of 
subject and object. A concrete intuition-medium, a Platonic 
heaven is necessary to ensure to these devatds or Ideas reality. 
It will not do to say that they exist in thought or reason : that 
ap|>ears from the waking standpoint to be too thin to support 
reality. 


39. pie doctrine of adhyatma, etc., is thus capable of being 
affihated on Absolute IdeaHsm, as modified by Yedantic trans¬ 
cendentalism. The devatds have the character of absolute iden- 
titim but do they resemble the Platonic Ideas in being univer^ 
^ rem ? Is the Vedantic view one of (conceptLl) real- 
. I^e fact that Schopenhauer’s view finds room for the 
eternal ideas, the grades of the objectification of the will. 




encourages us to look forward to something like them in 
Vedanta. 

40. A demta is differentiated transversely into udJiydtma 
and adhihhuta, but is it also longitudinally ^fferentiated into 
particular individuals ? It would appear to be so, for a demta 
hke the sun is said to be the unity of the senses of sight supposed 
to be severally possessed by different persons and of the visible 
aspects of things. There is an instructive difference in this 
respect between Vedanta and Sankhya ; according to the latter, 
each sense, as sense, ^.e., as adJiyatma, is one, and different souls 
partake (by reflection) of this one sense; but according to* the 
former, a sense as sense is many, being different in different 
individuals, but then these many are only the iUusory differen¬ 
tiations of one devatd wliich corresponds to the particular sense. 
(The difference is explained by the Sankliya view that the indi¬ 
vidual soul is real and that there is no such tiling as one cosmic 
illusion but only individual illusions of separate eyes, separate 
niinds, etc., there being one real prahriti which eternally and 
really evolves into maJiat, etc., including the archetypal senses. 
The Vedantic view is that this prakriti is but Mdyd or cosmic 
illusion, and that therefore not only the individual illusions but 
also the archetypal senses and the correlated primal matters are 
but its differentiations). In any case, the many particular 
senses of sight and the many visible aspects of things are said 
to find their unity in the Sun-deity. 

41. But still this would be a-spcc^-reahsm rather than true 
class-realism. The aspects, visibility, audibihty, etc., have 
their Ideas, concrete basal e?e«;a^as as they might be called, but 
are not these only superficial aspects of things ? What of the 
natural kinds like man, gold, etc. ? Have not they, too, their 
Ideas ? Vedanta, while admitting that not only the class but 
every individual has got its eternal ‘ name and form ’ (nama- 
rupa), wiU demur at first to an implication of the objection. 
These sense-aspects in Vedanta are the primal matters, the abso¬ 
lutes of the senses, hearing, touch,‘sight, taste, and smell. 
They constitute no superficial aspect but the central substance, 
and ‘ names and forms ’ are but the illusory differentiations of 
this substance. When, by means like upasana, we have risen 
to the absolute consciousness in the waking state, these external 
sensuous aspects are viewed as the basal devatds (they themselves 
are the iUusory differentiations of still higher, more substantial 
realities, as we shall see presently); they are viewed as the 
substance (relatively speaking) of the object of which the form 
(taken in its widest sense) is only the manifestation or illusory 
differentiation. Within the form, there are again relations of 
matter and form, for each stage of the form is matter in relation 



22 


to a further differentiation of it. JSTow each of these stages is 
capable of being actuahsedintodem^a^ by ecstatic contemplation. 
Js^ow when a rationahst takes the sensation to be lapsed thought 
or thought become unconscious, and when an empiricist holds 
that our thoughts are only the complex manufactures out of 
sense-material, by themselves only illusory refinements and 
useful only in reference to sense-reality, their antagonism is 
transcended by the Vedantist who reinstates both by pointing 
out that without an absolute intuition-continuum, the thought 
cannot be real and that the devatd is therefore the sense reality, 
divested of its limitation of unconsciousness, 

42. These devaids again have an order among them—an 
order reaUy of emanation but capable also of being.viewed as of 
evolution from the human standpoint-—the absolutely formless 
indeterminate matter being one pole, and the full-blown waking 
reality the other pole. We may notice two orders of differences, 
the one comprising the several grades of matter, the other 
comprising the forms as manifested in each grade. Yet the 
grades themselves are formed or determinate matter. The same 
(formless) matter persists through all the grades in all the forms ; 
so, too, each formed matter persists in its differentiations in the 
grades below it, the grades corresponding to dreamless sleep, 
dream, etc., the successive materialisations of the same reality. 
This then is the difference between ordinary realism and Vedan- 
tic reahsm ; the Ideas are not only concrete universals but sulh 
stantM matters of different grades from the pure subject to the 
grossest material object. The pure subject is the formless 
matter, the sole reality, the truth of the grades of materialisa¬ 
tion, and of all the determinate objects therein. The full-blown 
reality minus tliis formless matter is absolute negation, the 
\^ery principle of illusion. Yet what are the multitudinoxis 
‘ names and forms ’ of this full-blown reality ? These empty 
husks of reahty are not reality : but they get filled in with the 
formless matter. Why does the reahty enter these unreal forms ? 
It shows that these forms are neither real nor unreal. Such 
a contradictory thing can only be the principle of illusion ; it is 
dartaess only that can be at once revealed and destroyed by 
^ % if xf I^inous principle of Maya, which is one yet 

manffold, the matrix of all ‘ names and forms.’ These, too, must 
be eternal, coeternal with the pure subject. Yet this does not 
necessarily argue a despair of explanation. Of the forms which 
mdi^duality, no explanation is possible except that 
illusion IS at its root. No universal can exhaust the infinite 

If we could trace a consecutive 
downwards, each step 
of the differentiation would be unintelligible. It is the very 




23 


essence of differentiation to escape the universal. To recognise 
the necessity of this unknowability is to recognise the principle 
of maya, 

43. Not that universals among these shadowy names and 
forms, concatenating them, are unknown in Vedanta. The 
realistic or universal is admitted both in Nyaya and Vedanta, 
though the latter emphatically disclaims the abstract denota- 
tiimnX jaU of the former. According to Nyaya, this jati is an 
eternal reality, the vyakti or individual things inhering in it and 
being eternally connected with it. Vedanta denies both its 
eternal reality and its being co-ordinate with individual things. 
As has been already indicated, to Vedanta nothing is an eternal 
reality except the pure self. As to the other point, if an indi¬ 
vidual and its jati be taken to be distinct (and co-ordinate in 
reality), they cannot be unified in any way. The inherence, 
according to Vedanta, is a fiction. (This recalls the famous 
criticism of the Platonic doctrine of Ideas by Aristotle in his 
Nicoinachaean Ethics.) In " A is B,’ if B the concept is dis¬ 
tinct from A, their copular relation is a fiction; for it is asked, 
what connects A or B with the relation 1 If another relation, 
what connects that with its members ? And so there is a regress 
to infinity. Once you set up two utterly distinct things, you 
cannot bridge over the gulf ; only you may pronounce the effort 
to combine to be itseK iUusory. Without an admission of 
identity-]n-difierence, not only this inherence, but also any 
kind of connexion, even space-connexion, would be inconceiv¬ 
able. What vi ew, then, does Vedanta itself hold ? It understands 
the jati, not as the denotational real but as the connotational 
real {tatranugato dharmah), not as co-ordinate with and distinct 
from the pyakti or individual, but identical with it on the one 
hand and of a different grade of reahty on the other. The 
identity between attribute and substance {Dharma-Dharmin) 
is characteristic of the hylozoistic speculations of Vedanta and 
Sankhya (regarding mayd which is one yet many, or regarding 
^yraknti which really evolves), following logically on the denial 
of inherence as a relation. This Dharnm or attribute is again 
the essence, the persisting matter in relation to the Dharmin or 
thing, infinite in every individual, having the whole of the 
phenomenality behind it. 

44. Vedanta might very well admit the co-ordinateness of 
jati and vyakti in the sphere of the pure ‘ names and forms, 
that realm of shadows. The relation between jati a>nd vyakti, 
which has already been discussed, is in the region of formed 
matter where the more differentiated is less in reality. 
The realm of shadows or mayd may be compared to space, 
the principle of separation or ‘ spread-out-ness,’ the nearest 




24 


determinate symbol of the principle of difference, in which a 
mode may be said to be different from another in which it is 
included. 

45. We have thus to recognise three systems of eternal 
entities in Vedanta: (1) in regard to matter, formless matter 
and its several emanatory grades corresponding to the stages, 
mmMki^ mshupti, etc., including the intermediaries : (2) in 
regard to formed matter, the basal devatas, corresponding to 
the primal matters, and also the essences like ‘ cow-ness,’ ‘ horse- 
nms. ’ (gotm, asvatva) incarnated in the above grades; (3) in 
regard to the ' names and forms,’ the abstract differences, which 
are neither real nor unreal. We have still to recognise two 
other orders, (4) the Karmarumties or will-unities m the several 
grades, and (5) the universal unities of these with their cosmic 
reactions, the universal emanations of Brahman, including the 
le®«r gods, the inqiiiry into which is for the present postponed. 

46. Lest the identity-in-difference implied in Vedantic realism 
be taken to be an unwarranted importation of Hegelianism, it is 
necessary to refer to discussions bearing on the law of contradic¬ 
tion in Vedantic philosophy. It may be noted at the outset 
that in this Vedantic conception of identity-in-difference, as 
distinct from a similar conception in Hegel, the identity is 
the truth and the difference is illusory and even the negation 
of the difference through wliicli the identity is affirmed , is illu¬ 
sory. In comiexion with the discussion of illusory perception, 
m of the nacre taken for silver, the point is raised : when the 
appearance of the silver is corrected and the nacre in its real 
nature known, can it not be held that the thing is sometimes 
Bnver and sometimes nacre ? The reply given is that it is the 

correcting perception to deny the 
troth of the former perception once for all. When the illusion 

conscious of the real silver being 
lUusory silver having disappeared. But 

L ^ known to 

l^owledge itself self-contradictory, as 

The^ili non-existent ’? 

‘ fhp SL ’ knowledge is ratker expressible in the form, 
the illi^ry silver is absent.’ The very perception of the il- 
of a tking is the perception of the iUusory thing 
«2ti<i^?TT; ° ^|kt "p tJie darkness is to destroy it The 

(a, Mi. 






25 


absent. The cognition of this phenomenally real silver irfua 

tion percept of the nacre amounts to the oo^i- 

tion of the illimory sjlver bemg absent. In identity of contra- 
Jctones the identity is known through recognition: the rela¬ 
tion of identity is nothing but the identical t£g. The union 
of^ contradictones is uncritically accepted at first, only to be 
rejected when it is known to be a union of contradictories Tliis 
^ew of illusory perception is only the reappearance in a lower 
plane of the dualism of Brahman and maya which yet is no 
cluahsm of positives. 

^ 47. In this connexion, we may refer to a discussion of Sankara 
m his comnmntary on Brihad^aranyaka Upanisliad where 
he combats Bhartri-prapama\s views of Brahman beincr at once 

the causal Brahman different from 
the effect Brahman, though identical at the retractation of the 
world). Sankara argues that although rules of action may admit 
ot exceptions or alternatives, a truth does not; truth does not 
depend on any one’s choice. Two contradictory attributes, 
dvaita and advaita, dual and single, cannot both be true of the 
same thing. Yet the sea audits waves are said to be identieal- 
in-difference. In fact the union of contradictories is not denied 
of phenomenal objects,^ it is denied only of the noumenoii, the 
simple eternal ^object {nitya-niramyava^vastv^visliayam hi 
mruddhatvam avochama dvaitadvaitasya na kdrya-visJiaye sdvay- 
ave). Does not this remind one of Herbart’s criticism of Hegel, 
that the union of contradictories is only an empiricism ? The 
Yedantic doctrine of adhikari-hheda (accommodation), that the 
truth to be taught must be relative to the students’ capacities 
or qualifications, is not only a practical principle of pedagogy, 
secular and religious-—^it is founded on an epistemological truth. 
The duality of Brahman and the world is true to one steeped in 
desires, and encased in individuality; their unity is true to 
one who has come to know, to transcend individuality. Truth 
is relative to theknower. This, however, is no Protagorean sub¬ 
jectivism. So long as the individual is an individual, there is 
duality between teacher and taught, the teaching appearing 
to be something foreign, imposed from without; but when there 
is a flashing from below, there is one homogeneous flame of 
advaita-jnana or monistic knowledge, when, however, the indi¬ 
vidual does not remain an individual to recognise the contra¬ 
diction between it and the previous dvaita-indna or dualistic 
knowledge. To us, from the outside, dvaitri and adwfto are 
both true, as possible stages of knowledge, but dvaita is inferior 
in reality to advaita ; they are not co-ordinate. In every act 
of knowledge, the duality between subject and object pr^ents 
itself only to give way to their identification- 



26 


48 It mav be urged against the foregoing account of Vedan^ 
tic realism that it does not provide for a principle oi change, ^ 
distinct from one of mere difference, whether change is regarded 
as emanation (vivarta) or as evolution {pannarm). The three 
orders of eternal entities which we have recogmsed are all static , 

where is the dynamic principle ? . n i 

49. One would imagine such a pnnciple is hkely to be inet 
with in adiscussion of causality. Referring, however, to^ an ela- 
borate and acute discussion of the^ subject in Sankara s com¬ 
mentary on Briliadaranyaka U'panishad I, ii, we find only a 
clearer enunciation of the static view of the world which we 
liaTe already presented, hut the d 3 mamic principle appears to 
be nowhere. It would not be, however, quite out of place here 
to present, in a slightly modern garb, the sahent features of 
Siiraiwaargument, both as a specimen of his reasoning and 
as a further explication of the foregoing views. 

50. Before the world began, no deference was manifest ; 
evervthiniT was shrouded by death. Not that there was a mere 
void' for then causes and effects were in their seminal unmani¬ 
fested condition. (To justify this, he proves first that the cause, 
meaning by it only material cause, and next that the effect, 
meaning by it the effect-form, are eternally existent.) (1) Mter- 
niiy of cause. That effects are possible only when the causes 
are present is a matter of experience. It might be objected 
that when a pot is fashioned out of a lump of clay, the lump is 
first destroyed and then the pot comes into being and so the 
cause is not immediately antecedent to the effect. But it is 
replied that not the lump-form but the clay is the cause. All 
causes in their causation destroy their previous manifestation 
in introducing their present manifestation, for the same cause 
cannot exist in two different forms at the same time. But the ces¬ 
sation of the previous manifestation does not mean the cessa¬ 
tion of the cause itself. Yet why not take the lump-form also 
to be a cause, seeing that the claj^ cannot exist except in some 
form ? Because the form is variable but the matter is persis¬ 
tent. But still must it not have some form ? No ; in the pro¬ 
duction of the pot, the clay for a moment has left the lum]>form 
and is passing over to the pot-form. (That is the mystery of 
production. Change means the conflict of manifestation and 
the consequent momentary nakedness- of the substance.) But 
is this naked substance perceived? May it not be that the 
lump of clay only resembles the pot that is made out of it without 
the clay persisting identically in the change ? No ; the identity 
is p&ceived but the similarity is otvIy inferred. Inference is 
bas^ on perception, and if perception were to be questioned 
by inference here, there would be an illicit regress to infinity. 




27 


The denial of identity would mean the rapid succession of momen* 
tary acts, which means the denial of knowledge of. any object. 
For where is the evidence for the object ? If in another act of 
knowledge, where is the evidence for this again ? And so on. 
Similarly if you do not trust in your immediate perception of 
identity and ask ' what is the evidence for it ’ and reply because 
there is the felt similarity , you must ask for the evidence for that 
again, and so on, which means that you cannot affirm anything. 
Besides, the consciousness ‘ tliis is hke that ’ is possible if the 
same self or Imower is present to both the momentary cognitions, 
‘ this ’ and ‘that,’ which, however, cannot be admitted by one 
who denies identity. Is it replied that whether there be a self or 
not, the likeness is a feeling (itself an event of the mind) ? But 
it is no bhnd feeling ; ‘ this ’ and ‘ that ’ refer to each other ; 
it is an objective assertion. If it were only a subjective feeling, 
‘ this ’ and ‘ that ’ also, being individually known by assimila¬ 
tion with their likes, would be merely subjective, false: and 
then the knowledge of tliis subjectivity or falsity would itself 
be merely subjective or false. (Such a sceptical suicide then is 
the only alternative to the view that the cause is perceived to 
be persisting self-identically in the effect.) (2) JSterniiy of e^ect. 
The effect-form, too, does not accidentally emerge into existence 
but is eternally existent. {%) As an object hidden under darkness 
or behind an opaque wall manifests itself when a lamp is lighted 
or when the wall is removed, so is the form of the pot hidden 
under the previous form of the clay, the lump-form, and is 
manifested when the previous form is removed by appropriate 
means. Objections (a) In order to prove that all that is 
manifested was previously existent, it is necessary to know that 
what was previously non-existent is not manifested, but the 
absence of manifestation cannot be perceived. Hence it can 
only be said that a thing is existent when manifested Re^ly :— 
It cannot be held either that it is existent only when manifested, 
for that amounts to saying that aH existents are manifested, 
which, however, is not true. (&) The previous form, lump-form, 
as agent producing manifestation, is different in nature from the 
darkness or the opaque wall; for the wall occupies a space- 
position distinct from that of the object hidden by it, but the 
lump-form does not do so. Reply :—^This difference is not 
important; in milk, the milk-form prevents the manifestation 
of the water-form and yet occupies the same position as the 
latter, (c) But there is another difference : to the pot hidden 
under darkness, one has to make an exertion (light a lamp, etc.), 
but to see the pot emerging from the lump of clay, no such exer¬ 
tion is required (though it is required in the production of it). 
Reply :—In both cases, to see does not require any exertion : 



28 


the exertion put forth is for production only—in the former 
case for investing the pot with the attribute of lightedness, in 
the latter case, for destroying the lump-form, etc. 

(u) The past being or the future being of an object may be 
peculiarly distinct from the present being, but it is still being. 
Knowledge of the future is knowledge of some existent object, 
for otherwise how is the future ivilled? Willing (as distinct 
from merely desiring) means directly an objectification of the 
future. The Togin in his clairvoyance is said to see the past 
and the future as we see the present. Besides God’s foreknow'- 
ledge would be meaningless, if the future object w’-ere not eter¬ 
nally existent (c/. Anselm’s reconciliation between divine fore¬ 
knowledge and man’s free will). (Existence or-^reaHty imme¬ 
diately means ‘ transcending time.’) Again, what does non¬ 
existence of the future object, ‘pot,’ mean? Only that some 
other object is now present. Non-existence of pot itself is not 
existent positively: it is not defined by being distinguished 
from other non-existences, as that of the cloth. And what is 
non-existence 0 / pot? Is non-existence an attribute of pot? 
Then it means non-existence of non-existent pot, not of the 
positive pot. Finally, if we say, ‘ A is produced or comes into 
being,’ A, the subject, must be already existent in order to 
have the predicate, ‘ comes into being ’ ? 

51. This elaborate discussion of causality leads to the recog¬ 
nition of Brahman as the material cause of the universe and of 
the primal hiding principle, co-eternal with Brahman, viz,^ mdyd 
which by itself is nothing, like the blue tint which seems to 
pervade objects viewed through blue glasses. Still therefore 
the dynamic principle remains undiscovered. 

52. What is kakti or power ? It is sometimes identified 
with the principle of illusion or mdya. In PanchadaH, for 
example (Chapter II, slokas 42 seq.), we have pronouncements 
to the following effect:— mdyd, or the power of the Lord, is no 
reality (in the presence of Brahman), is inferrible from its effects, 
and only from these. The power of the Existent is not the 
Existent, even as the power of the fire is not the fire. What, 
then, is it apart from the Existent ? It cannot be called the 
void, as that is taken to be the effect of mdyd; it is something 
then which is neither the void nor the existent. Yet it exists 
only as through the Existent, for substance and attribute are not 
separate entities. It ma^^, no doubt, be manifested in effects, 
but before creation, such manifested power did not exist, and 
so power cannot be a principle separate from Brahman. (Yet 
to show that Brahman transcends it, it is added) this power 
does not pervade all Brahman but only a portion or aspect of 
Him (it). This Universe is only a quarter of Him ; full three- 




29 


quarters are self-luminous. So in Bhagavad-gtia^ Ivrislina says, 

‘ By a portion of myself, do I pervade the Universe.’ So too 
Srutiy ^ Having pervaded the universe, He extends a space 
beyond ’ {atyatishthad dakdngulam) ; and there is the Veddrda- 
Sutra, ‘ Also there is a form of the Lord not abiding in eflPected 
things ’ (Thibaut’s translation). (It is admitted, however, that 
tliis attribution of parts to the Indiscerptible is only provisional). 
‘That power, as residing^in the Existent, produces effects.’ 
The power that creates akdka (space or ether, its first effect) 
creates also its identity with the Existent and thus (in the inverse 
order) makes the existent an attribute of dhdka as substance. 
It is really the Existent that becomes ahaka ; to take the exist¬ 
ence as 0 / dhaka is what might be expected of mdyd or the prin¬ 
ciple of illusion. 

53. We have to note four points in the above passage :— 
(1) that this power, by itseff, is only mdyd ; (2) that it exists 
and functions only as residing in Brahman, i.e., only as Brahman 
informing mdyd] (3) that though thus informed, it is trans¬ 
cended by Brahman ; and (4) that Brahman existing in the 
power becomes the effect: the effect is thus not non-existent. 
The passage presents both sides of the Yedantic doctrine of 
mdyd —the world being unreal apart from Brahman and real in 
.the reahty of Brahman. The latter side is frequently overlooked. 

54. Power then as existent is the Existent assuming forms, 
Le., making the unreal real. The One Existent Bhssful Intelli¬ 
gence, entering mdyd, becomes seK-dirempted into Isvara and 
japard-prakriti, i,e., the Determinate God and the ‘ object-in- 
general,’ the primordial matter in which God is to energise. 
Brahman against the ‘ dark ground ’ of mdyd is Isvara, mdyd 
against the hght of the self is apard-prakriti. Yet Isvara is said 
to be free, to be related to the dark ground, yet floating on it, to 
have conquered it once for all, employing it ‘ only as a servant.’ 
This attribute of freely relating BQmself to the dark ground, 
being itseK absolute (for in Him attributes and aspects are con¬ 
crete realities), is to be viewed as an entity by itself, viz., 
as pard~prakriti, and the 7ii$us of this again towards apard- 
prakriti is to be taken as a third entity t-akti, or power of the 
Lord. 

55. This pard-prakriti is the intelligence of Jsmm, appearing 
in its determinate form only as reflected from the apard. As 
Brahman, the undifferenced intelligence, shines on this mdyd, 
it turns it into an object and forthwith becomes the Determinate 
Subject of this object, functioning towards the object. This 
triply stratified Mdyd with the reflection of the Lord, m 2 ., as 
comprising pard-prakriti, kakti of the Lord, and apard-prakriti, 
may be considered to be the concrete archetype of the abstrac- 





30 


tioas, saliva, rajas, and tama^ (light, intelligence or podness ; 
activity; darkness, insentiency, heaviness,_ 
versal aspects of existence, to understand which is to understand 
the differential genius of Hinduism itself. Conformably to the 
creneral trend of Vedantism, one would expect a projection ot 
Zara-prakriti and kakti on apara-prakriti : thus apara-jpvaknti 
is of the three gunas (attributes, elements), aattva, jajas, and 
iumas, all compact. The Sankhya principle Pradhana, is_this 
apard^prakriti, a stage more determinate than mere may a, 
differing from it much as Aristotle’s matter as potentiality 
differs from Plato’s me on, the negation-soil in which he plants 
his Ideas. Sankhya, however, takes it to be an ultimate reality 
incapable of being derived from higher principles.* 

56. The pard-prakriti has been taken to be the determinate 
intelligence {buddhi) of the Lord, but it should be noticed that 
tins buddhi is also taken to be an evolute of the apara-prakriti, 
in fact its first and most perfect evolute. So we have to under¬ 
stand the para as the buddhi in its subject-aspect, as in¬ 
formed with Brahman; the other buddhi is its passive aspect, 
its object aspect, for active buddhi knows passive buddhi, as the 
eye sees light. But what is this biiddhi, active and passive, as 
distinct from Brahman % Here an understanding of the psy¬ 
chology of the faculties recognised in Vedanta, viz,, buddhi, 
ynarms, ahankdra, and chitta is necessary. 

57, All knowledge is self-afi&rmation. The Vedantic self is 
as we have seen already, beyond tliis self-af&rmation, sometliing 
transcending determination, the indeterminate, the unknown 
and unknowable, that which being presupposed in all know¬ 
ledge is incapable of being caught in any determinate mode of 
knowledge. This determinate self-affirmation, too, as (eter¬ 
nally) completed or accomplished, is beyond the self-affirming 
activity. This activity implies the consciousness of a limited, 
unrealised agent proceeding or functioning towards an object. 
The consciousness of such a limited agent or subject as (illu¬ 
sorily) identified with the self (which is really absolute, not only 
in the sense of being above duality but above all determination 
also) is what Kant calls empirical self-consciousness. This ac¬ 
tivity itself is to be conceived as manifested in two grades, the 
intellectual and sensory, the synthesis of concepts and the 
synthesis of apprehension. The self is manifested in self-affirm¬ 
ation or Imowledge; knowledge is manifested by the self-affirm¬ 
ing activity of the self-conscious individualised self; the activity 
is that of the interpretation of the sense-manifold, given m one 
apprehension. The relation of the senses to the objects will be 
disci^ed later on. The senses are only blind receivers and in¬ 
capable of being themselves perceived {atmdriya). The essen- 



31 


tial character of the four faculties of (ivMJlirhcLTciiiix here discussed_ 

TfKxuds, chittd^ etc. [tticiucis in its widest sense comprising all the 
four) is that they have hoth spontaneity and receptivity and are 
capable of being self-perceived. Maims in the narrower sense 
is the faculty of simple af'prehension (not a mere seme). It has 
for its specific function^ samiaya (doubt), samkalpa and viJcalpa 
(assertion and negation, intellectual or conative). These func¬ 
tions, so widely different, are capable of being connected with 
one another. As an organ of simple apprehension, rmmas just 
raises the question, what is it ’ (sensation), but answers it not, 
just gives a start to attention ; so its function on the intellec¬ 
tual side is to doubt. SamkaV'pa is mental impulse {manasa 
kaTTifia), conation as it appears in desire or motor impulse, in 
attention, eyefi. in objectification. This blind spontaneity is 
essentially that element in an assertion which goes out beyond 
the mere judgment, the element of free will in intellec- 
tion to- which Descartes attributed error. Vikalpa is just the 
negation of this samkalpa, a mental impasse, attention as home¬ 
less, not as fixing itself on an object but as moving away from 
it or in its transition from one object to another, will in the air, 
appearing as aversion, hesitation, doubt or as consciousness of 
difference, the stress of the will in and beyond the negative judg¬ 
ment. Ohitta is the faculty of intellectual synthesis as distinct 
from mere apprehension, intellectual, in a wide sense including 
smarana (remembering), anusandhana (inquiring, seeking to 
know what), etc. Chitta thus is intellectual pravriUi or self- 
affirming activity directed outwards, i.e., towards the object; 
the consciousness which is directed inwards, i.e., the conscious¬ 
ness of self as agent or subject being ahamkdra. BuddM is the 
faculty of knowledge (as distinct from knowing), intellectual 
synthesis {nUchaya or adhyavasdya) not as activity but as an 
eternally accomplished (parinishthita) affair, the miquestioning, 
quiescent self-affirmation in the copula of a judgment, in belief, 
in the feelings of pleasure and pain. The relation of knowing 
to knowledge is peculiar ; the latter is manifested, eternally 
accomplished, not effected as a contingent product or result. 
In knowledge, however, two elements may be distinguished, the 
vritti or mental mode (section 88), and the fight of chit or self 
playing on it and investing it with its timeless or eternal charac¬ 
ter. The former can be described as the result of the knowing ac¬ 
tivity, of the ripening of the seeds of vidyd-karma or the samskdras; 
and so iuddhi or mahat in this aspect—the completed organism 
of knowledge—has been sometimes described as- the adhihhuta 
aspect of chitta, the knowing activity, which is thus the corres¬ 
ponding adhydtma or limited subjective aspect. Buddhi then 
as the faculty of determinate knowledge is the immediate home 



32 


of the self, which is the light of knowledge transcending all 
determination and yet transfiguring all determinate mental 
modes. 

58. Tins huddhi is either the immediate reflector of the self 
or the immediate envelope or body of the self. As reflector or 
object, it is the finest evolute of apara-prakriti. As the body 
with which the self is identified, it is para-prakriti. The two 
prakritis, therefore, interpenetrate one another ; they have been 
described as the primal male and female principles, a division 
which appears at different stages in Hindu cosmogony but does 
not, therefore, necessarily involve confusion of thought. The 
light of the self not only gets reflected from the surface of mayd^ 
turning it into apard-prakriU, it transfigures i^dyd in all its 
strata, everywhere differentiating it into sattva and iamas. itself 
getting nes;t identified with the saliva and then functioning 
(mjas) towards the lamas. Thus it is that the aspect of 

apara-prakriti is at the same time the adhyatma or subjective 
aspect, lamas being the adhibhuta or objective aspect. One is 
tempted to identify this distinction between sattvika and tamU'- 
sika in Vedanta with the distinction between actual and poten¬ 
tial in the Aristotelian system ; there is a good deal of agreement, 
too, between the systems in respect of the connected doctrines, 
viz., that matter is unredeemed potentiality, that the soul is 
the entelechy of the body, and that God is noesix^ 7 toeseus, the 
purest actuality (cf. Isvara having the transparent garment, 
suddha^sattva-upadhi of huddhi). But it must be remembered 
that whereas ah the differentiation is taken to be ultimately real 
by Aristotle Vedanta takes it to be real only within the sphere 
of maya or illusion. In fact, as has already been pointed out, 
^istotle s matter is apara^prakriti but not mdyd ; and although 
he recogrdses that there are different grades of reality, that 
actuality is the truth of potentiality, and that God though pure 
^tuahty stiU contains m Himself ideally all potentiaHty, yet 
he does not rise to the conception of Brahman to whom ‘being 
ae truth or actuahty of anything ’ is itself an wpadAt or envelope^ 

external relation 

^ f ^ internal relation, who is said to be eJcamsvadviUyam, 
second, transcending svagata-bheda (having parts), 

^mrn-hheda 

vSIc as the 

thTatt tude oTcrS!-?® of Brahman, Brahman in 

Sstinct fi. though the determinate 

oibnddhi Xch is nure .eW 

alike from rmr-A Pur® self-afifirmation, which is distinct 

alike from pure chaxtanya on the one hand, and from chitta md 




33 


ahamkara on the other. This buddhi has been identified with 
the state of the self as in sushupti, or better still, as in savikalpa* 
aamddhi which is its actuahsed state. Yet buddhi is not an 
abstract state but rather the concrete faculty or body in which 
the self is inclosed. The undifierenced character of buddhi 
appears still more explicitly when we consider that it is the 
faculty of feeling pleasure and pain, which is most intimately 
related to the self though different from it. 

59. Ismra then is the self as shining on and in mdyd which 
has the three gunas (attributes or elements) of sattva, rajas, and 
iamaa, and is accordingly both trigundtlta (transcending these 
gunas), and kuddha^sattvorupadhi (invested with a transparent 
body of sattspa). Of .Him as trigundtlta, pard-prakriti or the 
determinate actualised intelligence is the immediate prakriti or 
nature ; or rather as intelligence itself is an evolute of apard, 
taking on two aspects (male and female) in the fight of Brahman, 
He as trigundtlta the unity of pard (intelligence as facing the 
self) and apard (the same intelligence in its objective or passive 
aspect, the sa^i^a-aspect of apard facing its ^ama^-aspect) and 
yet prior to it. This unity next gets identified with and thus 
contracted into the para or the transparent garment of sattva 
which thus has before it the apard, with tamas as the predomi¬ 
nant, though not the sole element. Hence comes the peculiarity 
that the pard-prakriti is both different from Brahman and an 
aspect of Brahman. Hence, too, the possibility of sattva being 
here absolutely pure, though everywhere else the three gunas 
imply one another. It is the lighted surface of mdyd, as reflected 
from wliicli Brahman is Isvara; to this lighted surface, all the 
interior is darkness, negation. On the outer confines of mdyd, 
the sacred influence of fight ’ appears, and as ' chaos retires,^ 
‘ dim night ’ too retires, rendered dimmer by contrast. The 
alchemy of fight turns that which it shines on into fight. What 
was dark, negative, utterly false, becomes fight, existent, pard- 
prakriti which again shoots inward, stratifying apard-prahriti 
which is the equipoise of the gunas into its sattva and tamas 
aspects, and getting at every stage identified with the sattva- 
aspect, while the iamas-aspect is for ever retiring. 

‘‘But now at last the sacred influence 
Of light appears, and from the walls of Heaven 
Shoots far into the bosom of dim Night 
A glimmering dawn. Here Nature first begins 
Her farthest verge and Chaos to retire.” 

60. From the standpoint of Brahman, all this transfigured 

mdyd is false. From the standpoint of Isvara,^ as invested 
with the transparent body of sattva, alone is real, tamas 

is unreal—they are not co-ordinate. The * glimmering dawn ’ 

3 


shot inwards is only the promise of the conquest of the entire 
realm of chaos, .promise of the ultimate perishableness oitamas. 

61. Brahman and Isvara have sometimes been called the 
higher god and the lower god. The distinction is, to say 
the least, misleading, and probably the over-definite language 
•of some of the systematising schohasts is responsible for it. 
ISTo doubt there is a distinction between the conceptions. 
Yet Isvara is not in reality different from Brahman. As has 
beei^ already indicated, Isvara is the absolute of savikalpa 
samadhi,- whereas Brahman is of nirvikalpa-samddhi, these 
states being continuous yet different. As a conception, however, 
Isvara m trigundtlta ib different from Brahman. 

62. An image will make it clear—a hght-sphere^in circumam¬ 
bient darkness. From the centre of it, the iulness of light radiates 
all around, without a thought of the darkness: it is the indetermi¬ 
nate infinite Brahman. At the circumference, however, it reaches 
its hmit (not a resistance) and retires into itself, the hmiting 
darkness faUing outside of it; the sphere, as viewed from the cir¬ 
cumference inwards, is the determinate Infinite or the closed-in 
Absolute, Isvara. The limit, however, determines its quahty, 
not as darkness but as darkness lighted up, which again defines 
the darkness (thus the darkness gets stratified). Let us view 
all this from the standpoint of the individual. In the dim light 
of reason, in that ‘ glimmering dawn ’ in the bosom of night, 
the individual is lulled by the bright dreams of the morn, not 
unaccompanied by frightful nightmares ; this is the soul-clear¬ 
ing work of morahty (sattva-iuddhi), with its lapses and its 
despairs, with its toilsome march and its intervals of serenity. 
At length he wakes up to the glory of a sunrise, is lifted up to 
absolute consciousness when all the dreams which constituted 
life and the world he feels to be illusory, for he has now reached 
his true self which he always was but knew not. Still the dreams 
are there remembered, though now known to be dreams. He 
exclaims, ' Lo ! the Sun {Isvara) is there; He has revealed 
Himself unto me in grace and I am absolute in the Absolute. 
All that past individuality of mine was but a dream.’ Forth¬ 
with the duality vanishes in the rapt feeling, ' I am the Sun,’ 
which still means ' I am nothing and the Sun is all. I am no 
longer the limit outside the object; the limit is but the deter¬ 
mination of the object, the object which is conscious of the limit.' 
Both these stages are the aspects of Isvara^ the former being the 
suddhorsattvorupadhi aspect, the latter the triguridUta aspect. 
‘ In the former, He reveals Himself in me, in my absolute con¬ 
sciousness, puts on my absolute consciousness as a garment ; 
in the latter, I become His very self—He not only shines in me 
but passes out unimpeded and I am dissolved in Him.’ In the 





35 


former, the light of that sphere passing outwards impinges on 
darkness, lighting it up ; in the latter, the light retires backwards 
to the centre. But in either case, the light is determinate; 
in both, there is an awareness of the darkness ; the light at first 
makes it an object and then unites ecstatically with it. Isvara 
as tricjunatlta stiU remembers His feat of transcending maya ; 
the self is conscious of its difference from Isvara being illusory. 

It is just the passing into the indifference of Brahman, not the 
indifference itself. It is the indifference rendered conceiv¬ 
able ; yet such is the nature of the conception that its 
content spurns the form, proclaims its own inconceivability- 
This conceived inconceivability is the ultimate formula; 
as conceived, it is the trigunaiita Isvara, the inconceivability 
that is conceived being trigunatlta Brahman. They consti¬ 
tute one unit, one scintillating star; that noble verse in 
the Ohhandogya Upanishad, iydmdt ^avalam prapadye kavaldt 
Sydmam prapadye, ' May I pass from the dark blank to the 
figured determinate and from thence to the blank again 
points to this mystic scintillation of the One reality. No 
wonder, therefore, that the highest epithets should be apphed 
to Isvara, as for example, in the Sdiidilya-vidyd in the 
Ohhandogya, such as one would expect to be applied to Br^man 
from the characterisations, lower Brahman and higher Brahman, 
the misleadingness of which must be now apparent. ^ 

63 Yet after all it may be asked, why this hmitation oi a 
darkness at all ? Why the illusion of an individuality at all ? 
As we have seen already, the question itself is illegitimate, for 
while the individuahty is there, it necessarily sees no beginning 
or end of itself, for aU that it knows, it knows under the form of 
individuality ; and when the individuality is transcended, not 
onlv is it felt to be an iUusion, even its having .been lUusonly 
present in the past is felt to be so; so nowhere does it appear 
as a contingent reality of which only we can demand an ex- 

planatim^t should the inconceivable be thought of, 

referred to at aU ? It must be because it reveals itself in a form 
which it at the same time condemns. But are not those to 
whom it reveals iUusory also ? Why then tlns^ illusory revela¬ 
tion in an iUusory form to illusory subjects 1 Once again, this 
whv ’ is an iUegitimate demand, an aUprakna, as it has some¬ 
times been caUed As the individual is just passing into 

it feels aU this to be iUusory and then the illusion vam^^es. 
The highest consciousness then for the individual as in^^dua 
is this Consciousness of the musoriness oi his oym 
This has to be simply accepted ; there is no why for this 

for Brahman. 







36 


65. Before tlie moment of passing into Brahnmn, the indi- 
is raised to absolute consciousness {fara^'prahnh, as 

invested with which Isvcltu is iuddhctrSGMvct'-upcidht), when IsvciT^ 
m known to be knowing the world as His reflex, Le., as created 
by His will. Kot that the world is created out of nothing; 
for Isvara a^uming iuddha-sattvorupadhii i.e., knowing attitude, 
means at once homng apard-praJcriii before Him as object and 
material for His wiU to mould. But certain old difficulties at 
once start up. How does tbs wiU meet the matter r How 
does it actuaiise particular groupings of ' names and forms, 
potentially contained in tbs matter, and this in time, according 
^ law I "Why does He will at all, seeing that He, as perfectly 
actualised, cannot have anytbng to attain or ^void ? ^The 
will meets the matter as identical with it, just as the energising 
body can act on the object, the body being, as we saw but sen¬ 
tient space continuing itself in its movement through space. As 
to the other questions, a preliminary discussion is required to 
intreduce the Yedantic solutions, 

66. The absolute consciousness in which Isvara is revealed 
is reached only when there is a perfect chastening of the spirit, 
when it is made the still mirror of truth, not simply by a 
discipline of the intellect hut by an ethical discipline of the will, 
when ail the desires of the individual self have been completely 
eliminated and the spirit is broadened out so as to comprehend 
the truest interests of all beings. Ignorance is but tire intellec¬ 
tual reflex of evil willing, the shadow of wMch again deepens 
the evil, and thus it goes on ad infinitum. We have already 
introduced the notion of every man being born with the seed of 
ail bis spiritual life, intellective and eonative. Each such seed 
of vidyd-karma (knowledge and action) has a measure of ignorance 
or evil in it, and the self as embodied in tbs seed sees no begin¬ 
ning of itself, for it can explain its evil or sin only as due to an 
ignorance which is not a temporary cloud but is ingrained in the 
character which constitutes its body, and further it can explain 
this ignorance only as due to self-imposition, free sinning, for 
the self cannot have anytbng imposed upon it from without. 
The absolute consciousness is reached only when tbs substantial 
ignorance has been dispelled by good willing. So when Fichte 
said that every man could, if he would, i.e,, if he had not a sin¬ 
ning will, rise to inteUectuai perception and when SeheUing 
thought the very reverse, that ' the capacity for it, like the 
poetic talent, is possessed by a select few/ that the true philoso¬ 
pher, like the true poet, is bom, not made, they held views wHch 
are reconciled in the Yedantic doctrine wMch has already been 
presented. The ignorance that is ingrained in the seed of vidyd- 
karma with which a man is born shuts out certain forms or planes 





37 


of thought ab initio from his mental horizon, which no effort of 
mere thinking can make accessible, just as an instinctive ten¬ 
dency or an ingrained habit cannot be annulled by a single fiat 
of the will. At the same time there are rational elements or 
good tendencies in that seed or ‘ noumenal character ’ whicb. the 
will primarily, and the intellect secondarily {with the help of the 
will), can help to develop, gradually working out the ignorance 
and the evil. Accordingly when Hegel holds, as against both 
Eichte and Schelling, that the ‘ wonderful power of the understand¬ 
ing ’ alone can be trusted to lead us to every level of thought by 
a necessary dialectic development, that therefore a bad man can 
rise step by step up the thought-ladder alone to the highest con¬ 
ceptions of philosophy, Vedanta will press against him the old 
objection that thought is not knowledge, that even the large 
range of thought to which the bad man has access is due to the 
f^t that he is not all bad, and that though the thought is con¬ 
tinuous with absolute knowledge or intellectual perception, yet 
at every step this thought, necessary as it is, has the alternative 
of absolute scepticism beyond it. The smoky flickering flame 
of mere thought clears up only when the moisture of evil and 
ignorance in the ‘ noumenal character ’ (Schopenhauer) is com¬ 
pletely burnt off in the fire of morality. 

67. This Vedantic view may now be made the individualistic 
platform from which we may view the <]uestion already sug¬ 
gested, ‘ Why does Isvara will at all.’ Isvara is the crown of 
the moral consciousness, the unity of all the ‘ noumenal charac¬ 
ters ’ or the unities of vidya-karma (including not only human 
spirits but spirits above and below, as is apparent from the 
Vedantic doctrines of the continuity of spiritual gradations and 
of metempsychosis). He is again the organism, not only of the 
spirits—for ignorance, the mother of Karma, cannot have place 
in Him—but of nature, too, furnisliing the experiences appro¬ 
priate to their Karma (the maluim poena to their rnalum culpa). 
He is the joint organism of moral law and natural law, the 
latter being only the obverse of the former, the two being the 
differentiations, mainly sdttviha and of apard-praJcriti 

as interpenetrated by para-pralcriti. [Were it not for the ignor¬ 
ance begetting Karma and begotten of Karma, every one would 
see the unity of moral law and natural law, see that he is the 
architect of his own fortune, though now virtue and happiness 
seem to be synthetically connected ’ (Kant) with each other.] 
Isvara, however, is not the immanent unity but the transcen¬ 
dent, the latter being his' true nature. There are grades of 
transcendence, too. As primarily transcendent or trigunatita. 
He is in dreamless sleep, with the homogeneous unity of para 
and apard-prakriti as the objective blank before Him the 











38 



primal glory in which He rests {sve mahimni tishthati). This 
unity is the avyakrita akd§a, the unmanifested archetype of 
space and matter, the absolute huddhi (though sometimes taken 
as only objective, as the first objectivity of huddhi), the Vedan- 
tic substitute for the fradhdna of Sankhya. It is the home of 
all ‘names and forms,’ ‘unevolved but about to be evolved’ 
{avyakritOr-vydchiklrsMta), because of its being in immediate 
unity with the individual wills or noumenal characters, which 
last in the reflection of Isvara are the jlvas or individual souls, 
called prdjnas in this connexion, who rest, unconscious of their 
individualities in this dreamless sleep of the Universal Spirit 
(paramehardirayd mdydmayl mahasushuftih yasydm svarupa- 
pratihodha-rahitdh serate-samsdrino jivdh. — Sankam^s commen¬ 
tary to Brahma-sutras.) Next Isvara becomes invested with 
pard-prahriti,^QXidL as such transcends the processes of this 
unity of para and apard. The individual will-selfs have here 
as much a dual nature as Isvara himself. In dreamless sleep, 
their mind dissolves into mdyd and they attain their eternally 
free {muMa) state, their identity with the trigundtlta; the same 
souls, in relation to their life-processes and re-incarnations, 
are \dewed as invested with the first individualising sheath, 
the ‘noumenal character ’ (the Kararia-iarira or the will-self). 
But a difference emerges here; for whereas the envelope*of 
Isvara in this aspect is kuddha-saUva or transparent, that of the 
jiva is malma-sattva or impure, partly opaque, dimming the 
light that shines through it. The impurity is the hmitation 
that constitutes the individuality. But just as the apard- 
prakriti has huddhi as its evolute, so too these malina-sattva 
indi^dual souls gradually move towards the iuddha-sattva type, 
theJwan-mukta souls (i,e., those who have burst their bonds 
of individuality and ignorance in this hfe) being just a stage 
removed from the iuddha-sattva Isvara. 


68. A further understanding, somewhat after Schopenhauer, 
o the progressive reahsation of these individual spirits is neces- 
sary for a clearer explication of the nature of Isvara. The 
manudual t^IIs, asserts himself against the world, nature and 
society; and as liis will spends itself, the world recoils on him. 
AS his wilung necessarily means a limitation of vision, the recoil 
seems to be foreign to him; hence all the misery and apparent 
injustice of the world. He sets it down to blind^nature (or un¬ 
just selfish society). This rough tussle with nature and society, 
however, develops m some spirits a generalised and moralised 

deepens unreason, leading them 
to thf^AvI^^^f gradually, through a diminution" of life, 
d in whom reason is 

developed come to perceive that the recoil is their own work. 





39 


that a punishment as well as a reward is something that is 
their due, something to which they have a claim. But the 
Universe is not quite so simple, and it puzzles the reason to 
lead it peradventure-to serener heights or to hurl it down again. 
For are not the rewards and punishments, notoriously the latter, 
very often disproportionate to one's Karma in this life? 
What is stranger still, why should evil Karma be acquired at 
all ? Why should reason every now and then lapse into.irra¬ 
tionality which is the essence of sin ? Why again should there 
be the sudden conversions, the lightning flashes of good inclina¬ 
tions, now and again bursting forth from the leaden cloud of 
habits ? It is onl}’’ the ‘ noumenal character ’ that can explain 
all this, the« character which may not get completely mani¬ 
fested in any one stage of the phenomenal life, not even in 
one's whole life. The self as identified with it moves freely in 
the (knowing and), willing process ; at every stage, the self 
recognises the character then manifested to have been pre¬ 
existent, unconsciously constituting his individuality. This 
noumenal seed is not explained by heredity and accidental 
variations which explain only the outward, naturalistic side 
of it. The individual self sees no beginning of itself and looks 
out beyond its life-processes to an uninterrupted existence 
before birth. The existence of a life before this is intelligible in 
the light of the relation between the (naturalistic) evolutionary 
view and the a pnon view on the one hand and the Vedantic 
view on the other. The concrete self or the noumenal charac¬ 
ter is known a priori, at any rate recognised in empirical con¬ 
sciousness to have been beginninglessly operative. The empirical 
account of the origin of this concrete self does not prejudice 
the validity of the notion of its eternal pre-existence. If its 
pre-existence is admitted, is it (1) timelessly transcendent, or 
(2) timelessly immanent in experience or rather in the most 
concrete experience-system, the whole species regarded as one ? 
Vedanta will hold that it is both. A doctrine somewhat like 
traducianism is traceable in a passage in Brihad-aranyaha Upani- 
shad (I, V, 17—8} on the relation between father and son; 
other passages may also be referred to. At the same time, just 
as every object and every combination of objects were found to 
presuppose eternal ‘ names and forms,’ so every individual soul 
has its individuating principle in a distinctive Kdrana karlra. 
This karlra is timeless by itself, though its concrete nature, viz., 
its being the matrix of specific instincts and unconscious cogni¬ 
tion-traces points to the experiences of this distinctive body 
before the present life. Every such will-self, itself only d. name 
apart from Brahman—the name being what alone is said to 
persist after death, after the body has relapsed into the ele- 







40 


meiite, gross and subtile—is a centre of many names and forms/ 
tbe shadows of the objects of its experience in all time, with 
which, however, it is at this height in immediate unity. Such 
a will-self then, ranging as it does over many lives of the 
same individual, furnishes us with a solution that consi¬ 
derably lightens the heavy unintelligibility of the Karma- 
system. 

69. From the stage, therefore, in which the individual feels 
himself freely clai m ing his rewards and punishments, he passes 
again to the stage in which the recoil is felt to be foreign to liim 
till that mist, too, clears up in the recognition in a far wider sense 
than beioxe of himself being the eternal architect of his own for¬ 
tune. Here, however, the difficulty comes back in an accentu¬ 
al form. He does not indeed ask himself, ^ why was I cursed 
with^such a noumenal character’—^that would be the voice of 
the " devil that is an ass ’—for to ask tliis, one should first be 
dissociated from the noumenal character which, however, in this 
dissociation -Brould be iUnsory. But in the Hght of the moralised 
rea^n that has been developed in him, he ■will cry out in Augus- 
timan despair, ‘ Am I then never to escape from this self-imposed 
self, tins radical evil in me ? Is final liberation or MoTcsha im- 
poMble for me ?' In this stage of deep vairagya (denial of the 
mil, repentance), he learns, emotionally and intellectually, of a 
^igher soul (a yum) from the revealed Scriptures, or sometimes 
by sponteneo^ intuition (sources which are identical in the 
resort) that /arara is the Truth and that his individuality 
thaf il’ Sfii through His light, in His grace (Kamna), 

so W ^^ermg and thirsting for moksha (liberation) 

Ini unregenerate self, has not learnt the bliss- 

i=g JwS “'if2:^ 

to^^ ^ understand why is said 

in order that thp^r ™ ^ace, the Karma of individual souls ‘ 
By ffimself m L or identity with Himself, 

takes himself to ^ individual necessarilj'- 

him t£^ % existent, Isvara is to 

out of ® evolving world into existence 

work out the evil i^ 

takes his eroeriPTinAc i stage of duality, he at first 

punishment ^eted out to reward and 

recognise that thev are tK ™ Gfod ; but as he comes to 

he that i^tict reflections of his own nature, 

ance S ipaJSi 11 “®n®^ ae viewed through the ignor’ 

led to this rS£ tif Wle thaf has 

self. This mercy then /Jf ^ ^® ^^® ef God Him- 

y, tCen, does not conflict with justice: neither 




41 


vaishamya (injustice) nor nairghrinya (lieaxtlessness) can be 
predicated of Isvara., In mercy. He becomes the good principle 
in individual spirits. He actuahses them. He neutralises the evil 
in them by inflicting on them punishments (or as Christians put 
it, by inflicting on Himself their punishments). Yet his mercy 
is not indiscriminate; it descends on them according to the 
measure of their Karma. In reality, however, He does not work 
at all. He does not suffer at all, except in their persons: Karma 
and pain are to Him alike illusory, ffis willing to actualise 
them is but the evolution of their sattva^ through the dynamic 
of their Karma. He is but the breath of the Karma system, the 
organism of justice which is at the same time the organism of 
grace. His koMi or power is but the Karma of individual spirits 
pressing outwards towards fruition. His ichchha or will to create 
is no bondage to Him. To Him, it is a glorious divine disport 
or Ilia ; to us, individual spirits, the influx of grace or Karuna. 

71. Isvara, as Justice, has His dread aspect, too. Through 
Him, those in whom sattva is dominant rise higher and higher , but 
those in whom tamos is dominant sink deeper and deeper. Facilis 
descerisus Averni. Yet if He is universal reality, why is He 
specially identified with, goodness, with all that is ‘glorious and 
beautiful and potent ? ’ It is the old problem of evil—is evil 
positive in Vedanta ? As in ScheUing, it is ultimately but the 
‘ dark grouhd ’ of goodness. As indicated already, satfva is but 
tamos actualised. To most men, however, in whom saUva i^ but 
imperfectly developed, the evil is co-ordinate with the good, and 
therefore positive. But as the evil deepens, spiritual vision also 
gets dimmed; and the misery that follows drags the sinner lower 
and lower, instead of chasteniug his soul—there is an increasing 
helplessness—tiU the struggle between sattva and tamos ceases, 
sattva getting completely involved in one dull cloud of uncon¬ 
sciousness {sthdvaratva). But, apparently, this does not serve the 
ends of Divine Justice, far less of Divine mercy. Bor to whom 
is the unconsciousness a punishment at all ? It may be replied 
that to the individual left with the last spark of freedom, the 
passage to this sthavaratva will appear hke a sinking into ‘ eternal 
perdition.’ But how is Divine mercy vindicated ? The last 
fury of the Divine wrath is followed by unconsciousness. The 
last embrace of Divine love means, too, a lapse of differenced 
consciousness. Extremes tend to meet. 

72. Let us now consider the state of the jivanmuhta which is 
just the antipodes of the state of sthdvaratva. The jlvanmuhta 
is one who ^ter repeated births, repeated terms of probation 
passed successfully, at last kills off all ignorance, all Karma, 
aU evil, and reaches absolute knowledge. How does he still 
remain jlvat, living, embodied, the body being only a material- 





42 


isation of Karnm C objectification of tke will/ Scbopenliaaer) ? 
Karma is divided by Indian philosophers into three sections, 
sa'^Mta, arMha, and kriyamana. Not all the Karma acquired 
in previous fives receives fruition in this life. The noumenal 
character does not become fully phenomenalised in one life. The 
part that is manifested, that has started on its course of fruition 
in this fife, is called arabdha (that which has begun), the part that 
is unmanifested is called sanchita (hoarded) and the new Karma 
which is being generated in this life is the Kriyamana. Now the 
Jtmnmukta, having killed ofi his ignorance, no longer feels the* 
solicitations of desire, and hence acquires no new Karma. The 
sanchita Karma is burnt ofi in the fire of knowledge, destroyed 
in its embryonic stage. The arabdha, being a unity, must run 
out its course and cannot be stopped half-waj^. As in the case 
of an arrow shot through the air or of the revolving wheel of the 
potter, the momentum must spend itself out. But then it may 
be asked while the momentum is there in life, how can there be 
absolute knowledge or moksha ? If, too, sanchita be destroyed 
by this knowledge which shows forth all Karma to be illusory, 
how can the momentum of arabdha be there still 1 It is repHed 
that to the jlvan-mukta himself, the momentum of his bodily life 
is nothing in reality : it is positively existent only to others with 
dim vision. The world, including the bodies of individuals, is 
but the community of the self-energising Karma-unities (ener¬ 
gising in the grace of God, which is the deepest sense of self-en¬ 
ergising). Natural law is but the obverse face of the moral law. 
If the body of the jivan-mukta were annihilated for others also, 
there would be violation of this law, which is absurd. To the 
jwan-nmhta himself, however, the emergence of tliis knowledge 
of the illusoriness of his body must appear to be abrupt. He 
seems to be raised to divine grace without any merit of his own. 
But to Is’Dara, Justice does not admit of being baulked. Karma 
can be killed out only by Karma, the will can be denied only by 
the will (Schopenhauer). Yet the will, which has thus com¬ 
pletely denied itself would stand out in spiritual pride, were it 
not for the fact that it gets at this stage (and even earlier) trans- 
figured by reverence (the obverse of grace). In this reverence, 
in this assurance of free forgiveness, these individual souls elect 
to continue the divine system of Justice and grace by remaining 
in the body, by freely continuing in the illusory form in relation 
to other souls. S^the jivan-mukta souls assist as the high priests 
at the cosmic yajna or sacrifice, the incense from which is for 
ever and for ever mounting to the Highest in heaven. They 
move about like the impersonations of the Divine grace that 
IS <hmly stirring in the bosom of the age, the beacon-lights 
of the universe, the realised hopes of the army of the good. 




43 


never self-assertive, sometimes even despondent, fighting out 
the great battle with the army of the evil. The good 
triumphs; evil is vanquished and reduced to sthavaratva 
(unconsciousness). Peace reigns once again; Isvara passes 
into a deep sleep. This is pralaya, Universal Death 
to the last of the army of the evil just swooning . into 
sthavaratva, the ecstasy of life to the resplendent heroes of the 
army of the good. When, at any stage of the world, all the 
jiva^ come to be ranged under two classes, jlvan-muMa and 
sthavara, there comes on this pralaya or dissolution ; the 
system of Karmoriomes, that started on the course of fruition, 
the cosmic arahdha’, as it might be called, becomes completely 
dissipated ; the mwto or liberated need not work, the sthavara 
cannot work. The cycle closes ; there comes the turn for the 
cosmic sanchita (it may be, only a part of it) to mature itself; 
this includes not only the sanchita of those who have been re¬ 
duced to sthavaratva in this cycle, but also of those so reduced 
in other cycles. Isvara, the soul of the JS^ar?wu^-organism, awakes; 
there is begun srishii or creation over again. 

73. And how does he create ? He matures this sanchita. 
He proceeds according to law, according to the Vedas. Tiie 
uniformity of the course of jS'ama-fruition is but the reflection 
of the Impersonal Peason, which is an emanation of Brahman 
co-eternal with the creative Isvara, Isvara, having recognised 
it, has breathed it out in the form of Revelation {vdh or 
veda). The muhta (free) souls, who have had their sanchita all 
burnt ofi by knowledge (or, it may be conceived, only those of 
them whose sanchita was acquired in reciprocity with the cosmic 
sanchita, going to be actuafised in this creation), now freely, 
joyously get incarnated as deputy-creators of Isvara, as the 
strands of His creative huddki or grace, as His mduasorputras 
(sons begotten of huddhi), as the Vedic seers (BisMs who see 
the 7ndntras constituting Impersonal Reason), to quicken the 
sthdvaras once again into hfe, who now look out with young eyes 
of wonder on the renovated world. 

•: 74. Thus srishii (creation) succeeds pralaya (dissolution), 
and pralaya succeeds srishii. Srishii, as through Buddhi (the 
will and the intellect being the same to Him), is the function of 
Isvara in sattva-envelope, i.e., of Brahma. Pralaya, its obverse, 
is the function of Isvara in tamas-enYolope (envelope of uncon¬ 
sciousness), i.e., of Mahekvara ; while sthiti (or subsistence of the 
world) with its upward and downward trends is of Isvara in the 
envelope of rajas as Providence or Vishnu. The alternation of 
the Trinity is eternal; it is only the nothingness of JS'ama artis¬ 
tically exhibited on the stage of time, the empirical picture of 
Isvara being trigimdtlta, an emanation from His being. It may 






44 


also be viewed as evolution from the point of view of individual 
souls who, in their moralised reason as evolved with the pro¬ 
cession of the cycles, recognise an increasing moral purpose in 
the procession, assured of their progress towards mohsha along 
this eddying yet advancing stream ” of Karma, 

75, The nature of Brahman and /smm has been explicated 
at some length. It will suffice now only to indicate the main 
stages in the onward course of creation, along the three lines 
{1) Isvarct (as invested with fara-'praJcriti)^ (2) individual souls 
as embedded in this para a,nd constituting the forces or the 
weapons of Isvara's activity, and (3) apara^prakriti as gradually 
differentiated in response to this activity. 

76. (1) and (2). In nirvikdlpa samadhi, individual is 
no longer an individual, he is undifferenced Brahman, In su- 
shupti^ he is like Isvara^ dual; Isvara in one aspect is trigundtlta 
and in another aspect invested with iuddha-sattva-upadhi or 
transparent envelope of sattva (Section 70), and so the individual 
is merged in Brahman on the one hand (cf. svam apiti, attains 
his self) and is invested with an envelope of undifferenced 

on the other. On waking from deep sleep, the individual recog¬ 
nises that he has slept blissfully. This constitutes evidence for 
the envelope of huddhi and explains why it is called dnanda- 
maya-kosha or envelope of bliss. This dnandamaya is called the 
puchchha or tail of Brahman who is dnanda or bhss itself with¬ 
out an envelope. As having limitation in the individual, it 
is said to be rnaliTha-sattva or partly opaque, as opposed to the 
Quddhorsattva or transparent envelope of Isvara, This opacity 
IS due to the $amskdra% or the timeless traces of the 
vidyorkarma (knowledge and action) of a past life which con¬ 
stitute the dormant individuality in sushupti^ making up what 
is c^ll^d the Karana-sarlra (will-self) which is viewed as merged 
in dnandamaya. These traces again in their kinetic aspect, i,e,^ 
viewed as operative functions^ constitute the vijndnamaya kosha, 
the envelope constituted by the original springs of thought and 
volition, the tendencies which may be indifferently regarded as 
inherited habits or as ‘ reminiscences of a life before this.’ Thus 
these samskaras or vijhdnas^ too, are double-faced Hke Janus, 
and lie as it were in the borderland between sushupti and dream. 
Manomaya is the name applied to the body constituted by manas^ 
the receiver or unity of presentations, images and desires (as dis¬ 
tinct from the instinctive springs which belong to vijndnamaya). 
Pranamaya is the unity of the five sense-organs (not the bodily 
sites but the supersensuous principles of seeing, hearing, etc.), the 
nve organs of ^tion (not the limbs supplied with muscles, but 
rather the radical kinsesthetic ’ presentations—articulation, 
locomotion, prehension, etc.), and lastly the five ^^^^.(not 



45 


' airs ’ as they are often translated, but rather the five strands or 
currents of vital functions in the body). (Without attempting 
a detailed explanation of 'prana, apana, etc., we may point out 
that these are explicitly distinguished from air, e.g., in the 
BraJima-sutra ‘ na vayu-^hriye prithag-upadekat,'^ where Sankara 
describes these as the adhydtma counterparts of air. In fact it 
would appear from other contexts that air is taken to be life 
instead of life being taken to be air). Linga4ar%ra or the sub- 
tile^body is the name given to the complex of the three envelopes, 
vijndnamdya^ wxiThornaya, and prdnamaya^ which thus comprises 
seventeen elements (buddhi, manas, five sense-organs, five organs 
of action, and five vital functions). Another name is sukshyrm- 
karlra^ called also kiku and madhyamorprdna in the Upanishads, 
where it is not often distinguished from the Karana-karira. The 
next body or envelope is the annamaya or stJiuloriartra, the 
material body which the soul enters in waking life but abandons 
in dream, etc., and after death. 

77. The individual soiil, as identified with tlie material 
body is the jtva or dehin ; the unity of all these pvas, the collec¬ 
tive or cosmic self in the waking state is Virdj or Vais vdnara. 
As identified with the subtile body, the individual is the liTigin 
or taijasa, and the unity of all taijasas is Hiranya-garbha or 
Sutrdtman. Lastly, as identified with the Kdrana^§ar%ra, the 
individual is prdjna, and the unity of all prdjnas is Isvara. 
Prom Isvara to Virdj, from prdjna to dehin, is the order of srishti 
or progressive materialisation, the reverse being that of pralaya 
or progressive ideahsation or de-individualisation. As the pro¬ 
gress is continuous, each stage is double-faced, and so what is 
predicated of Isvara is sometimes predicated, of Hiranyagarhha, 
and so on. 

78. (3) We have already traced the stages of (a) mdyd as 
co-ordinate with Brahman, (5) the unity of para and apard-prak- 
riti as co-ordinate T^th the trigundtlta Isvara, and (c) apard with 
tamas predominant as co-ordinate with suddJia-sattva Isvara. 
Akdka in the strictly adhibhuta aspect is the last, for the second, 
though called avydhrita dkdia (Section 67), is the indifference of 
adhydtma and. adhibhuta. Tliis dkdia, then, is the obverse face 
of buddhi, the first evolute of apard, the blank of objectivity, 
the prim of space and matter. Next comes vdyu, more deter¬ 
minate in character than dkdia, the primordial force or motion 
filling tliis dkdia and poising the heavenly bodies each in its 
proper sphere, force conceived not in its mechanical aspect but 
as the cosmic life-force, that which constitutes the Sakti or 
power of the prdjnas, binding the samskdras, individual and 
cosmic, to the buddhi-umts and which, lower down in the 
course of materialisation, is the nerve-force and the objective 









46 


face of undifferentiated sensitivity (touch.). The attribute of 
uhaka is said to be not only emptiness or blank objectivity, but 
also sound. This sensuous sound, though generated by air¬ 
wave, is not air-wave; the sense of hearing (not the bodily appa¬ 
ratus) apprehends the sensuous sound (as distinct from the air¬ 
wave) ; the locus of this sound is ahaka. Sound again is the 
necessary sensuous basis for even the most abstract thoughts ; 
SQ Isvara has been said to apprehend the Impersonal Reason 
co-eternal with Him and to breathe it out in the shape of that 
potent sound-system, the Vedas. Vayu or air has not only these 
attributes of ahaia —^blankness and sound—but also touch. It is 
thus more determinate than ahdka, although both are said to be 
amurta (without form), amrita (imperishable), 2 /a^*(going in every 
direction, i.e., infinite), and tya (invisible ov 'parohsha), in con¬ 
tradistinction from the three other primal matters, tejas, ap, 
and prithivl (fire, water, earth), which are said to be finite and 
perishable (Brihadaranyaka Upanishad, 11, iii). Here, then, 
is a nodal point in the gradual procession or emanation of the 
five primal matters, the Vedantic analogues of the Sankhya 
tanmatroB (though with a difference), the probable explanation 
why very often the Upanishads speak of three (the last Jihree) 
primal matters instead of -five. Of the J:hree, te^as has rupa or 
colour in addition to the attributes of vayu ; ap has rasa or taste 
(which goes with liquidity in all its variations) in addition to 
those of tejas; and prithwi has smell in addition to those of 

ap. . 

79. It may be pointed out that the theory of these five primal 
matters does not, in any way, conflict with the theory of the 
elements in Chemistry. The principle of classification is alto¬ 
gether different. The five matters are the concretes or objectives 
corresponding to the five kinds of sensation, the sensations being 
taken as the attributes of objects (and attributes in Vedanta 
are identical with substance). Whether such a classification 
is fruitful of results or not is a different enquiry; at any rate 
it fits in with the peculiar ideahsm of Vedanta. One is tempted 
to connect it with Mill’s dictum that the number of primary 
laws of nature cannot be less numerous than the distinguishable 
feelings of the human mind; only what is regarded as a mere 
abstract concept or law by the empiricist is taken in Vedanta 
to be substantial matter (Section 42). 

80. Besides, it is to be noticed that if akaia is conceived to 

stand on the level of Sbnd vayu on the borderland between 

sushupti and dream, the thxee other elements stand on the level 
of dream, while the elements of Chemistry are all on the level 
of waking or the level of gross matter. On this waking level, 
Vedanta would introduce these primal matters, not in their 



47 


simplicity but as illusorily compounded or panclilkrita (quin¬ 
tupled). Pancfilkarana is the name given to the process of the 
combination of the matters according to a formula like |a, 

|c, where a, h, c, d, e, stand for the matters. Sometimes 

when the last three matters are alone taken, the process is 
called tribrit-karana or tripHng (la, ^b, |c). The dkdia, vdyu, 
etc., which are perceived by our senses, are only the modes of 
this compounded matter, the primal matters being superseii- 
suous. 

81. The shadowy ‘ names and forms ’ imbedded in the primal 
mdyd get actualised as material objects in this pancJilkrita 
matter. The noumenal will-self here gets materiahsed into a 
dehin*, hexe tlien is the sphere of Karma-imition and also of 
moral probation. 

82. We may conclude the present study with a paraphrase 
(with interpretations) of two cosmogonic accounts from the 
XTpanishads, in illustration of the Vedantic views already 
discussed. The first is from Ghhdndogya Upanishad VI, ii.— 
This (empirical world, differentiated into names and forms) 
was barely existent in the beginning (was the bare ' that’ as 
distinct from the ' what’), one without a second (homogeneous 
with it or heterogeneous). It saw {aikshata, thought 
and willed, which mean the same thing to it), "I shall be 
many : I shall generate,’ and accordingly created tejas (fire). 
Then tejas thought, ' I shall be many, I shall generate,’ and 
accordingly created water. Water next thought, I shall be 
many, I shall generate,’ and created earth (annam). 

(This One Existent (sat) is then intelligence and not the 
unintelligent pradhdna of Sankhya. This creation according to 
Sankara, is emanation {vivaria), for. nothing can be distinct 
from Sat. Fire, water, etc., also thought, i.e., as embodied 
in these. Sat thought and instituted the successive steps of crea¬ 
tion. Each link in the chain of causation is not only a medium 
but a true cause in the refiection of the First Cause. This amounts 
to saying that God creates reasonably, accordingto Law). 

VI, iii.—All living beings, whether oviparous, viviparous* or 
vegetable, generate their respective seeds. (These are the jivas 
or the beginningless units of individuahty). 

The One God {Sat) willed, I shall introduce myself into these 
three gods (fire, water, earth, the basal devatds) through this 
jlva (these beginningless principia individvMionis, i.e., as Sankara 
takes them, the ^sam^iams, in the buddhi of the Sat, of the forms 
of a past creation) and make " names and forms ’ manifest.. I 
shall render each of these (basal) devatds three-fold {tribrita, 
which does not deny panchlkriia or quintupled, explained 
already).” So it did. 




48 


83. The next passage is from Brihad-aranyaJca UpanisJiad, 

I, ii.' It exhibits the characteristic mystic imagination of the 
XJpanishads. Here ai large latitude of conjectural interpreta- ' 
tion must be allowed. Sankara's interpretations have been 
accepted, wherever available. 

There was nothing here in the beginning. Everything was 
shrouded by Death or Hunger. This Hunger is Death. He 
created marwis, in order that He might feel Himself (invested) 

with a mind. . . 

(This Death is here identified by Sankara with Hiranyagarb/ia* 
He is in fact Hiranyagarhha as passing into Isvara. He is the 
Universal Hunger which has retracted into itself the entire 
evolved world. Again, as Hunger is at once the destructive and 
creative stress of the p-dnamaya^ so the seM of dissolution or 
death is the seH of creation or life. Thus Death wanting to be 
Life, t.e., wanting to create, created to Himself a mind to anti¬ 
cipate the creation. The wiU-self is imbedded in intelligence. 
We have already explained the alternation of and 

ST%shti'^ * 

He worsMpped and was satisfied. As He worshipped (fire 
and) water came into being, as the ' embodied parts of his 
devotion’ {Pujanga-hhutdh). 

(Death has now passed into the living mind, which now re¬ 
duplicates itself, becomes self-conscious. Creation here is self- 
consciousness, self-worship. Worshipping a god is becomng 
that god. Nature is sometimes spoken of as the ‘ processio of 
the Holy Spirit’ or as ‘ a sacramental system.’ Of the ‘em¬ 
bodied parts of the worship,’ fire (with special reference to the 
sacrificial fire of the akvamedha sacrifice) is the direct embodi¬ 
ment, and water is the indirect embodiment; for fire is said to 
be situated both within and outside water. The series from 
akaia to ptithim is one of growing determinateness, and after 
vayu^ of descending magnitude, too). 

(Fire thus situated) thickened the froth of the waters and 
turned it into Earth. As He thus created Earth, He beca;me 
fatigued and forth exuded from within His fiery perspira¬ 
tion. 

(Tlie self-worship of Hiranya-garhha means the encasement 
of Himself in the primal matters evolved out of tamas (^.e., out 
of the imperfections or Karma of the individual seKs) and then 
the irradiation of this envelope with the fire of the self within, 
which makes the whole a living, developing ‘ mundane egg.’ 
Self-worship means ‘ being at once the worshipped, and the 
grosser worshipping self’). 

Now this fire or life (pra^ia) within this mundane egg divided 
itself info three parts, aditya (the sun, being the eye and soul 



49 


of akaka), air and fire, without losing its identity. (Thus all 
the five matters are mentioned.) This last (fire) rests on 
water. 

He (Death) wanting a second body (other than manas) effected 
a junction between His mind and vak (the Word). The genera¬ 
tive seed (entering the waters) developed into the year (sam- 
batsara), 

[This second body is the panchlkrita body of Viraj. Vak is 
objective or Impersonal Reason, that which is coined into words 
in the "Vedas. He united thought with vak, i.e,, reflected on 
the order of creation as laid down in the Vedas, on the eternal 
Logos or the Law. The generative seed is the cosmic system of 
vidya-karma acquired in a previous life of Hiranya-garbha, the 
collective self of all individual units of vidyd-karma. No crea¬ 
tion out of nothing ; the matter (fire, etc.) is but apard-prakriti, 
the ignoranbe constituting individuality, as encasing the self; 
the forms are the primordial principia individuationis, the 
.K^amo-units ; the law is eternal and is only recognised by this 
mind-endowed {samanaska) Hiranya-garhha. He makes Karma 
fructify, in grace (its. obverse being self-worship), according to 
law, by reflecting on it (for His knowing is willing). The Logos, 
quickened by reflection becomes the generative seed [para 
prakriti) planted in the waters (in the primal matters generally, 
in apard-prakriti) and develops into the year. The year is the 
eternal Idea of the concrete year; the yearly procession of 
events as a whole, ever repeating itself in the kaleidoscope of 
sensuous apprehension, represents a single pulsation (differen¬ 
tiation) of His life. It is the prototype of the infinite of waking 
time, not yet born]- 

It took a year for the egg to be hatched. Thus came the year 
into* being: there was no year before this. When the babe 
Virdj was born, Death opened His jaws to devour it, and Virdj 
screamed out in terror. Thus speech came into being. 

(The babe is the waking world just beginning to see liglit. It 
is the first waking actuahty, the potentiaHty of all the future. 
The phenomenal world, however, from the moment it comes 
into being, is in the jaws of death (cf. Ghhdndogya, mrityund 
grastameva) ; it is an illusory differentiation. Virdj screamed 
as the babe just born would scream, as its blank consciousness 
emerges from the dark unconsciousness which still hangs over 
it. Sound is, in more senses than one, the bridge between the 
visible world and the invisible). 

Death»paused and thought, ® Why devour the babe 1 (Let it 
have its spell of sensuous development.’) So it developed accord¬ 
ing to vdk (Impersonal Reason) into the articulate Vedas, Vedic 
metres, sacrifices, men, animals, etc. 






60 


(Vak has three forms : (1) Objective Reason, (2) this as actual- 
ised in thought or reflection, (3) this as sensuously developed 

into the Vedas....-The Vedas are again prior in reahty to 

the phenomenal world. The position of sound {akaka) between 
phenomenon and noumenon is to be noticed). 

All this sensuous creation He seized to devour. Death de¬ 
sired to celebrate a second AkvamedJm (horse-sacrifice, the first 
being that performed in a previous life by virtue of which He 
came to exist at the beginning of the cycle). He became weary 
and began to practise austerities Forth departed from 

His body (the Viraj-hodij) sentiency and power, leaving it 
‘ turgid and defiled.’ But his mind never lost sight of it. 

(The F^Vafbody has to die, to be sacrificed in .order to live. 
He was weary, impressed with the nothingness of the sensuous 
body as such, which is always in the jaws of death. But this 
sensuous life has to be lived through. Let it be a life of self- 
sacrifice then. Let the body be purified. So His heart was 
all along set on this purification). 

He thought, * Let this body medhya first, ie., worthy of 
being sacrificed, and then I shall get embodied in it.’ Mean¬ 
while the body had become ' turgescent ’ {aSvat) , and so as He 
entered it once again, He became an aim or horse (a sensuous 
body which the higher self fills, but with which it does not get 
confused. May we not trace here something like the stages of 
modern Ethics : {i) naive sensuousness, (ii) a division in spirit 
and asceticism, the sensuous body to be thoroughly mortified, 
(m) reinstatement of the sensuous self as conscious of its nothing¬ 
ness by itseK yet Justifying its existence as an organ of 
duty ?) 

He let the horse loose for a year (as they do at the Akvamedha 
ceremony) and then tied it up and offered it as a sacrifice, offered 
up each animal as a sacrifice to its proper god (offered up Him¬ 
self as a sacrifice to Himself) and thus attained the state of Prajd- 
paii. Thus He conquered the second death (became the arche¬ 
typal Life, and is not bom again to be devoured by death). 

(The year here stands for the cycle of samsdra, the wheel of 
Karma from which jlvas fly at a tangent into mohsha (liberation), 
into a Death which has conquered itself, into Eternal Life. 
‘ Letting Loose ’ represents the fact that God lets the individual 
eliminate his Karma by Karma, till in knowledge the indivi¬ 
duality lapses altogether). 






Ill, Vedantic Logic, (Mainly based on Vedanta- 

■parihhasha.) 

84. The central truth of the Vedantic system, the pure self 
or Braliman as undifferenced ‘being, consciousness, and bliss/ 
together with other ancillary truths about supersensuous things, 
is taken by Vedanta to be essentially revealed, not ascertained 
by any human evidence like that of perception or inference. 
The self that is immediately perceived, for example, is not known 
to be exist^t, far less to be existent after death. (SanJcara 
says this in his introductory note to BriJiadaranyaha Upamshad^ 
and it is pretty much the same as what Kant says about the 
‘paralogisms of the Pure Eeason.’) True, even in Vedanta, 
arguments are advanced in proof of the existence and immortality 
of the soul, but these are only suggestions of the Beyond by pheno¬ 
mena^ signs, not proofs positive, as they have been taken by 
Naiydyika^. If the ecstatic intuition in which alone the super- 
sensuous is knowable is not forthcoming at once, and if the pheno¬ 
menal world only suggests the noumenon as a thought, though it 
may be necessary thought, how is the enquiry into it to begin 
at all ? Some provisional belief {kraddha) is required to start 
the enquiry. A mere thought, even though necessary, can 
never induce belief, can never be mistaken for knowledge; 
for in knowledge there is an unmistakable intuitive or ‘ given ’ 
character. This provisional belief can only be induced by 
authoritative statement (idbda or dgama) wliich may, for aught 
we know, be disproved afterwards. But the statement gains 
in reliability if on acting on it or after contemplation of it we 
attain a progressive satisfaction or realisation. That is the only 
justification which we may expect to have of the truth of what 
is claimed to be revelation, from below, before we have 
finally realised its truth. Whether metaphysical enquiry neces¬ 
sarily presupposes a revelation is an issue which need not be 
confused with the other issue whether the Veda itself is revealed 
or not. If it be granted that spirit can only teach spirit and 
that truth can ohly be recognised and not created by mental 
activity, it must also be granted that revelation is necessary, 
and that the Word is God, and that accordingly there should be 
an eternal succession of omniscient teachers. 

85. At the same time Vedanta allows that for the attainment 
of the knowledge of Brahman, there is required not only kavana 
(hearing of revealed texts and trying to understand them) but 
also manana and nididhyasana. The exact relation of these 





52 


processes has been disputed, but the processes themselves are 
recognised in all Vedantic schools. Manana is defined aS ‘ the 
mental act which generates knowledge by means of arguments 
defending the truths embodied in the texts against objections 
preferred by other evidences ’ {'pramma). Inference, and the 
other natural sources of knowledge, cannot yield the sacred 
truths but only point to them. So the proofs of the existence 
of God in European philosophy have sometimes been pronounced 
to be no proofs, for the conclusion there necessarily transcends 
the premises. Inference, etc., however, show the direction 
along which one may proceed to the truths. They refute' hereti¬ 
cal objections ; and by detaining the thoughts about the truths, 
they enable the mind to get a tight grip of them and 4}hus prepare * 
the way for realising them in ecstatic intuition. 

86. Hence the position of logic in Vedanta. It considers all 
the pramanas or sources of knowMge. They are six in number: 
pratyaksha\ anumana, upamana, agama, arthapatti, anupalabdM. 
It is advisable to keep up the Sanskrit names, instead of giving 
the ordinary translations, some of which are, to say the least, 
misleading. Other schools of Indian Philosophy give shorter 
lists, but Vedanta vindicates the necessity of each of these pra- 
manas. It will be noticed that logic here is conceived to have a 
more extended scope than is ordinarily allowed to it, including 
as it does a consideration not only of mediate but also of im¬ 
mediate knowledge. It necessarily comprises a good deal of 
epistomological matter. 

87* Knowledge is of two kinds : anuhhava, reached through 
evidence (prammm), which may be both true (when it is prama) 
and false, but which is always something new, previously un¬ 
attained ; and smriti or memory-knowledge which, however, is 
not something new. in the persisting cognition of the same 
object, there is a single unchanging presentation illuminated 
by, f.e., subsumed under the form of the self. Such a persist¬ 
ing determinate cognition (as distinct &om the presentation) 
ceases, however, when it is contradicted by another cognition 
standing on stronger evidence. The theory of the persistence 
of the presentation fits in with the pecuHar reaHsni of Vedanta 
which demands an intuition-continuum for every grade: of ab¬ 
stract thought (Section 34). The necessary thought of the iden¬ 
tity between a presentation and an idea must have its basis in 
the continuity of the presentation in some real medium. Besides, 
as knowledge is viewed in Vedanta from the standpoint of the 
self as spontaneity and not from the empirical standpoint, the 
logical activity of the self (and not the presentation) is taken to 
determine how long a mode of cognition can be said to endure 
as one and the same ; it is said to cease only when contradicts. 



53 


Pratyaksha (External and internal Perception). 

88. Perception, as lias already been explained (Section 23) 
is Brahman itself, the immediate identity of knower and known. 

In fact the attitude of nirvilcal'pctrsamoMi is retained in the per¬ 
ception of phenomenal.objects. There is a difference no doubt 
between the timeless knowledge of Brahman and the abrupt 
emergence of the perceptual knowledge; but even in the latter 
the knowledge by itself is timeless and quiescent, its manifesta- , 
tion only being in time. The image of dust-motes getting into 

a quiescent sunbeam will furnish an apt illustration. Presen¬ 
tations are in time; they manifest the self and limit it at the 
same time. All determinate knowledge is a seK-abnegation, 
‘involving asdt does a stratification of the pure consciousness or 
chaitanya into three forms; pramairi-chaitanya or determinate 
self-consciousness, vritti-chaitanya or modes of consciousness, 
and or empirical object. 

89. In perception the manas (streaming* out of the sense- 
orifices of the body in visual and auditory perception and keeping 
at its bodily seat in the other forms of sense-perception) is sa.id 
to take the form of the object, ^.e., get determined into a mode 
or vritti like the object, occupying the same position in space 
and time as the object, both being pervaded by an identical 
(determinate) consciousness ov chditanya, provided, of course, 
the object is capable {yogya) of being cognised by the senses. 
An explanation is necessary. 

90. That an influence from the object produces sensation 
in us need not be denied by Vedanta. The point here is the 
explanation of that extra-organic localisation which specially 
marks visual and auditory perception. Now in perception, 
there is a tendency to slur over the sensation-sign and p^s at 
once to its significate, constituted by motor and other ideas. 
What is this signifying ? Rapid association, mental chemistry 
may be granted, but what is it from the point of view of the self ? 
From the standpoint then of the self, as invested with manas, 
as knowing the not-self in space viewed through the glasses of 
the manas^ niay it not be held that the Vedantic account of the 
mind going out to meet the object is truer than the confused 
physiological account that the ‘object or influence from the 
object conies to meet the mind as located in the body 1 Even 
in the grossest form of consciousness, when the body is taken to 
be the point of reference, not being distingmshed from the self, 
Vedanta recognises in this going out the priority of the Imower 
to the object and so still keeps the meaning of knowledge m- 
tact. If it be argued that growing reflection will shfft the point 
of reference from the body to something more spiritual, it is 
replied that unless one rises to levels of consciousness higher than 









54 


the waking, the self cannot be thought of except as located in 
the body. The objection that the streaming out of manas in- 
yplyes a materialistic conception is easily disposed of if we remem¬ 
ber that Vedanta recognises no absolute distinction (Section 42) 
between the self and material object but admits grades of 
emanatory existences between them, each being, material in 
relation to the grade before it, what we mean by matter coming 
last in the series. Ultimately no doubt Vedanta will hold that 
the body is phenomenal, this space also is phenomenal, and that 
this ‘ going out ’ of the mind is only illusory. 

91. ‘ The mind takes the form of the object.^ It is the idea 

of the conformity of the mental order with a order. No 

idealisation can completely do without this given eleihent. Below 
ecstatic intuition where tliis ' given ’-ness completely disappears, 
dualism is inevitable. 

92. The mind and the object occupy the same space-position. 

This distinguishes^ perception from inference. In inference, 
the mind only thinks of the inferred object but does not go out 
to meet it. The distinction is practically that drawn in modern 
psychology, only viewed from the point of view of the self’s 
spontaneity, that in perception the given element and its inter¬ 
pretation are welded together in a unity, while in inference they 
are kept distinct. In perception, the self as invested with the 
mental mode (the interpretative concept, which, relatively to the 
sensation, is the beginningless vasana or analogous to 

the eternal names and forms actualised in creation) becomes 
further materialised into the particular function of the sense- 
organ excited by the particular stimulus (and this might be 
regarded as a maturation of its Karma). In inference the self 
just expects to be realised : it descends from its plane to a lower 
plane, but not to the lowest. (Sometimes the tension is so great 
that it discharges itself in the waking plane; in other words, 
inference lapses into a percept, as in ‘ I see my brother.’ Does 
not this show that all perception is illusory, as it is always seem¬ 
ing to see, the mind forgetting itself and becoming the body) 1 

93. The perceptive act and the object pccupy the same time- 
position. The object of memory precedes the act of memory. 
But it may be ekadeka with it, i.e., occupy the same position 
as it, in the same sense in which, in internal perception, a plea¬ 
sure is said to be ekadeia with the perception of the pleasure. 
What then is this de^a? It should be remembered that in 
Vedanta, afcaia appears in all the stages, waking, dream, etc., 
and there is the theory of the intermediate existences between 
self and matter. 

94. One ckaitanya pervades both vishaya (empirical object) 
and m%‘ (apprehending mental mode). This is readily under- 




55 


stood in the light of Kant’s theory of the self working uncon¬ 
sciously in the object-consciousness: all consciousness is impU* 
self-consciousness. This implicitness, ’ this indistinguish¬ 
able blending of the subject and object, is precisely what is 
brought out in this identity of ckaitanya (self) coYering viskaya 
(object) and vritti (mental mode). 

95. Yogyatva or ' the object being capable of being perceived ’ 
distinguishes perception from kabda (knowledge through authori¬ 
tative statement) which last can take cognisance of supersen- 
suous objects as spiritual merit and demerit {dharmadharrm). 

96. In the case of a judgment in which the subject is per¬ 

ceived but the predicate is inferred, or in which the terms are 
perceived through different senses, if the Judgment be sub¬ 
stantive mental state, the foregoing account of the perceptual 
process is not tenable ; for how can manas at once go out of the 
iDody and be in it or go out of two different sense-orifiees at the 
same time ? But then, according to Vedanta, the judgment is 
not one state but rather a process from the subject-thought to 
the predicate thought. It would appear, from its criticism of 
Nyaya, that a judgment, according to it, does not involve a con- 
ceptualistic universal, co-substantial with the terms and eternally 
connected with them (Section 4.3). Vedanta might hold that this 
transition from the subject to the predicate is a necessary thought 
of the union of the terms, but then this does not mean their con¬ 
crete identity-in-difference. If the thought be concretely realised 
(in the Vedantic sense, ^.e., through the judging self being de- 
individualised), the relation will cease to be relation ; one would 
see their undifferenced identity. When the copula is concretely 
reahsed, the terms are lower in reality ; when the copula is only 
abstract, the terms are of higher reality-. - 

97. The perception of object so long discussed may not 
amount to the knowledge of object as object, i,e,, as distinct 
from the subject and yet related to it. Mere perception of 
object requires only the coincidence of vritti-chaitanya, with 
vishaya-chaitanya (Section 88), but the perception^ of object as 
object requires also their coincidence with pramatrbcJiaitanya* 
It requires that the self should not be a mere logical pre-supposi- 
tioh, it should come out as determinate self-consciousness as 
distinct from object-consciousness. The vritti or mental mode 
in relation to which the object exists—^for the object is only em¬ 
pirical object—^is a determination of pramairi or the determinate 
self. The vritti then points two ways, towards the self and to¬ 
wards the object. At each moment, the whole of manas gets 
modified into vritti (this being vivarta or emanation, not 
ndma ov real modification), by the ripening of some 
or Karma-seed, under the stress of the cosmic Kama-organism 




56 


app^anng ^ stimulus. Sp on the one hand the samsJcara gets 
matenaiised into a percept and the percept into a bodily (cere- 
bral) impression; on the other the cosmic stress takes the form 

^ object (and that gives the sense-stimnlus). 

(Inis account has to be expanded a Httle to explain the extra- 
orgamc lo^ahsation in visual and auditory perception). Thus 
the pramatr% chaitanya rests on the vishayarchaitanycb in the 
perception of the object as object. 

98. In the internal perception of the self, the pramatri- 

chaitanya does not rest on visTmyorcJmitanya, lout rests simply 
ou vritti^^ Not that it is then the pwre self seeing the as 

object; it sees, only <xs invested with vrifti, only as determined, 

as it sees in a dream. So Sankara, in his commentary on 
nnA. Upanishad IV, hi, points out that in the stage of dream 
the self-luminous (svaya'm^jyotir) self sees the dream-forms as 
object and therefore is itself revealed; but in the stuge oi sushupti, 
whexe^ vrifti or mental mode lapses altogether, the self-lumin¬ 
osity is not revealed, being present in its purity. To be visible, 
an object must not be perfectly transparent. 

99. So it is held on the one hand that aAamham (Section 57) 
requires a vrifti or empirical mode and on the other that even 
in illusory object-consciousness, there is a real materialisation 
of the self. The last point requires explanation. When the 
nacre is mistaken for silver, the nacre, a mode of mdya (as 
every phenomenal object is) modifies the mental mode coincident 
with it by the idea of silver which it revives by similarity. The 
self looking through it sees the objective illusory mode, silver. 
This theory of an objective illusory mode or anirvachaniya 
existence is characteristic of Vedanta. 

100. Ohjecfions met : —(1) If the illusory object, silver, is 
created in the absence of silver, we could see anything of which 
we have an idea, ix., there could be no difference between image 
and percept. So it is held by the anyathd^khydti-vadin thai m 
such a case, the self freely, perversely applies to the nacre a 
predicate, silver, which does not belong to it but to something 
else. No illusory object, silver, is here created. We only think, 
pass intellectually to, the object silver, which, however, exists 
somewhere. The reply is that to take the interpretative element 
in perception (true or false) to be merely inteUectual or merely 
associational (representative) would be alike wrong—it is really 
a concept based on an associated image. This concept is the 
necessary objective element, the image is the subjective element. 
Yet though the subjective element is there, Vedanta would argue 
against the dtmorkhydti-vddin that the silver in this case is not 
consciously remembered. Such a subjectivity, unconscious of 
its subjectivity, is nothing but the anirvdehya or ‘ inexplicable, 





57 


pratihhasika or illusory objectivity. The objectivity, however, 
which is contrasted with a conscious subjectivity, would be the 
phenomenal or vyavahariJca reality. In the presence of the 
thing-in4tself or paramarihiJca reality, these two realities are 
just the same, • both illusory ; but this tliing-in-itself is know- 
able precisely because in the reflection of its light, maya itself 
is differentiated into the (phenomenally) real and the illusory. 

101. (2) How to know that this nacre is silver ? Through the 

coincidence in position (eJcadeiatva) of the two objective modes 
of mdyd, the corresponding subjective modes, and pramatn^ 
chaitanya, (3) Why is not the illusory silver apparent to all ? 
An object-determination is a determination of the particular 
subject who has the illusion. That most things, however, ap¬ 
pear much the same to aU is explained by a community of the 
Karma of diflerent seifs. (4) If in all judgments, there is a 
transition from one cognition to another (Section 96), how can 
there be a false perceptual judgment at all ? It is replied that 
in the perceptual judgment " this nacre is silver,’ there is a 
coincidence of the determinations of chaitanya corresponding 
to ‘ this ’ and ‘ silver ’ ; as a single cognition therefore it ad¬ 
mits of truth and falsehood. (6) Why not say, ‘ this is some¬ 
times silver, sometimes nacre ’ % because when the (apparent) 
percept of silver ceases, one is not conscious of the real silver 
being absent but only of the illusory silver having vanished 
(Section 46). When a percept is contradicted by another per¬ 
cept, there is indeed no final guarantee that the contradicting 
percept is not illusory instead of the contradicted percept—for 
there can be such a thing as illusion of illusion ; still there is 
the psychological fact that while in the contradicting perception, 
one has to believe that it is true and that the contradicted 
perception is false. It is the abrupt disappearance of the silver 
when looked at carefully with the naive belief (coupled in many 
cases with a reflective inferential belief) that what is looked at 
carefully is real, that accounts for our disbelief in the persistence 
of silver. 

Anumana (Inference). 

102. The Vedantic theory of the nature of inference is best 
studied in relation to the Nyaya theory of Merence in its two 
aspects, inference as the process of discovering truth for oneself 
(8vdrtha)y and as the form of proving or exhibiting the truth to 
others {pardrtha). The main contention between Vedanta and 
Nydya is in regard to the former. 

103. Three stages in the inferential process are recogmsed 
in Nydya, In the example, ‘ the mountain has fire, because it 



58 


Ifes smoke/ there must have been established, first, a con¬ 
stant concomitance (vyapti) between fire and smoke, from their 
occurring together in kitchens, etc., then this smoke must have 
been perceived in the mountain {paksha‘dharmata)^ and finally 
this last relation is combined with the memory of the vyapti 
{tntiyadmga’paramarka) in order to get the conclusion, " the 
mountain has fire.’ In other words, the middle term is first 
(inductively) related to the major, then to the minor, and then 
the two relations are related to one another. The three processes 
may be symbolised thus :—(1) connected with 

Ou^-Gp . m-p; {ii) has m (is like A^,, B^, ..which 

have p ); (iii) has m, m-p\ (reappearing in memory); the two 
together leading to ' . Z« has p.’ , 

104. To this account Vedanta has the following objections : 
(a) The first twn stages precede the inference and are no part of 
it; (?>) ‘ m-p ’ in the third stage is more a function {samskara or 
vyapara) than a substantive mental state, though it is a con¬ 
scious function, being quickened with the consciousness of the 
middle term: (c) m-p,’ the function, though retained in memory , 
is not operative as a conscious remembrance. (A conscious 
remembrance of it may sometimes accompany the inference 
though forming no part of it), {d) The whole proposition, 

has p’ is not inferred : p only is inferred, Z,,, being perceived. 

105. The second objection, in a sense, comprehends all the 

others. It is connected with the Vedantic position on jdti already 
explicated (Section 43). When Mill holds that the conclusion in 
a syllogism is drawn, not from the premises but according to 
them only, that not rules but facts constitute the evidence, he 
agrees vdth Vedanta (and Hegel) in disbelieving in the abstract 
universal being co-substantial with things and eternally con¬ 
nected with them. How can an eternal thing be eternally 
connected with non-eternal things ? The so-called axiom of 
the syllogism cannot possibly subsume particulars under it, for 
the simple reason that no premise is absolutely true. From the 
purely conceptualistic point of view (that of Nyaya), the unity 
of the inferential act is never really attained ; the relation of 
relations, as in is unintelligible. So long 

as the universal is regarded as a substantive state of the mind 
and not a spontaneity (a ‘ transitive ’ state, as Janies would 
call it), the Judgment must be regarded as pieced out of terms 
and reasoning as pieced out of the separate Judgments, instead 
of reasoning being regarded as the unity prior to them aU. Not 
that Vedanta accepts the Hegelian solution of the identity of 
contradictories. To it, the entire inferential process is summed 
up in the single word ' function,’ which does not constitute a 
substantive unity with the given minor term and the major 






59 


term. Hence, too, the conclusion is taken to be, not the whole 
proposition ' has 'p ’ but only p. This accords with the 
Vedantic view of the judgment, already presented under per¬ 
ception (Section 96). This is also intelligible in the light of the 
general Vedantic position that a grade of reality (to which, for 
example, the jati as the connotational universal belongs) (Section 
42) is unconsciously immanent in the next grade (to which the 
corresponding vyaUis, or individuals belong) which it trans¬ 
cends but where, if consciously emergent at all, it is taken as an 
abstract thought lower in point of reality. Buddhi, which is the 
self-affirmation in the copula, transcends manas which is yet 
informed by it. The axiom of the syllogism, like axioms in. 
general, stands on the level of buddhi and is a timeless samskdra, 
106. It must not be supposed, however, that Vedanta takes 
this process or function to be merely blind expectation, the 
working of an anudhuddha or unawakened samskdra. The 
awaking of it helps on the function {tadudhodJiasyapi sakakdrit- 
vat). It is in fact a conscious function, an intellectual sjmthesis, 
and not an imaginative or associational synthesis. The major 
premise, according to Mill, is only a concurrent or subsequent 
justification of the conclusion. But is not the justification 
essential to inference as distinct from association ? So Sjjencer 
holds in his Psychology (Special Analysis, Reasoning), wdiere he 
saj'^s that though the major premise comes after the conclusion, 
it is recognised to have been operative before the conclusion, 
the recognition being the completion of the reasoning, without 
which in fact the reasoning would not be reasoning.^ In ‘ the 
mountain has fire because it has smoke,’ the perception of the 
smoke rouses into conscious activity the samskdra of the relation 
between smoke and fire. This samskdra, though conscious, is 
not present as a conscious memory {smriti). The logical ground 
of inference is objective ; it is not subjective memory. In illu¬ 
sory perception and in dreams, the anirvachamya object (Section 
99) is a memory-image, unconscious of its memory-character. 

107. As to the major premise itself or vyapti, it is not an 
inference by itself, being only the samskara generated by the 
observation of the concomitance {anvaya) between the major 
term and the middle term (and non-observation of noncon¬ 
comitance), but not by the observation of the concomitance 
of the absences of the terms {vyatireka). As against Nyaya, 
it is argued that the positive evidence alone generates belief. 
The negative evidence only assures the reason, constitutes a 
collateral justification. It is clear that this criticism of Hyaya 
is directly connected with the Vedantic position that the major 
premise is only a function, a consciously operative universal, 
and not an abstract reason only. All inference is then anvayi- 



60 


rufa, *.e., founded on positive concomitance. It is not, how- 
ever, to be called Kevalanvayit as arguments like ‘ this pot is 
knowable because nameable ’ are called, where according to 
^atirehi-vya'pti, i.e., concomitance between not-name- 
able and not-knowable is not ascertainable, because the terms 
do not stand for anything existent. According to Vedanta, 
there is no Keva^nmyi inference; as Braiman is the constant 
groyM oi ^ differenced reahty, the negation of aU things is 
existent. According to nominalistic existential logic, the nega¬ 
tive concept ‘ not-A,’ which has no positive existent equivalent, 
IS altopther inadmissible in logic; and therefore a positive con- 
cept like A, of which the negation is non-existent, is also in¬ 
admissible. According to conceptualistic logic (including Nya- 
ya), there is a pl^e for all that is conceivable, and therefore 
a place for a concept like A, though not-A be non- 
,• ^ reahstic Vedanta (realistic hke Kantianism), even 
the self-contradictory, not to speak of a more conceivable, is 
^sttive ; and what would sound paradoxical, the self-contra¬ 
dictory IS the only positive both in the sense that the pheno¬ 
menon in which contradiction is immanent is the only thing 
dete^nately knowable. Brahman being indeterminate, and 
m the seme that, apart from Brahman to which all contradic- 

aspire, the phenomenal system is a house of 
cards or mere negation. 

further holds that the numler of the instances 
observed IS messential to the induction or vyapti. How to 
reconcile this mth the idew of empirical logic that it is the one 

Universai^P^t m induction ? Spencer, in his discussion of the 
traversal Postulate, holds, as against Mill, that though the belief 

W generated by the instances, they are not separate- 

fLS f operate as a consolidated 

nwlw- “coneeivabihty of the opposite being its negative 

^ V® operative universal is not the 

Wmit* knowledge of the objective relation 

rnajor term. How this know- 
IS Itself generated, how the number of instances 
logic Thf ^ question for psychology rather than for 

inference^t sc>call_ed syUogism of inclusion or exclusion is no 
to ^ inference only because the number leads us 

cLcp^S ®°“® connotational connexion. Logic is 

with tofi.?secondarily, if at aU, 

exhibit i^?® process of inference (svariha). To 

lik7tht others (pamrt^a), we require an ideal form 

tor^ ®^’ is no inference but only the 

ofmference. Here, too, a difference emerges between Nyaya 



61 


and Vedanta. Where Nyaya states five members of the 
syllogism. (1. The mountain has fire. 2. Because of the smoke. 

3. Whatever has smoke has fire, as the kitchen. 4. This moun¬ 
tain has it. 5. Therefore it has fire), Vedanta states only tteee, 
either the first three (analytical) or the last three (synthetical). 
The third member represents the major premise with the state¬ 
ment of an instance (‘ the kitchen ’), other than the minor term, 
falling under the middle term, which is necessary to obviate the 
appearance of a p&titio pri'iicipii in the syllogism. The second 
or the fourth member represents the minor premise and the 
first or the fifth the conclusion. The two premises, appearing 
only as functions in svartha inference, have to be exhibited as 
substantive pippositions in parartha inference.^ ihe conside:^ 
ing of them together to secure the unity of the inference, which 
is taken by Nyaya to be a distinct step in svartha inference, is 
exhibited by it in the inference by presenting the minor 

premise twice, first as the second member which is the bare 
nition of the middle term, and then as the fourth member wmch 
is tliis cognition spread out as a proposition, and sandwichmg 
the wap^^-tunction, here spread out as the major premise between 
them ; the conclusion, too, is put both at the beginnmg and a 
the end. AU this, apparently, according to Vedanta, is arti¬ 
ficial ; for in parartha, inference, we should trust the hearer to 
function for himself and content ourselves with sketching p 
outhnes of the language-picture which might start the nec€te- 
sary functioning in his mind. . ix 

. 110. Hegel has taught us to look beyond logmal forms, to the 

absolute realities of which they are shadows. 

of pratyaksha or perception is Brahman (Section 88); it reyeate 

BrSmL to . JHenome..! object. To 

reahty is at the same time to admit the concept of reah y. 

irdevLoe reveak to us the unreality of ^ 

the members of the absolute mf^ence bemg, T^s ^ 

unreal, because different from Bra^an ; ’ ifw 

and pbo.oto«on^^J 

vaharika) which gives us the concept of umeahty, 
of phenomenon would have been mconcewa , ^ abrupt 

lutely without analogy; mofoAa would have been an ab p 
irrational affair. On the other band.^h^ it 





62 


I 


1 :* 


'in 


ledge against illusion witliin tlie phenomenal region and avail¬ 
ing Himself of this self-created antithesis to negate the whole 
phenomenal existence, to work out KaTtnd by Karnui, and thus 
to return to His undifferenced self. This process of Brahman 
is Isvara or Hegel’s Absolute Idea. 


Upamana. 

111. Vfamana is the source of the knowledge of similarity. 
It is an independent 'pramana. Whatever gives us new and 
certain ^owledge is framana. Now the knowledge of similarity 
is certainly new knowledge, not mere memory. It is direct 
knowledge,' not inferential, for it is felt to be so ; besides, what 
possible proof can there be of similarity ? Can it be called 
‘perception ’ of similarity ? No; two like things may not be 
toth presented at the same time. Yet, it may be urged the 
id^ of the one and presentation of the other are synchronous; 
and is not perception itself a presentative-representative pro¬ 
cess ? The reply is, this will explain only the perception of the 
common elements, not the consciousness of the relation of simi- 
laxity. If, however, the relation be taken only as a feeling, as it 
IS taken by all thorough-going empiricists, by the Buddhists 
(cf Sankara s reply to this. Section 49), by Mill (in his Logic) 
and by Spencer (in his Psychology), it may no doubt be said to 
be perceived. But knowledge is always viewed in Vedanta, 
not from the empmcal standpoint, but from the standpoint of 
the self M spontaneity. It may be objected that from this stand- 
point, the consciousness of similarity is the same as the recog- 
mtion of identity (knowledge which is mere memory, no new 
toowledge or anwbJiavaB.t all). But they can hardly be taken 

tLt c —1 ^0“^® psychologists 

_at similar things have an identical element and that suggestion 

® .f®™iIation followed by contiguous ^socia- 

n /i' manifest. Identity is 

no doubt the truth of the similarity, but the psychological difer- 
ence between the two is absolute to us, so long as le are con- 
to empmcal consciousness. In the ecstatic intuition of 
ahman, one is not conscious of a similarity with (or difference 
from) other experiences. The consciousness of similaritvlies 

tic intmtion of identity. In this consciousness, there is a nro 
c^, a swm^ng of the self backward and forward bespeaking 

“"O'-of 

be like B B af then, as a result of it, A is felt to 

or smuianty (cf. Bradley on Association in his Principles of 



63 


Logic), though here, too, as in the case of the function of vyapti 
in inference, it is consciously operative (Section 104) ; and then 
the self swings hack from A to B {ix., the functional activity of 
similarity is transformed into the substantive consciousness of 
similarity), 

Agama. 

112. Vakya, a sentence or series of sentences in which there 
is a principal one to which the others are subordinate, is said to 
be a pramana or independent source of knowledge. The right 
appreciation of this pramana will depend on the understanding 
of a certain theory of language with which it is bound up. When 
we say, a word means a thing, we do not mean that the word 
reminds us ofthe idea of a thing. We may no doubt consciously 
pause to remember or visualise the ideas, but this remembering 
is not understanding the meaning of the word, any more than 
any irrelevant idea, of which we are reminded by a word, is a 
part of the meaning. The word directly refers to the thing, 
expresses the thing, touches it (Brih, XJpanishad I, V, 3) in a 
sense. Psychologists speak of the primitive tendency to reify 
names, but have we got beyond this reification even now ? With 
the same naivet4 with which we objectify our ideas in percep¬ 
tion, we ohjectify the word. The free concept not only requires 
the name for its support but is identical with it, though trans¬ 
cending it. Just as the presentative and representative ele¬ 
ments of perception are not only associated but identified, being 
covered by the same determination of the self and objectified 
by it, so too in conception, the same determination of the self 
gives the name and the concept an identical object-reference. 
This unity of the name and the concept works unconsciously 
even in perception. 

113. The sentence at once refers to an objective relation. 
The moment it is employed (provided of course it is a complete 
sentence, satisfying certain conditions, to be explained presently) 
a belief is generated in something objective. So Mill argued 
against the conceptualistic theory of judgment that ‘ the sun is 
hot ’ does not mean that the idea of the sun is the idea of hot. 
The copula of a judgment is the self pointing necessarily to an 
object and the unity of the sentence is but this self clothed in 
language. The primordial objective reference of a judgment 
is a provisional belief, a belief, it may be, with a certain general 
cautiousness induced by experience; if it is only thought, it is 
at any rate continuous with knowledge. The mere absence of 
conflict with other evidence is sufficient to turn it into know¬ 
ledge : we do not require a positive confirmation by other evi¬ 
dence. 




114. The understanding or the self in judgments transcends 
judgments and points to the Ideas of the Reason or noumena. 
They are to be realised only in ecstatic intuition, but till that is 
forthcoming, the necessary thought of them must have some 
intuition-basis, viz,, a name. Yet just as an Idea of the Reason 
intrinsically spurns all sense-intuition as being completely in¬ 
adequate, so too ordinary names constitute only the means by 
which such an Idea is pointed to, not its support or expression. 
Each noumenon demands its true expression, and as Schopen¬ 
hauer remarked, a potent musical sound constitutes its direct 
objectification whereas other aesthetic symbols are mere imita¬ 
tions of its grosser objectifications. Such potent sound-symbols 
are supplied by the mantras, by such mystic syllables as the 
Om, the power of which is not to be judged by any a priori reason¬ 
ing but only through the persistent attempt to realise them by 
devout intonation. A conventional word comes to mean a 
thing, to be provisionally identified with a thing, only through 
this necessary demand of the thing for its true sound-symbol. 

115. The same result is reached in another way. Though 
every vdhya,d,^ having a direct objective intention, has the appear¬ 
ance of impersonality, yet as it may be ambiguous or false and 
may have reference to phehoniehal truth, a subjective personal 
element has also to be taken into account. It is only in true 
statements about the supersensuous that this personal element 
is wholly ehminated. The supersensuous, as has been already 
explained (Section 84), to be thought at all, must have been 
revealed. The Vedas claim to be the repository of all such true 
statements about the supersensuous ; and whether the claim is 
allowed or not, the true revelation, wherever it is found, rpust 
have also the true form, and therefore the perfection or the sacred¬ 
ness of it must transfigure every sound (or letter) composing it. 

116. To this theory of the identity between thought and 
language, ISTyaya takes an objection which easily connects itself 
with the conceptualistic theory of the judgment. The subject 
and predicate of a judgment are, according to it, subsumed under 
the same abstract universal. In modern language, the pro¬ 
position states the ‘ congruence or confliction of concepts.’ 
The sentence, then, has not an immediate, objective reference; 
the objective reference is mediate, i.e., gained through 
iMerence like the following : Sentences (satisfying certain con¬ 
ditions) in the past gave rise to thoughts which were found to 
ancord with objective relations; here is a sentence (satisfying 
these conditions), therefore it is expected to accord with objec- 
tive relations.’ In the last resort, then, a word is taken to be 

with its meaning by mere convention 
(Sanheta) or by the Will of Grod {Iharechchha). In the case of 



65 


the Vedas, they are taken to be a system of sounds created by 
the personal author, Isvara {paurusheya). 

117. Vedanta, however, holds that the system of sounds is 
not created but only manifested. When a letter is articulated 
wif created but only manifested in sensuous form {dhvani). 
Whenever a sound is produced, we recognise it as ' that sound.’ 
If we are to believe in this recognition, every distinctive sound- 
mrm must be taken to have a persistence, not as air-vibration, 
but as sound-form (in its immediacy, as sensuous objectivity). 
The manifestation alone is in time but the sound-form is 
eternal. Thus the eternity of ' names ’ (ndmcb-rupa) and 
the impersonal reality of the Word are intelligible. The 
question of the primum cognitum naturally leads to the theory 
of the eternal pre-existence of aU difierences that come to be 
manifested (Section 42). The Word which is thus manifested 
to us is to be regarded as the Word existent in all previous 

freely remenibered and manifested by Isvara. So 
Viraj at birth remembered he was Brahman (* aJiam Brahmdsmi ’ 
—Brih. UpanisJiad). To who is eternally free in intel¬ 

ligence and volition, all these remembrances before each crea¬ 
tion {srishti) are one, and all these srishtis are but the 
timeless actuahsation of the same Vedas or objective Reason. 
To the individual, however, the manifestation in a particular 
cycle is 

118. ^ The Word is co-eternal with Isvara, both being Infinite 
determinations of Brahman, and it is noticeable that the same 
word Sakti or power is used to indicate both the relation of 
Isvara to created (manifested) things and the relation of the 
Word (and therefore py word) to its objective meaning. In 
both cases, this kahti, though but mdyd investing Brahman 
(Section 52), is turned into an impersonal reality by the irradi¬ 
ation of Brahman- 

119. The meaning of a word is two-fold, direct {kahya) and 
implied (tahshya). The object which is directly meant is that 
towards which the word functions through its kahti. A word 
retera to a thing through its jdti or class. The reference to the 
individual is not independent of the reference to the universal 
(substance and attribute being taken to be identical in Vedanta) , 
except in cases where the name directly points to the thing. 
The iakti is there said to be svarupa-aatl (non-connotative refer¬ 
ence) but not jndtd-hetu,^ Le,, not functioning through 

i.e.f not applying to the individual because of its possessing cer¬ 
tain attributes. No doubt the direct reference of a word to 
(or its identity with) the universal also is unaccountable, but it is 
still jnatd^hetu, i.e., self-conscious reference and not a mere 
pointing out with the finger. Although essence and an existent 


66 


partaking of the essence {vikeshana and vikshya) are not differ¬ 
ent in reality, they are absolutely distinct aspects to the judg¬ 
ing or discursive reason. The self of the understanding is, 
as Kant said, for the objective judgment, is unconsciously im¬ 
manent in the empirical object, and at the same time it is an 
Idea of the Reason, a noumenon transcending the empirical 
object. 

120. The reference to the individual through the universal 

is to be__taken as only an implied reference or laksJiana, This 
loJcsho/Ud is not the function of a single word but of the whole 
sentence. The sentence reacts on each word that it contains. 
How is that possible? How do and laTcsJiya 

Just as in perception, the concept unconsciously synthesises 
the intuition, so in a judgment the copular unity modifies each 
of the terms. A is B ’ is really equivalent to ^ AB is AB.’ 
The sentence is an organic unity and each word in it partakes 
of the common hfe. The judgment has a tendency to lapse 
into'a concept. This is noticeable in eulogistic or abusive sen¬ 
tences which are not meant to be literally taken but express 
simply praise or abuse. Ultimately the sentence unity is only 
for the knowledge of particular objects, and the members of 
this unity, the concepts, also refer to them. 

121. Not every combination of words, however, constitutes 
a true sentence, but only such as has the conditions of dhamksha, 
yogyatd, asatti, and tdtfarya. These might be roughly trans¬ 
lated as ‘ syntactical connexion ’ (the mutual demand of the 
essential parts of a sentence for one another, as the demand of 
a verb for its subject, of a transitive verb for its object, 
etc.) ^ compatibility of meaning ’ (of parts of the sentence), 
‘ proximity of the parts, ’ and the ‘ obj ective intention. ’ The ab¬ 
stract assertive form of a sentence is determined by akamkshd^ 
as the self thinks of object through the categories, though some¬ 
times the assertive form appears almost in its purity as in the 
appositional construction (ahheddnvaya) ' this pot is a blue pot,’ 
where there is no dkdmksha (‘ syntactical connexion ’ therefore 
is too wide a rendering). This assertive form, determinate or 
otherwise, may be perfect, though there may not be compati¬ 
bility of meaning, as in ^ tliis square is round.’ This compati- 
bihty of meaning is what is ordinarily called consistency, though 
it has a material aspect, too, for in one sense even a self-contra- 
(hctory sentence is conceivable through the propositional form. 
Isatti OT the proximity of the parts has reference to the arti- 
culatory or written form of a sentence rather than to the thought- 
unity, though this form is but the expression of the unity. It is 
that which makes us understand omitted words in elliptical 
constructions and unites the direct meaning of the words of a 




67 


sentence with tlieir implied meaning. Tatparya is the capacity 
of a sentence to produce objective knowledge. It is not the * 
subjective intention of the person uttering the sentence, 
though in cases of ambiguity the subjective intention has to be 
taken into account. It is the objective intention, which, in 
eases of ambiguity or the like, is not contradicted by the sub¬ 
jective intention. So a true sentence, even when uttered by 
one not understanding or misunderstanding it, has an intrinsic 
tatparya. If yogyata be the formal compatibility of meaning, 
tatparya is compatibility in a material reference, the unity of 
the sentence and the corresponding objective relation. There 
might be higher unities, too, but these go beyond the sentence 
form. • 

122, The first thought roused by a sentence may be one of 
doubt or misunderstanding ; should it then be said that the 
objective knowledge produced by a sentence is dependent on a 
prior belief induced by other evidences ? No, says Vedanta ; 
a sentence by itself has the objective reference. The knowledge 
of the objective relations through other pramanas may no 
doubt remove doubts and misunderstanding, but is not neces¬ 
sarily demanded by the sentence. The sentence shines by its 
own light. The ascertainment of the meaning of a sentence, 
however, may be aided by the knowledge of the topic through 
other evidences, as in the case of sentences having secular refer¬ 
ence. In the 6ase of revealed texts, however, the meaning is 
evolved through mmamsa of the texts themselves, i.e., through 
their mutual criticism and not through any extraneous pramana ; 
for no other pramana can determine of the super-sensible. 

Arthapatti. 

123. Arihapatti is the supposition (or conception) of the 
premises, reason, or cause from the conclusion, consequence, 
or effect. Here is one getting stout though he does not take 
food during the day ; the reason supposed is that he takes food 
at night. It includes all inference through vyatireki linga, i.e., 
negative mark or middle term, which, according to Vedanta, is 
not inference at all. In reference to the stock example given 
in Nyaya of Kevala-vyatirehi inference, ‘earth differs from 
other primal matters, for it has smell,’ Vedanta would point 
out that here earth, as a new primal matter, is conceived only, 
not inferred. It is hke the framing of a hypothesis from given 
facts. So, too, where Nyaya holds that the major premise is 
reached both through positive and negative evidences, Vedanta 
holds that inference from it appeals to the positive instances or 
facts only; the negative instances simply define the positive 




68 


inistances, enable us to conceive, the major premise clearly. The 
so-called inductive methods are therefore mixtures of annmana 
and artha'patti, deduction and hypohesits. In all inductive 
method there is an element of hypothesis, i.e., an assuring of 
ourselves, before the deductive verification, whether by tact 
or by conscious method, that in the absence of a certain antece¬ 
dent, a consequent will also be absent. In the conscious 
framing of a hypothesis, our aim (though not always accom¬ 
plished) is to find out something explaining facts that no alter¬ 
native supposition will explain. In fact all hitting at the cause, 
all solving of riddles, all colligation by concepts involve a con¬ 
scious or sub-conscious employment of negative instances, sug¬ 
gested by the positive data—and this is artha'paUi- This ap¬ 
pears clearly in understanding omitted words in a sentence. 
So, too, a negation presupposes an affirmation, the presuppos¬ 
ing being arfhapatti. 


Atiupalabdhi. 

124. Ahhava is negation, including non-existence relative 
whether to aU time, to particiilar times, or to particular natures. 
How is it known ? It can no doubt be inferred but can it be 
perceived ? It may be a percept, but the percept is then not 
the effect of a process of perception directed towards it. The 
self sometimes may not perceive a thing, even though it exerts 
the perceptive activity, yet the percept of the locus, minus that 
thing, is therefore the percept of the minus-ness or ahhava. But 
we cannot say that the percept of this ahhava is the result of the 
process of perception directed towards it; the perceptive process 
is directed only to the locus of the ahhava, not to the ahhava or 
to the thing that is non-existent. The non-existence of the thing, 
therefore, is an accidental percept implicated in the percept of 
its locus and not the intended objective of the actual process. 

125. What is meant by saying that a percept is at once 
differentiated from everytliing else ? Does it involve an ex¬ 
plicit perception of the difference 1 No. In the stage of 
thought, the relation itself is definitely attended to, but in the 
stage of perception, it is only sub-consciously, implicitly present. 
The substantive presentation or percept is alone explicitly 
perceived. But then what is this implicitness of its relations 
from the point of view of the seif’s spontaneity 1 Need we 
admit a new process, a new pramdna for this implicit percept 
of difference ? Why not call it implicit perceptive process 
only ? From the point of view of the self knowing or func¬ 
tioning, this ‘ imphcitness ’ is meaningless, being only a meta¬ 
phor borrowed from the unintelligent object. So the languaige 
of implicit and explicit is not employed in Vedanta at all. So 



69 


in inference, where one might have said that the fritlya-linga- ^ 
paramaria of Nyaya (Section 103) gives at any rate the implicit ^ 
articulations of the inferential act, Vedanta prefers to say that 
there is a single mediating function, and no substantive mental 
state somewhere out of the ken of consciousness, as the word " im¬ 
plicit " would imply. It marks an essential difference between 
a priori-ism on the one hand, and intuitionism and empiricism on 
the other. Should we not admit a passive or presentative side 
to this functioning ? We may, but the self, while functioning 
in a particular way, cannot at the same time apprehend the 
functioning in its passive aspect as object, for the self is identi¬ 
fied with the envelope of that passivity (or ignorance). It may 
view it, while shaking it off, as an outworn slough. When we 
speak of pramdna or logical evidence, we view the mental pro¬ 
cess from the point of view of function and not of passivity. 
Hence it will not do to say that implicit perception is the pro¬ 
cess of which the result is the percept of ahJidva. For implicit 
perception, we have to substitute a distinctive positive func¬ 
tion of the mind, anupalahdhi. When the ahhava of a thdng 
capable of being perceived is cognised where no other pramdna 
can take cognisance of it, it is cognised through this anupalab- 
dJii, It has for its object not the absent thing but the absence 
itself. It is the bare aw'areness of the absence, though what 
is absent may not be known. Again the thing that is absent 
must be, unhke spiritual merit or demerit (Section 95), cap¬ 
able of being perceived, i,e., it must be of the same order of 
reality as its locus which is perceived ; otherwise the percept 
of its absence cannot be implicated in the percept of its locus. 
The negation must not be absolute indeterminate negation: it 
must be the negation of something intuitable. 

126. An objection: If ahhava be a percept, though not the 
result of a perceptive process directed towards it, is it a percept 
even in the illusion of ahhava ? In the case of the nacre taken 
for silver, the objectivity of the silver is constituted by its im¬ 
plicit subjective existence (Section 99) or anirvachaniyatva. 
Has the illusory ahhava also this " inexplicable ’ existence 1 
No, it may be replied : here we have anyathd-hhydti (Section 100). 
Objectivity is through impHcit subjectivity in those illusions 
only in which the mind and the senses are in contact with J)he 
object mistaken. But here the object mistaken being ahhava, 
they are not in contact with it,t.e,, although the objective appear¬ 
ance is there, it has no subjective counterpart. If there is any¬ 
thing at all, it must be the implicit subjectivity of the absence 
of sensation, i.e., the implicit consciousness of the absence.* 
This is only partially similar to the implicit subjectivity of the 
silver in the case of the nacre. The consciousness of absence is 



70 


half-way between positive and negative, and because knowing 
comprehends and also transcends the known, it is, relatively 
speaking, phenomenally negative and really positive. Not that 
the illusor;^ objective appearance of alMva is Brahman, for 
though Braiiinan is the substrate or adhisthana of mdya and so 
of all phenomenal and illusory existence, it is not their updddna 
or modifiable material. (Brahman is still sometimes spoken 
gf as the material cause of the universe. As against the non- 
intelligent pradhdna of Sankhya, Vedanta proposes a spiritual 
material, Brahman ; but then it is not naked Brahman but 
rather Brahman as informing mdyd,) So the implicit con¬ 
sciousness of the absence of sensation is not the same as the 
implicit consciousness of the pure self but rather {hat of manas 
(or its objective obverse) which is the material capable of 
being differentiated into the sensation-modes though now with¬ 
out them. 




Analysis. 

1. An Appboach through Psychology {Sections 1—31). 

Importance of the psychology of waking, dream and dream¬ 
less sleep (Section 1). Empirical account of a dream; no sensa¬ 
tion ; consciousness of the body at a minimum (2—3). Does 
it demand a new dimension of psychical existence ? Impres¬ 
sion and idea qualitatively distinct. Dreams as pure ideas 
turned into percepts (4—5). Which is more real, dream or 
waking Not sensation but idea gives truth, though idea in 
presence of sensation is felt to be less real. Dreams, though 
illusory, have wider possibilities than waking (6—9). 

Possibilities of self-conscious dream and dreamless sleep 
(10—11). Timeless synthetic concepts behind concrete know¬ 
ledge on the same level as dreamless sleep, where the self is 
immediately self-conscious (12—14). Vedantic discussion of 
this state (15—16). Parallelism between different views about 
this state and those about self-consciousness in European philo¬ 
sophy. Kant, Hegel, andVedantaon self-consciousness (17—19). 
Difference between Kant’s self and Vedantic atman (20). Spen¬ 
cer and Kant on indeterminate consciousness of the Unknow¬ 
able (20—22). Vedantic view of knowledge (23). 

Samadhi (two forms), the concrete form of this indeterminate 
consciousness ; actualised states of waking, dream and dream¬ 
less sleep (924—25). Difference between dreamless sleep and 
samadhi (26—27). Samadhi and discursive reason compared 

(28) . Relation between savihalfa and nirvikalfa samadhi 

(29) . 

Waking, dream, dreamless sleep, and ecstasy constitute the 
gradation of existence ; gradation between subject and object, 
truth and untruth (30). Projections of dream, etc., on waking 
plane; parallelism with empirical and a 'priori psychology (31). 

II. Vedantic Metaphysics (Sections 32^83). 

The theory of adhydtma, adhihhuta, etc., dimly traceable in 
the Upanishads, brought out (32—38). JDevatd, the absolute 
unity of subject and object (33). Loha, the absolute intuition- 
medium for this unity (34), Necessity of loha defended against 
possible objections. Relation of the theory to Absolute Ideal¬ 
ism (35—38). . ^ V • a 

Are the devatas universalia ante rem F Is Vedanta realistic ? 
( 39 —45). Yes; the sun the unity of the particular eyes and 
he visible things (40). But is not this aspect-realism rather 
t 


72 


than class-realism ? Yes, but these sense-aspects are substan¬ 
tial realities or primal matters. Reconciliation of empiricism 
and rationalism (41). Grades of matter, formless matter one 
pole and fuU-blown reality the other. The full-blown reality 
minus the formless matter is maya, the matrix of eternal ' names 
and forms ’ or princi'pia individuationis (42). Realistic class 
is also admitted. Vedanta versus Nyaya on jdU. Jdti not co¬ 
ordinate with vyakti (43—44). Three (five) systems of eternal 
entities in Vedanta (45). 

Vedanta versus Hegel on the identity of contradictories. 
Vedantic discussions bearing on the law of contradiction (46 
—47). Does Vedantic realism furnish a principle of change i 
(48). Sankara^s discussion of causality (49—61)! Panchadaii 
on iakti or power (52—53). 

Brahman and maya, by mutual reflection, become Isvara 
with fard-prakriti^ kakti, apara^prahriU (54). These the arche¬ 
typal concretes of sattva, rajas, tamas (56). Pard-prakriti is 
the active huddhi of the Lord (56). Discussion of huddhi, aham- 
kdra, manas, chitta (57). Buddhi both the object and the (deter¬ 
minate but imdifferentiated) body of Isvara, Parallelism of 
sattva and tamas with Aristotle’s actuality and potentiality. 
Difference between Vedanta and Aristotle (58). 

Two forms of Isvara—trigundtita and kuddhorsattvarupddhi. 
Their relation to Brahman. Distinction between the higher 
god and the lower god misleading (60—62). Why Brahman 
becomes determinate, an illegitimate question (63^—64). Diffi¬ 
culties in the conception oi Isvara creator (65). A prelimin¬ 
ary discussion of the relation between moral discipline and 
absolute consciousness (66) necessary to understand Isvara 
(in His two aspects) as the Absolute of both, , the unity of the 
individual spirits (67). A further discussion of the progressive 
realisation of individual spirits necessary (68—^69) to under¬ 
stand Isvara as the Good, the Just, as exercising iakti ov power, 
as in grace maturing the Karrm of individual spirits (70). Sihd- 
varatva, the extreme punishment (71). Pate of sthdvarahomxd 
up with jivan-mukta souls (72), through whom as deputies, 
Isvara creates. Creation and dissolution. Trinity of Brahma, 
Vishnu, Mahehara (73—74). 

Onward course of creation (75). Discussion of the five Koshas 
and the three bodies of the individual, to introduce the universal 
emanations Hiranya-garhha, etc. (76—77). Vedanta on the 
five primal matters; their relation to the elements of chemis¬ 
try ; ‘ quintupling ’ of these matters (78—81). 

Interpretation of two cosmogonic myths, to illustrate the 
above (82—-SS), 





73 


HI VlDANTio LO'Oio {Sections 84—126). 

Vediwitic truths said to be revealed ; do they admit of proof ? 
Necessity of revelation (84). Position of manana in Vedanta 
(86). Six framams^ (80). Two kinds of knowledge (87). 

Perception is Brahman; knowledge timeless, 
its empirical mode in time (88). Conditions of perception ex¬ 
plained (89—96). Perceptual judgment (96). Perception of 
object as object (97). Perception of the self (98). Discussion 
of illusory perception (99—101). 

Nyaya account of svartha inference (102—103). 
Pour Vedantio objections connected with European Logic 
(104^—106). • Major premise reached through positive instances 
(107). Number of the instances inessential (108). Nyaya versus 
Vedanta on parartha inference; deduction of Vedanta’s posi¬ 
tion from its position on svartha inference (109). The absolute 
syllogism after Hegel (110). 

tjpamana (111). 

' Agama .—How vakya is a pmmawa explained by the identity 
of thought and language (words, sentences, (112—116). 

Objection of Nyaya to this identity (116)/ Vedanta on eternity 
of the Word (117). S'akti (meaning) of the Word like.the Sakti 
(power) of Isvara (118). Two kinds of meaning (119—120). 
Oonditions of valid vakya (120). A sentence by itself induces 
belief (122). 

Arthapatti connected with hypothesis in Inductive Logic 
(123), 

Anupalabdhi.-- Abhava a percept but not the result of a per¬ 
ceptive process directed towards it (124). What is implicit 
perception from the point of view of the Self ? Anupalabdhi 
a positive function of the mind (125). Discussion of the illusion 
of abhdva (126). 




