# Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna - Volume 2
# Source: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/gospel/volume_2/



=== 28_star_theatre_i.htm ===

Master and Disciple

←
Home
/ The Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna
/ Volume 2
/ →

AT THE STAR THEATRE (I)

Master praises Captain's devotion — The spell of Divine Sakti — Nature
of gopis' love for Krishna — Unfulfilled desires make one deviate from
yoga — About Rakhal — Balaram's devotion — Narendra's first visit —
Master warns the devotees about women — Master's attraction for people
— His own reminiscences — Master's following of different paths — His
acceptance of all religions — Master's praise of Vijay Goswami —
Bondage and freedom are of the mind — Master's prayer to Divine Mother
— Advice to Hazra — Scriptures and sadhana — Master's spiritual
practice
— Master praises Naran — Occult powers — Divine madness —
Master's God-intoxicated condition — Two kinds of yogis — Identity of
Brahman and Sakti — Master at Star Theatre.

Friday, September 19, 1884

IT WAS MAHALAYA, a sacred day of the
Hindus, and the day of the new
moon. At two o'clock in the afternoon Sri Ramakrishna was sitting in
his
room with Mahendra Mukherji, Priya Mukherji, M., Baburam, Harish,
Kishori, and Latu. Some were sitting on the floor, some standing, and
others
moving about. Hazra was sitting on the porch. Rakhal was still at
Vrindavan
with Balaram.

MASTER (to the devotees): "I was at
Captain's house in Calcutta. It was
very late when I returned. What a sweet nature Captain has! What
devotion!
He performs the arati before the image. First he waves a lamp with
three
lights, then a lamp with one light, and last of all he waves burning
camphor.
When performing the worship he does not speak. Once he motioned to me
to take my seat. During the worship his eyes become swollen from
spiritual
emotion, They look as if they have been stung by wasps. He cannot sing,
but he chants hymns beautifully. In his mother's presence he sits on a
lower
level; she sits on a high stool.

"His father was a havildar in the English army. He would hold a gun
with
one hand and with the other worship Siva. His servant made a clay image
of Siva for him. He wouldn't even touch water before performing the
worship.
He earned six thousand rupees a year.

"Captain sends his mother to Benares now and then. Twelve or thirteen
servants attend her there; it is very expensive. Captain knows the
Vedanta,
the Gita, and the Bhagavata by
heart. He says that the educated gentlemen
of Calcutta follow the ways of the mlechchhas.

"In his earlier years he practised hathayoga. That is why he strokes my
head gently when I am in samadhi. His wife worships the Deity in
another
form — that of Gopala. This time I didn't find her so miserly. She too
knows
the Gita and other scriptures. What devotion they
have!

"They cooked a goat curry. Captain said they could eat it for fifteen
days,
but she said, 'No, no! Only seven days.' But I liked the taste of it.
They
serve a very small quantity of each dish, but nowadays they give me
good
portions since I eat more than they do. After the meal either Captain
or his
wife fans me.

"They are very pious souls and show great respect to holy men. The
people
of upper India are greatly devoted to sadhus. The sons and nephews of
the Jung Bahadur of Nepal once visited the temple garden; before me
they
showed great respect and humility. Once a young girl of Nepal came to
see
me with Captain. She was a great devotee, and unmarried; she knew the
whole of the Gitagovinda by heart. Dwarika Babu (A
son of Mathur Babu) and the others wanted
to hear her music. When she sang the Gitagovinda,
Dwarika Babu was
profoundly moved and wiped the tears from his eyes with his
handkerchief.
She was asked why she was not married. She said: 'I am the handmaid of
God. Whom else shall I serve?' Her people respect her as a goddess, as
the scriptures enjoin.

(To Mahendra Mukherji and the others) "I shall feel
very happy to know
that you are being benefited by your visits here. (To M.)
Why do people
come here? I don't know much of reading and writing."

M: "God's power is in you. That is why there is such power of
attraction.
It is the Divine Spirit that attracts."

MASTER: "Yes, this is the attraction of
Yogamaya, the Divine Sakti. She
casts the spell. God performs all His lila through the help of Yogamaya.

"The love of the gopis was like the attachment of a woman to her
paramour.
They were intoxicated with ecstatic love for Sri Krishna. A woman
cherishing illicit love is not very keen about her own husband. If she
is told
that her husband has come, she will say: 'What if he has? There is food
in
the kitchen. He can help himself.' But if she is told of the arrival of
a
stranger — jovial, handsome, and witty — she will run to see him and
peep at
him from behind a screen.

"You may raise an objection and say: 'We have not seen God. How can
we feel attracted to Him as the gopis felt attracted to Krishna?' But
it is
possible. 'I do not know Him. I have only heard His name, and that has
fixed my mind upon Him.'"

A DEVOTEE: "Sir, what is the significance of
Sri Krishna's stealing the gopis' clothes?"

MASTER: "There are eight fetters that bind
a person to the world. The
gopis were free from all but one: shame. Therefore Krishna freed them
from
that one, too, by taking away their clothes. On attaining God one gets
rid of
all fetters. (To Mahendra Mukherji and the others)
By no means all
people feel attracted to God. There are special souls who feel so. To
love
God one must be born with good tendencies. Otherwise, why should you
alone of all the people of Baghbazar come here? You can't expect
anything
good in a dunghill. The touch of the Malaya breeze turns all trees into
sandal-wood, no doubt. But there are a few exceptions — the banyan, the
cotton-tree, and the aswattha, for example.

(To the Mukherji brothers) "You are well off. If a
man slips from the
path of yoga, then he is reborn in a prosperous family and starts again
his
spiritual practice for the realization of God."

MAHENDRA: "Why does one slip from the path of yoga?"

MASTER: "While thinking of God the aspirant may
feel a craving for
material enjoyment. It is this craving that makes him slip from the
path. In
his next life he will be born with the spiritual tendencies that he
failed to
translate into action in his present life."

MAHENDRA: "Then what is the way?"

MASTER: "No salvation is possible for a man as
long as he has desire, as
long as he hankers for worldly things. Therefore fulfil all your
desires
regarding food, clothes, and sex. (Smiling) What do
you say about the
last one? Legitimate or illegitimate? (M. and Mahendra laugh.)

"It is not good to cherish desires and hankerings. For that reason I
used to
fulfil whatever desires came to my mind. Once I saw some coloured
sweet-meats
at Burrabazar and wanted to eat them. They brought me the sweets
and I ate a great many. The result was that I fell ill.

"In my boyhood days, while bathing in the Ganges, I saw a boy with a
gold ornament around his waist. During my state of divine intoxication
I
felt a desire to have a similar ornament myself. I was given one, but I
couldn't keep it on very long. When I put it on, I felt within my body
the
painful uprush of a current of air. It was because I had touched gold
to my
skin. I wore the ornament a few moments and then had to put it aside.
Otherwise I should have had to tear it off.

"I once felt a desire to eat the famous sweetmeats of different cities.
(All
laugh.) I had a desire to hear Sambhu's musical recital of
the Chandi.
After fulfilling that desire I wanted to hear the same thing by
Rajnarayan. That
desire also was satisfied.

"At that time many holy men used to visit the temple garden. A desire
arose in my mind that there should be a separate store-room to supply
them
with their provisions. Mathur Babu arranged for one. The sadhus were
given
food-stuffs, fuel, and the like from that store-room.

"Once the idea came to me to put on a very expensive robe embroidered
with gold and to smoke a silver hubble-bubble. Mathur Babu sent me the
new robe and the hubble-bubble. I put on the robe. I also smoked the
hubble-bubble in various fashions. Sometimes I smoked it reclining this
way, and sometimes that way, sometimes with head up, and sometimes with
head down. Then I said to myself, 'O mind, this is what they call
smoking
a silver hubble-bubble.' Immediately I renounced it. I kept the robe on
my
body a few minutes longer and then took it off. I began to trample it
underfoot
and spit on it, saying: 'So this is an expensive robe! But it only
increases
man's rajas.'"

Rakhal had been staying at Vrindavan with Balaram. At first he had
written excited letters praising the holy place. He had written to M.:
"It is
the best of all places. Please come here. The peacocks dance around,
and one
always hears and sees religious music and dancing. There is an unending
flow of divine bliss." But then Rakhal had been laid up with an attack
of
fever. Sri Ramakrishna was very much worried about him and vowed to
worship the Divine Mother for his recovery. So he began to talk about
Rakhal.

MASTER: "Rakhal had his first religious
ecstasy while sitting here massaging
my feet. A Bhagavata scholar had been expounding
the sacred book in the
room. As Rakhal listened to his words, he shuddered every now and then.
Then he became altogether still.

"His second ecstasy was at Balaram Bose's house. In that state he could
not keep himself sitting upright; he lay flat on the floor. Rakhal
belongs to
the realm of the Personal God. He leaves the place if one talks about
the
Impersonal.

"I have taken a vow to worship the Divine Mother when he recovers.
You see, he has renounced his home and relatives and completely
surrendered
himself to me. It was I who sent him to his wife now and then. He
still had a little desire for enjoyment.

(Pointing to M.) "Rakhal has written him from
Vrindavan that it is a
grand place — the peacocks dance around. Now let the peacocks take care
of
him. He has really put me in a fix.

"Rakhal has been staying with Balaram at Vrindavan. Ah, what a nice
nature Balaram has! It is only for my sake that he doesn't go to
Orissa, where
his family owns an estate. His brother stopped his monthly allowance
and
wrote to him: 'Come and stay with us here. Why should you waste so much
money in Calcutta?' But he didn't listen. He has been living in
Calcutta
because he wants to see me. What devotion to God! He is busy day and
night with his worship. His gardener is always making garlands of
flowers
for the Deity. He has decided to spend four months a year at Vrindavan
to
reduce his expenses. He gets a monthly allowance of two hundred rupees.

"Why am I so fond of the youngsters? They are still untouched by 'woman
and gold'. I find that they belong to the class of the nityasiddhas,
the
ever-perfect.

"When Narendra first came here he was dressed in dirty clothes; but his
eyes and face betokened some inner stuff. At that time he did not know
many songs. He sang one or two: 'Let us go back once more, O mind, to
our own abode!' and 'O Lord, must all my days pass by so utterly in
vain?'.

"Whenever he came here, I would talk only with him, though the room
was filled with people. He would say to me, 'Please talk to them', and
then
I would talk with the others.

"I became mad for the sight of him and wept for him in Jadu Mallick's
garden house. 'I wept here, too, holding Bholanath's hand. Bholanath
said,
'Sir, you shouldn't behave that way for a mere kayastha boy.' One day
the
'fat brahmin'1
said to me about Narendra, with folded hands, 'Sir, he has
very little education; why should you be so restless for him?'

"Bhavanath and Narendra are a pair. They are like man and woman.
So I asked Bhavanath to rent a house near Narendra's. Both of them
belong
to the realm of the formless Reality.

"I forbid the youngsters to spend a long time with women or visit them
too frequently. Haripada has fallen into the clutches of a woman of the
Ghoshpara sect. She shows maternal feeling for him; but Haripada is a
child
and doesn't understand its real meaning. The women of that sect act
that
way when they see young boys. I understand that Haripada lies on her
lap and that she feeds him with her own hands. I shall tell him that
this is
not good. This very maternal feeling leads to a downfall. The women of
that sect practise spiritual discipline in the company of men; they
regard
men as Krishna. A teacher of that sect asks a woman devotee, 'Have. you
found your Krishna?' and she says, 'Yes, I have found my Krishna.'

"The other day that woman came here. I watched the way she looked
around and I didn't approve of it. I said to her, 'You may treat
Haripada
any way you like, but don't have any wrong feeling for him.'

"The youngsters are now in the stage of sadhana. They are aspirants.
For
them the only thing now is renunciation. A sannyasi must not look even
at
the portrait of a woman. I say to them: 'Don't sit beside a woman and
talk
to her, even if she is a devotee. You may say a word or two to her,
standing.'
Even a perfect soul must follow this precept for his own protection and
also
to set an example to others. When women come to me, I too say to them
after a few minutes, 'Go-and visit the temples.' If they don't get up,
I myself
leave the room. Others will learn from my example.

"Can you tell me why all these youngsters, and you people, too, visit
me?
There must be something in me, or why should you all feel such a pull,
such
attraction?

"Once I visited Hriday's house at Sihore. From there I was taken to
Syambazar. I had a vision of Gauranga before I entered the village, and
I
realized that I should meet Gauranga's devotees there. For seven days
and
nights I was surrounded by a huge crowd of people. Such attraction!
Nothing
but kirtan and dancing day and night. People stood in rows on the walls
and
even were in the trees.

"I stayed at Natavar Goswami's house. It was crowded day and night. In
the morning I would run away to the house of a weaver for a little
rest.
There too I found that people would gather after a few minutes. They
carried drums and cymbals with them, and the drum constantly played:
'Takuti! Takuti!' We would have our meal at three in the afternoon.

"The rumour spread everywhere that a man had arrived who died
(Referring
to the Master's samadhi.) seven
times and came back to life again. Hriday would drag me away from the
crowd to a paddy-field for fear I might have an attack of heat apoplexy.
The
crowd would follow us there like a line of ants. Again the cymbals and
the
never-ending 'Takuti! Takuti!' of the drums. Hriday scolded them and
said:
'Why do you bother us like this? Have we never heard kirtan?'

"The Vaishnava priests of the village came and almost started a
quarrel.
They thought I would take their share of the fees from the devotees.
But
soon they discovered that I didn't touch a piece of cloth or even a
thread.
Someone remarked that I was a Brahmajnani. So the Vaishnava pundits
wanted to test me. One said, 'Why hasn't he beads, and a mark on his
fore-head?' Another of them replied, 'They have dropped from him, as
the dry
branch from a coconut tree.' It was there that I learnt this
illustration of the
dry branch of a coconut tree. The upadhis, limitations, drop when one
attains Knowledge.

"People came thronging from distant villages. They even spent the night
there. At Syambazar I learnt the meaning of divine attraction. When God
incarnates Himself on earth He attracts people through the help of
Yogamaya, His Divine Power. People become spellbound."

It was about three o'clock in the afternoon. The Master had been
conversing with the Mukherji brothers and the other devotees, when
Radhika
Goswami, a Vaishnava scholar, arrived and bowed before him. This was
his
first visit to the Master. Radhika Goswami took a seat.

MASTER: "Are you a descendant of Advaita?"
(An intimate companion of Sri Chaitanya.)

GOSWAMI: "Yes, sir."

At this the Master saluted him with folded hands.

MASTER: "You are descended from Advaita Goswami.
You must have
inherited some of his traits. A sweet-mango tree produces only sweet
mangoes
and not sour ones. Of course, it happens that some trees produce large
mangoes and some small; that depends on the soil. Isn't that true?"

GOSWAMI (humbly): "Sir, what do I know?"

MASTER: "Whatever you may say, others will not let
you off so easily.
Brahmins, however imperfect they may be, are worshipped by all on
account
of their having been born in the lines of great sages. (To M.)
Tell us the
story of the samkhachila." (A bird similar to the kite.)

M. sat in silence.

MASTER: "If one of your ancestors was a great soul,
he will certainly pull
you up, however unworthy you may be. When King Duryodhana and his
brothers were taken captive by the gandharvas, Yudhisthira released
them in
spite of the fact that King Duryodhana was his enemy and had banished
him to the forest.

"Besides, one must show respect to the religious garb. Even the mere
garb
recalls to mind the real object. Chaitanya once dressed an ass in a
religious
garb and then prostrated himself before it.

"Why do people bow before a samkhachila? When Kamsa was about to
kill the Divine Mother, She flew away taking the form of a samkhachila.2
So even now people salute the bird.

"An Englishman arrived at the cantonment of Chanak. The sepoys saluted
him. Koar Singh explained to me: 'India is under the rule of the
English.
Therefore one should salute an Englishman.'

"The Saktas follow the Tantra, and the Vaishnavas the Purana. There is
no harm for the Vaishnavas in speaking publicly of their spiritual
practices.
But the Saktas maintain secrecy about theirs. For this reason it is
difficult
to understand a Sakta.

(To Goswami) "You are all good people. How much japa
you practise!
How much you chant the name of Hari!"

GOSWAMI (humbly): "Oh, no! We do very little. I
am a great sinner."

MASTER (smiling): "You have humility. That
is good. But there is also
another way: 'I chant the name of Hari. How can I be a sinner?' He who
constantly repeats: 'I am a sinner! I am a wretch!' verily becomes a
sinner.
What lack of faith! A man chants the name of God so much, and still he
talks of sin!"

Radhika Goswami listened to these words in amazement.

MASTER: "At Vrindavan I myself put on the garb
of the Vaishnavas and
wore it for fifteen days. (To the devotees) I have
practised the disciplines of
all the paths, each for a few days. Otherwise I should have found no
peace
of mind. (Smiling) I have practised all the
disciplines; I accept all paths. I
respect the Saktas, the Vaishnavas, and also the Vedantists. Therefore
people
of all sects come here. And every one of them thinks that I belong to
his
school. I also respect the modern Brahmajnanis.
(The members of the Brahmo Samaj.)

"A man had a tub of dye. Such was its wonderful property that people
could dye their clothes any colour they wanted by merely dipping them
in
it. A clever man said to the owner of the tub, 'Dye my cloth the colour
of
your dye-stuff.' (All laugh.)

"Why should I be one-sided? The idea that the people of a particular
sect will not come to me does not frighten me. I don't care a bit
whether
people come to me or not. The thought of keeping anyone under my
control
never crosses my mind. Adhar Sen asked me to ask the Divine Mother for
a
big position for him, but he didn't get it. If that makes him think
differently
about me, what do I care?

"Once at Keshab's house I found myself in a new mood. The Brahmos
always speak of the Impersonal; therefore I said to the Divine Mother
in
an ecstatic mood: 'Mother, please don't come here. They don't believe
in
Your forms.'"

Radhika Goswami listened to these words of the Master against
sectarianism and remained silent.

MASTER (smiling): "Vijay3
is in a wonderful state of mind nowadays. He
falls to the ground while chanting the name of Hari. He devotes himself
to
kirtan, meditation, and other spiritual practices till four in the
morning.
He now puts on an ochre robe and prostrates himself before the images
of
God. Once he accompanied me to Gadadhar's (A
celebrated Vaishnava saint.) schoolhouse. I pointed out
the place where Gadadhar used to meditate. At once Vijay prostrated
himself
there. Again he fell prostrate before the picture of Chaitanyadeva."

GOSWAMI: "What about the image of Radha-Krishna?"

MASTER: "He prostrated himself there too. Vijay
also follows all the. conventions of religious life."

GOSWAMI: "He can now be accepted in Vaishnava society."

MASTER: "People's opinions don't count for much with him."

GOSWAMI: "I don't mean that. By accepting him Vaishnava society will
honour itself."

MASTER: "He respects me very much. But it is difficult to reach him.
One
day he is called to Dacca, the next day to some other place. He is
always
busy. His presence has created great trouble in the Sadharan Brahmo
Samaj."4

GOSWAMI: "Why so, sir?"

MASTER: "The Brahmos tell him: 'You mix
with people who worship
God with form. You are an idolater.' Vijay is liberal and
straightforward.
Unless a man is guileless, he doesn't receive the grace of God."

Sri Ramakrishna talked to the Mukherji brothers. Mahendra, the elder,
had his own business. Priyanath, the younger, had been an engineer.
After
making some provision for himself, he had given up his job. Mahendra
was
thirty-five or thirty-six years old. The brothers had homes both in the
country and in Calcutta.

MASTER (smiling): "Don't sit idle simply
because your spiritual consciousness has been awakened a little. Go
forward.
Beyond the forest of sandal-wood there are other and more valuable
things —
silver-mines, gold-mines, and so on."

PRIYA (smiling): "Sir, our legs are in chains. We
cannot go forward."

MASTER: "What if the legs are chained? The important
thing is the mind. Bondage is of the mind, and freedom also is of the
mind.

"Listen to a story. There were two friends. One went into a house of
prostitution and the other to hear a recital of the Bhagavata. 'What a
shame!'
thought the first. 'My friend is hearing spiritual discourse, but just
see what I
have slipped down to!' The second friend said to himself: 'Shame on me!
My friend is having a good time, but how stupid I am!' After death the
soul
of the first was taken to Vaikuntha by the messenger of Vishnu, while
that
of the second was taken to the nether world of Yama."

PRIYA: "But the mind is not under my control."

MASTER: "How is that? There is such a thing as abhyasayoga,
yoga through practice. Keep up the practice and you will find that your
mind will follow in
whatever direction you lead it. The mind is like a white cloth just
returned
from the laundry. It will be red if you dip it in red dye and blue if
you dip
it in blue. It will have whatever colour you dip it in.

(To Goswami) "Have you anything to ask?"

GOSWAMI: "No, sir. I am satisfied that I
have seen you and have been listening to your words."

MASTER: "Go and visit the temples."

GOSWAMI (very humbly): "Won't you
please sing something about Sri Chaitanya?"

The Master complied. He sang:

Why has My body turned so golden? It is not time for this to be:

Many the ages that must pass, before as Gauranga I appear! . . .

Again:

Gora gazes at Vrindavan and tears stream from his eyes;

In an exuberance of joy, he laughs and weeps and dances and sings.

He takes a wood for Vrindavan, the ocean for the blue Jamuna;

He rolls on the ground for love of Hari.

After singing, the Master went on with the conversation.

MASTER (to Goswami): "I have sung
these songs to suit your Vaishnava
temperament. But I must sing differently when the Saktas or others come.

"Here (Referring to himself.) people of all
sects come — Vaishnavas, Saktas, Kartabhajas,
Vedantists, and also members of the modern Brahmo Samaj. Therefore one
finds here all ideals and attitudes. It is by the will of God that
different
religions and opinions have come into existence. God gives to different
people what they can digest. The mother does not give fish pilau to all
her
children. All cannot digest it; so she prepares simple fish soup for
some.
Everyone cherishes his own special ideal and follows his own nature.

"They provide various images for the Baroari5
because people of different
sects assemble at it. You see there images of Radha-Krishna,
Siva-Durga,
and Sita-Rama — different images in different places. A crowd gathers
before
each image. The Vaishnavas spend most of their time before the image of
Radha-Krishna, the Saktas before Siva-Durga, and the devotees of Rama
before Sita-Rama.

"But it is quite different with those who are not spiritually minded at
all.
In the Baroari one sees another image also — a prostitute beating her
paramour with a broomstick. Those people stand there with gaping mouths
and
cry to their friends: 'What are you looking at over there? Come here!
Look
at this!'" (All laugh.)

Radhika Goswami saluted the Master and took his leave.

It was about five o'clock. The Master was on the semicircular west
porch.
Baburam, Latu, the Mukherji brothers, M., and some other devotees were
with him.

MASTER (to M. and the others): "Why
should I be one-sided? The
goswamis belong to the Vaishnava school and are very bigoted. They
think
that their opinion alone is right and all other opinions are wrong. My
words
have hit him hard. (Smiling) One must strike the
elephant on the head
with the goad; that is the elephant's most sensitive spot."

Then Sri Ramakrishna told a few naughty jokes for the young men.

MASTER (to the devotees): "I don't
give the youngsters a pure vegetarian
diet: now and then I give them a little water smelling of fish.
Otherwise,
why should they come?"

The Mukherji brothers left the porch. They went to the garden for a
stroll.

MASTER (to M.): "I wonder whether
the Mukherjis have taken offence at my jokes?"

M: "Why should they? Captain said that you are like a child. After
realizing
God a man becomes childlike."

MASTER: "Yes, and sometimes he behaves like
a boy, and sometimes like a
young man. As a boy he is very light-hearted. He may use frivolous
language.
As a young man he is like a roaring lion while teaching others. You
had better explain my state of mind to the Mukherjis."

M: "I don't have to do that. Haven't they the sense to see it?"

Again the Master became light-hearted with the boys. Then he said to
one of the devotees: "Today is the new moon. Go to the Kali temple in
the evening."6

It was dusk. They heard the sound of gongs, cymbals, and other
instruments
used in the evening service in the temples. The Master said to
Baburam, "Come with me to the Kali temple." He and Baburam went toward
the temple, accompanied by M. At the sight of Harish sitting on the
porch,
the Master said: "What is this? Is he in ecstasy?"

Going through the courtyard, the Master and the devotees stopped a
minute in front of the Radhakanta temple to watch the worship. Then
they
proceeded to the shrine of Kali. With folded hands the Master prayed to
the
Divine Mother: "O Mother! O Divine Mother! O Brahmamayi!"

Reaching the raised platform in front of the shrine, he bowed low
before
the image. The arati was going on. He entered the shrine and fanned the
image.

The evening worship was over. The devotees bowed before the Deity. It
was the night of the new moon. The Master was in a spiritual mood.
Gradually his mood deepened into intense ecstasy. He returned to his
room,
reeling like a drunkard and holding to Baburam's hand.

A lamp was lighted on the west porch. The Master sat there a few
minutes,
chanting: "Hari Om! Hari Om! Hari Om!" and other mystic syllables of
the Tantra. Presently he returned to his room and sat on the small
couch
facing the east. He was still completely absorbed in divine fervour. He
said
to the Divine Mother: "Mother, that I should first speak and You then
act —
oh, that's nonsense! What is the meaning of talk? It is nothing but a
sign.
One man says, 'I shall eat.' Again, another says, 'No! I won't hear of
it.'
Well, Mother, suppose I had said I would not eat; wouldn't I still feel
hungry? Is it ever possible that You should listen only when one prays
aloud and not when one feels an inner longing? You are what You are.
Then why do I speak? Why do I pray? I do as You make me do. Oh, what
confusion! Why do You make me reason?"

As Sri Ramakrishna was thus talking to God, the devotees listened
wonderstruck
to his words. The Master's eyes fell upon them.

MASTER (to the devotees): "One must
inherit good tendencies to realize
God. One must have done something, some form of tapasya, either in this
life or in another.

"When Draupadi's7
clothes were being taken off, she cried earnestly,
praying to God. God revealed Himself to her and said: Try to remember.
whether you have ever made a gift of a cloth to anyone. Then your
modesty
will be preserved.' Draupadi replied: 'Yes, I remember now. Once a
rishi was
taking his bath when his loin-cloth was carried away by the current. I
tore off
half my cloth and gave it to him.' Thereupon the Lord said, Then you
have nothing to fear.'"

M. was sitting on the small foot-rug.

MASTER (to M.): "You have understood
what I said."

M: "Yes, sir. You spoke about inherent tendencies."

MASTER: "Repeat what I said."

M. repeated the story of Draupadi.

Hazra entered the room. He had been living with Sri Ramakrishna in
the temple garden for the past two years and had first met the Master
in
1880 at Sihore in the house of Hriday, the Master's nephew. Hazra's
native
village was near Sihore, and he owned some property there. He had a
wife
and children and also some debts. From youth he had felt a spirit of
renunciation and sought the company of holy men and devotees. The
Master
had asked him to live with him at Dakshineswar and looked after his
necessities.
Hazra's mind was a jumble of undigested religious moods. He professed
the path of knowledge and disapproved of Sri Ramakrishna's attitude
of bhakti and his longing for the young devotees. Now and then he
thought
of the Master as a great soul, but again he slighted him as an ordinary
human being. He spent much of his time in telling his beads, and he
criticized Rakhal and the other young men for their indifference to the
practice. He was a strong advocate of religious conventions and rules
of
conduct, and made a fad of them. He was about thirty-eight years old.

As Hazra came in, the Master became a little abstracted and in that
mood
began to talk.

MASTER (to Hazra): "What you are doing
is right in principle, but the
application is not quite correct. Don't find fault with anyone, not
even with
an insect. As you pray to God for devotion, so also pray that you may
not
find fault with anyone."

HAZRA: "Does God listen to our prayer for bhakti?"

MASTER: "Surely. I can assure you of
that a hundred times. But the
prayer must be genuine and earnest. Do worldly-minded people weep for
God as they do for wife and children? At Kamarpukur the wife of a
certain
man fell ill. The man thought she would not recover; he began to
tremble
and was about to faint. Who feels that way for God?"

Hazra was about to take the dust of the Master's feet.

MASTER (shrinking): "What is this?"

HAZRA: "Why should I not take the dust of his feet who has so kindly
kept me with him?"

MASTER: "Satisfy God and everyone will be satisfied.
'If He is pleased
the world is pleased.' Once the Lord ate a few greens from Draupadi's
cooking-pot and said, 'Ah, I am satisfied.' Immediately the whole world
and
all its living beings were satisfied; they felt as if they had eaten
their fill. But
was the world satisfied or did it feel that way when the rishis ate
their food?

(To Hazra) "A perfect soul, even after attaining
Knowledge, practises
devotions or observes religious ceremonies to set an example to others.
I go to
the Kali temple and I bow before the holy pictures in my room;
therefore
others do the same. Further, if a man has become habituated to such
ceremonies, he feels restless if he does not observe them.

"One day I saw a sannyasi under the banyan-tree. He had put the
salagram
on the same carpet with his guru's sandals. He was worshipping them. I
said to him, 'If you have attained Knowledge to that extent,8
then why such formal worship at all?' He replied: 'What difference does
it make?
Since I do everything else, why not this too? Sometimes I offer the
flowers
at the guru's feet and sometimes to God.'

"One cannot renounce work as long as one has a body. As long as there
is mud at the bottom of the lake, bubbles will be produced.

(To Hazra) "If there is knowledge of one, there is
also knowledge of
many. What will you achieve by mere study of the scriptures? The
scriptures
contain a mixture of sand and sugar, as it were. It is extremely
difficult to
separate the sugar from the sand. Therefore one should learn the
essence of
the scriptures from the teacher or from a sadhu. Afterwards what does
one
care for books?

(To the devotees) "Gather all the information and
then plunge in.
Suppose a pot has dropped in a certain part of a lake. Locate the spot
and dive
there.

"One should learn the essence of the scriptures from the guru and then
practise sadhana. If one rightly follows spiritual discipline, then one
directly
sees God. The discipline is said to be rightly followed only when one
plunges
in. What will a man gain by merely reasoning about the words of the
scriptures? Ah, the fools! They reason themselves to death over
information
about the path. They never take the plunge. What a pity!

"You may say, even though you dive deep you are still in danger of
sharks and crocodiles, of lust and anger. But dive after rubbing your
body
with turmeric powder; then sharks and crocodiles will not come near
you.
The turmeric, is discrimination and renunciation.

(To the devotees) "God made me pass through the
disciplines of various
paths. First according to the Purana, then according to the Tantra. I
also
followed the disciplines of the Vedas. At first I practised sadhana in
the
Panchavati. I made a grove of tulsi-plants and used to sit inside it
and
meditate. Sometimes I cried with a longing heart, 'Mother! Mother!' Or
again, 'Rama! Rama!'

"While repeating the name of Rama, I sometimes assumed the attitude of
Hanuman and fixed a tail to the lower end of my backbone. I was in a
God-intoxicated state. At that time I used to put on a silk robe and
worship
the Deity. What joy I experienced in that worship!

"I practised the discipline of the Tantra under the bel-tree. At that
time
I could see no distinction between the sacred tulsi and any other
plant. In
that state I sometimes ate the leavings from a jackal's meal,9
food that had
been exposed the whole night, part of which might have been eaten by
snakes or other creatures. Yes, I ate that stuff.

"Sometimes I rode on a dog and fed him with luchi, also eating part of
the
bread myself. I realized that the whole world was filled with God
alone.
One cannot have spiritual realization without destroying ignorance; so
I
would assume the attitude of a tiger and devour ignorance.

"While practising the disciplines of the Vedas, I became a sannyasi. I
used to lie down in the chandni and say to Hriday: 'I am a sannyasi. I
shall
take my meals here.'10

"I vowed to the Divine Mother that I would kill myself if I did not see
God. I said to Her: 'O Mother, I am a fool. Please teach me what is
contained
in the Vedas, the Puranas, the Tantras, and the other scriptures.' The
Mother said to me, 'The essence of the Vedanta is that Brahman alone is
real
and the world illusory.' The Satchidananda Brahman described in the
Vedas
is the Satchidananda Siva of the Tantra and the Satchidananda Krishna
of
the Purana. The essence of the Gita is what you get
by repeating the word
ten times. It is reversed into 'tagi', which indicates renunciation.

"After the realization of God, how far below lie the Vedas, the
Vedanta,
the Purana, the Tantra! (To Hazra) I cannot utter
the word 'Om' in
samadhi. Why is that? I cannot say 'Om' unless I come down very far
from
the state of samadhi.

"I had all the experiences that one should have, according to the
scriptures,
after one's direct perception of God. I behaved like a child, like a
madman,
like a ghoul, and like an inert thing.

"I saw the visions described in the scriptures. Sometimes I saw the
universe
filled with sparks of fire. Sometimes I saw all the quarters glittering
with
light, as if the world were a lake of mercury. Sometimes I saw the
world as
if made of liquid silver. Sometimes, again, I saw all the quarters
illumined
as if with the light of Roman candles. So you see my experiences tally
with
those described in the scriptures.

"It was revealed to me further that God Himself has become the universe
and all its living beings and the twenty-four cosmic principles. It is
like the
process of evolution and involution.11

"Oh, what a state God kept me in at that time! One experience would
hardly be over before another overcame me. It was like the movement of
the
husking-machine: no sooner is one end down than the other goes up.

"I would see God in meditation, in the state of samadhi, and I would
see
the same God when my mind came back to the outer world. When looking
at this side of the mirror I would see Him alone, and when looking on
the
reverse side I saw the same God."

The devotees listened to these words with rapt attention.

(To the Mukherji brothers) "Captain is now really in
the state of the
sadhaka. That the mere possession of wealth should create attachment is
by
no means true. Sambhu Mallick used to say to Hriday, 'Hridu, I have
packed my things and am ready for the journey.' I said to him: 'God
forbid!
Why do you say such ominous words?' 'No', replied Sambhu. 'Please bless
me that I may cast aside all-these possessions and go to God.'

"God's devotees have nothing to fear. They are His own. He always
stands
by them. Once Duryodhana and his brothers were imprisoned by the
gandharvas. It was Yudhisthira who freed them. Yudhisthira said, 'If
our
relatives are placed in such a plight, then it is our disgrace.'"

It was about nine o'clock in the evening. The Mukherji brothers were
ready to return to Calcutta. The Master left his seat and began to pace
the
room and the porch. He could hear the kirtan sung in the Vishnu temple.
A devotee said that Harish and Latu were in the singing party.

Sri Ramakrishna and the devotees went to the Vishnu temple and saluted
the Deity. The brahmins belonging to the staff of the temple garden,
and
also the priests, the cooks, and the servants, were singing the kirtan.
He
stood there a few minutes and encouraged the singers. On the way back
to
his room he remarked to the devotees, "You see, some of them polish the
metal utensils and some go to houses of prostitution."

The Master returned to his room and took his seat. Presently the
singers
came and bowed low before him. The Master Said to them: "One should
perspire, dancing and singing the name of God, as people do earning
money.
I had thought of joining you in the dancing; but I found that you did
everything
very well. You had flavoured the curry with all the seasoning. What
could I add? It will be nice if you sing devotional songs that way now
and
then."

The Mukherji brothers saluted the Master. Their carriage was ready near
the verandah north of the room. The Master stood facing the north. On
his
left was the Ganges; in front of him were the nahabat, the garden, and
the
kuthi; and to his right was the road leading to the gate. The night was
dark,
and a devotee had brought a lantern to show the visitors their way. One
by
one the devotees bowed and took the dust of the Master's feet. The
carriage
seemed too heavily loaded for the horses. The Master said, "Aren't
there too
many people in the carriage?"

Sri Ramakrishna remained standing. As the carriage rolled away, the
devotees looked back at the Master's face beaming with compassion and
love.

Sunday, September 21, 1884

A large number of devotees were in Sri Ramakrishna's room,
among them
Ram, Mahendra Mukherji, M., and Chunilal. Chunilal had just returned
from Vrindavan, where he had gone with Rakhal and Balaram. The two
latter were still there. Nityagopal also was staying there. The Master
began to talk with Chunilal about Vrindavan.

MASTER: "How is Rakhal?"

CHUNI: "He is quite well now, sir."

MASTER: "Isn't Nityagopal coming back?"

CHUNI: "He was still there when I left."

MASTER: "Who will bring your family back?"

CHUNI: "Balaram Babu told me he would arrange it with some reliable
person. He didn't mention any name."

Sri Ramakrishna then spoke to Mahendra Mukherji about Narayan, a
school-boy sixteen or seventeen years old, who often visited the Master
and
was very dear to him.

MASTER: "He is quite guileless, isn't he?"

The very uttering of the word "guileless" filled the Master with great
joy.

MAHENDRA: "Yes, sir. Completely guileless."

MASTER: "His mother came here the other day.
I was a little frightened to
see that she was a proud woman. That day she found that Captain, you
and many others, too, visited me. Then she must have realized that she
and
her son were not the only people to come here. (All laugh.)
There was some
sugar candy in the room and she remarked that it was good. That made
her
feel there was no scarcity of food here. I happened to tell Baburam, in
front
of her, to keep some sweets for himself and Naran. Ganu's mother said
that
Naran always bothered his mother for the boat hire to come here. His
mother
said to me, 'Please ask Naran to consent to marry.' I replied, 'All
that depends
on one's fate.' Why should I interfere? (All laugh.)
Naran is indifferent to
his studies. His mother said, 'Please ask him to pay a little more
attention.'
So I said to Naran, 'Attend to your studies.' Then his mother said,
'Please
tell him seriously.' (All laugh.)

(To Chunilal) "Why doesn't Gopal come here?"

CHUNILAL: "He has been suffering from dysentery."

MASTER: "Is he taking any medicine?"

Sri Ramakrishna was planning to go to a performance of the Chaitanyalila
at the Star Theatre. Mahendra Mukherji was to take him to Calcutta in
his
carriage. They were talking about choosing good seats. Some suggested
that
one could see the performance well from the one-rupee gallery. Ram
said,
"Oh, no! I shall engage a box for him." The Master laughed. Some of the
devotees said that public women took part in the play. They took the
parts
of Nimai, Nitai, and others.

MASTER (to the devotees): "I shall look
upon them as the Blissful
Mother Herself. What if one of them acts the part of Chaitanya? An
imitation
custard-apple reminds one of the real fruit. Once, while going along a
road, a devotee of Krishna noticed some babla-trees. Instantly his mind
was
thrown into ecstasy. He remembered that the wood of babla-trees was
used
for the handles of the spades that the garden of the temple of
Syamasundar
(A name of Krishna.)
was dug with. The trees Instantly reminded him of Krishna. I was once
taken to the Maidan in Calcutta to see a balloon go up. There I noticed
a
young English boy leaning against a tree, with his body bent in three
places.
It at once brought before me the vision of Krishna12
and I went into samadhi.

"Once Chaitanyadeva was passing through a village. Someone told him
that the body of the drum used in the kirtan was made from the earth of
that village, and at once he went into ecstasy.

"Radha could not control herself at the sight of a cloud or the blue
throat
of a peacock. It would at once awaken in her mind the thought of
Krishna,
and she would go into ecstasy."

The Master was silent a few moments and then resumed the conversation.

MASTER: "Radha had attained mahabhava. There was. no desire behind
the ecstatic love of the gopis. A true lover does not seek anything
from God.
He prays only for pure love. He doesn't want any powers or miracles.
"It is very troublesome to possess occult powers. Nangta taught me this
by
a story. A man who had acquired occult powers was sitting on the
seashore
when a storm arose. It caused him great discomfort; so he said, 'Let
the storm
stop.' His words could not remain unfulfilled. At that moment a ship
was
going full sail before the wind. When the storm ceased abruptly the
ship
capsized and sank. The passengers perished and the sin of causing their
death fell to the man. And because of that sin he lost his occult
powers and
went to hell.

"Once upon a time a sadhu acquired great occult powers. He was vain
about them. But he was a good man and had some austerities to his
credit.
One day the Lord, disguised as a holy man, came to him and said,
'Revered
sir, I have heard that you have great occult powers.' The sadhu
received
the Lord cordially and offered him a seat. Just then an elephant passed
by.
The Lord, in the disguise of the holy man, said to the sadhu, 'Revered
sir,
can you kill this elephant if you like?' The sadhu said, 'Yes, it is
possible.'
So saying, he took a pinch of dust, muttered some mantras over it, and
threw
it at the elephant. The beast struggled awhile in pain and then dropped
dead. The Lord said: 'What power you have! You have killed the
elephant!'
The sadhu laughed. Again the Lord spoke: 'Now can you revive the
elephant?'
'That too is possible', replied the sadhu. He threw another pinch
of charmed dust at the beast. The elephant writhed about a little and
came
back to life. Then the Lord said: 'Wonderful is your power. But may I
ask
you one thing? You have killed the elephant and you have revived it.
But
what has that done for you? Do you feel uplifted by it? Has it enabled
you
to realize God?' Saying this the Lord vanished.

"Subtle are the ways of dharma. One cannot realize God if one has even
the least trace of desire. A thread cannot pass through the eye of a
needle
if it has the smallest fibre sticking out.

"Krishna said to Arjuna, 'Friend, if you want to realize Me, you will
not
succeed if you have even one of the eight occult powers.' This is the
truth.
Occult power is sure to beget pride, and pride makes one forget God.

"Once a cross-eyed rich man came here. He said to me: 'You are a
paramahamsa. That is good. You must perform a swastyayana ceremony for
me.' What a small-minded person he was! He called me a paramahamsa
yet wanted me to perform that ceremony. To secure welfare by means of
swastyayana is to exercise occult power.

"An egotistic person cannot realize God. Do you know what egotism
like? It is like a high mound, where rain-water cannot collect: the
water
runs off. Water collects in low land. There seeds sprout and grow into
trees. Then the trees bear fruit.

"Therefore I say to Hazra, 'Never think that you alone have true
understanding
and that others are fools.' One must love all. No one is a stranger.
It is Hari alone who dwells in all beings. Nothing exists without Him.

"The Lord said to Prahlada, 'Ask a boon of Me.' 'I have seen You',
replied
Prahlada. 'That is enough. I don't need anything else.' But the Lord
insisted.
Thereupon Prahlada said, 'If You must give me a boon, let it be that
those
who have tortured me may not have to suffer punishment.' The meaning of
those words is that it was God who tortured Prahlada in the form of his
persecutors, and, if they suffered punishment, it would really be God
who
suffered.

"Radha was mad with prema, ecstatic love of God. But there is also the
madness of bhakti. Hanuman's was such. When he saw Sita entering the
fire he was going to kill Rama. Then, too, there is the madness of
Knowledge.
I once saw a jnani behaving like a madman. He came here very soon after
the temple garden was dedicated. People said he belonged to the Brahmo
Sabha of Rammohan Roy. He had a torn shoe on one foot, a stick in one
hand, and a potted mango-plant in the other. After, a dip in the Ganges
he
went to the Kali temple where Haladhari was seated. With great fervour
he
began to chant a hymn to the Divine Mother. Then he went up to a dog,
held it by the ear, and ate some of its food. The dog didn't mind. Just
at that
time I too was about to experience the state of divine madness. I threw
my
arm around Hriday's neck and said, 'Oh, Hride! Shall I too fall into
that
plight?'

"I became mad. Narayan Shastri came here and saw me roaming about
with a bamboo pole on my shoulder. He said to the people, 'Ah, he is
mad!'
In that state I could not observe any caste restrictions. The wife of a
low-caste man used to send me cooked greens, and I ate them.

"I touched my head and lips with the leaf-plates from which the beggars
ate their food in the guest-house of the Kali temple. Thereupon
Haladhari
said to me: 'What have you done? You have taken the food left by
beggars.
How will you marry off your children?'13
These words aroused my anger.
Haladhari was my cousin, older than myself. But could that restrain me?
I
said to him: 'You wretch! Isn't it you who take pride in the study of
the
Gita and the Vedanta? Isn't it you who teach people
that Brahman alone is
real and the world illusory? And yet you imagine that I shall beget
children!
May your mouth that recites from the Gita be
blighted!'

(To M.) "You see, mere study of books avails
nothing. One may recite
the written part for the drum glibly from memory, but to play the drum
is
exceedingly difficult."

The Master continued with the description of his divine madness:

"Once, for a few days, I was out on an excursion with Mathur Babu in
his house-boat. We took the trip for a change of air. During that trip
we
visited Navadvip. One day I saw the boatmen cooking their meal and
stood
and watched them. Mathur said to me, 'What are you doing there?' I
replied
with a smile, 'The boatmen are cooking, and their food looks very
good.'
Mathur felt that I might ask the boatmen to give me a portion of their
food;
so he said: 'Come away! Come away!'

"But I cannot do such a thing now. I am no longer in that mood. Now
the food must be cooked by a brahmin observing ceremonial purity, and
be
offered to the Deity; then only can I eat it.

"Oh, what moods I passed through! At Kamarpukur I said to Chine
Sankhari and the other chums of my boyhood days, 'Oh, I fall at your
feet
and beg of you to utter the name of Hari.' I was about to prostrate
myself
before them all. Thereupon Chine said, 'This is the first outburst of
your
divine love; so you don't see any distinction between one man and
another.'
When the storm breaks and raises the dust, then mango and tamarind
trees
look the same. One cannot distinguish the one from the other."

A DEVOTEE: "How can a householder keep on
with his worldly duties if
he is overwhelmed by such bhakti-madness or Love-madness or
Knowledge-madness?"

MASTER (looking at him): "There are two kinds of
yogis, the 'revealed'
and the 'hidden'. The householder may be a 'hidden' yogi. None
recognizes
him. The householder should renounce mentally, not outwardly."

RAM: "You talk as if you were consoling
children. A householder may be a jnani but never a vijnani."

MASTER: "He may become a vijnani in the
end. But it is not good to force oneself into renunciation."

RAM: "Keshab Sen used to say: 'Why do
people go to him so much? One
day he will sting them and they will flee from him.'"

MASTER: "Why should I sting people? I say
to people: 'Do this as well as
that. Do your worldly duties and call on God as
well.' I don't ask them to
renounce everything. (With a smile) One day Keshab
was delivering a
lecture. He said, 'O Lord, grant us that we may dive into the river of
divine
love and go straight to the Ocean of Satchidananda.' The ladies were
seated
behind the screen. I said to Keshab, 'How can you all dive once for
all?'
Pointing to the ladies', I said: 'Then what would happen to them? Every
now
and then you must return to dry land. You must dive and rise
alternately.'
Keshab and the others laughed.

"Hazra says to me, 'You love most those endowed with rajas, those who
have great wealth and name and fame.' If that is so, then why do I love
people like Harish and Noto? (Referring to Latu.)
Why do I love Narendra? He can't even afford salt to season his roast
banana!"

Sri Ramakrishna left his room and went toward the pine-grove talking
with M. A devotee followed them with water and towel. The Master was
talking about his intended visit to the Star Theatre. He said to M.:
"What
Ram says applies to rajasic people. What is the use of reserving an
expensive seat?"

About five o'clock that afternoon Sri Ramakrishna was on his way to
Calcutta. M., Mahendra Mukherji, and a few other devotees accompanied
him in Mahendra's carriage. Thinking of God, the Master soon went into
an ecstatic mood. After a long time he regained consciousness of the
world.
He observed: "That fellow Hazra dares teach me! The rascal!" After a
short
pause he said, "I shall drink some water." He often made such remarks
in
order to bring his mind down to the sense plane.

MAHENDRA (to M.): "May I get some refreshments for
him?"

M: "No, he won't eat anything now."

MASTER (still in ecstatic mood): "I shall eat."

Mahendra took the Master to his flour-mill located at Hathibagan. After
a
little rest Sri Ramakrishna was to go to the theatre. Mahendra did not
care
to take him to his own house, for the Master was not well acquainted
with
his father. Priyanath, Mahendra's second brother, was also a devotee of
the
Master.

Sri Ramakrishna was sitting on a cot over which a carpet had been
spread,
and was engaged in spiritual talk.

MASTER (to M. and the others): "Once, while
listening to the various
incidents of the life of Chaitanya, Hazra said that these were
manifestations
of Sakti, and that Brahman, the All-pervasive Spirit, had nothing to do
with
hem. But can there be Sakti without Brahman? Hazra wants to nullify the
teachings of this place. (Referring to himself.)

"I have realized that Brahman and Sakti are identical, like water and
its
wetness, like fire and its power to burn. Brahman dwells in all beings
as the
Bibhu; the All-pervasive Consciousness, though Its manifestation is
greater
in some places than in others. Hazra says, further, that anyone who
realizes
God must also acquire God's supernatural powers; that he possesses
these
powers, though he may or may not use them."

M: "Yes, one must have control over these supernatural powers!" (All
laugh.)

MASTER (smiling): "Yes, one must have
them in one's grasp! How mean!
He who has never enjoyed power and riches becomes impatient for them.
But a true devotee never prays to God for them."

Sri Ramakrishna washed his face. A smoke was prepared for him. He
said to M.: "Is it dusk now? If it is, I won't smoke. During the
twilight
hour of the dusk you should give up all other activities and remember
God."
Saying this he looked at the hairs on his arm. He wanted to see whether
he
could count them. If he could not, it would be dusk.

About half past eight in the evening the carriage with the Master and
the
devotees drew up in front of the Star Theatre on Beadon Street. He was
accompanied by M., Baburam, Mahendra, and two or three others. They
were talking about engaging seats, when Girish Chandra Ghosh, the
manager
of the theatre, accompanied by several officials, came out to the
carriage,
greeted the Master, and took him and the party upstairs. Girish had
heard
of the Master and was very glad to see him at the theatre. The Master
was
conducted to one of the boxes. M. sat next to him; Baburam and one or
two
devotees sat behind.

The hall was brilliantly lighted. The Master looked down at the pit and
saw that it was crowded. The boxes also were full. For every box there
was
a man to fan those who occupied it. Sri Ramakrishna was filled with joy
and said to M., with his childlike smile: "Ah, it is very nice here! I
am glad
to have come. I feel inspired when I see so many people together. Then
I
clearly perceive that God Himself has become everything."

M: "It is true, sir."

MASTER: "How much will they charge us here?"

M: "They won't take anything. They are very happy that you have come
to the theatre."

MASTER: "It is all due to the grace of the Divine Mother."

The Chaitanyalila was about to be performed. It was
a play about the
early life of Sri Chaitanya, who was also known as Nimai, Gaur, Gora,
and
Gauranga. The curtain rose; the attention of the audience was fixed on
the
stage.

The first scene depicts a council of Sin and the Six Passions. On a
forest path behind them walk Viveka, Vairagya, and Bhakti, engaged
in conversation.

Bhakti says to her companions: "Gauranga is born in Nadia. Therefore
the vidyadharis, (Demigoddesses.) the munis,
and the rishis have come down to earth in disguise to pay their
respects to him."

She sings:

Blest indeed is the earth! Gora is born in Nadia!

Behold the vidyadharis, coming in chariots to adore him;

Behold the munis and rishis, who come, allured by the spell of Love.

The vidyadharis, munis, and rishis sing a hymn to Gauranga and
adore him as an Incarnation of God.

Sri Ramakrishna watched the scene and was overpowered with
divine
ecstasy. He said to M.: "Look at it! Ah! Ah!"

Sages:         
  O Kesava, bestow Thy grace

Upon Thy luckless servants here!

O Kesava, who dost delight

To roam Vrindavan's glades and groves!

Goddesses:   
O Madhava, our mind's Bewitcher!

Sweet One, who dost steal our hearts,

Sweetly playing on Thy flute!

Chorus:        
Chant, O mind, the name of Hari,

Sing aloud the name of Hari,

Praise Lord Hari's name!

Sages:         
  O Thou Eternal Youth of Braja,

Tamer of fierce Kaliya,

Slayer of the afflicted's fear!

Goddesses:   Beloved with
the arching eyes

And crest with arching peacock feather,

Charmer of Sri Radha's heart!

Sages:         
  Govardhan's mighty Lifter, Thou,

All garlanded with sylvan flowers!

O Damodara, Kamsa's Scourge!

Goddesses:   O Dark One,
who dost sport in bliss
With sweet Vrindavan's gopi maids.

Chorus:        
Chant, O mind, the name of Hari,

Sing aloud the name of Hari,

Praise Lord Hari's name!

As the vidyadharis sang the lines,

Beloved with the arching eyes

And crest with arching peacock feather!

the Master went into deep samadhi. The orchestra played on, but he was
not aware of the outer world.

Another scene: A guest has arrived at the
house of Jagannath Misra,
Nimai's father. The boy Nimai plays about, singing with his friends,
in a happy mood:14

Tell Me, where is My blessed Vrindavan?'

Where is Mother Yasoda?

Where Father Nanda and Brother Balai?

Where My twin cows, black and, white?

Tell Me, where is My magic flute?

My friends Sudama and Sridama?

Where My Jamuna's bank. My banyan?

Where My beloved gopi maids?

Where is Radha, queen of My heart?

The guest closes his eyes while offering food to the Lord. Nimai
runs to him. and eats the food from the plate. The guest recognizes
Nimai as an Incarnation of God and seeks to please him with the
Hymn of the Ten Incarnations. Before taking leave of Gauranga's
parents he sings:

Glory to Gora, the Source of Bliss!

Hail Gauranga, Redeemer of earth!

Help of the helpless, Life of the living,

Slayer of fear in the hearts of the fearful!

Age after age we see Thy play —

New sports unfolding, moods ever new;

New waves rolling, new tales to be told.

Thou who bearest the whole world's burden,

Shower on us the nectar of Love!

Take away our grief and affliction:

Thou in Love's pleasure-cave dost dwell.

Hope of the suffering! Chastiser of sin!

Scourge of the wicked! Victory to Thee!

Listening to the hymn, the Master was thrilled with ecstasy.

The next scene is at Navadvip on the bank of the Ganges. After
bathing in the holy water, the brahmin men and women engage in
worship by the riverside. As they close their eyes, Nimai steals their
food offerings and begins to eat them. A brahmin loses his temper and
says: "You scapegrace! You rascal! You are taking away my offering for
Vishnu. Ruin will seize you!" Nimai holds on to the offering and is
about to run away. Many of the women love him dearly and cannot
bear to have him go away. They call to him: "Return, O Nimai!
Come back, O Nimai!" Nimai turns a deaf ear to them.

One of the women, however, knows the irresistible charm that will
bring him back. She loudly chants the name of Hari. Immediately he
repeats the name of Hari and comes back.

M. was seated beside the Master. Sri Ramakrishna could not
control
himself. He cried out, "Ah!" and shed tears of love. He said to Baburam
and M.: "Don't make a fuss if I fall into an ecstatic mood or go into
samadhi.
Then the worldly people will take me for a cheat."

Another scene: Nimai is invested with the sacred thread of the
brahmins. He puts on the traditional ochre robe of the sannyasi. Mother
Sachi and the women of the neighbourhood stand about while he begs
for alms, singing:

Drop a morsel of food, I pray, into my begging-bowl;

Alone I roam, a new-made yogi, on the highways of the world.

People of Braja, you I love, and so, time and again,

I come to you; at hunger's call I beg my food from door to door.

The sun is low, and I must seek my home on the Jamuna's bank;

Into its waters fall my tears, as onward murmuring it flows.

The onlookers leave the stage. Nimai stands alone. The gods, in the
guise of brahmin men and women, sing his praises.

Men:         
     Thy body gleams like
liquid moonlight;

Thou hast put on man's dwarfish form.

O Lord, Thee we salute!

Women:         
Bewitcher of the gopis' hearts,

Thou roamest in the shady groves

About Vrindavan's vale.

Nimai:         
  Hail Sri Radha! Glory to Radha!

Men:         
     The youths of Braja
are Thy friends;

Thou curbest haughty Madan's15
pride.

Women:         
Thy love has made the gopis mad;

In ecstasy the Jamuna thrills.

Men:         
     Narayana, Deluder of
demons!

Refuge of the fear-stricken gods!

Women:         O
Lover of Braja, Thou dost beg

The love of Braja's comely maidens!

Nimai:         
  Hail Sri Radha! Glory to Radha!

Listening to the music, the Master went into samadhi. The
curtain fell
and the orchestra played on.

A new scene: Srivas and other devotees are engaged in conversation
in front of Advaita's house. Mukunda sings:

Sleep no more! How long will you lie

In maya's slumber locked, O mind?

Who are you? Why have you been born?

Forgotten is your own true Self.

O mind, unclose your eyes at last

And wake yourself from evil dreams;

A fool you are to bind yourself

So to the passing shows of life,

When in you lives Eternal Bliss.

Come out of the gloom, O foolish mind!

Come out and hail the rising Sun!

Sri Ramakrishna praised the voice of the singer highly.

Another scene: Nimai is staying at home. Srivas comes to visit him.
First he meets Sachi. The mother weeps and says: "My son doesn't attend
to his household duties. My eldest son, Viswarupa, has renounced
the world, and my heart has ached ever since. Now I fear that Nimai
will follow in his steps."

Nimai arrives. Sachi says to Srivas: "Look at him. Tears run down
his cheeks and breast. Tell, tell me how I can free him from these
notions."

At the sight of Srivas, Nimai clings to his feet and says, with eyes
full of tears: "Ah me! Revered sir, I have not yet attained devotion to
Krishna. Futile is this wretched life! Tell me, sir, where is Krishna?
Where shall I find Krishna? Give me the dust of your feet with your
blessing, that I may realize the Blue One with the garland of
wild-flowers hanging about His neck."

Sri Ramakrishna looked at M. He was eager to say something but
he
could not. His voice was choked with emotion; the tears ran down his
cheeks; with unmoving eyes he watched Nimai clinging to Srivas's feet
and
saying, "Sir, I have not yet attained devotion to Krishna."

Nimai has opened a school, but he cannot teach the students any
longer. Gangadas, his former teacher, comes to persuade him to direct
his attention to his worldly duties. He says to Srivas: "Listen,
Srivas! We
are brahmins, too, and devoted to the worship of Vishnu. But you
people are ruining Nimai's worldly prospects."

MASTER (to M.): "That is the advice of the
worldly-wise: Do 'this' as
well as 'that'. When the worldly man teaches spirituality he always
advises
a compromise between the world and God."

M: "Yes, sir. That is true."

Gangadas continues his argument with
Nimai. He says: "Nimai,
undoubtedly you are versed in the scriptures. Reason with me. Explain
to
me if any other duty is superior to worldly duties. You are a
house-holder. Why disregard the duties of a householder and follow
others'
duties?"

MASTER (to M.): "Did you notice?
He's trying to persuade Nimai to make a compromise."

M: "Yes, sir."

Nimai says to Gangadas: "I am not wilfully indifferent to a
householder's
duties. On the contrary, it is my desire to hold to all sides. But,
revered sir, I don't know what it is that draws me on. I don't know
what to do. I want to cling to the shore but I cannot. My soul wanders
away. I am helpless. My soul constantly wants to plunge headlong into
the boundless Ocean."

MASTER: "Ah me!"

The scene changes: Nityananda has arrived at Navadvip. After a
search he meets Nimai, who, in turn, has been seeking him. When
they meet, Nimai says to him: "Blessed is my life! Fulfilled is my
dream! You visited me in a dream and then disappeared."

The Master said in a voice choked with emotion, "Nimai said he
had
seen him in a dream."

Nimai is in an ecstatic mood and becomes engaged in conversation
with Advaita, Srivas, Haridas, and other devotees. Nitai sings a song
suited to Nimai's mood:

Where is Krishna? Where is my Krishna?

He is not in the grove, dear friends.

Give me Krishna! Bring me my Krishna!

Radha's heart knows naught but Him.

At this song Sri Ramakrishna went into samadhi. He remained in
that
state a long time. The orchestra played on. Gradually his mind came
down
to the relative plane. In the mean time a young man of Khardaha, born
in
the holy family of Nityananda, had entered the box. He was standing
behind
the Master's chair. Sri Ramakrishna was filled with delight at the
sight of
him. He held his hand and talked to him affectionately. Every now and
then
he said: "Please sit down here. Your very presence awakens my spiritual
feeling." He played tenderly with the young man's hands and lovingly
stroked his face.

After he had left, Sri Ramakrishna said to M.: "He is a great scholar.
His
father is a great devotee of God. When I go to Khardaha to visit
Syamasundar,
the father entertains me with sacred offerings such as one cannot buy
even
for a hundred rupees. This young man has good traits. A little shaking
will
awaken his inner spirit. At the sight of him my spiritual mood is
aroused. I
should have been overwhelmed with ecstasy it he had stayed here a
little
longer."

The curtain rises: Nityananda is walking in a procession on the public
road with his companions, chanting the name of Hari. He meets two
ruffians, Jagai and Madhai, who are sworn enemies of all religious
people. Madhai strikes Nitai with a piece of broken pottery. Nitai is
hurt and bleeds profusely, but he pays no heed, inebriated as he is
with
the love of God.

Sri Ramakrishna was in an ecstatic mood.

Nitai embraces both Jagai and Madhai, and sings a song to the two
ruffians:

Jagai! Madhai! Oh, come and dance,

Chanting Hari's name with fervour!

What does it matter that you struck me?

Dance, dear friends, in Hari's name!

Sing the name of our Beloved:

He will embrace you in love's rapture!

Let the heavens resound with His name!

You have not tasted true emotion:

Weep as you chant the name of Hari,

And you will see the Moon of your soul.

Hari's name would I lovingly give you;

Nitai calls you to share His love.

Nimai speaks to Sachi of his desire to enter the monastic life. His
mother faints and falls to the ground.

At this point many in the audience burst into tears. Sri
Ramakrishna
remained still and looked intently at the stage. A single tear appeared
in
the corner of each eye. The performance was over.

Sri Ramakrishna was about to enter a carriage. A devotee asked him how
he had enjoyed the play. The Master said with a smile, "I found the
representation the same as the real."

The carriage proceeded toward Mahendra's mill. Suddenly Sri
Ramakrishna went into an ecstatic mood and murmured to himself in
loving
tones: "O Krishna! O Krishna! Krishna is knowledge! Krishna is soul!
Krishna is mind! Krishna is life! Krishna is body!" He continued: "O
Govinda, Thou art my life! Thou art my soul!"

The carriage reached the mill. Mahendra fed the Master tenderly with
various dishes. M. sat by his side. 'Affectionately he said to M.,
"Here, eat
a little." He put some sweets in his hands.

With Mahendra and a few other devotees, Sri Ramakrishna left in the
carriage for the Dakshineswar temple garden. The Master was in a happy
mood. He sang a song about Gauranga and Nitai, M. sang with him:

Gaur and Nitai, ye blessed brothers!

I have heard how kind you are,

And therefore I have come to you. . . .

The Master and Mahendra talked about the latter's intended
pilgrimage.

MASTER (smiling): "The divine love
in you is barely a sprout now. Why
should you let it wither? But come back very soon. Many a time I have
thought of visiting your place. At last I have done it. I am so happy."

MAHENDRA: "My life is indeed blessed, sir."

MASTER: "You were already blessed. Your father is also a good man. I
saw
him the other day. He has faith in the Adhyatma Ramayana."

MAHENDRA: "Please bless me that I may have love for God."

MASTER: "You are generous and artless. One cannot
realize God without
sincerity and simplicity. God is far, far away from the crooked heart."

Near Syambazar, Mahendra bade the Master good-bye, and the carriage
continued on its way.

^A
nickname for Prankrishna, a devotee of the Master.

^The
following story is recorded in connexion with the birth of Sri Krishna:
Kamsa, the king of Mathura, was the very personification of evil. His
god-fearing
sister Devaki was married to Vasudeva. When Kamsa came to know that a
son of
Devaki would be his slayer, and that his sister was already expecting a
child, he
was about to kill her. But he spared her life on her promise to deliver
her child
to him as soon as it was born. Both Vasudeva and Devaki were kept in
prison under
a strong guard. In the prison seven sons were born to Devaki, one after
another,
and they were all slain by the evil Kamsa. The eighth child was Sri
Krishna.
Immediately after His birth, Vasudeva, through, divine help, took Him
across the
Jamuna river to the village of Gokula, where Nanda and his wife Yasoda
lived. To
them had just been born a daughter, who was an Incarnation of the
Divine Power.
Sri Krishna was exchanged for the girl, who was then delivered to Kamsa
as the
new-born child of Devaki. Kamsa was about to kill her when she flew
into the sky
in the form of a bird, the samkhachila, remarking that Kamsa's slayer
was growing
up at Gokula. This is why the samkhachila is held in respect.
Eventually Sri
Krishna killed Kamsa.

^Vijaykrishna
Goswami. Though born in a Vaishnava family, he became a member
of the Brahmo Samaj. Later he returned to the worship of the Personal
God.

^Vijay
and several of his friends, on account of a disagreement with Keshab,
seceded from Keshab's organization and founded the Sadharan Brahmo
Samaj.

^A
religious festival, the cost of which is borne by the whole community.

^The
night of the new moon is especially auspicious for the worship of the
Divine
Mother.

^The
wife of the five Pandava brothers. In order to humiliate her in the
court,
Duryodhana ordered her clothes to be taken off.

^That
is to say, realization of the identity of the guru and God.

^In
a certain form of Tantrik worship, food is offered to the jackals, the
companions of the Goddess Kali.

^The
chandni is an open portico in the temple garden with steps descending
to
the Ganges. According to the orthodox Hindu tradition, a monk is
forbidden to
live in a house.

^That
is to say. God Himself evolves as the universe, at the time of
creation,
and names and forms are involved back into God, at the time of
dissolution.

^Images
of Krishna are usually bent in three parts of the body, namely, the
neck, the waist, and the knees.

^According
to the rules of Hindu society, brahmins lose their caste by eating food
left or touched by people of a lower caste.

^In
this song Gauranga identifies himself with Krishna.

^In
this song Gauranga identifies himself with Krishna.


=== 29_durga_puja.htm ===

The Durga Puja Festival

←
Home
/ The Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna
/ Volume 2
/ →

THE DURGA PUJA FESTIVAL

Master's catholicity — Different paths for different temperaments —
Dogmatism condemned — Encouragement to Vijay — How to deal with
wicked people — Advice to householders — Difference between ordinary
men and Incarnations — Nature of the ever-perfect — Illustration of
homa bird — Discrimination about food — Master's divine madness —
Oneness of Sakti and Brahman — Knowledge and ignorance — Child
like faith — Danger of Tantrik discipline — Master's inner experiences

Friday, September 26, 1884

SRI RAMAKRISHNA had come to Calcutta. It
was the first day of the Durga
Puja, the great religious festival, and the Hindus of the metropolis
were celebrating it. The Master intended to visit the image of the
Divine
Mother at Adhar's house. He also wanted to see Shivanath, the Brahmo
devotee.

It was about midday. Umbrella in hand, M. was pacing the foot-path in
front of the Brahmo Samaj temple. Two hours had passed but the Master
had
not yet appeared. Now and then M. sat down on the steps of Dr.
Mahalnavish's
dispensary and watched the joy and mirth of the people, young and
old, who were celebrating the Puja.

A little after three the Master's carriage drove up. As soon as Sri
Ramakrishna
stepped out he saluted the temple of the Brahmo Samaj with folded
hands. Hazra and a few other devotees were with him. M. bowed before
the
Master and took the dust of his feet. The Master told him that he was
going
to Shivanath's house. A few minutes later several members of the Brahmo
Samaj came and took him to Shivanath's. But Shivanath was not at home.
Shortly afterwards Vijay Goswami, Mahalnavish, and several other Brahmo
leaders greeted the Master and took him inside the Brahmo temple.

Sri Ramakrishna was in a happy mood. He was given a seat below the
altar. There the Brahmo devotees sang their devotional music. Vijay and
the
Brahmo devotees sat in front of the Master.

MASTER (to Vijay, with a smile): "I
was told that you had put up a
'signboard' here that people belonging to other faiths are not allowed
to
come in. Narendra, too, said to me: 'You shouldn't go to the Brahmo
Samaj.
You had better visit Shivanath's house.'

"But I say that we are all calling on the same God. Jealousy and malice
need not be. Some say that God is formless, and some that God has form.
I say, let one man meditate on God with form if he believes in form,
and let
another meditate on the formless Deity if he does not believe in form.
What
I mean is that dogmatism is not good. It is not good to feel that my
religion
alone is true and other religions are false. The correct attitude is
this: My
religion is right, but I do not know whether other religions are right
or
wrong, true or false. I say this because one cannot know the
true-nature of
God unless one realizes Him. Kabir used to say: 'God with form is my
Mother, the Formless is my Father. Which shall I blame? Which shall I
praise? The two pans of the scales are equally heavy.'

"Hindus, Mussalmans, Christians, Saktas, Saivas, Vaishnavas, the
Brahmajnanis of the time of the rishis, and you, the Brahmajnanis of
modern
times, all seek the same object. A mother prepares dishes to suit the
stomachs
of her children. Suppose a mother has five children and a fish is
bought for
the family. She doesn't cook pilau or kalia for all of them. All have
not the
same power of digestion; so she prepares a simple stew for some. But
she
loves all her children equally.

"Do you know my attitude? I love all the preparations of fish. I have a
womanly nature. (All laugh.) I feel myself at home
with every dish — fried
fish, fish cooked with turmeric powder, pickled fish. And further, I
equally
relish rich preparations like fish-head, kalia, and pilau. (All
laugh.)

"Do you know what the truth is? God has made different religions to
suit
different aspirants, times, and countries. All doctrines are only so
many
paths; but a path is by no means God Himself. Indeed, one can reach God
if one follows any of the paths with whole-hearted devotion. Suppose
there
are errors in the religion that one has accepted; if one is sincere and
earnest,
then God Himself will correct those errors. Suppose a man has set out
with
a, sincere desire to visit Jagannath at Puri and by mistake has gone
north
instead of south; then certainly someone meeting him on the way will
tell
him: 'My good fellow, don't go that way. Go to the south.' And the man
will reach Jagannath sooner or later.

"If there are errors in other religions, that is none of our business.
God, to
whom the world belongs, takes care of that. Our duty is somehow to
visit
Jagannath. (To the Brahmos) The view you hold is
good indeed. You
describe God as formless. That is fine. One may eat a cake with icing,
either
straight or sidewise. It will taste sweet either way.

"But dogmatism is not good. You have no doubt heard the story of the
chameleon. A man entered a wood and saw a chameleon on a tree. He
reported to his friends, 'I have seen a red lizard.' He was firmly
convinced
that it was nothing but red. Another person, after visiting the tree,
said,
'I have seen a green lizard.' He was firmly convinced that it was
nothing but
green. But the man who lived under the tree said: 'What both of you
have
said is true. But the fact is that the creature is sometimes red,
sometimes
green, sometimes yellow, and sometimes has no colour at all.'

"God has been described in the Vedas as both with attributes and
without.
You describe Him as without form only. That is one-sided. But never
mind.
If you know one of His aspects truly, you will be able to know His
other
aspects too. God Himself will tell you all about them. (Pointing
to two or
three Brahmo devotees) Those who come to your Samaj know both
this
gentleman and that."

Vijay still belonged to the Sadharan Brahmo Samaj. He was a salaried
preacher of that organization but could not obey all its rules and
regulations.
He mixed with those who believed in God with form. This was creating a
misunderstanding between him and the Brahmo authorities. Many Brahmos
disapproved of his conduct. The Master suddenly looked at Vijay and
began to talk to him.

MASTER (to Vijay, smiling): "I
understand that they have been finding
fault with you for mixing with those who believe in God with form. Is
that
true? He who is a devotee of God must have an understanding that cannot
be shaken under any conditions. He must be like the anvil in a
blacksmith's
shop. It is constantly being struck by the hammer; still it is
unshaken. Bad
people may abuse you very much and speak ill of you; but you must bear
with them all if you sincerely seek God. Isn't it possible to think of
God in
the midst of the wicked? Just think of the rishis of ancient times.
They
used to meditate on God in the forest, surrounded on all sides by
tigers,
bears, and other ferocious beasts. Wicked men have the nature of tigers
and
bears. They will pursue you to do you an injury.

"One must be careful about these few things. First, an influential man
who has much money and many men under his control. He can injure you
if he wants; you must be careful while talking to him; perhaps you may
have to approve what he says. Second, a dog. When it chases you or
barks
at you, you must stand still, talk to it gently, and pacify it. Third,
a bull.
If it runs after you with lowered horns, you must calm it with a gentle
Voice. Fourth, a drunkard. If you arouse his anger, he will abuse you,
naming
fourteen generations of your family. You should say to him; 'Hello
uncle! How are you?' Then he will be mightily pleased and sit by you
and
smoke.

"In the presence of a wicked person I become alert. If such a man asks
me whether I have a pipe for smoking, I say, 'Yes, I have.' Some people
have the nature of a snake: they will bite you without warning. You
have
to discriminate a great deal in order to avoid the bite; otherwise your
passion
will be stirred up to such an extent that you will feel like doing
injury in
return. The companionship of a holy man is greatly needed now and then.
It enables one to discriminate between the Real and the unreal."

VIJAY: "I have no time, sir. I am entangled in my duties here."

MASTER: "You are a religious teacher. Others
have holidays, but not so a
religious teacher. When the manager of an estate brings order to one
part of
it, the landlord sends him to another part. So you have no leisure." (All
laugh.)

VIJAY (with folded hands): "Sir,
please give me your blessing."

MASTER: "Now you are talking like an
ignorant person. It is God alone who blesses."

VIJAY: "Revered sir, please give us some instruction."

The Master glanced around the Brahmo temple and said with a smile,
"This is nice too — a mixture of crystals and syrup.1
There are crystals, and there is syrup too.

"I have scored too many points and am therefore out of the game. (All
laugh.) Do you know the game called 'nax'? It is a game of
cards, and
anyone scoring above seventeen is out of the game. Those who score
fewer points
— say five, seven, or ten — are clever. I have scored too many and am
out of
the game.

"Once Keshab Sen gave a lecture at his house. I was present. Many
people were there. The ladies were seated behind the screen. Keshab, in
the
course of his talk, said, 'O God, please bless us that we may dive and
disappear
altogether in the river of bhakti.' I said to Keshab with a smile: 'If
you disappear altogether in the river of bhakti, then what will be the
fate of
those behind the screen? By all means dive into the river, but you had
better come back to dry land now and then. Don't disappear in the river
altogether.' At these words Keshab and the others burst out laughing.

"Never mind. One can realize God in the world, too, if only one is
sincere. 'I' and 'mine' — that is ignorance. But, 'O God! Thou and
Thine' —
that is knowledge.

"Live in the world like a maidservant in a rich man's house. She
performs
all the household duties, brings up her master's child, and speaks of
him as
'my Hari'. But in her heart she knows quite well that neither the house
nor
the child belongs to her. She performs all her duties, but just the
same her
mind dwells on her native place. Likewise, do your worldly duties but
fix
your mind on God. And know that house, family, and son do not belong to
you; they are God's. You are only His servant.

"I ask people to renounce mentally. I do not ask them to give up the
world. If one lives in the world unattached and seeks God with
sincerity,
then one is able to attain Him.

(To Vijay) "There was a time when I too would
meditate on God with
my eyes closed.2
Then I said to myself: 'Does God exist only when I think
of Him with my eyes closed? Doesn't He exist when I look around with my
eyes open?' Now, when I look around with my eyes open, I see that God
dwells in all beings. He is the Indwelling Spirit of all — men, animals
and
other living beings, trees and plants, sun and moon, land and water.

"Why do I seek Shivanath? He who meditates on God for many days has
substance in him, has divine power in him. Further, he who sings well,
plays well on a musical instrument, or has mastered any one art, has in
him
real substance and the power of God. This is the view of the Gita.
It is said
in the Chandi that he who is endowed with physical
beauty has in him
substance and the power of God. (To Vijay) Ah, what
a beautiful nature
Kedar has! No sooner does he come to me than he bursts into tears. His
eyes
are always red and swim in tears, like a chanabara in syrup."

VIJAY: "At Dacca he is constantly talking
about you. He is always eager to see you."

Sri Ramakrishna was about to depart. The Brahmo devotees bowed low
before him and he returned their salute. Then, getting into the
carriage, he
set out for Adhar's house to see the image of the Divine Mother.

Sunday, September 28, 1884

It was the day of the Mahashtami, the most auspicious day of the
worship
of Durga, the Divine Mother. At Adhar's invitation Sri Ramakrishna had
come to Calcutta to see the holy image at his house. Before going there
he
went to Ram's. Many devotees, including Narendra, Baburam, M.,
Niranjan,
Vijay, Kedar, Ram, and Surendra, were present. Balaram and Rakhal were
still at Vrindavan.

MASTER (looking at Vijay and Kedar, with a smile):
"This is a nice
reunion today. You two have the same spiritual mood. (To Vijay)
Well,
what about Shivanath? Did you — ?"

VIJAY: "Yes, sir, he heard that you had been to his house.
I haven't seen him, but I sent him word. He knows about it."

MASTER (to Vijay and the others): "Four
desires have come into my mind.
I shall eat fish curry cooked with egg-plant. I shall visit Shivanath.
The
devotees will repeat the name of Hari over their beads, and I shall
watch
them. And the Tantrik devotees will drink consecrated wine, eight
annas'
worth, on the ashtami3
day, and I shall watch them and salute them."

Narendra was seated in front of the Master. He was about twenty-two
years old. While Sri Ramakrishna was talking thus his eyes fell upon
his
beloved disciple. At once the Master stood up and went into samadhi. He
placed one foot on Narendra's knee. He was in a deep spiritual mood,
his
eyes unblinking, his mind completely unconscious of the outer world.
After
a long time he came down to the relative plane of consciousness; but he
still appeared dazed, for the intoxication of divine bliss had not
altogether
left him. Speaking to himself in that ecstatic state, he repeated the
name of
God He said: "Satchidananda! Satchidananda! Satchidananda! Shall I
repeat
that? No, it is the day of the Divine Mother, the Giver of the bliss of
divine
inebriation. O Mother, full of the bliss of divine inebriation! Sa, re,
ga, ma,
pa, dha, ni. It is not good to keep the voice on 'ni'. It is not
possible to keep
it there very long. I shall keep it on the next lower note.

"There are different planes of consciousness: the gross, the subtle,
the
causal, and the Great Cause. Entering the Mahakarana, the Great Cause,
one becomes silent; one cannot utter a word.

"But an Isvarakoti, after attaining the Great Cause, can come down
again
to the lower planes. Incarnations of God, and others like them, belong
to
the class of the Isvarakotis. They climb up, and they can also come
down.
They climb to the roof, and they can come down again by the stairs and
move about on a lower floor. It is a case of negation and affirmation.4
There is, for instance, the seven-storey palace of a king. Strangers
have access only
to the lower apartments; but the prince, who knows the palace to be his
own, can move up and down from floor to floor. There is a kind of
rocket
that throws out sparks in one pattern and then seems to go out. After a
moment it makes another pattern, and then still another. There is no
end to
the patterns it can make. But there is another kind of rocket that,
when it
is lighted, makes only a dull sound, throws out a few sparks, and then
goes out
altogether. Like this second kind, an ordinary jiva, after much
spiritual effort,
can go to a higher plane; but he cannot come down to tell others his
experiences.
After much effort he may go into samadhi; but he cannot climb
down from that state or tell others what he has seen there.

"There is a class of devotees, the nityasiddhas, the ever-perfect. From
their
very birth they seek God. They do not enjoy anything of the world. The
Vedas speak of the homa bird. It lives very high in the sky. There the
mother bird lays her egg. She lives so high that the egg falls for many
days.
While falling it is hatched. The chick continues to fall. That also
goes on for
many days. In the mean time the chick develops eyes. Coming near the
earth, it becomes conscious of the world. It realizes it will meet
certain death
if it hits the ground. Then it gives a shrill cry and shoots up toward
its
mother. The earth means death, and it frightens the young bird; it then
seeks its mother. She dwells high up in the sky, and the young bird
shoots
straight up in that direction. It doesn't look anywhere else.

"Those who are born as the companions of an Incarnation of God are
eternally perfect. For some of them that birth is the last.

(To Vijay) "You have both — yoga and bhoga. King
Janaka also had yoga
and bhoga. Therefore he is called a rajarshi, both king and seer.
Narada was
a devarshi, and Sukadeva a brahmarshi. Yes, Sukadeva was a brahmarshi.
He was not a mere jnani; he was the very embodiment of Jnana, Divine
Knowledge. Whom do I call a jnani? A man who has attained Knowledge
and has done so after much effort. Sukadeva was the very image of
Knowledge,
in other words, a form of concentrated Knowledge. He attained
Knowledge spontaneously, without any labour."

Saying this, Sri Ramakrishna came down to the normal mood. Then he
talked freely with the devotees. The Master asked Kedar to sing.

Kedar sang:

How shall I open my heart, O friend?

It is forbidden me to speak.

I am about to die, for lack of a kindred soul

To understand my misery. . . .

Kedar sang several other songs. After the music the Master
again talked
to the devotees. Nandalal, Keshab's nephew, was also present with a few
Brahmo friends. They were sitting near the Master.

MASTER (to Vijay and the other devotees): "A man
brought
a bottle of consecrated wine for me; but I couldn't even touch it."

VIJAY: "Ah!"

MASTER: "I become intoxicated at the mere thought of God. I don't have
to take any wine. I feel drunk at the very sight of the charanamrita.5
I feel as if I had drunk five bottles of liquor. When a person attains
such a state he
cannot help discriminating about food."

NARENDRA: "As regards food, one should take whatever comes."

MASTER: "What you say applies only to a particular state of the
aspirant's
mind. No food can harm a jnani. According to the Gita,
the jnani himself
does not eat; his eating is an offering to the Kundalini. But that does
not
apply to a bhakta. The present state of my mind is such that I cannot
eat
any food unless it is first offered to God by a brahmin priest.
Formerly my
state of mind was such that I would enjoy inhaling the smell of burning
corpses, carried by the wind from the other side of the Ganges. It
tasted very
sweet to me. But nowadays I cannot eat food touched by anybody and
everybody. No, I cannot. But once in a while I do. One day I was taken
to see
a performance of a play at Keshab's house. They gave me luchi and
curries
to eat. I didn't know whether the food was handed to me by a washerman
or a barber; but I ate quite a little. (All laugh.)
Rakhal had asked me to eat.
(To Narendra) "With you it is all right. You are in
'this' as well as in
'that'.6
You can eat everything now. (To the devotees)
Blessed is he who
feels longing for God, though he eats pork. But shame on him whose mind
dwells on 'woman and gold', though he eats the purest food — boiled
vegetables, rice, and ghee.

"Once I had a desire to eat dal cooked in a blacksmith's house. From my
childhood I had heard the blacksmiths say, 'Do the brahmins know how to
cook?' I ate the dal, but it smelt of the blacksmith. (All
laugh.)

"I received the Allah mantra7
from Govinda Rai. Rice was cooked for me with onions8
in the kuthi. I ate some. I ate curry in Mani Mallick's garden
house, but I felt a kind of repulsion to it.

"When I went to Kamarpukur, Ramlal's father was frightened. He
thought I might eat at any and every house. He was frightened to think
I
might be expelled from the caste; so I couldn't stay long. I came away.

"Both the Vedas and the Puranas describe pure food and conduct. But
what the Vedas and the Puranas ask people to shun as impure is extolled
by the Tantra as good.

"Oh, what a state of mind I passed through! I would open my mouth,
touching, as it were, heaven and the nether world with my jaws, and
utter
the word 'Ma'. I felt that I had seized the Mother, like a fisherman
dragging
fish in his net. Let me recite a song:

This time I shall devour Thee utterly. Mother Kali!

For I was born under an evil star,

And one so born becomes, they say, the eater of his mother.

Thou must devour me first, or I myself shall eat Thee up;

One or the other it must be.

I shall besmear my hands with black,9
and with black my face;

With black I shall besmear the whole of my body.

And when Death seizes me, with black I shall besmear his face.

O Mother, I shall eat Thee up but not digest Thee;

I shall install Thee in my heart

And make Thee offerings with my mind.

You may say that by eating Kali I shall embroil myself

With Kala,10
Her Husband, but I am not afraid;

Braving His anger, I shall chant my Mother's name.

To show the world that Ramprasad is Kali's rightful son,

Come what may, I shall eat Thee up — Thee and Thy retinue —

Or lose my life attempting it.

"I almost became mad — such was my longing for God."

Narendra began to sing:

O Mother, make me mad with Thy love!

What need have I of knowledge or reason? . . .

Listening to the song, the Master again went into samadhi.
Coming down
to the normal plane, he assumed the attitude of Girirani11
and sang the agamani. He sang, intoxicated with divine love:

Tell me, my Uma, how have you fared, alone in the Stranger's house? . .
.

He said to the devotees, "Today is the Mahashtami. The Mother
has come;
that is why I feel such an awakening of spiritual emotion."

KEDAR: "Lord, you are here. Are
you different from the Divine Mother?"

Sri Ramakrishna looked in another direction and sang in an
absent-minded
mood:

Ah, friend! I have not found Him yet, whose love has driven me
mad. . . .

Again he became ecstatic and sang of the Divine Mother. As he
sang
Vijay suddenly stood up crying the name of Hari. Sri Ramakrishna, full
of
divine love, began to dance with Vijay and the other devotees.

The music was over. The Master, Vijay, Narendra, and the other devotees
sat down. All eyes were fixed on Sri Ramakrishna, who began conversing
with the devotees. He asked about their health. Kedar spoke to him
humbly in a soft, sweet voice. Narendra, Chunilal, Ram, M., and Harish
were sitting by the Master.

KEDAR (humbly): "How can I get rid of my dizziness?"

MASTER (tenderly): "One gets that. I have had it
myself.
Use a little almond oil. I have heard that it cures dizziness."

KEDAR: "I shall, sir."

MASTER (to Chunilal): "Hello! How is everything?"

CHUNILAL: "Everything is all right with us now. Balaram Babu and
Rakhal are well at Vrindavan."

MASTER: "Why have you sent so many sweetmeats?
(To Harish) Wait a day or two before coming to
Dakshineswar. You are not well. You may fall
ill again there. (To Narayan, tenderly) Sit here.
Sit by me. Come to
Dakshineswar tomorrow and have your meal there. (Pointing to M.)
Come with
him. (To M.) What do you say?"

M. wanted to accompany Sri Ramakrishna to Dakshineswar that very day.
He became thoughtful.

Surendra stood near Sri Ramakrishna. He was in the habit of drinking
and
often went to excess. This had worried the Master greatly, but he had
not
asked Surendra to give up drinking altogether. He had said to him:
'.'Look
here, Surendra! Whenever you drink wine, offer it beforehand to the
Divine
Mother. See that your brain doesn't become clouded and that you don't
reel.
The more you think of the Divine Mother, the less you will like to
drink.
The Mother is the Giver of the bliss of divine inebriation. Realizing
Her,
one feels a natural bliss."

The Master looked at Surendra and said, "You have had a drink." With
these words he went into samadhi.

It was dusk. Regaining partial consciousness, the Master sang:

Behold my Mother playing with Siva, lost in an ecstasy of joy!

Drunk with a draught of celestial wine. She reels, and yet She
does not fall. . . .

Then he chanted the name of Hari, clapping his hands
occasionally. In
a sweet voice he said: "Hari! Hari! O mind, chant the name of Hari!
Sing
the name of Hari!" Then he chanted: "Rama! Rama Rama! Rama!"

Now the Master began to pray: "O Rama! O Rama! I am without devotion
and austerity, without knowledge and love; I have not performed any
religious rites. O Rama, I have taken refuge in Thee; I have taken
shelter
at Thy feet. I do not want creature comforts; I do not seek name and
fame.
O Rama, I do not crave the eight occult powers; I do not care for a
hundred
occult powers! I am Thy servant. I have taken refuge in Thee. Grant, O
Rama, that I may have pure love for Thy Lotus Feet; that I may not be
deluded by Thy world-bewitching maya! O Rama, I have taken refuge in
Thee."

As the Master prayed all eyes were turned toward him. Hearing his
piteous
voice, few could restrain their tears.

Ramchandra Dutta came in and stood near him.

MASTER: "Where have you been. Ram?"

RAM: "I was upstairs, sir."

Ram had been making arrangements for feeding the devotees on the roof
of the house.

MASTER (to Ram, with a smile): "Isn't it
better to stay down below than
to be high up? Water accumulates in low land but flows down from a high
mound."

RAM (with a smile): "That is true, sir."

Supper was ready on the roof. Sri Ramakrishna and the devotees were
taken there and sumptuously fed. Later the Master went to Adhar's house
with M., Niranjan, and others. The Divine Mother was being worshipped
there. It had been Adhar's earnest prayer that on this sacred day Sri
Ramakrishna might bless his house with his presence.

Monday, September 29, 1884

It was the third day of the Durga Puja. The Master had been
awake in
his room at Dakshineswar since early morning. The morning worship in
the Kali temple was over and the orchestra had played the morning
melodies
in the nahabat. Brahmins and gardeners, basket in hand, were plucking
flowers for the worship of the Divine Mother. Bhavanath, Baburam,
Niranjan,
and M. had spent the night at Dakshineswar, sleeping on the porch of
the Master's room. As soon as they awoke they saw Sri Ramakrishna
dancing
in an ecstatic mood. He was chanting: "Victory to Mother Durga!
Hallowed
be the name of Durga!" He was naked and looked like a child as he
chanted
the name of the Blissful Mother. After a few moments he said: "Oh, the
bliss of divine ecstasy! Oh, the bliss of divine drunkenness!" Then he
repeatedly chanted the name of Govinda: "O Govinda! My life! My soul!"

The devotees sat on their beds and with unwinking eyes watched Sri
Ramakrishna's spiritual mood. Hazra was living at the temple garden.
Latu
was also living there to render the Master personal service. Rakhal was
still
at Vrindavan. Narendra visited Sri Ramakrishna now and then. He was
expected that day.

The devotees washed their faces. The Master took his seat on a mat on
the north verandah. Bhavanath and M. sat beside him. Other devotees
were
coming in and out of the room.

MASTER (to Bhavanath): "The truth is
that ordinary men cannot easily
have faith. But an Isvarakoti's faith is spontaneous. Prahlada burst
into
tears while writing the letter 'ka'. (The first consonant
of the Sanskrit alphabet.) It reminded him of Krishna. It is the
nature of jivas to doubt. They say yes, no doubt, but —

"Hazra can never be persuaded to believe that Brahman and Sakti, that
Sakti and the Being endowed with Sakti, are one and the same. When the
Reality appears as Creator, Preserver, and Destroyer, we call It Sakti;
when
It is inactive, we call It Brahman. But really It is one and the same
thing—
indivisible. Fire naturally brings to mind its power to burn; and the
idea of
burning naturally brings to mind the idea of fire. It is impossible to
think of
the one without the other.

"So I prayed to the Divine Mother: 'O Mother! Hazra is trying to upset
the views of this place.("This place" refers to the Master
himself.) Either give him right understanding or take him
from here.' The next day he came to me and said, Yes, I agree with
you.'
He said that God exists everywhere as All-pervading Consciousness."

BHAVANATH (smiling): "Did what Hazra
said really make you suffer so much?"

MASTER: "You see, I am now in a different mood. I can't shout and carry
on heated discussions with people. I am not in a mood now to argue and
quarrel with Hazra. Hriday said to me at Jadu Mallick's garden house,
'Uncle, don't you want to keep me with you?'12
'No,' I said, 'I am no longer
in a mood to get into heated arguments with you.'

"What is knowledge and what is ignorance? A man is ignorant so long as
he feels that God is far away. He has knowledge when he knows that God
is here and everywhere.

"When a man has true knowledge he feels that everything is filled with
Consciousness. At Kamarpukur I used to talk to Shibu, (Shivaram,
a nephew of the Master.) who was then a
lad four or five years old. When the clouds rumbled and lightning
flashed,
Shibu would say to me: There, uncle! They're striking matches again!' (All
laugh.) One day I noticed him chasing grasshoppers by
himself. The leaves
rustled in the near-by trees. 'Hush! Hush!' he said to the leaves. 'I
want to
catch the grasshoppers.' He was a child and saw everything throbbing
with
consciousness. One cannot realize God without the faith that knows no
guile,
the simple faith of a child.

"Ah, what a state of mind I passed through! One day something bit me
while I was sitting in the grass. I was afraid it might have been a
snake, and
I didn't know what to do. I had heard that if a snake bites you again
immediately after its first bite, it takes back its own venom. At once
I set out
to discover the hole so that I might let the snake bite me again. While
I
was searching, a man said to me, 'What are you doing?' After listening
to
my story, he said, 'But the snake must bite in the very same place it
has
bitten before.' Thereupon I went away. Perhaps I had been bitten by a
scorpion or some other insect.

"I had heard from Ramlal that the autumn chill was good for one's
health. Ramlal had quoted a verse to support it. One day, as I was
returning
from Calcutta in a carriage, I stuck my head out of the window so that
I
might get all the chill. Then I fell ill." (All laugh.)

Sri Ramakrishna entered his room and sat down. His legs were a little
swollen. He asked the devotees to feel his legs and see whether or not
the
pressure of their fingers made dimples. Dimples did appear with the
pressure,
but the devotees said that it was nothing.

MASTER (to Bhavanath): "Please ask
Mahendra of Sinthi to see me. I shall feel better if he reassures me."

BHAVANATH (with a smile): "You have
great faith in medicine. But we haven't so much."

MASTER: "It is God who, as the doctor,
prescribes the medicine. It is He
who, in one form, has become the physician. Dr. Gangaprasad asked me
not
to drink water at night. I regarded his statement as the words of the
Vedas.
I look upon him as the physician of heaven."

Hazra entered the room and sat down. The Master talked awhile about
different things and then said to Hazra: "You see, many people were at
Ram's house yesterday. Vijay, Kedar, and others were there. But why did
I
feel so deeply stirred at the sight of Narendra? I found that Kedar
belonged
to the realm of Divine Inebriation."

Presently Narendra arrived, and Sri Ramakrishna was exceedingly happy.
Narendra saluted the Master and began to talk with Bhavanath and others
in the room. M. was seated near by. A long mat was spread on the floor.
While talking, Narendra lay on it flat on his stomach. The Master
looked
at him and suddenly went into samadhi. He sat on Narendra's back in an
ecstatic mood.

Bhavanath sang:

O Mother, ever blissful as Thou art,

Do not deprive Thy worthless child of bliss! . . .

Sri Ramakrishna came down from the plane of samadhi. He sang:

Repeat, O mind, my Mother Durga's hallowed name!

O Gauri! O Narayani! to Thee I bow.

Thou art the day, O Mother! Thou art the dusk and the night.

As Rama Thou drawest the bow, as Krishna Thou playest the flute;

As Kali all-terrible, Thou hast silenced Siva, Thy Lord.

The ten Embodiments13
of Divine Sakti art Thou,

And Thou the ten Avatars: this time save me Thou must!

With flowers and vilwa-leaves did Yasoda worship Thee,

And Thou didst bless her by placing Krishna, the Child, in her arms.

Wherever I chance to live, O Mother, in forest or grove,

May my mind, day and night, dwell at Thy Lotus Feet;

Whether at last I die a natural or sudden death,

Oh, may my tongue repeat Durga's name at the end!

Thou mayest send me away, O Mother, but where shall I go?

Tell me, Mother, where else shall I hear so sweet a name?

Thou mayest even say to me: "Step aside! Go away!"

Yet I shall cling to Thee, O Durga! Unto Thy feet

As Thine anklets I shall cling, making their tinkling sound.

When, O Mother, Thou sittest at mighty Siva's side,

Then I shall cry from Thy feet, "Victory unto Siva!"

Mother, when as the Kite14
Thou soarest in the sky,

There, in the water beneath, as a minnow I shall be swimming;

Upon me Thou wilt pounce, and pierce me through with Thy claws.

Thus, when the breath of life forsakes me in Thy grip,

Do not deny me the shelter of Thy Lotus Feet!

From the world's bondage free me, O Spouse of the Absolute!

Thy two feet are my boat to cross this world's dark sea.

Thou art the heavens and the earth, and Thou the nether world;

From Thee have the twelve Gopalas and Hari and Brahma sprung.

Whoever treads the path, repeating "Durga! Durga!"

Siva Himself protects with His almighty trident.

Hazra was sitting on the northeast verandah counting the beads
of his
rosary. The Master went and sat in front of him, taking the rosary in
his
own hands.

MASTER (to Hazra): "You see, I
cannot use the rosary. No, perhaps I can.
Yes, I can with my left hand. But I cannot repeat the name of God with
it."

With these words Sri Ramakrishna tried to perform a little japa. But
hardly had he begun when he went into samadhi. He sat in that state a
long time, still holding the rosary in his hand. The devotees looked at
him
with wonder in their eyes. Hazra also watched the Master without
uttering
a word. After a long time Sri Ramakrishna regained consciousness of the
outer world and said that he was hungry. He often said such things to
bring his mind down to the normal plane. M. was. going to bring
something
for him to eat. The Master said, "No, I shall first go to the Kali
temple."

He went across the cement courtyard toward the Kali temple. On the
way he bowed with folded hands to the twelve Siva temples. On the left
was the temple of Radhakanta. He went there first and bowed before the
image. Then he entered the Kali temple and saluted the Mother. Sitting
on a carpet, he offered flowers at the Mother's holy feet. He also
placed a
flower on his own head. While returning from the temple he asked
Bhavanath
to carry the green coconut offered at the temple, and the charanamrita.
Coming back to his room, accompanied by M. and Bhavanath, he saluted
Hazra, who cried out in dismay: "What are you doing, sir? What is
this?"
The Master said, "Why should you say it is wrong?" Hazra often argued
with the Master, declaring that God dwelt in all beings and that
everybody
could attain Brahmajnana through sadhana. He had an exaggerated idea of
his own spiritual progress.

It was about noon. The gong and the bells announced the worship and
offering in the various temples. The brahmins, the Vaishnavas, and the
beggars
went to the guest-house to have their midday meal. The devotees of the
Master were also to partake of the sacred offerings. He asked them to
go to
the guest-house. To Narendra he said: "Won't you take your meal in my
room? All right. Narendra and I will eat here." Bhavanath, Baburam, M.,
and the other devotees went to the guest-house.

After his meal Sri Ramakrishna rested a few minutes. The devotees were
on the verandah engaged in light conversation. He soon joined them and
was happy in their company. It was about two o'clock. All were still
sitting
on the verandah, when suddenly Bhavanath appeared in the garb of a
brahmachari, dressed in an ochre cloth, kamandalu in hand, his face
beaming
with smiles.

MASTER (with a smile): "That is his
inner feeling. Therefore he has dressed himself as a brahmachari."

NARENDRA: "He has put on the garb of a
brahmachari; let me put on the garb of a Tantrik worshipper."

HAZRA: "Then you will have to follow the
Tantrik rituals, with women, wine, and so on."

Sri Ramakrishna did not encourage the conversation. Indeed, he made
fun of it.

Suddenly the Master began to dance in an ecstatic mood. He sang:

Mother, Thou canst not trick me any more,

For I have seen Thy crimson Lotus Feet. . . .

The Master said: "Ah, how wonderfully Rajnarayan sings about
the
Divine Mother! He sings and dances that way. The music of Nakur Acharya
at Kamarpukur is also wonderful. Ah, how beautiful his singing and
dancing
are!

A sadhu was staying at the Panchavati. But he was a hot-tempered man;
he scolded and cursed everyone. He came to the Master's room wearing
wooden sandals and asked the Master, "Can I get fire here?" Sri
Ramakrishna
saluted him and stood with folded hands as long as he remained
in the room.

When he had left, Bhavanath said to the Master with a laugh, "What
great respect you showed the sadhu!"

MASTER (smiling): "You see, he too
is Narayana, though full of tamas.
This is the way one should please people who have an excess of tamas.
Besides, he is a sadhu."

The devotees were engaged in a game of golakdham.15
Hazra joined
them. The Master stood by, watching them play. M. and Kishori reached
"heaven". Sri Ramakrishna bowed before them and said, "Blessed are you
two brothers." He said to M., aside, "Don't play any more." Hazra fell
into
"hell". The Master said: "What's the matter with Hazra? Again!" No
sooner
had Hazra got out of "hell" than he fell into it again. All burst into
laughter.
Latu, at the first throw of the dice, went to "heaven" from "earth". He
began
to cut capers of joy. "See Latu's joy!" said the Master. "He would have
been terribly sad if he hadn't achieved this. (Aside to the
devotees)
This too has a meaning. Hazra is so vain that he thinks he will triumph
over all even
in this game. This is the law of God, that He never humiliates a
righteous
person. Such a man is victorious everywhere."

Sri Ramakrishna was sitting on the small couch in his room. Narendra,
Baburam, Bhavanath, and M. were sitting on the floor. Narendra referred
to various religious sects — the Ghoshpara, Panchanami, and others. Sri
Ramakrishna described their views and condemned their immoral
practices. He
said that they could not follow the right course of spiritual
discipline, but
enjoyed sensuous pleasures in the name of religion.

MASTER (to Narendra): "You need not
listen to these things. The bhairavas
and the bhairavis of the Tantrik sect also follow this kind of
discipline.
While in Benares I was taken to one of their mystic circles. Each
bhairava
had a bhairavi with him. I was asked to drink the consecrated wine, but
I
said I couldn't touch wine. They drank it. I thought perhaps they would
then practise meditation and japa. But nothing of the sort. They began
to
dance. I was afraid they might fall into the Ganges: the circle had
been
made on its bank. It is very honourable for husband and wife to assume
the
roles of bhairava and bhairavi.

(To Narendra and the others) "Let me tell you this.
I regard woman as
my mother; I regard myself as her son. This is a very pure attitude.
There
is no danger in it. To look on woman as a sister is also not bad. But
to
assume the attitude of a 'hero', to look on woman as one's mistress, is
the
most difficult discipline. Tarak's father followed this discipline. It
is very
difficult. In this form of sadhana one cannot always maintain the right
attitude.

"There are various paths to reach God. Each view is a path. It is like
reaching the Kali temple by different roads. But it must be said that
some
paths are clean and some dirty. It is good to travel on a clean path.

"Many views, many paths — and I have seen them all. But I don't enjoy
them any more; they all quarrel.

"No one else is here, and you are my own people. Let me tell you
something.
I have come to the final realization that God is the Whole and I am
a part of Him, that God is the Master and I am His servant.
Furthermore,
I think every now and then that He is I and I am He."

The devotees listened to these words in deep silence.

BHAVANATH (humbly): "I feel
disturbed if I have a misunderstanding
with someone. I feel that in that case I am not able to love all."

MASTER: "Try at the outset to talk to him and establish a friendly
relationship with him. If you fail in spite of your efforts, then don't
give it
another thought. Take refuge in God. Meditate on Him. There is no use
in giving up God and feeling depressed from thinking about others."

BHAVANATH: "Great souls, such as Christ
and Chaitanya, have admonished us to love all beings."

MASTER: "Love you must, because God dwells in all beings.
But salute a wicked person from a distance. You speak of Chaitanya? He
also used to
restrain his spiritual feeling in the presence of unsympathetic people.
At
Srivas's house he put Srivas's mother-in-law out of the room, dragging
her out
by the hair."

BHAVANATH: "It was not he but others who did it."

MASTER: "Could the others have done it without his approval? What can
be done? Suppose a man cannot make another love him; must he worry
about it day and night? Must I waste my mind, which should be given to
God, on useless, things? I say: 'O Mother, I don't want Narendra,
Bhavanath,
Rakhal, or anybody. I seek Thee alone. What shall I do with man?'

When the Blissful Mother comes to my house, how much of the Chandi
I shall hear!

How many monks will come here, and how many yogis with matted locks!

"When I attain God I shall attain everything. I renounced gold
and silver,
saying, 'Rupee is clay and clay is rupee; gold is clay and clay is
gold.' With
these words I threw gold, silver, and clay into the Ganges. Then I was
afraid at the thought that Mother Lakshmi might be angry with me
because
I had treated Her wealth with contempt; that She might even stop my
meals.
So I prayed to the Divine Mother, 'O Mother, I want Thee and nothing
else.' I knew that by realizing Her I should get everything."

BHAVANATH (smiling): "This is the
shrewd calculation of a business man."

MASTER (smiling): "Yes, that is so.
Once the Lord was pleased with a
certain devotee. He appeared before him and said: 'I am very much
pleased
with your austerities. Ask a boon of Me.' The devotee said, 'O Lord, if
You
are gracious enough to give me a boon, then please grant that I may eat
from gold plates with my grandchildren.' One boon covered many things —
wealth, children, and grandchildren." (All laugh.)

Hazra was sitting on the verandah.

MASTER: "Do you know what Hazra wants? He wants
money. His family
is in distress; he has debts. He thinks that God will give him money
because
he devotes himself to japa and meditation."

A DEVOTEE: "Can't God fulfil a devotee's desire?"

MASTER: "If it is His sweet will. But God doesn't
take entire responsibility
for a devotee unless the devotee is completely intoxicated with
ecstatic love
for Him. At a feast it is only a child whom one takes by the hand and
seats
at his place. Who does that with older people? Not until a man thinks
so
much of God that he cannot look after himself does God take on his
responsibilities.
Hazra doesn't inquire about his family. His son said to Ramlal:
'Please ask father to come home. We shall not ask anything of him.'
These
words almost brought tears to my eyes. Hazra's mother said to Ramlal:
'Please ask Pratap (Hazra.) to come home just once.
Also ask your uncle (The Master.) to request
him to come home.' I told him about it, but he didn't listen to me.

"Is a mother to be trifled with? Before becoming a sannyasi
Chaitanyadeva
worked hard to persuade his mother to let him renounce home. Mother
Sachi said that she would kill Keshab Bharati.16
Chaitanyadeva did his
utmost to persuade her. He said: 'Mother, I shall not renounce home if
you
won't let me. But if you compel me to lead a householder's life, I
shall die.
And, mother, even if I go away as a sannyasi, you will be able to see
me
whenever you desire. I shall stay near you. I shall see you every now
and
then.' Only when Chaitanya explained it to her thus did she give her
permission.
Narada could not go to the forest to practise austerity as long as his
mother was alive. He had to take care of her. After her death he went
away
to realize God.

"When I went to Vrindavan I felt no desire to return to Calcutta. It
was
arranged that I should live with Gangama. (A great
woman saint of vrindavan..) Everything was settled. My
bed was to be on one side and Gangama's on the other. I resolved not to
go
back to Calcutta. I said to myself, 'How long must I eat a kaivarta's17
food?' 'No,' said Hriday to me, 'let us go to Calcutta.' He pulled me
by one hand
and Gangama pulled me by the other. I felt an intense desire to live at
Vrindavan. But just then I remembered my mother. That completely
changed
everything. She was old. I said to myself: 'My devotion to God will
take to
its wings if I have to worry about my mother. I would rather live with
her.
Then I shall have peace of mind and be able to meditate on God.'

(To Narendra) "Why don't you say a few Words to
Hazra about going
home? The other day he said to me, 'Yes, I shall go home and stay there
three days.' But now he has forgotten all about it.

(To the devotees) "We have talked about filthy
things — Ghoshpara and
things like that. Govinda! Govinda! Govinda! Now chant the name of
Hari.
Let there be a dish of rice pudding and sweets after the ordinary
lentils."

Narendra began to sing:

Fasten your mind, O man, on the Primal Purusha,

Who is the Cause of all causes,

The Stainless One, the Beginningless Truth.

As Prana He pervades the infinite universe;

The man of faith beholds Him,

Living, resplendent, the Root of all.

Beyond the senses, eternal, the Essence of Consciousness,

He shines in the cave of the heart,

Adorned with Holiness, Wisdom, and Love;

By meditating on Him, man is delivered from grief.

Of countenance ever serene,

An inexhaustible Ocean of Virtue,

None can fathom His depths; yet freely, of His own grace,

Does He reveal Himself

To those who come to His feet for shelter,

Merciful since they are helpless and He is the Ever-forgiving,

The Giver of happiness,

The Ready Help in the sea of our woe.

Unswervingly just, bestowing the fruits of our deeds, good and ill,

Yet is He the Fount of Compassion,

The Ocean of Mercy brimming with Love;

Even to hear of His glory suffuses the eyes with tears.

Gaze on His face and be blest:

Your heart is hungry for Him, O man!

Bright with unspeakable beauty, peerless and without stain,

No words can ever describe Him;

Be as a beggar before His gate

And worship Him day and night, beseeching Him for His grace.

He sang again:

In Wisdom's firmament the moon of Love is rising full,

And Love's flood-tide, in surging waves, is flowing everywhere.

O Lord, how full of bliss Thou art! Victory unto Thee!

On every side shine devotees, like stars around the moon;

Their Friend, the Lord All-merciful, joyously plays with them.

Behold! the gates of paradise today are open wide. . . .

Sri Ramakrishna was dancing in a circle. The devotees joined
him. They
all sang and danced. Their bliss was indescribable. The Master sang
about
the Divine Mother:

Behold my Mother playing with Siva, lost in an ecstasy of joy! . . .

Sri Ramakrishna was highly pleased because M. had joined in
the music.
He said to M., with a smile, "The atmosphere would have been more
intense
with divine fervour if a drum had accompanied the music and played:
'Tak tak ta dhina! Dak dak da dhina!'"

It was dusk when the kirtan was finished.

Wednesday, October 1, 1884

Sri Ramakrishna had set out from Dakshineswar for Adhar's house in
Calcutta. Narayan and Gangadhar were with him. In the carriage, in an
ecstatic mood, he said: "Shall I count the beads? How shameful that
would
be! This emblem of Siva has sprung from the bowels of the earth; it is
self-created and not set up by man's hands."

They arrived at Adhar's house, where many devotees, including Kedar,
Baburam, and Vijay, had assembled. Vaishnavcharan, the musician, was
present. At the Master's behest, Adhar heard Vaishnavcharan's music
daily
after his return from the office.

When the Master entered Adhar's drawing-room the devotees stood up to
receive him. Kedar and Vijay saluted him, and the Master asked Narayan
and Baburam to salute Kedar and Vijay. He asked Kedar and Vijay to
bless Narayan and Baburam that they might have devotion to God.
Pointing
to Narayan he said, "He is utterly guileless." The eyes of the devotees
were
fixed on the two boys.

MASTER (to Kedar and, the other devotees):
"It is good that I have met
you all here; otherwise perhaps you would have come to the Kali temple
to
see me. Through the will of God, however, we have met here."

KEDAR (with folded, hands): "The
will of God! It is all your will."

Sri Ramakrishna smiled. Vaishnavcharan began a kirtan about Radha and
Krishna. When the music was nearing its end, with the union of Radha
and Krishna, the Master began to dance with ecstatic fervour. The
devotees
danced and sang around him. After the music they all sat down. The
Master said to Vijay, referring to Vaishnavcharan, "He sings very
well." He
asked the musician to sing the song about Sri Chaitanya, beginning with
the
line, "The beautiful Gauranga, the youthful dancer, fair as molten
gold."

When the song was over, the Master asked Vijay, "How did you like it?"

VIJAY: "Wonderful."

Sri Ramakrishna also sang a song about Sri Chaitanya, M. joining him.
Then Vaishnavcharan sang another song:

O my flute, sing Hari's name!

You cannot know the highest Truth

Without Lord Hari's grace.

His name removes our bitter grief;

Repeat the name of Hari, then,

Repeat Sri Krishna's holy name!

If He bestows His grace on me,

No longer shall I be afraid

Of this unfriendly world;

Sing then Lord Hari's name, my flute!

Our only treasure is His name.

Govinda says: Behold, my days

Are passing by in vain;

In the world's deep and shoreless sea,

Oh, let me not be drowned!

Vaishnavcharan sang again, this time about Mother Durga:

O tongue, always repeat the name of Mother Durga;

Who but your Mother Durga will save you in distress? . . .

The Master and the musician sang again and again the following
lines
from the song:

The moving and the unmoving, the gross and the subtle, art Thou;

Creation and preservation art Thou, and the last dissolution.

Thou art the Primal Root of this manifold universe;

The Mother of the three worlds, their only Saviour, art Thou;

Thou art the Sakti of all, and Thou Thine own Sakti, too.

Kedar and several devotees stood up. They were about to return
home.
Kedar saluted the Master and bade him good-bye.

MASTER: "Should you go away without bidding Adhar good-bye? Wouldn't
that be an act of discourtesy?"

KEDAR: "'When God is pleased, the world is pleased.'
You are staying;
so in a sense we are all staying. I am not feeling well. Besides, I am
a little
nervous about my social conventions.18
Once before I had trouble with our community."

VIJAY (pointing to the Master): "Should we go away
and leave him here?"

Just then Adhar came in to take the Master to the dining-room, for the
meal was ready. Sri Ramakrishna stood up and said, addressing Kedar and
Vijay: "Come. Come with me." They followed him and partook of the
dinner together with the other devotees.

After dinner they all returned to the drawing-room, where the devotees
sat around the Master. Kedar said to him with folded hands, "Please
forgive
me for hesitating to eat here." Perhaps the thought had come to his
mind
that he should not have hesitated, since the Master himself had no
scruples
about eating at Adhar's house.

Kedar worked at Dacca. Many devotees brought offerings of sweets and
other food for him. Referring to this, Kedar said to the Master:
"People
want to give me food. What should I do? Lord, what is your command in
this matter?"

MASTER: "One can eat food even from an
untouchable if the untouchable
is a devotee of God. After spending seven years in a God-intoxicated
state
at Dakshineswar, I visited Kamarpukur. Oh, what a state of mind I was
in
at that time! Even a prostitute fed me with her own hands. But I cannot
allow that now."

Kedar was about to take his leave.

KEDAR (in a low voice): "Lord, please
transmit power to me. Many people come to me. What do I know?"

MASTER: "Everything will be all right. One
gets along well if one is sincerely devoted to God."

Yogendra, the editor of a Bengali paper, the Bangavasi,
entered the room.
The conversation turned to the Personal God and God without form.

MASTER: "God has form; again, He is
formless. How many aspects He has!
We cannot comprehend Him. Why should we say that God is formless only?"

YOGENDRA: "That is the one amazing thing about the Brahmo Samaj.
There even a boy twelve years old sees God as formless. The members of
the
Adi Samaj (A branch of the Brahmo Samaj.) do not object very
much to God with form. They are allowed to
attend ritualistic worship if it takes place in respectable families."

MASTER (smiling): "How nicely he has put it!
Even a boy sees the formless God!"

ADHAR: "Shivanath Babu does not believe in God's forms."

VIJAY: "That is his mistake. (Pointing to the Master)
As he says,
the chameleon assumes different colours — now this colour, now that.
Only the
man who lives under the tree knows the animal's true colour.

"While meditating I saw images of gods painted on a canvas. How many
gods! How many different things they said! I said to myself: 'I shall
go to
the Master. He will explain it all to me.'"

MASTER: "You saw correctly."

KEDAR: "God assumes forms for the sake of
His devotees. Through ecstatic
love a devotee sees God with form. Dhruva had a vision of the Lord. He
said: 'Why don't, Your ear-rings move?' The Lord said, 'They will move
if
you move them.'"

MASTER: "One must accept everything: God
with form and God without
form. While meditating in the Kali temple I noticed Ramani, a
prostitute.
I said, 'Mother, I see that Thou art in that form too.' Therefore I say
one
must accept everything. One does not know when or how God will reveal
Himself."

The Master sang:

A mendicant has come to us, ever absorbed in divine moods. . . .

VIJAY: "God has infinite power. Can He not
reveal Himself in any form
He chooses? Man is a speck of dust, and he dares come to a conclusion
about
God. How amazing!"

MASTER: "A man reads a little of the
Gita, the Bhagavata, or the
Vedanta
and thinks he has understood everything. Once an ant went to a hill of
sugar.
One grain of sugar filled its stomach, and it was returning home with
another
grain in its mouth. On the way it said to itself, 'Next time I go, I
shall bring
home the whole hill.'" (All laugh.)

^That
is to say, a mixture of worldly and spiritual ideals. The allusion is
to the
practice of keeping molasses in an earthen jar with a small hole at the
bottom; the
watery part slowly leaks out and crystals are formed inside.

^An
allusion to the Brahmo way of meditating on God.

^The
eighth day of either half of the lunar month, an auspicious day for the
followers of Tantra.

^That
is to say, the aspirant at first negates the world on account of its
not being
God; but after divine realization he accepts the same world as the
manifestation of
God Himself.

^The
water in which the image of the Deity is bathed; it is considered very
sacred.

^That
is to say, Narendra was attentive both to the world and to the
spiritual life.

^The
Master was referring to his initiation into Islam.

^The
Mussalmans generally relish onions, which are forbidden to orthodox
brahmins.

^Black
is the colour of Kali's complexion.

^Siva,
the Absolute.

^Consort
of King Himalaya and mother of Uma.

^Hriday,
the Master's nephew, had taken care of him for many years. During
the latter part of his stay at Dakshineswar he had treated the Master
harshly and
often spoken rudely to him. Finally he had incurred the displeasure of
the temple
authorities. He was driven out and was not allowed to set foot in the
temple garden
again.

^The
Mahavidyas, or Powers, of the Divine Mother.

^According
to Hindu mythology the Divine Mother at one time took the form of
a bird similar to the kite.

^A
game in which the player tries to get to "heaven" by passing through
different "planes"; but on each false step he falls into a particular
"hell".

^The
guru who initiated Chaitanya into monastic life.

^A
reference to the proprietors of the Dakshineswar temple, who belonged
to
the fisherman caste, considered low in Hindu society.

^Adhar
belonged to a lower caste. Kednr, a brahmin, could not dine with him
or eat at his home.


=== 30_master_in_various_moods.htm ===

The Master in Various Moods

←
Home
/ The Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna
/ Volume 2
/ →

THE MASTER IN VARIOUS MOODS

Inscrutability of God's ways — Two ways of yoga — Efficacy of
bhakti-yoga — Householder's duty — Complete renunciation for religious
teachers — Hard rules for a sannyasi — About Keshab and Vijay —
Praise of guilelessness and purity — Master's guilelessness — Nature of
Brahman — What happens after death — Maya hides Knowledge —
Master's renunciation — Liberation — Path of devotion for Kaliyuga —
Power of inborn tendencies — Various forms of divine love —
Chaitanya's spiritual moods — Practice of Japa — Master with Brahmo
devotees — Hazra's eccentricities — Master's attitude toward women —
Physical signs indicating character — Master and Nilkantha.

Thursday, October 2, 1884

SRI RAMAKRISHNA was sitting in his room
at Dakshineswar. Latu, Ramlal,
Harish, and Hazra were living with him at the temple garden.
Baburam spent a day or two with him now and then.

Manilal Mallick, Priya Mukherji and his relative Hari, a bearded Brahmo
devotee from Shibpur, and several Marwari devotees from Calcutta were
in the Master's room. Manilal was an old member of the Brahmo Samaj.

MASTER (to Manila and the others): "It is wise
to salute a person mentally.
What need is there of touching his feet? Mental salutation doesn't
embarrass anybody.

"The attitude that my religion alone is right and all other religions
are
false is not good. I see that God Himself has become all these: men,
images,
and salagram. I see one alone in all these; I do not see two. I see
only one.

"Many people think that their opinion alone is right and others'
opinions
are wrong; that they alone have won and others have lost. But a person
who
has gone forward may be detained by some slight obstacle, and someone
who has been lagging behind may then steal a march on him. In the game
of golakdham one may advance a great deal, but still somehow one's
piece
may fail to reach the goal.

"Triumph or defeat is in the hands of God. We cannot understand His
ways. You must have noticed that the green coconut remains high in the
tree and is exposed to the sun, but still its milk is cool. On the
other hand
the paniphal (A kind of aquatic fruit.) remains in
the water, but when eaten it heats the body.

"Look at the body of man. The head is the root, and it is at the top."

MANILAL: "What then is our duty?"

MASTER: "To remain somehow united with God. There are two ways:
karmayoga and manoyoga. Householders practise yoga through karma, the
performance of duty. There are four stages of life: brahmacharya,
garhasthya,
vanaprastha, and sannyas. Sannyasis must renounce those karmas which
are
performed with special ends in view; but they should perform the daily
obligatory karmas, giving up all desire for results. Sannyasis are
united with
God by such karmas as the acceptance of the staff, the receiving of
alms,
going on pilgrimage, and the performance of worship and japa.

"It doesn't matter what kind of action you are engaged in. You can be
united with God through any action provided that, performing it, you
give
up all desire for its result.

"There is the other path: manoyoga. A yogi practising this discipline
doesn't show any outward sign. He is inwardly united with God. Take
Jadabharata and Sukadeva, for instance. There are many other yogis of
this
class, but these two are well known. They shave neither hair nor beard.

"All actions drop away when a man reaches the stage of the paramahamsa.
He always remembers the ideal and meditates on it. He is always united
with God in his mind. If he ever performs an action it is to teach men.

"A man may be united with God either through action or through
inwardness
of thought, but he can know everything through bhakti. Through
bhakti one spontaneously experiences kumbhaka. The nerve currents and
breathing calm down when the mind is concentrated. Again, the mind is
concentrated when the nerve currents and breathing calm down. Then the
buddhi, the discriminating power, becomes steady. The man who achieves
this state is not himself aware of it.

"One can attain everything through bhaktiyoga. I wept before the Mother
and prayed, 'O Mother, please tell me, please reveal to me, what the
yogis
have realized through yoga and the jnanis through discrimination.' And
the
Mother has revealed everything to me. She reveals everything if the
devotee
cries to Her with a yearning heart. She has shown me everything that is
in
the Vedas, the Vedanta, the Puranas, and the Tantra."

MANILAL: "And what about hathayoga?"

MASTER: "The hathayogis identify themselves
with their bodies. They
practise internal washing and similar disciplines, and devote
themselves
only to the care of the body. Their ideal is to increase longevity.
They serve
the body day and night. That is not good.

"What is your duty? You should renounce 'woman and gold' mentally.
You cannot look on the world as crow-droppings.

"The goswamis are householders. Therefore I said to them: 'You have
your duties in the temple; how can you renounce the world? You cannot
explain away the world as maya.'

"Chaitanyadeva said that the duties of householders were kindness to
living beings, service to the Vaishnavas, and the chanting of God's
holy name.

"Keshab Sen once said about me: 'Now he asks us to hold to both — God
and the world. But one day he will sting us.' No, that is not true. Why
should I sting?"

MANI MALLICK:
"But, sir, you do."

MASTER (smiling): "How so? You are a
householder. Why should you renounce?

"But the renunciation of the world is needful for those whom God wants
to be teachers of men. One who is an acharya should give up 'woman and
gold'; otherwise people will not take his advice. It is not enough for
him to
renounce only mentally; he should also renounce outwardly. Only then
will
his teaching bear fruit. Otherwise people will think, 'Though he asks
us to
give up "woman and gold", he enjoys them himself in secret.'

"A physician prescribed medicine for a patient and said to him, 'Come
another day and I'll give you directions about diet.' The physician had
several jars of molasses in his room that day. The patient lived very
far
away. He visited the physician later and the physician said to him: 'Be
careful about your food. It is not good for you to eat molasses.' After
the
patient left, another person who was there said to the physician: 'Why
did
you give him all the trouble of coming here again? You could very well
have given him the instructions the first day.' The physician replied
with a
smile: 'There is a reason. I had several jars of molasses in my room
that day.
If I had asked the patient then to give up molasses, he would not have
had
faith in my words. He would have thought: "He has so many jars of
molasses in his room, he must eat some of it. Then molasses can't be so
bad." Today I have hidden the jars. Now he will have faith in my words.'

"I have seen the acharya of the Adi Brahmo Samaj. I understand that he
has married for the second or third time. He has grown-up children. And
such men are teachers! If they say, 'God is real and all else
illusory', who will
believe them? You can very well understand who will be their disciples.

"Like teacher, like disciple. Even if a sannyasi renounces 'woman and
gold' mentally, but lives with them outwardly, he cannot be a teacher
of
men. People will say that he enjoys 'molasses' secretly.

"Once Mahendra Kaviraj of Sinthi gave five rupees to Ramlal. I didn't
know about it. When Ramlal told me about the money, I asked him, 'For
whom was the money given?' He said it was for me. At first I thought
that
I should use it to pay what I owed for my milk. But will you believe
me? I
had slept only a little while when I suddenly woke up writhing with
pain,
as if a cat were scratching my chest. I went to Ramlal and asked him
again,
'Was the money given for your aunt?' (The Holy Mother,
his wife.) 'No', Ramlal answered. Thereupon
I said to him, 'Go at once and return the money.' Ramlal gave it back
the
next day.

"Do you know how it looks for a sannyasi to accept money or to be
attached to an object of temptation? It is as if a brahmin widow who
had
practised continence and lived on simple boiled rice and vegetables and
milk for many years, were suddenly to accept an untouchable as her
paramour.
(All look stunned.)

"There was a low-caste woman named Bhagi Teli in our part of the
country. She had many disciples and devotees. Finding that she, a
sudra,
was being saluted by people, the landlord became jealous and engaged a
wicked man to tempt her. He succeeded in corrupting her and all her
spiritual practice came to nothing. A fallen sannyasi is like that.

"You are leading householders lives. It is necessary for you to live in
the
company of holy men. First of all, the company of holy men; then
sraddha,
faith in God.

"How can people have reverence and faith in God if the holy men do not
sing His name and glories? People respect a man if they know that in
his
family there have been royal ministers for three generations.

(To M.) "Even if one has attained Knowledge, one
must still constantly
practise God-Consciousness. Nangta used to say: 'What is the use of
polishing
the outside of a metal pot one day only? If you don't polish it
regularly
it will get tarnished again.' I shall have to go to your house some
time. If I
know your house I can meet other devotees there. Please go to see Ishan
some time.

(To Manilal) "Keshab Sen's mother came here the
other day. The young
boys of her family sang the name of Hari. She went around them clapping
her hands. I noticed she was not very much stricken with grief over
Keshab's death. She observed the fast of ekadasi here and counted her
beads.
I was pleased to see her devotion to God."

MANILAL: "Ramkamal Sen, Keshab Babu's
grandfather, was a devotee
of God. He used to sit in a tulsi-grove and repeat God's holy name.
Pyarimohan,
Keshab's father, was also a Vaishnava devotee."

MASTER: "The son could not have been so devoted to God if the father
had not been like that. Look at Vijay. His father would become
unconscious
of the world in divine ecstasy while reading the Bhagavata.
Vijay can hardly
control his emotion: while uttering Hari's name, he sometimes stands up
from his seat. The forms of God that Vijay sees nowadays are all real.
Speaking about the different aspects of God, formless and with form,
Vijay
said that God sometimes appears with attributes and sometimes without
attributes. He gave the example of the chameleon, which sometimes turns
red, sometimes blue, sometimes green, and sometimes remains colourless.

"Vijay is really guileless. One cannot realize God without being
guileless
and liberal-minded. Yesterday Vijay was at Adhar Sen's house. He
behaved
as if it were his own place and those who lived there his own people.
One
cannot be guileless and liberal-minded unless one is free from
worldliness."

Then the Master sang:

You will attain that priceless Treasure when your mind is free from
stain. . . .

He continued: "You cannot make a pot without first carefully preparing
the clay. The pot will crack if the clay contains particles or sand or
stone.
That is why the potter first prepares the clay by removing the sand and
stones.

"If a mirror is covered with dirt, it won't reflect one's face. A man
cannot
realize his true Self unless his heart is pure. You will find
guilelessness
wherever God incarnates Himself as man. Nandaghosh, Dasaratha, Vasudeva
— all of them were guileless.

'The Vedanta says that a man does not even desire to know God unless he
has a pure mind. One cannot be guileless and liberal-minded without
much
tapasya or unless it is one's last birth."

Sri Ramakrishna was worrying, like a child, because he thought his legs
were slightly swollen. Mahendra Kaviraj of Sinthi entered the room and
saluted the Master.

MASTER (to the devotees): "Yesterday I said to
Naran,
'Just press your
leg and see if there is any dimple.' He pressed it and there was one.
Then I
gave a sigh of relief. (To Mukherji) Will you please
press your leg? Is
there any dimple?"

MUKHERJI: "Yes, sir."

MASTER: "Ah, what a relief!"

MANI MALLICK:
"Why should you worry about it, sir? Please take your
bath in the river. Why should you take medicine?"

MASTER: "No, sir. You have strong blood.
Your case is different. The
Divine Mother has placed me in the state of a child. One day I was
bitten
by something in the jungle. I had heard people say that, in case of
snake-bite,
the poison would come out if the snake bit again. So I put my hand in
a hole and waited. A man passing by said to me: 'What are you doing?
You
will get rid of the poison only if the snake bites again in the same
place. You
will not be cured if the snake bites another part of your body.'

"I was told that the autumn dew was good. One day, while coming from
Calcutta, I stuck my head out of the carriage and exposed it to the
damp
air. (All laugh.)

(To Mahendra of Sinthi) "That pundit from Sinthi is
very good. He holds
a title for his scholarship. He respects me. I said to him, 'You have
read
a great deal; but give up the vanity that you are a scholar.' That made
him
very happy. I discussed Vedanta with him.

(To M.) "That which is Pure Atman is unattached.
Maya, or avidya, is
in It. In maya there are three gunas: sattva, rajas, and tamas. These
three
gunas also exist in the Pure Atman. But Atman Itself is unattached. If
you
throw a blue pill into the fire, you will see a blue flame. If you
throw a red
pill, you will see a red flame. But fire itself has no colour of its
own.

"If you put a blue pill in water, the water will turn blue. Again, if
you
put alum in that water, it will regain its natural colour.

"A butcher was carrying a load of meat when he touched Sankara.
Sankara exclaimed: 'What! You have touched me!' The butcher replied:
"Venerable sir, neither have you touched me nor have I touched you. You
are Pure Atman, unattached.' Jadabharata said the same thing to King
Rahugana.

"The Pure Atman is unattached, and one cannot see It. If salt is mixed
with water, one cannot see the salt with the eyes.

"That which is the Pure Atman is the Great Cause, the Cause of the
cause. The gross, the subtle, the causal, and the Great Cause. The five
elements
are gross. Mind, buddhi, and ego are subtle. Prakriti, the Primal
Energy, is the cause of all these. Brahman, Pure Atman, is the Cause of
the cause.

This Pure Atman alone is our real nature. What is jnana? It is to know
one's own Self and keep the mind in It. It is to know the Pure Atman.

"How long should a man perform his duties? As long as he identifies
himself with the body, in other words, as long as he thinks he is the
body.
That is what the Gita says. To think of the body as
the Atman is ajnana,
ignorance.

(To the bearded Brahmo devotee from Shibpur) "Are
you a Brahmo?"

DEVOTEE: "Yes, sir."

MASTER (smiling): "I can recognize a worshipper of
the Formless by looking at his face and eyes. Please dive a little
deeper. One doesn't get the
gem by floating on the surface. As for myself, I accept all — the
formless God
and God with form."

The Marwari devotees from Burrabazar entered the room and saluted the
Master. He began to praise them.

MASTER (to the devotees): "Ah! They are real
devotees of God. They
visit temples, sing hymns to God, and eat prasad. And the gentleman
whom
they have made their priest this year is learned in the Bhagavata."

MARWARI DEVOTEE: "Who is this 'I'
that says, 'O Lord, I am Thy servant'?"

MASTER: "This is the lingasarira, or embodied soul. It consists of
manas,
buddhi, chitta, and ahamkara."

DEVOTEE: "Who is the embodied soul?"

MASTER: "It is the Atman bound by the eight fetters. And what is the
chitta? It is the 'I consciousness' that says, 'Aha!'"

DEVOTEE: "Revered sir, what happens after death?"

MASTER: "According to the Gita, one becomes
afterwards what one
thinks of at the time of death. King Bharata thought of his deer and
became
a deer in his next life. Therefore one must practise sadhana in order
to
realize God. If a man thinks of God day and night, he will have the
same
thought in the hour of death."

DEVOTEE: "Why don't we feel dispassion toward worldly objects?"

MASTER: "Because of maya. Through maya one feels the Real to be the
unreal and the unreal to be the Real. The Real means That which is
eternal, the Supreme Brahman; and the unreal means that which is
non-eternal,
that is to say, the world."

DEVOTEE: "We read the scriptures. Why is it that we can't assimilate
them?"

MASTER: "What will one accomplish by mere reading? One needs
spiritual practice — austerity. Call on God. What is the use of merely
repeating
the word 'siddhi'? One must eat a little of it.

"The hand bleeds when it touches a thorny plant. Suppose you bring
such a plant and repeat, sitting near it: 'There! The plant is
burning.' Will
that burn the plant? This world is like the thorny plant. Light the
fire of
Knowledge and with it set the plant ablaze. Only then will it be burnt
up.

"One must labour a little while at the stage of sadhana. Then the path
becomes easy. Steer the boat around the curves of the river and then
let it
go with the favourable wind.

"As long as you live inside the house of maya, as long as there exists
the
cloud of maya, you do not see the effect of the Sun of Knowledge. Come
outside the house of maya, give up 'woman and gold', and then the Sun
of
Knowledge will destroy ignorance. A lens cannot burn paper inside the
house. If you stand outside, then the rays of the sun fall on the lens
and
the paper burns. Again, the lens cannot burn the paper if there is a
cloud.
The paper burns when the cloud disappears.

The darkness of the mind is destroyed only when a man stands a little
apart from 'woman and gold' and, thus standing apart, practises a
little
austerity and spiritual discipline. Then only does the cloud of his ego
and
ignorance vanish. Then only does he attain the Knowledge of God. This
'woman and gold' is the only cloud that hides the Sun of Knowledge.

(To the Marwari devotee) "The rules for a sannyasi
are extremely hard.
He cannot have the slightest contact with 'woman and gold'. He must not
accept money with his own hands, and he must not even allow it to be
left
near him.

"Lakshminarayan Marwari, a Vedantist, used to come here very often.
One day he saw a dirty sheet on my bed and said: 'I shall invest ten
thousand rupees in your name. The interest will enable you to pay your
expenses.' The moment he uttered these words, I fell unconscious, as if
struck by a stick. Regaining consciousness I said to him: 'If you utter
such
words again, you had better not come here. It is impossible for me to
touch
money. It is also impossible for me to keep it near me.' He was a very
clever
fellow. He said: 'Then you too have the idea of acceptance and
rejection.
In that case you haven't attained Perfect Knowledge.' 'My dear sir,' I
said,
'I haven't yet gone that far.' (All laugh.)
Lakshminarayan then wanted to
leave the money with Hriday. I said to him: 'That will not do. If you
leave
it with Hriday, then I shall instruct him to spend it as I wish. If he
does not
comply, I shall be angry. The very contact of money is bad. No, you
can't
leave it with Hriday.' Won't an object kept near a mirror be reflected
in it?"

DEVOTEE: "Revered sir, is a man liberated
only when he dies on the bank of the Ganges?"

MASTER: "It is the Knowledge of God alone that gives liberation. The
jnani will certainly attain liberation wherever he may die, whether in
the
charnel-pit or on the bank of the Ganges. But the bank of the Ganges is
prescribed for a bound soul."

DEVOTEE: "Revered sir, why does a man dying
in Benares become liberated?"

MASTER: "A person dying in Benares sees the vision of Siva. Siva says
to
him: 'This is My aspect with form, My embodiment in maya. I assume this
form for the sake of the devotees. Now look. I am merging in the
indivisible
Satchidananda!' Uttering these words, Siva withdraws His form and
enables
the dying person to see Brahman.

"The Puranas say that even a chandala endowed with love of God achieves
liberation. According to this school the name of God is enough to
liberate a
soul. There is no need of such things as worship, sacrifice, the
discipline of
Tantra, and the recitation of mantras.

"But the teachings of the Vedas are different. According to the Vedas
none
but a brahmin can be liberated. Further, the worship is not accepted by
the
gods unless the mantras are recited correctly. One must perform
sacrifice,
worship, and so on, according to scriptural injunction. But where is
the time
in the Kaliyuga to perform the Vedic rituals? Therefore in the Kaliyuga
the
path of devotion prescribed by Narada is best. The path of karma is
very
difficult. Karma becomes a cause of bondage unless it is performed in a
spirit
of detachment. Further, the life of man nowadays depends on food. He
has
no time to observe the rituals enjoined by the scriptures. The patient
dies if
he tries to cure his fever by taking the decoction of herbs prescribed
by the
orthodox native physicians. Therefore he should take a modern 'fever
mixture'.

"According to Narada the devotee should sing the name and glories of
God. The path of karma is not the right one for the Kaliyuga.
Bhaktiyoga
is the right path. Do your duties in the world as long as you need them
to
reap the fruit of the actions of your past lives. But you must develop
love
for God and be passionately attached to Him. The singing of the name
and
glories of God destroys the effect of past action.

"You don't have to perform duties all your life. As you develop
unalloyed
love and longing for God, your duties become fewer and fewer. After the
realization of God they completely drop away. When the young
daughter-in-law
is pregnant, her mother-in-law lessens her duties. After the birth of
the child she doesn't have to do any household work."

Several young men from the village of Dakshineswar entered the room
and saluted Sri Ramakrishna. It was about four o'clock in the
afternoon.
They sat down and began to talk with the Master.

YOUNG MAN: "Sir, what is Knowledge?"

MASTER: "It is to know that God is the only Reality and that all else
is
unreal. That which is the Real is also called Brahman. It has another
name:
Kala, Time. There is a saying, 'O brother, how many things come into
being
in Time and disappear in Time!'

"That which sports with Kala is called Kali. She is the Primal Energy.
Kala and Kali, Brahman and Sakti, are indivisible.

"That Brahman, of the nature of Reality, is eternal. It exists in past,
present, and future. It is without beginning or end. It cannot be
described in
words. The utmost that can be said of Brahman is that It is of the very
nature
of Intelligence and Bliss.

"The world is illusory; Brahman alone is real. The world is of the
nature
of magic. The magician is real but his magic is unreal."

YOUNG MAN: "If the world is of the nature
of illusion — magic — then why doesn't one get rid of it?"

MASTER: "It is due to the samskaras, inborn
tendencies. Repeated births in this world of maya make one believe that
maya is real.

"Let me tell you how powerful inborn tendencies are. A prince had, in a
previous birth, been the son of a washerman. While playing with his
chums
in his incarnation as the prince, he said to them: 'Stop those games. I
will
show you a new one. I shall lie on my belly, and you will beat the
clothes
on my back as the washerman does, making a swishing sound.'

"Many youngsters come here. But only a few long for God. These few are
born with a spiritual tendency. They shudder at the talk of marriage.
Niranjan has said from boyhood that he will not marry.

"More than twenty years ago two young men used to come here from
Baranagore. One was named Govinda Pal and the other Gopal Sen. They
had been devoted to God since boyhood. The very mention of marriage
would frighten them. Gopal used to have bhava samadhi. He would shrink
from worldly people, as a mouse from a cat. One day he saw the boys of
the
Tagore family strolling in the garden. He shut himself in the kuthi
lest he
should have to talk with them.

"Gopal went into samadhi in the Panchavati. In that state he said to
me,
touching my feet: 'Let me go. I cannot live in this world any more. You
have a long time to wait. Let me go.' I said to him, in an ecstatic
mood, "You
must come again.' "Very well, I will', he said. A few days later
Govinda
came to me. 'Where is Gopal?' I asked him. He said, 'He has passed
away.'

"What are the other youngsters about? Money, house, carriage, clothes,
and finally marriage. These are the things that keep them busy. If they
want to marry, at the outset they make inquiries about the girl. They
want
to find out for themselves whether she is beautiful.

"There is a person who speaks much ill of me. He is always criticizing
me
for loving the youngsters. I love only those who are born with good
tendencies,
pure souls with longing for God, who do not pay any attention to
money, creature comforts, and such things.

"If married people develop love for God, they will not be attached to
the
world. Hirananda is married. What if he is? He will not be 'much
attached
to the world."

Hirananda, a member of the Brahmo Samaj, was a native of Sindh. He
had met the Master in Calcutta and become devoted to him.

Manilal, the Marwari devotees, the Brahmo devotees from Shibpur, and
the young men from Dakshineswar saluted Sri Ramakrishna and took their
leave.

It was evening. Lamps were lighted on the south and west verandahs. A
lamp was lighted in the Master's room also, and incense was burnt. He
was
repeating the name of the Divine Mother, absorbed in contemplation of
Her. After a while he talked again to the devotees. There was still
some
time before the evening worship in the temples.

MASTER (to M.): "What need of the
sandhya has a man who thinks of God day and night?

What need of rituals has a man, what need of devotions any more,

If he repeats the Mother's name at the three holy hours?

Rituals may pursue him close, but never can they overtake him.

Charity, vows, and giving of gifts do not appeal to Madan's mind;

The Blissful Mother's Lotus Feet are his whole prayer and sacrifice.

"The sandhya merges in the Gayatri, the Gayatri in Om. A man
is firmly
established in spiritual life when he goes into samadhi on uttering
'Om' only once.

"There is a sadhu in Hrishikesh who gets up early in the morning and
stands near a great waterfall. He looks at it the whole day and says to
God:
'Ah, You have done well! Well done! How amazing!' He doesn't practise
any
other form of japa or austerity. At night he returns to his hut.

"What need is there even to bother one's head about whether God is
formless or has a form? It is enough for a man to pray to Him, alone in
solitude, weeping, 'O God, reveal Yourself to me as You are.'

"God is both inside and outside. It is He who dwells inside us.
Therefore
the Vedas say, Tattvamasi — That thou art.' God is also outside us. He
appears manifold through maya; but in reality He alone exists.
Therefore
before describing the various names and forms of God, one should say,
'Om Tat Sat.' ("Om. That alone is Reality.")

"It is one thing to learn about God from the scriptures, and quite
another
to see Him. The scriptures only give hints. Therefore to read a great
many
scriptures is not necessary. It is much better to pray to God in
solitude.

"It isn't necessary to read all of the Gita. One
can get the essence of the
Gita by repeating the word ten times. It becomes
reversed and is then 'tagi'.
The essence of the book is: 'O man, renounce everything and worship
God.'"

The Master went into an ecstatic mood while watching the evening
worship of Kali in the company of the devotees. He was in no condition
even
to salute the image. Very carefully he returned to his room with the
devotees
and sat down; he was still in an ecstatic mood. He spoke to them while
in that state.

In the room was Hari, a young man about twenty years of age, who was a
relative of the Mukherjis and very much devoted to the Master. He was
married. At that time he was living with the Mukherjis and looking for
a job.

MASTER (to Hari, in an ecstatic mood): "Take
your initiation after getting your mother's permission. (To
Priya, referring to Hari)
I couldn't give him the mantra though I said I would initiate him. I
don't initiate people.
Continue with your own meditation and japa as you have been doing."

PRIYA: "Yes, sir."

MASTER: "And I am saying this to you in this state of my mind. Believe
my
words. You see, there is no show or deceit here. I just said to the
Divine
Mother in my ecstatic mood, 'O Mother, may those who come here
[referring
to himself] through sincere attraction obtain perfection!'"

Mahendra Kaviraj of Sinthi was seated on the verandah conversing with
Ramlal, Hazra, and others. The Master called to him from his room. M.
went
out quickly and brought Mahendra in.

MASTER (to Mahendra): "Sit down and listen to my
words."

Mahendra was a little embarrassed. He sat down.

MASTER (to the devotees): "God can be served in
different ways. An
ecstatic lover of God enjoys Him in different ways. Sometimes he says,
'O
God, You are the lotus and I am the bee', and sometimes, 'You are the
Ocean
of Satchidananda and I am the fish.' Sometimes, again, the lover of God
says, 'I am Your dancing-girl.' He dances and sings before Him. He
thinks
of himself sometimes as the friend of God and sometimes as His
handmaid.
He looks on God sometimes as a child, as did Yasoda, and sometimes as
husband or sweetheart, as did the gopis.

"Sometimes Balarama looked on Krishna as a friend; sometimes he would
think he was Krishna's umbrella or carpet. He served Krishna in all
possible
ways."

Was Sri Ramakrishna hinting at his own state of mind while thus
describing
the different attitudes of a lover of God?

Next he described Chaitanya's three spiritual moods.

MASTER: "Chaitanyadeva used to experience three moods. In the inmost
mood he would be absorbed in samadhi, unconscious of the outer world.
In
the semi-conscious mood he would dance in ecstasy but could not talk.
In
the conscious mood he would sing the glories of God.

(To the devotees) "You are listening to my words.
Try to assimilate them.
When worldly people sit before a sadhu, for the time being they
completely
hide all worldly thoughts and ideas. But once away from the holy man
they
let them out again. You have seen a pigeon eating dried peas. You think
he
has digested them, but he keeps them in his crop. You can feel them
there.

"At dusk put aside all duties and pray to God. One is reminded of Him
by darkness. At the approach of darkness one thinks: 'I could see
everything
a moment ago. Who has brought about this change?' The Mussalmans put
aside all activities and say their prayers at the appointed times."

MUKHERJI: "Revered sir, is it good to practise japa?"

MASTER: "Yes. One attains God through japa. By repeating the name of
God secretly and in solitude one receives divine grace. Then comes His
vision. Suppose there is a big piece of timber lying under water and
fastened
to the land with a chain; by proceeding along the chain, link by link,
you
will at last touch the timber.

"Higher than worship is japa, higher than japa is meditation, higher
than
meditation is bhava, and higher than bhava are mahabhava and prema.
Chaitanyadeva had prema. When one attains prema one has the rope to
tie God."

Hazra entered the room.

MASTER (to Hazra): "Love of God, when
it is intense and spontaneous, is
called raga-bhakti. Vaidhi-bhakti, formal devotion, depends on
scriptural
injunctions. It comes and it goes. But raga-bhakti is like a stone
emblem of
Siva that has sprung up out of the bowels of the earth. One cannot find
its
root; they say the root goes as far as Benares. Only an Incarnation of
God
and His companions attain raga-bhakti."

HAZRA: "Ah me!"

MASTER: "One day I was returning from the pine-grove, when I saw you
telling your beads. I said to the Divine Mother: 'Mother, what a
small-minded
fellow he is! He lives here and still he practises japa with a rosary!
Whoever comes here [referring to himself] will have his spiritual
consciousness
awakened all at once; he won't have to bother much about japa. Go to
Calcutta and you will find thousands telling their beads — even the
prostitutes.'

(To M.) "Please bring Naran here in a carriage. I am
making the same
request to Mukherji. I shall give Naran something to eat when he comes.
There is great significance in feeding boys like him."

Saturday, October 4, 1884

It was the day of the first full moon after the Durga Puja.
Sri Ramakrishna
arrived at the Calcutta house of Nabin Sen, the elder brother of
Keshab Chandra Sen. On the previous Thursday Keshab's mother had
begged the Master to pay her a visit in Calcutta.

The Master seated himself in a room on the upper floor of the house.
With him were Baburam, Kishori, and a few other devotees. Nandalal and
Keshab's other nephews, Keshab's mother, and other relatives of his,
waited
on the Master. It had been arranged to have devotional music performed
in
the room. M. was sitting in a room downstairs, listening to the kirtan.

Sri Ramakrishna said to the Brahmo devotees: "The world is impermanent.
One should constantly remember death." Then he sang:

Remember this, O mind! Nobody is your own:

Vain is your wandering in this world.

Trapped in the subtle snare of maya as you are,

Do not forget the Mother's name. . . .

The Master said to the devotees: "Dive deep. What will you
gain by
merely floating on the surface? Renounce everything for a few days,
retire
into solitude, and call on God with all your soul."

The Master sang:

Dive deep, O mind, dive deep in the Ocean of God's Beauty;

If you descend to the uttermost depths,

There you will find the gem of Love. . . .

At Sri Ramakrishna's request the Brahmo devotees sang:

Thou art my All in All, O Lord! — the Life of my life, the Essence of
essence;

In the three worlds I have none else but Thee to call my own.

Thou art my peace, my joy, my hope; Thou my support, my wealth, my
glory;

Thou my wisdom and my strength. . . .

The Master sang again:

O Mother, for Yasoda Thou wouldst dance, when she called
Thee her precious "Blue Jewel";

Where hast Thou hidden that lovely form, O terrible Syama? . . .

The Brahmo devotees also sang to the accompaniment of cymbals
and
drums:

O Mother, how deep is Thy love for men!

Mindful of it, I weep for joy.

Almost from the day of my birth

I have transgressed Thine every law,

And still Thou lookest on me with love,

Comforting me with sweetest words.

Mindful of it, I weep for joy.

O Mother, the burden of Thy love

Is far too great for me to bear;

My soul gives a heart-piercing cry

At Thy love's touch. To Thee I come,

Seeking a refuge at Thy feet.

They again sang of the Divine Mother:

O Mother, Thou my Inner Guide, ever awake within my heart!

Day and night Thou boldest me in Thy lap.

Why dost Thou show such tenderness to this unworthy child of Thine?

Ah! It seems Thou art mad with love: now caressing, now with strong
grasp

Holding me firm. Thou givest me to drink

Thy nectar, pouring in my ears Thy words of loving tenderness.

Unceasing is Thy love for me, a love that cannot see my faults;

Whenever I am in danger. Thou dost save me.

Saviour of sinners! I know the truth: I am my Mother's and She is mine.

Now I shall listen to Her alone, and follow the path of righteousness;

Drinking the milk that flows from my Mother's breasts,

I shall be strong and sing with joy: "Hail, O Mother! Brahman Eternal!"

The Master and the Brahmo devotees sang several songs about
Hari and
Gauranga.

Sunday, October 5, 1884

Sri Ramakrishna was sitting in his room after the midday meal,
with M.,
Hazra, the elder Kali, Baburam, Ramlal, Hari, and others. Some of them
sat on the floor and some stood about. On the previous day the Master
had
visited Keshab's mother at her Calcutta house and had made her happy
with
his devotional songs.

Hazra had been living with the Master at Dakshineswar a long time. He
was a little conceited about his knowledge and even criticized the
Master
now and then before others. Again, he would sit on the verandah of the
Master's room and tell his beads with apparent concentration. He spoke
slightingly of Chaitanya as a "modern Incarnation". He would say: "God
gives not only pure devotion but also wealth. He has no lack of it. By
attaining God one obtains the eight occult powers as well." Hazra had a
small
debt to clear up, about one thousand rupees. He had incurred it for the
building of his house and was worried about paying it.

The elder Kali had a position in an office, from which he received a
small
salary. He had a large family to maintain. He was devoted to the Master
and visited him now and then, even absenting himself from the office.

KALI (to Hazra): "You go about criticizing
people; you are like a touch-stone, testing what is pure gold and what
is impure. Why do you speak so
much ill of others?"

HAZRA: "Whatever I say, I say to him [meaning Sri Ramakrishna] alone."

MASTER: "That is so."

Hazra began to explain Tattvajnana.

HAZRA: "The meaning of Tattvajnana is the knowledge
of the existence of the twenty-four tattvas, or cosmic principles."

He was wrong about the meaning of the word.

A DEVOTEE: "What are they?"

HAZRA: "The five elements, the six passions, the five organs
of perception, the five organs of action, and so forth."

M. (to the Master, smiling): "He says that the six
passions are included
in the twenty-four cosmic principles."

MASTER (smiling): "Listen to him!
Notice how he explains Tattvajnana!
The word really means 'knowledge of Self. The word 'Tat' means the
Supreme Self, and the word 'tvam', the embodied soul. One attains
Supreme
Knowledge, Tattvajnana, by realizing the identity of the embodied soul
and
the Supreme Self."

After a few minutes Hazra left the room and sat on the porch.

MASTER (to M. and the others): "He
[meaning Hazra] only argues. This
moment perhaps he understands, but the next moment he is his old self
again.

"When the angler hooks a big fish and finds it pulling hard, he
releases
the line; otherwise it will snap and the angler himself will be thrown
into
the water. Therefore I do not say much to him.

(To M.) "Hazra said that a man could not be
liberated unless he was born
in a brahmin body. 'How is that?' I said. 'One attains liberation
through
bhakti alone. Savari was the daughter of a hunter. She, Ruhidas, and
others
belonged to the sudra caste. They were liberated through bhakti alone.'
'But
still —' Hazra insisted.

"He recognized Dhruva's spiritual greatness, but not as much as he
recognized
Prahlada's. When Latu said, 'Dhruva had great yearning for God from
his boyhood', he kept still.

"I said that there was nothing greater than the bhakti that sought no
end
and had no selfish motive. Hazra contradicted me. I said to him, 'A
wealthy
man is annoyed when a petitioner comes to him. "There he comes", he
says
angrily. "Sit down", he says to him in an indifferent voice, and shows
that
he is much annoyed. He doesn't allow such a beggar to ride with him in
his carriage.'

"But Hazra said that God was not like such wealthy people of the world;
did He lack wealth, that He should feel pinched to give it away? Hazra
said further: 'When rain falls from the sky, the Ganges and all the big
rivers and lakes overflow with water. Small tanks, too, are filled.
Likewise,
God out of His grace grants wealth and riches as well as knowledge and
devotion.'

(To the devotees) "But I call this impure devotion
to God. Pure devotion
has no desire behind it. You don't want anything from me, but you love
to
see me and hear my words. My mind also dwells on you. I wonder how you
are and why you don't come.

"You don't want anything of God but still you love Him. That is pure
bhakti, love of God with no motive behind it. Prahlada had it. He
sought
neither kingdom nor riches; he sought Hari alone."

M: "Hazra is a chatterbox. He won't achieve anything unless he becomes
silent."

MASTER: "Now and then he comes to me and
becomes mellowed. But he
is a pest; again he argues. It is very hard to get rid of egotism. You
may cut
down an aswattha tree, but the next day a sprout will spring up. As
long as
the roots remain, the tree will grow again.

"I said to Hazra, 'Don't speak ill of anyone.' It is Narayana Himself
who
has assumed all these forms. One can worship even a wicked person.
Haven't
you observed the Kumari Puja? Why should you worship a girl who has all
the physical limitations of a human being? It is because she is a form
of the
Divine Mother. But God dwells in a special way in His devotee. The
devotee
is His parlour. If the gourd has a large body then it makes a good
tanpura.
It gives a nice sound."

Two monks had arrived at the temple garden in the morning. They were
devoted to the study of the Bhagavad Gita, the Vedanta, and other
scriptures.
They entered the Master's room, saluted him, and sat on the mat on
the floor. Sri Ramakrishna was seated on the small couch. The Master
spoke
to the sadhus in Hindusthani.

MASTER: "Have you had your meal?"

SADHU: "Yes, sir."

MASTER: "What did you eat?"

SADHU: "Dal and bread. Will you take some?"

MASTER: "No, I take only a few morsels of rice. Well,
your japa and meditation must be without any desire for results. Isn't
that so?"

SADHU: "Yes, sir."

MASTER: "That is good. One must surrender
the result to God. What do you say? That is the view of the Gita."

One sadhu said to the other, quoting from the Gita:
'O Arjuna, whatever
action you perform, whatever you eat, whatever you offer in sacrifice,
whatever
you give in charity, and whatever austerities you practise, offer
everything to Me."

MASTER: "If you give God something, you receive it back a
thousand times over. That is why after doing meritorious deeds one
offers a handful
of water to God. It is the symbol of offering the fruit to God. When
Yudhisthira was about to offer all his sins to Krishna, Bhima warned
him:
'Never do such a thing. Whatever you offer to Krishna you will receive
back
a thousandfold.'

(To one of the sadhus) "Well, sir, one should be
desireless; one should
renounce all desires. Isn't that so?"

SADHU: "Yes, sir."

MASTER: "But I have the desire for bhakti. That is
not bad. Rather, it is good. Sweets are bad, for they produce acidity.
But sugar candy
is an exception. Isn't that so?"

SADHU: "Yes, sir."

MASTER: "Well, sir, what do you think of the Vedanta?"

SADHU: "It includes all the six systems of philosophy."

MASTER: "But the essence of Vedanta is: 'Brahman alone is real, and the
world illusory; I have no separate existence; I am that Brahman alone.'
Isn't
that so?"

SADHU: "That is true, sir."

MASTER: "But for those who lead a householder's life, and those who
identify themselves with the body, this attitude of 'I am He' is not
good. It
is not good for householders to read Vedanta or the Yogavasishtha.
It is very
harmful for them to read these books. Householders should look on God
as
their Master and on themselves as His servants. They should think, 'O
God,
You are the Master and the Lord, and I am Your servant.' People who
identify themselves with the body should not have the attitude of 'I am
He."

The devotees in the room remained silent. Sri Ramakrishna was smiling
a little, a picture of self-contentment. He appeared happy in his own
Self.

One of the sadhus whispered in the other's ear: "Look! This is the
state
of the paramahamsa."

MASTER (to M.): "I feel like laughing."

Sri Ramakrishna smiled like a child. The monks left the room. The
devotees were moving about in the room and on the porch.

MASTER (to M.): "Did you go to Nabin Sen's house?"

M: "Yes, sir. I listened to the songs from downstairs."

MASTER: "That was well done. Your wife was there. She is a cousin of
Keshab Sen, isn't she?"

M: "A distant cousin."

Sri Ramakrishna strolled up and down with M. No one else was with them.

MASTER: "A man visits his father-in-law's house. I, too, often used to
think
that I should marry, go to my father-in-law's house, and have great
fun. But
see what has come of it!"

M: "Sir, you say, 'If the boy holds his father's hand, he may slip; but
he
doesn't if the father holds his hand.' That is exactly your condition.
The
Mother has taken hold of your hand."

MASTER: "I met Bamandas at the Viswases' house. I said to him, 'I have
come to see you.' As I was leaving the place I heard him say: 'Goodness
gracious! The Divine Mother has caught hold of him, like a tiger
seizing a
man.' At that time I was a young man, very stout, and always in ecstasy.

"I am very much afraid of women. When I look at one I feel as if a
tigress were coming to devour me. Besides, I find that their bodies,
their
limbs, and even their pores are very large. This makes me look upon
them
as she-monsters. I used to be much more afraid of women than I am at
present. I wouldn't allow one to come near me. Now I persuade my mind
in various ways to look upon women as forms of the Blissful Mother.

"A woman is, no doubt, a part of the Divine Mother. But as far as a man
is concerned, especially a sannyasi or a devotee of God, she is to be
shunned.
I don't allow a woman to sit near me very long, no matter how great her
devotion may be. After a little while I say to her, 'Go and see the
temples.'
If that doesn't make her move, I myself leave the room on the pretext
of
smoking.

"I find that some men are not at all interested in women. Niranjan
says,
'A woman never enters my thought.' I asked Hari (Later Swami
Turiyananda.)
about it. He too says that his mind does not dwell on woman.

"Woman monopolizes three quarters of the mind, which should be given
to God. And then, after the birth of a child, almost the whole mind is
frittered
away on the family. Then what is left to give to God?

"Again, there are some men who shed their last drop of blood, as it
were,
to keep their wives out of mischief. There is the gate-keeper, an old
man,
whose wife is only fourteen years old. She had to live with him. They
lived
in a thatched hut with walls made of dry leaves. People made holes in
the
wall to peep in. Now she has left him and run away.

"I know another man. He doesn't know where to keep his wife. There
was some trouble at home, and now he is greatly worried. Let's not talk
about
these things any more.

"If a man lives with a woman, he cannot help coming under her control.
Worldly men get up and sit down at the bidding of women. They all speak
highly of their wives.

"Once I wanted to go to a certain place. I asked Ramlal's aunt (His
own wife) about it.
She forbade me to go; so I could not. A little while later I said to
myself: 'I
am not a householder. I have renounced "woman and gold". If, in spite
of
that, this is my plight, one can well imagine how much worldly people
are
controlled by their wives.'"

M: "One who lives in the midst of 'woman and gold' can't help being
stained by it, even if only slightly. You told us about Jaynarayan. He
was such a great scholar. When you visited him he was an old man. You
found him warming pillows and blankets in the sun."

MASTER: "But he had no vanity of scholarship.
Further, what he said
about the last days of his life came to pass. He spent them in Benares,
following the injunctions of the scriptures. I saw his children. They
were
wearing high boots and had been educated in English schools."

By means of questions and answers Sri Ramakrishna now explained to
M. his own exalted state.

MASTER: "At first I went stark mad. Why am
I less so now? But I get into that state now and then."

M: "You don't have just one mood. As you said, you experience various
moods. Sometimes you are like a child, sometimes like a madman,
sometimes
like an inert thing, and sometimes like a ghoul. And now and then
you are a natural person."

MASTER: "Yes, like a child. But I also experience
the moods of a boy and
a young man. When I give instruction I feel like a young man. Then
there
is my boyishness: like a boy twelve or thirteen years old, I want to be
frivolous. That is why I joke and make merry with the youngsters.

"What do you think of Naran?"

M: "He has good traits, sir."

MASTER: "Yes, the shell of the gourd is good.
The tanpura made out of it
will give good music. He says to me, 'You are everything.' Everyone
speaks
of me according to his comprehension. Some say that I am simply a
sadhu,
a devotee of God.

"If I forbid Naran to do something, he understands it very well. The
other day I asked him to pull up the curtain, but he didn't do it. I
had
forbidden him to tie a knot, to sew his clothes, to lock a box, to pull
up a
curtain, and similar things. He understood it all. He who would
renounce the
world must practise all these disciplines. They are meant for sannyasis.

"While practising sadhana a man should regard a woman as a raging
forest fire or a black cobra. But in the state of perfection, after the
realization of God, she appears as the Blissful Mother. Then you will
look on her
as a form of the Divine Mother."

A few days earlier Sri Ramakrishna had spoken many words of warning
to Narayan about women. He had said: "Don't let yourself touch the air
near a woman's body. Cover yourself with a heavy sheet lest the air
should
touch your body. And keep yourself eight cubits, two cubits, or at
least one
cubit away from all women except your mother."

MASTER (to M.): "Naran's mother said to him
about me, 'Even we are
enchanted by the sight of him, not to speak of you, a mere child.' None
but
the guileless can realize God. How guileless Niranjan is!"

M: "True, sir."

MASTER: "Didn't you notice him that day in
the carriage on the way to
Calcutta? He is always the same — without guile. A man shows one side
of
his nature inside his house and another to the outside world. Since his
father's death Narendra has been worried about his worldly affairs. He
has
a slightly calculating mind. How I wish that other, youngsters were
like
Niranjan and Narendra!

"Today I went to the village to see Nilkantha's theatrical performance.
It
was given at Nabin Niyogi's house. The children there are very bad;
they
have nothing to do but find fault. In such a place a person's spiritual
feeling
is restrained. During a performance the other day I saw Doctor Madhu
shedding tears. I looked at him alone.

(To M.) "Can you tell me why people feel so much
attracted to this
place [meaning himself]? What does it mean?"

M: "It reminds me of an episode in Krishna's life at Vrindavan. Krishna
transformed Himself into the cowherd boys and the calves, whereupon the
cows began to feel more strongly attracted to the cowherd boys, the
gopis, and
the calves."

MASTER: "That is the attraction of God. The
truth is, the Divine Mother creates the spell and it is that which
attracts people.

"Well, not as many people come here as used to go to Keshab Sen. And
how many people respect and honour Keshab! He is known even in England.
Queen Victoria spoke with him. It is said in the Gita
that God's power
is manifest in him who is honoured and respected by many. But so many
people do not come here."

M: "It was the householders who went to Keshab Sen."

MASTER: "Yes, that is true. The worldly-minded."

M: "Will what Keshab has founded remain a long time?"

MASTER: "Why, he has written a samhita, a
book of rules for the guidance of the members of his Brahmo Samaj."

M: "But it is quite different with the work done by a Divine
Incarnation
Himself — Chaitanya's work, for instance."

MASTER: "Yes, yes. That is true."

M: "You yourself tell us that Chaitanyadeva said, 'The seeds I have
sown
will certainly bear fruit some time or other.' A man left some seeds on
the
cornice of a house. Later on the house fell down and trees grew from
those
seeds."

MASTER: "Many people go to the Samaj founded by
Shivanath and his friends. Isn't that so?"

M: "Yes, sir. People of that sort."

MASTER (smiling): "Yes, yes. The worldly-minded
go there, but not
many of those who long for God and are trying to renounce 'woman and
gold'."

M: "It will be fine if a current flows from this place. Everything will
be
carried away by its force. Nothing that comes out of this place will be
monotonous."

MASTER (smiling): "I keep men's own
ideals intact. I ask a Vaishnava to
hold to his Vaishnava attitude and a Sakta to his. But this also I say
to them:
"Never feel that your path alone is right and that the paths of others
are
wrong and full of errors.' Hindus, Mussalmans, and Christians are going
to
the same destination by different paths. A man can realize God by
following his own path if his prayer is sincere.

"Vijay's mother-in-law said to me, 'Why don't you tell Balaram that it
is
unnecessary to worship God with form; that it will be enough if he
prays
to the formless Satchidananda?' I replied, 'Why should I say such a
thing,
and why should he listen to me even if I should say it?'"

M: "That is true, sir. There are different paths to suit time, place,
and
the fitness of the candidate. Whatever path a man may follow, he will
ultimately
reach God if he is pure of heart and has sincere longing. That is what
you say."

Sri Ramakrishna was sitting in his room. Hari, the relative of the
Mukherjis,
M., and other devotees were on the floor. An unknown person saluted the
Master and took a seat. The Master remarked later that his eyes were
not
good. They were yellow, like a cat's.

Hari prepared a smoke for Sri Ramakrishna.

MASTER (to Hari): "Let me see the palm of
your hand. This mark is a good sign. Relax your hand."

He took Hari's hand into his as if to feel its weight.

MASTER: "He is still childlike. As yet there
is no blemish in him. (To the
devotees) From the hand I can tell whether a person is
deceitful or
guileless. (To Hari) Why, you should go to your
father-in-law's house. You
should talk to your wife and have a little fun with her if you like. (To
M.)
What do you say?" (M. and the others laugh.)

M: "If a new pot becomes bad, one can no longer keep milk in it."

MASTER (smiling): "How do you know that it is not
already bad?"

The two Mukherjis, Mahendra and Priyanath, were brothers. They did
not work in an office, but had their own flour-mill. Priyanath had been
an
engineer. Sri Ramakrishna talked to Hari about the Mukherji brothers.

MASTER: "The elder brother is nice, isn't he? He is artless."

HARI: "Yes, sir."

MASTER: "Isn't the younger brother very miserly? I
understand that since coming here he has improved a great deal. He once
said to me, 'I didn't
know anything before.' (To Hari) Do they give
anything in charity?"

HARI: "Not much, as far as I can see. Their elder brother, now dead,
was
a very good man. He was very charitable."

MASTER (to M. and the others): "Whether a person
will
make spiritual progress or not can be known to a great extent by his
physical marks. The
hand of a deceitful person is heavy. A snub nose is not a good sign.
Sambhu
had that kind of nose; hence he was not quite sincere in spite of all
his wisdom.
Pigeon-breast is not a good sign either. Hard bones and heavy
elbow-joints
are bad signs too; and yellow eyes, like a cat's.

"A man becomes very mean if he has lips that are thick, like a dome's.
(One of the lowest castes among the Hindus.)
A brahmin was here for a few months acting as priest of the Vishnu
temple.
I couldn't eat the food he touched. One day I suddenly exclaimed, 'He
is a
dome!' Afterwards he said to me: 'Yes, sir. We live in the dome
quarters. I
know how to make wicker baskets and such things, just like a dome.'

"There are other bad physical signs: one eye and squint eyes. It is
rather
better to have one eye, but never squint eyes. Squint-eyed people are
wicked
and deceitful.

"A student of Mahesh Nyayaratna's came here. He described himself as an
atheist. He said to Hriday: 'I am an atheist. You may take up the
position
of a believer in God and argue with me.' Thereupon I watched him
closely
and noticed that his eyes were yellow, like a cat's.

"Whether a person is good or bad can also be known from the way he
walks."

Sri Ramakrishna paced the verandah. M. and Baburam walked with him.

MASTER (to Hazra): "A man came here.
I saw that his eyes were like a
cat's. He asked me: 'Do you know astrology? I am in some difficulty.' I
said:
'No, I don't. Go to Baranagore. There you will find astrologers.'"

Baburam and M. talked about Nilkantha's theatrical performance. Baburam
had spent the previous night at the temple garden after his return from
Nabin Sen's house. In the morning he had attended Nilkantha's
performance
with the Master.

MASTER (to M. and Baburam): "What are
you talking about?"

M. AND BABURAM:
"About Nilkantha's performance."

While pacing the verandah Sri Ramakrishna suddenly took M. aside and
said, "The less people know about your thoughts of God, the better for
you." Saying these words the Master abruptly went away. A short time
afterwards he began to talk with Hazra.

HAZRA: "Nilkantha told you he would pay you a visit. It would be good
to
send for him."

MASTER: "No, he didn't sleep at all last night. It will be different if
he
comes here through the will of God."

Sri Ramakrishna asked Baburam to visit Narayan at his house. He looked
on Narayan as God Himself, and so he longed to see him. The Master said
to Baburam, "You may go to him with one of your English text-books."

About three o'clock in the afternoon Sri Ramakrishna was sitting in his
room. Nilkantha arrived with five or six of his companions. The Master
went toward the east door as if to welcome him. The musicians bowed
before the Master, touching the ground with their foreheads.

Sri Ramakrishna went into samadhi. Baburam stood behind him. M.,
Nilkantha, and the musicians were in front of him, watching him in
great
amazement. Dinanath, an officer of the temple, looked on from the north
side of the bed. Soon the room was filled with officers of the temple
garden.
Sri Ramakrishna's ecstasy abated a little. He seated himself on a mat
on the
floor, surrounded by Nilkantha and other devotees.

MASTER (still in an ecstatic mood): "I am all right."

NILKANTHA (with folded hands): "Make me all right
too."

MASTER (smiling): "Why, you are already all right.
Adding the letter 'a'
to 'ka', one gets 'ka'. By adding another 'a' to 'ka', one still gets
the same
• ka'." (All laugh.)

NILKANTHA: "Revered sir, I am entangled in worldliness."

MASTER (smiling): "God has kept you in the world for
the sake of others.
There are eight fetters. One cannot get rid of them all. God keeps one
or
two so that a man may live in the world and teach others. You have
organized
this theatrical company. How many people are being benefited by seeing
your bhakti! If you give up everything, then where will these musicians
go?

"God is now doing all these works through you. When they are finished,
you will not return to them. The housewife finishes her household
duties,
feeds everyone, including the menservants and maidservants, and then
goes
to take her bath. She doesn't come back then even if people shout for
her."

NILKANTHA: "Please bless me."

MASTER: "Yasoda went mad with grief because she was separated from
Krishna. She went to Radhika, who was meditating. Radhika said to her
in
an ecstatic state: 'I am the Ultimate Prakriti, the Primal Power. Ask a
boon
of Me.' Yasoda said to her: 'What shall I ask of You? Please bless me,
that
with all my body, mind, and speech I may think of God and serve Him;
that
with my ears I may hear the singing of God's name and glories; that
with
my hands I may serve Hari and His devotees; that with. my eyes I may
behold His form and His devotees.'

"Your eyes fill with tears when you utter the name of God. Why then
should you worry about anything? Divine love has grown in you.

"To know many things is ajnana, ignorance. To know only one" thing is
jnana, Knowledge — the realization that God alone is real and that He
dwells in all. And to talk to Him is vijnana, a fuller Knowledge. To
love
God in different ways, after realizing Him, is vijnana.

"It is also said that God is beyond one and two. He is beyond speech
and
mind. To go up from the Lila to the Nitya and come down again from the.
Nitya to the Lila is mature bhakti.

"I love that song of yours about aspiring to reach the Lotus Feet of
the
Divine Mother. It is enough to know that everything depends on the
grace
of God. But one must pray to God; it will not do to remain inactive.
The
lawyer gives all the arguments and finishes his pleading by saying to
the
judge: 'I have said all I have to say. Now the decision rests with Your
Honour.'"

After a few minutes Sri Ramakrishna said to Nilkantha: "You sang so
much in the morning, and now you have taken the trouble to come here.
But here everything is 'honorary'."

NILKANTHA: "Why so?"

MASTER (smiling): "I know what you will say."

NILKANTHA: "I shall get a precious gem from here."

MASTER: "You already have that precious gem. What will you gain by
adding again the letter 'a' to 'ka'? If you didn't have the gem, should
I like
your songs so much? Ramprasad had attained divine realization; that is
why
his songs appeal so much.

"I had already planned to hear your music. Later on Niyogi, too, came
here to invite me."

The Master was sitting on the small couch. He told Nilkantha that he
would like to hear a song or two about the Divine Mother.

Nilkantha sang two songs with his companions. When the Master heard
the second song he stood up and went into samadhi. Presently he began
to
dance in an ecstasy of divine love. Nilkantha and the devotees sang and
danced around him. Then Nilkantha sang a song about Siva, and the
Master
danced with the devotees.

When the singing was over, Sri Ramakrishna said to Nilkantha, "I should
like to hear that song of yours I heard in Calcutta."

M: "About Sri Gauranga?"

MASTER: "Yes, yes!"

Nilkantha sang the song, "The beautiful Gauranga, the youthful dancer,
fair as molten gold".

Sri Ramakrishna sang again and again the line, "Everything is swept
away
by the onrush of love", and danced with Nilkantha and the other
devotees.
Those who saw that indescribable dancing were never to forget it. The
room was filled with people, all intoxicated with divine joy. It seemed
as if
Chaitanya himself were dancing with his companions.

Manomohan was in an ecstatic mood. He was a devotee of Sri Rama-
krishna and a brother-jn-law of Rakhal. Several ladies of his family
had come
with him. They were witnessing this divine music and dancing from the
north verandah.

Sri Ramakrishna sang again, this time about Gauranga and Nityananda:

Behold, the two brothers have come, who weep while chanting Hari's
name. . . .

He danced with Nilkantha and the other devotees, improvising
the-line:

Behold, the two brothers have come, they who are mad with love of Radha.

Hearing the loud music, many people gathered about the room.
The
verandahs to the south and north, and the semicircular porch to the
west of
the room, were crowded with people. Even passengers in the boats going
along the Ganges were attracted by the kirtan.

The music was over. Sri Ramakrishna bowed to the Divine Mother and
said, "Bhagavata — Bhakta — Bhagavan. My salutations to the jnanis, my
salutations to the yogis, my salutations to the bhaktas."

The Master was seated on the semicircular porch with Nilkantha and
the other devotees. The autumn moon flooded all the quarters with
light.
Sri Ramakrishna and Nilkantha talked.

NILKANTHA: "You are none other than Gauranga."

MASTER: "Why should you say such a thing? I am the servant of
the servant of all. The waves belong to the Ganges; but does the Ganges
belong
to the waves?"

NILKANTHA: "You may say whatever you like, but we regard
you as Gauranga himself."

MASTER (tenderly, in an ecstatic mood): "My dear
sir,
I try to seek my
'I', but I do not find it. Hanuman said: 'O Rama, sometimes I think
that You
are .the whole and I am a part, and sometimes that You are the Master
and
I am Your servant. But when I have the Knowledge of Reality, I see that
You are I and I am You.'"

NILKANTHA: "What shall I say, sir? Please be gracious to us."

MASTER (smiling): "You are ferrying many people
across the ocean of
the world. How many hearts are illumined by hearing your music!"

NILKANTHA: "You talk of ferrying. But bless me that I may not be
drowned
in the ocean myself."

MASTER (smiling): "If you get drowned, it will be in
the Sea of
Immortality."

Sri Ramakrishna was delighted with Nilkantha's company. He said to the
musician: "For you to have come here! You whom people see as a result
of
many austerities and prayers! Listen to a song."

The Master sang a song, two lines of which ran:

When the Blissful Mother comes to my house, how much of the Chandi
I shall hear!

How many monks will come here, and how many yogis with matted locks!

He said, continuing, "As long as the Divine Mother has come
here, many
yogis with matted locks will come too."

Sri Ramakrishna laughed. To M, Baburam, and the other devotees he
said: "I feel very much like laughing. Just fancy, I am singing for
these
musicians!"

NILKANTHA: "We go about singing; but today we have had our true reward."

MASTER (smiling): "When a shopkeeper sells an
article, he sometimes
gives a little extra something to the buyer. You sang at Nabin's house
and
have given the extra something here."

All laughed.


=== 31_advice_to_ishan.htm ===

Advice to Ishan

←
Home
/ The Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna
/ Volume 2
/ →

ADVICE TO ISHAN

The worldly Jadu Mallick — Warning devotees about women — How
to conquer passion — Disciplines during the sadhana period — Planes
of mind — On meditation — Tendencies from previous births — Dayananda
— Theosophy — Preparation for God-vision — Purusha and
Prakriti — Knowledge and ignorance — Hollowness of worldly love —
Reason and love — Different attitudes toward God — Master and
Ishan — Characteristics of Knowledge — Path of devotion — Path of
karma — Rituals are only steps — Master exhorts Ishan — Master sings
of the Divine Mother — The worship in the temple.

Saturday, October 11, 1884

SRI RAMAKRISHNA lay on the small couch in his room at the
Dakshineswar
temple garden. It was about two in the afternoon. M. and Priya
Mukherji were sitting on the floor. M. had left his school at one
o'clock and had just arrived at Dakshineswar. The Master was telling
anecdotes
about the calculating nature of the wealthy Jadu Mallick.

MASTER: "Once I went to Jadu Mallick's house. He asked right away,
'How much is the carriage hire?' Someone told him it was three rupees
and
two annas. Then he questioned me about it. Next one of his people
secretly
asked the coachman, who said it was three rupees and four annas. (All
laugh.) At that he ran to us and said, 'How much did you say
the carriage
hire was?'

"A broker was present. He said to Jadu: 'There is a plot of land at
Burrabazar for sale. Will you buy it?' Jadu asked the price and the
broker
told him. Jadu said, 'Won't he give it for less?' I said to Jadu:
'Come, come.
You aren't going to buy the land. You're only bargaining. Isn't that
so?' He
turned to me and laughed.

"That is the nature of the worldly man. He wants people to come to him.
That spreads his name in the market.

"Jadu went to Adhar's house. I told him it had made Adhar very happy.
He said: 'What? What? Was he really happy?' A certain Mallick came to
Jadu's house. He was very clever and deceitful. I saw it in his eyes. I
looked
at him and said: 'It isn't good to be clever. The crow is very clever,
but it
eats others' filth.' I could tell he was badly off. Jadu's mother was
amazed
and said to me, 'How did you know he hadn't a penny?' I saw it from his
appearance."

Narayan entered the room and sat on the floor.

MASTER (to Priyanath): "Well, your
Hari is a fine young man."

PRIYANATH: "What is so fine about him? Of course, he has a childlike
nature."

NARAYAN: "He addressed his wife as mother."

MASTER: "What! Even I can't do that. And he calls her mother! (To
Priyanath) You see, the boy is very quiet. His mind is
directed to God."

Sri Ramakrishna changed the subject of conversation.

MASTER: "Do you know what Hem said? He said to Baburam, 'God alone
is real; all else is illusory.' (All laugh.) Oh, no!
He said it sincerely. Again,
he told me he would take me to his house and sing kirtan. But he didn't
do
it. I understand that he said later on, 'What will people say if I sing
with
drums and cymbals?' He was afraid that people might think he was crazy.

"Haripada has fallen into the clutches of a woman of the Ghoshpara
sect.
He can't get rid of her. He says that she takes him on her lap and
feeds
him. She claims that she looks on him as the Baby Krishna. I have
warned
him a great many times. She says that she thinks of him as a child. But
this maternal affection soon degenerates into something dangerous.

"You see, you should keep far away from woman; then you may realize
God. It is extremely harmful to have much to do with women who have
bad motives, or to eat food from their hands. They rob a man of his
spirituality.
Only by being extremely careful about woman can one preserve one's
love of God. One day Bhavanath, Rakhal, and some other youngsters had
cooked their own meal in the temple garden. They were sitting at their
meal when a Baul arrived, sat down with them, and said he wanted to eat
with them. I said that there was not enough food; if anything was left
it
would be kept for him. He became angry and left. On the Vijaya day a
man allows anyone and everyone to feed him with his own hand. It is not
good. But one can eat food from the hand of a devotee who is pure in
heart.

"You must be extremely careful about women. Women speak of the attitude
of Gopala! Pay no attention to such things. The proverb says: 'A woman
devours the three worlds.' Many women, when they see handsome and
healthy young men, lay snares for them. That is what they call the
'attitude
of Gopala'.

"Those who develop dispassion from early youth, those who roam about
yearning for God from boyhood, those who refuse all worldly life,
belong to
a different class. They belong to an unsullied aristocracy. If they
develop
true renunciation, they keep themselves at least fifty cubits away from
women
lest their spiritual mood should be destroyed. Once falling into the
clutches
of women, they no longer remain on the level of unsullied aristocracy.
They
fall from it and come to a lower level. People who practise
renunciation
from early youth belong to a very high level. Their ideal is very pure.
They
are stainless.

"How can a man conquer passion? He should assume the attitude of a
woman. I spent many days as the handmaid of God. I dressed myself in
women's clothes, put on ornaments, and covered the upper part of my
body
with a scarf, just like a woman. With the scarf on I used to perform
the
evening worship before the image. Otherwise, how could I have kept my
wife with me for eight months? Both of us behaved as if we were the
hand-maids
of the Divine Mother, I cannot speak of myself as a man. One day I
was in an ecstatic mood. My wife asked me, 'How do you regard me?' 'As
the Blissful Mother', I said.

"Do you know the significance of the Siva emblem? It is the worship of
the symbols of fatherhood and motherhood. The devotee worshipping the
image prays, 'O Lord, please grant that I may not be born into this
world
again; that I may not have to pass again through a mother's womb.'"

A tutor of the Tagores entered the room with some boys of the family.
Sri Ramakrishna continued talking.

MASTER (to the devotees): "Sri Krishna has a peacock
feather on His
crest. The feather bears the sign of the female sex. The significance
of this
is that Krishna carries Prakriti, the female principle, on His head.
When
Krishna joined the circle of the gopis to dance with them, He appeared
there as a woman. That is why you see Him wearing women's apparel in
the company of the gopis. Unless a man assumes the nature of a woman,
he is not entitled to her company. Assuming the attitude of a woman, he
can sport with her and enjoy her company. But a man must be extremely
careful during the early stages of spiritual discipline. Then he must
live far
away from any woman. He must not go too close to one even if she is a
great devotee of God. You see, a man must not sway his body while
climbing
to the roof; he may fall. Weak people should hold on to a support while
going up the stairs.

"But it is quite different when one reaches perfection. After the
realization
of God there is not much for a man to fear; he has become to a great
extent secure. The important thing is for a man somehow to climb to the
roof. After that he can even dance there. But he cannot dance on the
steps.
Again, after climbing to the roof, you need no longer discard what you
discarded before. You find that the stairs are made of the same
materials —
bricks, lime, and brick-dust — as the roof. The woman you have to be so
careful about at the beginning will appear to you, after the
realization of
God, as the Divine Mother Herself. Then you will worship her as the
Divine Mother. You won't fear her so much.

"The thing is to touch the 'granny', as children do in the game of
hide-and-seek. Then you can do whatever you like.

"Man, looking outward, sees the gross; at that time his mind dwells in
the annamayakosha, the gross body. Next is the subtle body. Functioning
through the subtle body, the mind dwells in the manomayakosha and the
vijnanamayakosha. Next is the causal body. Functioning through the
causal
body the mind enjoys bliss; it dwells in the anandamayakosha. This
corresponds
to the semi-conscious state experienced by Chaitanya. Last of all, the
mind loses itself in the Great Cause. It disappears. It merges in the
Great
Cause. What one experiences after that cannot be described in words. In
his inmost state of consciousness, Chaitanya enjoyed this experience.
Do you
know what this state is like? Dayananda described it by saying, 'Come
into
the inner apartments and shut the door.' Anyone and everyone cannot
enter
that part of the house.

"I used to meditate on the flame of a light. I thought of the red part
as
gross, the white part inside the red as subtle, and the stick-like
black part,
which is the innermost of all, as the causal.

"By certain signs you can tell when meditation is being rightly
practised.
One of them is that a bird will sit on your head, thinking you are an
inert
thing.

"I first met Keshab at a meeting of the Adi Samaj. Several members of
the
Samaj were sitting on the platform. Keshab was in the middle. I saw him
motionless as a log. Pointing to Keshab, I said to Mathur Babu: 'Look
there!
That bait has been swallowed by a fish.' Because of that power of
meditation
he achieved what he wanted — name, fame, and so forth —, through the
grace of God.

"One can meditate even with eyes open. One can meditate even while
talking. Take the case of a man with toothache —"

TUTOR OF THE TAGORES: "Yes, sir.
I know that very well." (All laugh.)

MASTER (smiling): "Yes, even when his teeth ache he
does all his duties,
but his mind is on the pain. Likewise one can meditate with eyes open
and
while talking to others as well."

TUTOR: "One of the epithets of God is the Redeemer
of the sinner'. That is our hope. God is compassionate."

MASTER: "The Sikhs, too, said that God was compassionate. I asked, 'How
is He compassionate?' 'Why,' they answered, 'He has begotten us; He has
created so many things for us; He has brought us up to be men; and He
protects us from danger at every step.' Thereupon I said: 'After
begetting
us, God looks after us and feeds us. Is there much credit in that?
Suppose a
son is born to you. Do you expect a man from another part of the city
to
bring him up?'"

TUTOR: "Revered sir, one man quickly succeeds in spiritual life, and
another doesn't succeed at all. How do you explain that?"

MASTER: "The truth is that a man succeeds to a great extent because of
tendencies inherited from his previous births. People think he has
attained
the goal all of a sudden. A man drank a glass of wine in the morning.
It
made him completely drunk. He began to behave improperly. People were
amazed to see that he could be so drunk after one glass. But another
man
said, 'Why, he has been drinking all night.'

"Hanuman burnt down the golden city of Lanka. People were amazed
that a mere monkey could burn the whole, city. But then they said, 'The
truth is that the city was burnt by the sighs of Sita and the wrath of
Rama.'

"Look at Lala Babu.1
He had so much wealth. Could he have renounced
it all so suddenly without the good tendencies of his previous births?
And
Rani Bhavani. So much knowledge and devotion in a woman!

"In his last birth a man is endowed with sattva. His mind is directed
to
God. He longs for God. He withdraws his mind from worldly things.

"Krishnadas Pal came here. I found him full of rajas. But it must be
said
that he observed the Hindu customs. He left his shoes outside before
entering
the room. After a little conversation I discovered that he had no stuff
inside. I asked him about man's duty. He said, To do good to the
world.' I
said: 'My dear sir, who are you? What good will you do to the world? Is
the
world such a small thing that you think you can help it?'"

Narayan arrived. Sri Ramakrishna was very happy to see him. He seated
Narayan by his side on the small couch. He showed him his love by
stroking
his body and giving him sweets to eat. Then he asked Naravan tenderly,
"Will you have some water?" Narayan was a student at M.'s school. At
home
his people beat him for visiting Sri Ramakrishna. The Master said to
Narayan with an affectionate smile, "You had better get a leather
jacket;
then the beating won't hurt." Turning to Harish, the Master said that
he
would like to have a smoke.

Again addressing Narayan, Sri Ramakrishna said: "That woman who has
established an artificial relationship of mother and son with Haripada
came
here the other day. I have warned Haripada very often. She belongs to
the
Ghoshpara sect. I asked her if she had found her 'man'. She said yes,
and
mentioned a man's name.

(To M.) "Ah! Nilkantha came here the other day. What
spiritual fervour
he has! He said he would come here another day and sing for us. They
are
dancing over there. Why don't you go and see it? (To Ramlal)
There is no
oil in the room. (Looking at the oil-jar) The
servant hasn't filled it."

Sri Ramakrishna was walking up and down, now in his room, now on the
south verandah. Occasionally pausing on the semicircular porch west of
his
room, he would look at the Ganges.

After a little while he returned to his room and sat on the small
couch.
It was past three in the afternoon. The devotees took their seats on
the floor.
The Master sat in silence before them, now and then casting a glance at
the walls, where many pictures were hanging. To Sri Ramakrishna's left
was a picture of Sarasvati, and beyond it, a picture of Gaur and Nitai
singing
kirtan with their devotees. In front of the Master hung pictures of
Dhruva,
Prahlada, and Mother Kali. On the wall to his right was another picture
of
the Divine Mother, Rajarajesvari. Behind him was a picture of Jesus
Christ
raising the drowning Peter. Suddenly Sri Ramakrishna turned to M. and
said: "You see, it is good to keep pictures of sannyasis and holy men
in one's
room. When you get up in the morning you should see the faces of holy
persons rather than the faces of other men. People with rajasic
qualities
keep 'English' pictures on their walls — pictures of rich men, the
King, the
Queen, the Prince of Wales, and white men and women walking together.
That shows their rajasic temperament.

"You acquire the nature of the people whose company you keep. Therefore
even pictures may prove harmful. Again, a man seeks the company that
agrees with his own nature. The paramahamsas keep near them a few young
boys five or six years old. They allow such boys to be near them.
Attaining
the state of a paramahamsa, a man loves the company of boys. Like the
paramahamsas, the boys are not under the control of the gunas — sattva,
rajas, or tamas.

"By looking at trees a man awakens in his heart the picture of a
hermitage
in which a rishi is practising austerity."

A brahmin from Sinthi entered the room and saluted Sri Ramakrishna.
He had studied Vedanta in Benares. He was stout and had a smiling face.

MASTER: "Hello! How are you? You haven't been here in a long time."

PUNDIT (smiling): "Worldly duties, sir. You know I
have very little leisure."

The pundit sat down, and the Master began to talk with him.

MASTER: "You spent a long time in Benares. Tell us
what you saw there. Tell us something about Dayananda."

PUNDIT: "Yes, I met him. You also met him, didn't you?"

MASTER: "Yes, I visited him. He was living then in a garden house on
the other side of the Ganges. Keshab was expected there that day. He
longed
for Keshab as the chatak bird longs for rain. He was a great scholar
and
made fun of the Bengali language. He admitted the existence of the
deities,
but Keshab did not. Dayananda used to say: 'God has created so many
things.
Couldn't He have created the deities?' Dayananda believed the Ultimate
Reality to be without form. Captain was repeating the name of Rama.
Dayananda said to him sarcastically, 'Better repeat "sandesh"!'"

PUNDIT: "In Benares the pundits had great discussions with Dayananda.
Finally he was left alone with all the others against him. They made it
so
hot for him that he thought the only way to save himself was by running
away. All the pundits shouted with one voice, 'Whatever Dayananda has
said is to be despised!'

"I saw Colonel Olcott too. The Theosophists believe in the existence of
mahatmas, They also speak of the 'lunar', 'solar', 'stellar', and other
planes.
A Theosophist can go in his 'astral body' to all these planes. Oh,
Olcott said
many such things. Well, sir, what do you think of Theosophy?"

MASTER: "The one essential thing is bhakti, loving devotion to God. Do
the Theosophists seek bhakti? They are good if they do. If Theosophy
makes
the realization of God the goal of life, then it is good. One cannot
seek God
if one constantly busies oneself with the mahatmas and the lunar,
solar,
and stellar planes. A man should practise sadhana and pray to God with
a
longing heart for love of His Lotus Feet. He should direct his mind to
God
alone, withdrawing it from the various objects of the world."

The Master sang:

How are you trying, O my mind, to know the nature of God?

You are groping like a madman locked in a dark room.

He is grasped through ecstatic love; how can you fathom Him without it?
. . .

And, for that love, the mighty yogis practise yoga from age to age;

When love awakes, the Lord, like a magnet, draws to Him the soul.

Continuing, the Master said: "You may speak of the scriptures,
of
philosophy. of Vedanta; but you will not find God in any of these. You
will never
succeed in realizing God unless your soul becomes restless for Him.

Only through affirmation, never negation, can you know Him,

Neither through Veda nor through Tantra nor the six darsanas.

It is in love's elixir only that He delights, O mind;

He dwells in the body's inmost depths, in Everlasting Joy.

"One must be very earnest about God. Listen to another song:

Can everyone have the vision of Radha? Can everyone taste her love?

This, the rarest treasure of all, no earthly wealth can buy;

Without devotions and sadhana none can ever obtain it.

The raindrop falling upon the deep when Svati shines on high

Is formed within the oyster's shell into a priceless pearl.

Can such a pearl be formed from rain that falls at other times?

Mothers with their babes in arms may beckon to the moon

To leave the sky and come to them; but only the babes are fooled.

Does the moon ever leave the sky and dwell upon the earth?

"One must practise intense spiritual discipline. Can one
obtain the vision
of God all of a sudden, without any preparation?

"A man asked me, 'Why don't I see God?' I said to him, as the idea came
to my mind: "You want to catch a big fish. First make arrangements for
it.
Throw spiced bait into the water. Get a line and a rod. At the smell of
the
bait the fish will come from the deep water. By the movement of the
water
you will know that a big fish has come.'

"You want to eat butter. But what will you achieve by simply repeating
that there is butter in milk? You have to work hard for it. Only thus
can
you separate butter from milk. Can one see God by merely repeating,
'God
exists'? One needs sadhana.

"The Divine Mother Herself practised austere sadhana to set an example
for mankind. Sri Krishna, who is none other than the Ultimate Brahman,
also practised sadhana to set an example to others.

"Sri Krishna is the Purusha and Radha the Prakriti, the Chitsakti, the
Adyasakti. Radha is the Prakriti, the embodiment of the three gunas.
Sattva,
rajas, and tamas are in her. As you remove the layers of an onion, you
will
first see tints of both black and red, then only red, and last of all
only white.
The Vaishnava scriptures speak of 'Kam-Radha', 'Prem-Radha', and
'Nitya-Radha'. Chandravali is Kam-Radha, and Srimati is Prem-Radha;
Nanda
saw Nitya-Radha holding Gopala in Her arms.2

"The Brahman of Vedanta and the Chitsakti are identical, like water and
its wetness. The moment you think of water you must also think of its
wetness, and the moment you think of water's wetness you must also
think
of water. Or it is like the snake and its wriggling motion. The moment
you
think of the snake you must also think of its wriggling motion, and the
moment you think of the snake's wriggling motion you must also think of
the snake. When do I call the Ultimate Reality by the name of Brahman?
When It is actionless or unattached to action. When a man puts on a
cloth
he remains the same man as when he was naked. He was naked; now he is
clothed. He may be naked again. There is poison in the snake, but it
doesn't
harm the snake. It is poison to him who is bitten by the snake. Brahman
Itself is unattached.

"Names and forms are nothing but the manifestations of the power of
Prakriti. Sita said to Hanuman: 'My child, in one form I am Sita, in
another
form I am Rama. In one form I am Indra, in another I am Indrani. In one
form I am Brahma, in another, Brahmani. In one form I am Rudra, in
another, Rudrani.'3
Whatever names and forms you see are nothing but the
manifestations of the power of Chitsakti. Everything is the power of
Chitsakti — even meditation and he who meditates. As long as I feel
that I
am meditating, I am within the jurisdiction of Prakriti. (To M.)
Try to
assimilate what I have said. One should hear what the Vedas and the
Puranas
say, and carry it out in life.

(To the pundit) "It is good to live in the company
of holy men now and
then. The disease of worldliness has become chronic in man. It is
mitigated,
to a great extent, in holy company.

"'I' and 'mine' — that is ignorance. True knowledge makes one feel: 'O
God, You alone do everything. You alone are my own. And to You alone
belong houses, buildings, family, relatives, friends, the whole world.
All is
Yours.' But ignorance makes one feel: 'I am doing everything. I am the
doer. House, buildings, family, children, friends, and property are all
mine.'

"Once a teacher was explaining all this to a disciple. He said, 'God
alone,
and no one else, is your own.' The disciple said: 'But, revered sir, my
mother,
my wife, and my other relatives take very good care of me. They see
nothing
but darkness when I am not present. How much they love me!' The teacher
said: 'There you are mistaken. I shall show you presently that nobody
is
your own. Take these few pills with you. When you go home, swallow them
and lie down in bed. People will think you are dead, but you will
remain
conscious of the outside world and will see and hear everything. Then I
shall visit your home.

"The disciple followed the instructions. He swallowed the pills and lay
as if unconscious in his bed. His mother, wife, and other relatives
began to
cry. Just then the teacher came in, in the guise of a physician, and
asked
the cause of their grief. When they had told him everything, he said to
them: 'Here is a medicine for him. It will bring him back to life. But
I must
tell you one thing. This medicine must first be taken by one of his
relatives
and then given to him. But the relative who takes it first will die. I
see his
mother, his wife, and others here. Certainly one of you will volunteer
to
take the medicine. Then the young man will come back to life.'

"The disciple heard all this. First the physician called his mother,
who
was weeping and rolling on the ground in grief. He said to her:
'Mother,
you don't need to weep any more. Take this medicine and your son will
come to life. But you will die.' The mother took the medicine in her
hand
and began to think. After much reflection she said to the physician,
with
tears in her eyes: 'My child, I have a few more children. I have to
think
about them too. I am wondering what will happen to them if I die. Who
will feed them and look after them?' The physician next called the wife
and
handed the medicine to her. She had been weeping bitterly too. With the
medicine in her hand she also began to reflect. She had heard that she
would
die from the effect of the medicine. At last, with tears in her eyes,
she said:
'He has met his fate. It I die, what will happen to my young children?
Who
will keep them alive? How can I take the medicine?' In the mean time
the
disciple had got over the effect of the pills. He was now convinced
that
nobody was really his own. He jumped out of bed and left the place with
his teacher. The guru said to him, 'There is only one whom you may call
your own, and that is God.'

"Therefore a man should act in such a way that he may have bhakti for
the Lotus Feet of God and love God as his very own. You see this world
around you. It exists for you only for a couple of days. There is
nothing to it."

PUNDIT (smiling): "Revered sir, I feel a spirit of
total
renunciation when I am here. I feel like going away, giving up the
world."

MASTER: "No, no! Why should you give up? Give up mentally. Live
unattached in the world.

"Surendra wanted to spend the night here occasionally. He brought a
bed and even spent a day or two here. Then his wife said to him, 'You
may
go anywhere you like during the day-time, but at night you must not
leave
home.' What could poor Surendra do? Now he has no way of spending the
night away from home.

"What will you achieve by mere reasoning? Be restless for God and learn
to love Him. Reason, mere intellectual knowledge, is like a man who can
go only as far as the outer court of the house. But bhakti is like a
woman
who goes into the inner court.

"One must take up a definite attitude toward God. Then alone can one
realize Him. Rishis like Sanaka cherished the attitude of santa;
Hanuman
the attitude of a servant; the cowherd boys of Vrindavan, like Sridama
and
Sudama, the attitude of a friend; Yasoda the attitude of a mother; and
Radha the attitude of a sweetheart.

"'O God, Thou art the Lord and I am Thy servant' — that is the
servant's
attitude, a very good one for aspirants."

PUNDIT: "Yes, sir."

The pundit from Sinthi left. If was dusk. Twilight hung over the
Panchavati, the temples, and the river. Evening worship began in the
different
temples, accompanied by the sound of bells, gongs, and conch-shells.
Sri Ramakrishna bowed before the pictures of the deities in his room.
He
was sitting on the small couch in an abstracted mood. A few devotees
were
on the floor. There was silence in the room.

An hour passed. Ishan and Kishori entered and sat down on the floor
after
saluting Sri Ramakrishna. Ishan was a great ritualist. He was devoted
to the
performance of the various rites and ceremonies prescribed by the
scriptures.
The Master opened the conversation.

MASTER: "Can one attain knowledge of God by merely repeating the
word 'God'? There are two indications of such knowledge. First,
longing,
that is to say, love for God. You may indulge in reasoning or
discussion, but
if you feel no longing or love, it is all futile. Second, the awakening
of the
Kundalini. As long as the Kundalini remains asleep, you have not
attained
knowledge of God. You may be spending hours poring over books or
discussing
philosophy, but if you have no inner restlessness for God, you have no
knowledge of Him.

"When the Kundalini is awakened, one attains bhava, bhakti, prema, and
so on. This is the path of devotion.

"The path of karma (Here signifying religious rites and rituals.)
is very difficult. Through it one obtains some powers — I mean occult
powers."

ISHAN: "Let me go and see Hazra."

Sri Ramakrishna sat in silence. After a while Ishan returned to the
room
accompanied by Hazra. The Master was still silent. A few moments later
Hazra whispered to Ishan: "Let's leave him alone. Perhaps he will
meditate
now." Both left the room.

Sri Ramakrishna was still silent. In a few moments the devotees noticed
that he was really meditating. Then he performed japa. He placed his
right
hand on his head, then on his forehead, then on his throat, then on his
heart,
and last of all on his navel. Was it meditation on the Primordial
Energy in
the six centres of the body?

Ishan and Hazra had gone to the Kali temple. Sri Ramakrishna was
absorbed
in meditation. Meanwhile Adhar had arrived. It was about half past
seven.

A little later the Master went to the Kali temple. He looked at the
image,
took some sacred flowers from the feet of the Mother, and placed them
on
his head. He prostrated himself before the Mother and went round the
image. He waved the chamara. He appeared ecstatic with divine fervour.
Coming out, he found Ishan performing the sandhya with the kosakusi.

MASTER (to Ishan): "What? You are
still here? Are you still performing the sandhya? Listen to a song:

Why should I go to Ganga or Gaya, to Kasi, Kanchi, or Prabhas,

So long as I can breathe my last with Kali's name upon my lips?

What need of rituals has a man, what need o£ devotions any more,

If he repeats the Mother's name at the three holy hours?

Rituals may pursue him close, but never can they overtake him.

Charity, vows, and giving of gifts do not appeal to Madan's mind;

The Blissful Mother's Lotus Feet are his whole prayer and sacrifice. .
. .

"How long must a man continue the sandhya? As long as he has
not
developed love for the Lotus Feet of God, as long as he does not shed
tears
and his hair does not stand on end when he repeats God's name.

I bow my head, says Prasad, before desire and liberation;

Knowing the secret that Kali is one with the highest Brahman,

I have discarded, once for all, both dharma and adharma.

"When the fruit grows, the flower drops off. When One has
developed
love of God and has beheld Him, then one gives up the sandhya and other
rites. When the young daughter-in-law is with child, the mother-in-law
reduces her activities. When she has been pregnant for nine months, she
is
not allowed to perform any household duty. After the birth of the
child,
she only carries the child on her arm and nurses it. She has no other
duty.
After the attainment of God, the sandhya and other rites are given up.

"You cannot achieve anything by moving at such a slow pace. You need
stern renunciation. Can you achieve anything by counting fifteen months
as
a year? You seem to have no strength, no grit. You are as mushy as
flattened
rice soaked in milk. Be up and doing! Gird your loins!

"I don't like that song:

Brother, joyfully cling to God;

Thus striving, some day you may attain Him.

I don't care for the line, Thus striving, some day you may
attain Him.' You
need stern renunciation. I say the same thing to Hazra.

"You ask me why you don't feel stern renunciation. There is a reason
for it. You have desires and tendencies within you. The same is true of
Hazra. In our part of the country I have seen peasants bringing water
into
their paddy-fields. The fields have low ridges on all sides to prevent
the
water from leaking out; but these are made of mud and often have holes
here and there. The peasants work themselves to death to bring the
water,
which, however, leaks out through the holes. Desires are the holes. You
practise japa and austerities, no doubt, but they all leak out through
the
holes of your desires.

"They catch fish with a bamboo trap. The bamboo is naturally straight.
But why is it bent in the trap? In order to catch the fish. Desires are
the
fish. Therefore the mind is bent down toward the world. If there are no
desires, the mind naturally looks up toward God.

"Do you know what it is like? It is like the needles of a balance. On
account of the weight of 'woman and gold' the two needles are not in
line.
It is 'woman and gold' that makes a man stray from the path of yoga.
Haven't
you noticed the flame of a candle? The slightest wind makes it waver.
The
state of yoga is like the candle-flame in a windless place.

"The mind is dispersed. Part of it has gone to Dacca, part to Delhi,
and
another part to Coochbehar. That mind is to be gathered in; it must be
concentrated on one object. If you want sixteen annas' worth of cloth,
then
you have to pay the merchant the full sixteen annas. Yoga is not
possible if
there is the slightest obstacle. If there is a tiny break in the
telegraph-wire,
then the news cannot be transmitted.

"You are no doubt in the world. What if you are? You must surrender the
fruit of your action to God. You must not seek any result for yourself.
But
mark one thing. The desire for bhakti cannot be called a desire. You
may
desire bhakti and pray for it. Practise the tamas of bhakti and force
your
demand upon the Divine Mother.

This bitterly contested suit between the Mother and Her son —

What sport it is! says Ramprasad. I shall not cease tormenting Thee

Till Thou Thyself shalt yield the fight and take me in Thine arms at
last.

"Trailokya once remarked, 'As I was born into the family, I
have a share
in the estate.'

"God is your own Mother. Is She a stepmother? Is it an artificial
relationship?
If you cannot force your demand on Her, then on whom can you force
it? Say to Her:

Mother, am I Thine eight-months child.?4
Thy red eyes cannot frighten me!

A deed of gift I hold in my heart, attested by Thy Husband Siva;

I shall sue Thee, if I must, and with a single point shall win.

"God is your own Mother. Enforce your demand. If you are part
of a
thing, you feel its attraction. Because of the element of the Divine
Mother
in me I feel attracted to Her. A true Saiva has some of the
characteristics of
Siva; he has in him some of the elements of Siva. He who is a true
Vaishnava
is endowed with some of the elements of Narayana.

"Nowadays you don't have to attend to worldly duties. Spend a few days
thinking of God. You have seen that there is nothing to the world."

The Master sang:

Remember this, O mind! Nobody is your own:

Vain is your wandering in this world.

Trapped in the subtle snare of maya as you are,

Do not forget the Mother's name.

Only a day or two men honour you on earth

As lord and master; all too soon

That form, so honoured now, must needs be cast away,

When Death, the Master, seizes you.

Even your beloved wife, for whom, while yet you live,

You fret yourself almost to death,

Will not go with you then; she too will say farewell,

And shun your corpse as an evil thing.

Continuing, the Master said: "What are these things you busy
yourself
with — this arbitration and leadership? I hear that you settle people's
quarrels
and that they make you the arbiter. You have been doing this kind of
work
a long time. Let those who care for such things do them. Now devote
your
mind more and more to the 'Lotus Feet of God. The saying goes: 'Ravana
died in Lanka and Behula5
wept bitterly for him!'

"Sambhu, too, said, 'I shall build hospitals and dispensaries.' He was
a
devotee of God; so I said to him, 'Will you ask God for hospitals and
dispensaries when you see Him?'

"Keshab Sen asked me, 'Why do I not see God?' I said, 'You do not see
God because you busy yourself with such things as name and fame and
scholarship.' The mother does not come to the child as long as it sucks
its
toy —a red toy. But when, after a few minutes, it throws the toy away
and
cries, then the mother takes down the rice-pot from the hearth and
comes
running to the child.

"You are engaged in arbitration. The Divine Mother says to Herself:
'My child over there is now busy arbitrating and is very happy. Let him
be.'"

In the mean time Ishan had been holding Sri Ramakrishna's feet. He said
humbly, "It is not my will that I should do those things."

MASTER: "I know it. This is the Divine Mother's play — Her lila. It is
the
will of the Great Enchantress that many should remain entangled in the
world. Do you know what it is like?

How many are the boats, O mind,

That float on the ocean of this world!

How many are those that sink!

Again,

Out of a hundred thousand kites, at best but one or two break free;

And Thou dost laugh and clap Thy hands, O Mother, watching them!

Only one or two in a hundred thousand get liberation. The rest
are entangled
through the will of the Divine Mother.

"Haven't you seen the game of hide-and-seek? It is the 'granny's' will
that the game should continue. If all touch her and are released, then
the
playing comes to a stop. Therefore it is not her will that all should
touch her.

"You see, in big grain stores the merchants keep rice in great heaps
that
touch the ceiling. Beside them there are heaps of lentils. To protect
the
grain from the mice, the merchants leave trays of puffed rice and
sweetened
rice near it. The mice like the smell and the sweet taste of these and
so stay
around the trays. They don't find the big heaps of grain. Similarly,
men are
deluded by 'woman and gold'; they do not know where God is.

"Rama said to Narada, 'Ask a boon of Me.' Narada said: 'O Rama, is
there anything I lack? What shall I ask of Thee? But if Thou must give
me
a boon, grant that I may have selfless love for Thy Lotus Feet and that
I
may not be deluded by Thy world-bewitching maya.' Rama said, 'Narada,
ask
something else.' Narada again replied: 'O Rama, I don't want anything
else.
Be gracious to me and see that I have pure love for Thy Lotus Feet.'

"I prayed to the Divine Mother: 'O Mother, I don't want name and fame.
I don't want the eight occult powers. I don't want a hundred occult
powers.
O Mother, I have no desire for creature comforts. Please, Mother, grant
me
the boon that I may have pure love for Thy Lotus Feet.'

"It is written in the Adhyatma Ramayana that
Lakshmana asked Rama:
'Rama, in how many forms and moods do You exist? How shall I be able to
recognize You?' Rama said: 'Brother, remember this. You may be certain
that I exist wherever you find the manifestation of ecstatic love.'
That love
makes one laugh and weep and dance and sing. If anyone has developed
such love, you may know for certain that God Himself is manifest there.
Chaitanyadeva reached that state."

The devotees listened spellbound to Sri Ramakrishna. His burning words
entered their souls, spurring them along the path of renunciation.

Now he spoke to Ishan in a serious voice.

MASTER: "Don't forget yourself because of what you hear from your
flatterers. Flatterers gather around a worldly man. Vultures gather
around
the carcass of a cow.

"Worldly people have no stuff in them. They are like a heap of
cow-dung.
Flatterers come to them and say: 'You are so charitable and wise! You
are
so pious!' These are not mere words but pointed bamboos thrust at them.
How foolish it is! To be surrounded day and night by a bunch of worldly
brahmin pundits and hear their flattery!

"Worldly men are slaves of three things: they are slaves of their
wives,
slaves of their money, slaves of their masters. Can they have any inner
stuff?
There is a certain person whom I shall not name; he earns eight hundred
rupees a month but is the slave of his wife. He stands up or sits down
at
her bidding.

"Arbitration and leadership? How trifling these are! Charity and doing
good to others? You have had enough of these. Those who are to devote
themselves to such things belong to a different class. Now the time is
ripe
for you to devote your mind to the Lotus Feet of God. If you realize
God,
you will get everything else. First God, then charity, doing good to
others,
doing good to the world, and redeeming people. Why need you worry about
these things. 'Ravana died in Lanka and Behula wept for him bitterly!'

"That's the trouble with you. It will be very good if a
world-renouncing
sannyasi gives you some spiritual instruction. The advice of the
worldly man
will not be right, be he a brahmin pundit or anyone else.

"Be mad! Be mad with love of God! Let people know that Ishan has gone
mad and cannot perform worldly duties any more. Then people will no
longer come to you for leadership and arbitration. Throw aside the
kosakusi
and justify your name of Ishan." (An epithet of the
all-renouncing Siva.)

Ishan quoted:

O Mother, make me mad with Thy love!

What need have I of knowledge or reason?

MASTER: "Mad! That's the thing! Shivanath once said that one 'loses
one's
head' by thinking too much of God. 'What?' said I. 'Can anyone ever
become
unconscious by thinking of Consciousness? God is of the nature of
Eternity,
Purity, and Consciousness. Through His Consciousness one becomes
conscious
of everything; through His Intelligence the whole world appears
intelligent.'
Shivanath said that some Europeans had gone insane, that they had
lost their heads', by thinking too much about God. In their case it may
be
true; for they think of worldly things. There is a line in a song:
'Divine
fervour fills my body and robs me of consciousness.' The consciousness
referred
to here is the consciousness of the outer world."

Ishan was seated touching Sri Ramakrishna's feet and listening to his
words. Now and then he cast a glance at the basalt image of Kali in the
shrine. In the light of the lamp She appeared to be smiling. It was as
if the
living Deity, manifesting Herself through the image, was delighted to
hear
the Master's words, holy as the words of the Vedas.

ISHAN (pointing to the image): "Those words from
your sacred lips have
really come from there."

MASTER: "I am the machine and She is the Operator. I am the house and
She is the Indweller. I am the chariot and She is the Charioteer. I
move as
She moves me; I speak as She speaks through me. In the Kaliyuga one
does
not hear the voice of God, it is said, except through the mouth of a
child or
a madman or some such person.

"A man cannot be a guru. Everything happens by the will of God. Heinous
sins — the sins of many births — and accumulated ignorance all
disappear in
the twinkling of an eye, through the grace of God. When light enters a
room that has been kept dark a thousand years, does it remove the
thousand
years' darkness little by little, or instantly? Of course, at the mere
touch of
light all the darkness disappears.

"What can a man do? He may speak many words, but after all is said and
done everything rests with God. The lawyer says: 'I have said all that
can
be said. Now the verdict rests with the judge.'

"Brahman is actionless. When It is engaged in creation, preservation,
and
dissolution, It is called the Primal Power, Adyasakti. This Power must
be
propitiated. Don't you know that it is so written in the Chandi?
The gods
first sang a hymn to the Adyasakti in order to propitiate Her. Only
then did
Hari wake up from His yoga sleep."

ISHAN: "Yes, sir. Brahma and the other gods sang this hymn at the time
of the death of the demons Madhu and Kaitabha:

Svaha, Vashat, and Svadha art Thou;6
Thou the inner Self of the mantra;

Thou the Nectar of Immortality, O Everlasting One!

Eternal and unutterable art Thou, and yet Thou art manifest

In the three matras7
and the half matra.8

O Goddess, Thou art Savitri;9
Thou art the Ultimate Mother;

All things have their support in Thee, by whom this universe was made.

O Goddess, Thou sustainest all, and all by Thee is devoured!

Thou it is that we call the Creator, when Thou Greatest the world,

O Embodiment of creation!

Thou it is that we call the Preserver, when Thou preservest it;

Thou it is that we call the Destroyer, when Thou destroyest it."

MASTER: "Yes, but you must assimilate that."

The Master rose. He mounted the platform in front of the shrine and
saluted the Mother, touching the ground with his forehead. The devotees
quickly gathered around him and fell at his feet. They all begged his
grace.
He descended from the platform and started toward his room, conversing
with M. First he sang:

I bow my head, says Prasad, before desire and liberation;

Knowing the secret that Kali is one with the highest Brahman,

I have discarded, once for all, both dharma and adharma.

The Master continued: "Do you know the meaning of dharma and
adharma? Here dharma means religious acts enjoined by the scriptures,
such
as charity, sraddha, feeding the poor, and the like.

"The performance of this dharma is called the path of karma. It is an
extremely difficult path: it is very hard to act without motive.
Therefore
one is asked to pursue the path of devotion.

"A man was performing the sraddha ceremony at his house. He was
feeding many people. Just then a butcher passed, leading a cow to
slaughter.
He could not control the animal and became exhausted. He said to
himself:
'Let me go into that house and enjoy the feast of the sraddha ceremony
and strengthen my body. Then I shall be able to drag the cow along.' So
he
carried out his intention. But when he killed the cow, the sin of the
slaughter fell also on the performer of the sraddha. That is why I say
the
path of devotion is better than the path of action."

The Master entered his room accompanied by M. He was humming a
song. The forceful words of renunciation that he had just spoken to
Ishan
found expression through its words. He sang the lines:

Mother, take everything else away from me,

But leave me my necklace of bones and my pot of hemp!10

Sri Ramakrishna sat down on the small couch, and Adhar,
Kishori, and
the other devotees sat on the floor.

MASTER (to the devotees): "I was noticing Ishan.
Why, he hasn't achieved
anything! What can be the reason? He practised the purascharana for
five
months. That would have caused a revolution in any other person."

ADHAR: "It wasn't wise of you to say those things to him in front of
us."

MASTER: "How is that? He is so much given to japa! How can words
affect him?"

After a while Sri Ramakrishna said to Adhar, "Ishan is very charitable,
and he practises japa and austerity a great deal." The Master remained
quiet
a few moments. The eyes of the devotees were fixed on him. Suddenly Sri
Ramakrishna said to Adhar, "You have both — yoga and bhoga."

Saturday, October 18, 1884

It was the day of the worship of Kali, the Divine Mother. The
worship
was to begin at eleven o'clock at night. Several devotees arrived at
the temple
garden early in the evening. They wanted to visit Sri Ramakrishna
during
the holy hours of the night of the new moon.

M. came alone to the garden about eight o'clock in the evening. The
great religious festival had already begun. Lamps had been lighted here
and
there in the garden, and the temples were brightly illuminated. Music
could
be heard in the nahabat. The temple officers were moving about
hurriedly.
There was to be a theatrical performance in the early hours of the
morning.
The villagers had heard of the festive occasion, and a large crowd of
men
and women, young and old, was streaming in.

In the afternoon there had been a musical recital of the Chandi
by
Rajnarayan. Sri Ramakrishna had been present with the devotees and had
enjoyed the recital immensely. As the time for the worship approached,
he
was overwhelmed with ecstasy.

M. found Sri Ramakrishna seated on the small couch in his room.
Baburam, the younger Gopal, Haripada, Kishori, a relative of Niranjan,
a
young man from Ariadaha, and other devotees were seated on the floor
facing him. Ramlal and Hazra were in the room part of the time.
Niranjan's
young relative was meditating in front of Sri Ramakrishna, as the
Master
had bidden.

M. saluted the Master and took a seat. After a while Niranjan's
relative
bowed low before Sri Ramakrishna and was about to depart. The young
man from Ariadaha also wished to leave. The Master said to Niranjan's
relative, "When will you come again?"

DEVOTEE: "Perhaps next Monday."

MASTER (eagerly): "Do you want a lantern to take
with you?"

DEVOTEE: "No, sir, I live next to this garden. I don't need a lantern."

MASTER (to the young man from Ariadaha): "Are you
going too?"

YOUNG MAN: "Yes, sir, I have a slight cold."

MASTER: "All right. Cover your head."

They again saluted the Master and took their leave.

It was the awe-inspiring night of the new moon. The worship of the
Divine Mother added to its solemnity. Sri Ramakrishna was seated on the
couch, leaning against a pillow. His mind was indrawn. Now and then he
exchanged a word or two with the devotees. Suddenly he looked at M. and
the other devotees and said: "Ah, how deep the young man's meditation
was! (To Haripada) Wasn't it deep?"

HARIPADA: "Yes, sir, he was motionless as a log."

MASTER (to Kishori): "Do you know that boy? He is a
cousin of
Niranjan."

Again there was silence in the room. Haripada was gently stroking the
Master's feet. The Master was humming some of the songs he had heard
that evening during the recital of the Chandi. He
sang softly:

Who is there that can understand what Mother Kali is?

Even the six darsanas are powerless to reveal Her. . . .

Sri Ramakrishna sat up. With intense fervour he began to sing
about the
Divine Mother:

All creation is the sport of my mad Mother Kali;

By Her maya the three worlds are bewitched.

Mad is She and mad is Her Husband; mad are Her two disciples!

None can describe Her loveliness, Her glories, gestures, moods;

Siva, with the agony of the poison in His throat,

Chants Her name again and again.

The Personal does She oppose to the Impersonal,

Breaking one stone with another;

Though to all else She is agreeable,

Where duties are concerned She will not yield.

Keep your raft, says Ramprasad, afloat on the sea of life,

Drifting up with the flood-tide, drifting down with the ebb.

The Master was quite overwhelmed with the song. He said that
songs like
these denoted a state of divine inebriation. He sang one after another:

This time I shall devour Thee utterly, Mother Kali!

For I was born under an evil star,

And one so born becomes, they say, the eater of his mother. . . .

Then:

O Kali, my Mother full of Bliss! Enchantress of the almighty Siva!

In Thy delirious joy Thou dancest, clapping Thy hands together! . . .

And then:

If at the last my life-breath leaves me as I repeat the name of Kali,

I shall attain the realm of Siva. What does Benares mean to me?

Infinite are my Mother's glories; who can find the end of Her virtues?

Siva, beholding their smallest part, lies prostrate at Her Lotus Feet.

The singing was over. Two sons of Rajnarayan entered the room
and
bowed low before the Master. In the afternoon they had sung with their
father the glories of the Divine Mother. The Master sang again with
them:

All creation is the sport of my mad Mother Kali . . .

The younger brother requested Sri Ramakrishna to sing a
certain song
about Sri Gauranga. The Master sang:

Gaur and Nitai, ye blessed brothers!

I have heard how kind you are,

And therefore I have come to you. . . .

Ramlal entered the room. The Master said to him: "Please sing
something
about the Divine Mother. It is the day of Her worship."

Ramlal sang:

Who is the Woman yonder who lights the field of battle?

Darker Her body gleams even than the darkest storm-cloud,

And from Her teeth there flash the lightning's blinding flames!

Dishevelled Her hair is flying behind as She rushes about,

Undaunted in this war between the gods and the demons.

Laughing Her terrible laugh. She slays the fleeing asuras,

And with Her dazzling flashes She bares the horror of war. . . .

Again Ramlal sang:

Who is this terrible Woman, dark as the sky at midnight?

Who is this Woman dancing over the field of battle? . . .

Sri Ramakrishna began to dance to the song. Then he himself
sang:

The black bee of my mind is drawn in sheer delight

To the blue lotus flower of Mother Syama's feet,

The blue flower of the feet of Kali, Siva's Consort.

Tasteless, to the bee, are the blossoms of desire.

My Mother's feet are black, and black, too, is the bee;

Black is made one with black! This much of the mystery

These mortal eyes behold, then hastily retreat.

But Kamalakanta's hopes are answered in the end;

He swims in the Sea of Bliss, unmoved by joy or pain.

After the music and dancing Sri Ramakrishna sat on the couch
and the
devotees sat on the floor. He said to M.: "It is a pity you weren't
here in
the afternoon. The musical recital of the Chandi
was very fine."

Some of the devotees went to the temple to salute the image of the
Divine
Mother. Others sat quietly performing japa on the steps leading to the
Ganges. It was about eleven o'clock, the most auspicious time for
contemplation
of the Divine Mother. The flood-tide was rising in the Ganges, and the
lights on its banks were reflected here and there in its dark waters.

From outside the shrine M. was looking wistfully at the image. Ramlal
came to the temple with a book in his hand containing the rules of the
worship. He asked M. if he wanted to come in. M. felt highly favoured
and
entered the shrine. He saw that the Divine Mother was profusely
decorated.
The room was brilliantly illuminated by a large chandelier that hung
from
the ceiling. Two candles were burning in front of the image. On the
floor
were trays full of offerings. Red hibiscus flowers and bel-leaves
adorned Her
feet. She wore garlands round Her neck M.'s eyes fell on the chamara.
Suddenly he remembered that Sri Ramakrishna often fanned the Divine
Mother with it. With some hesitation he asked Ramlal if he might fan
the
image. The priest gave his permission. M. joyously fanned the image.
The
regular worship had not yet begun.

The devotees again entered the Master's room. Beni Pal had invited Sri
Ramakrishna to visit the Sinthi Brahmo Samaj the next day, but had made
a mistake in his letter with regard to the date.

MASTER (to M.): "Beni Pal has sent me an invitation.
But why has he put
the wrong date?"

M: "The date was not written correctly. He wrote the letter carelessly."

As Sri Ramakrishna spoke, he was standing in the middle of the room
with Baburam by his side. He leaned toward the disciple, touching his
body.

Suddenly he went into samadhi. The devotees stood around with their
eyes
fixed on him. The Master's left foot was advanced a little; the
shoulder was
slightly inclined to one side; his arm rested on Baburam's neck near
the ear.
After a while he came down from the ecstatic state. As he stood there
he put
one hand to his cheek and appeared to be brooding over something. Then,
smiling, he addressed the devotees.

MASTER: "I saw everything — how far the devotees
had advanced. I saw Rakhal, him (pointing to M.),
Surendra, Baburam, and many others."

HAZRA: "Me?"

MASTER: "Yes."

HAZRA: "Many more obstacles?"

MASTER: "No."

HAZRA: "What about Narendra?"

MASTER: "I didn't see him. But I can tell about him. He
is a little entangled. But I saw that everyone will succeed. (To
M.) I saw that all are in hiding."

The devotees listened to these words with great wonder. It seemed to
them that they were hearing an oracle.

MASTER: "But I got into that mood by touching Baburam."

HAZRA: "Who is first?"

Sri Ramakrishna was quiet for a time. Then he said, "I wish I had a few
like Nityagopal." Again he appeared thoughtful. He remained standing.
He
said: "I wish Adhar Sen's duties would become fewer. But I am afraid
the
English officer will scold him. He may say, 'What is all this
nonsense?'"
(All smile.)

Sri Ramakrishna sat on the small couch, and the devotees on the floor.
Baburam and Kishori came quickly to the Master and began to stroke his
feet gently.

MASTER (to Kishori): "What's the matter? Why so much
service today?"

Ramlal entered the room and saluted Sri Ramakrishna, touching the
ground with his forehead. Then with great respect he touched the
Master's
feet. He was ready to worship the Divine Mother in the temple.

RAMLAL: "Please permit me to go to the shrine."

The Master twice uttered the words "Om Kali" and said: "Perform the
worship carefully. There is also a sheep to be slaughtered."

It was midnight. The worship began in the Kali temple. The Master went
to watch the ceremony. During the worship he stood near the image. Now
the sheep was going to be slaughtered. The animal was consecrated
before
the Deity. People stood in lines watching the ceremony. While the sheep
was being taken to the block Sri Ramakrishna returned to his room. He
could not bear the sight.

Several devotees remained in the temple till two o'clock in the
morning.
Haripada came and asked them to take the prasad to the Master's room.
After finishing their meal they lay down wherever they could for the
remainder
of the night.

It was morning. The dawn service in the temples was over and the
theatrical
performance was going on in the open hall in front of the shrine. M.
was
coming through the courtyard with Sri Ramakrishna. He wanted to take
leave of the Master.

MASTER: "Why should you go now?"

M: "You are going to Sinthi in the afternoon. I too intend to be there.
So I should like to go home for a few hours."

They came to the Kali temple. At the foot of the steps M. saluted the
Master.

MASTER: "You are going? All right. Please bring two pieces of cheap
cloth
for me. I shall use them while taking my bath."

^A
well-known landholder of Bengal who renounced the world at an early age
and lived at Mathura as a Vaishnava monk.

^Kam-Radha,
full of seductive power, is the first aspect of Radha; Prem-Radha,
full of ecstatic love, is her second aspect; Nitya-Radha is her third
aspect, as the
eternal Primordial Power. Chandravali, one of the gopis, had a lustful
attitude
toward Sri Krishna. Srimati is another name of Radhika, the foremost of
the gopis.
Nanda was Sri Krishna's foster-father.

^Indrani,
Brahmani. and Rudrani are the Consorts, or Powers, of Indra, Brahma,
and Rudra.

^A
premature child is generally weak and fearful.

^Ravana
and Behula were two persons totally unrelated to each other, having
lived far apart in time and place.

^Svaha,
Vashat, and Svadha are mystic syllables. The first two are uttered
while
oblations are being offered to the gods, and the third while they are
being offered
to the ancestors.

^The
length of time for pronouncing a vowel sound. The "three matras" denote
the three durations — short, long, or protracted — required for
pronouncing vowels.

^A
consonant sound.

^The
presiding deity of Om, the essence of the Vedas.

^Siddhi,
or hemp, and the necklace of bones are associated with Siva, the model
of renunciation.


=== 32_sinthi_brahmo_samaj.htm ===

Visit to the Sinthi Brahmo Samaj

←
Home
/ The Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna
/ Volume 2
/ →

VISIT TO THE SINTHI BRAHMO SAMAJ

Occult powers — Four classes of devotees —Difference between
intellectual
understanding and actual vision — Advice to Brahmos — Need
of firmness and conviction — Faith of the worldly-minded — Seek the
Creator and not the world's beauty — Futility of mere study — Different
degrees of divine manifestation — Advice to the worldly-minded —
Prayer in solitude — Danger of   "woman and gold"   —
Sin and God's
name — Self-surrender to God — Duty to wife and children — Signs
of God-vision — Force your demand on the Divine Mother — Futility
of egotism — Sattva, rajas, and tamas — Four classes of men — The
entangled soul — Thought of God at the hour of death — Master's
humility — Brahman and Kali — Way to Brahmajnana — Master and
the Marwari pundit — Different kinds of samadhi.

October 19, 1884

ON THIS DAY Sri Ramakrishna again visited the
Sinthi Brahmo Samaj.
It was the occasion of the autumn festival of the Samaj, which was
being celebrated at Benimadhav Pal's garden house. The hall was
decorated with flowers and greens, flags and festoons, of various
colours.
Outside, the blue autumn sky with its fleecy clouds was reflected in
the
water of the lake.

Sri Ramakrishna arrived at half past four in the afternoon. Entering
the
hall, he bowed down before the altar. The Brahmo devotees, among whom
could be noticed Vijay and Trailokya, sat around him. A sub-judge, who
was
a member of the Brahmo Samaj, was with them.

Trailokya was entertaining the devotees with his melodious music.

MASTER (to Trailokya): "That song of yours, 'O
Mother, make me mad
with Thy love', I enjoy very much. Won't you sing it?"

Trailokya sang:

O Mother, make me mad with Thy love!

What need have I of knowledge or reason?

Make me drunk with Thy love's Wine;

O Thou who stealest Thy bhaktas' hearts,

Drown me deep in the Sea of Thy love!

Here in this world, this madhouse of Thine,

Some laugh, some weep, some dance for joy:

Jesus, Buddha, Moses, Gauranga,

All are drunk with the Wine of Thy love.

O Mother, when shall I be blessed

By joining their blissful company?

As he listened to the song, the Master's mind underwent a
transformation,
and presently he went into deep samadhi. Coming down a little to the
plane of the sense world, he gave instruction to the devotees. His mind
was
still charged with the divine experience. His words were spoken as if
in a
state of intoxication. Gradually he became again fully conscious of the
world.
MASTER: "O Mother! I don't want the bliss of divine inebriation. I
shall
eat siddhi.

(To the devotees) "By 'siddhi' I mean the attainment
of the spiritual goal
and not one of the eight occult powers. About the occult powers, Sri
Krishna
said to Arjuna, 'Friend, if you find anyone who has acquired even one
of
the eight powers, then know for certain he will not realize Me.' For
powers
surely beget pride, and God cannot be realized if there is the
slightest trace
of pride.

"According to a certain school of thought there are four classes of
devotees:
the pravartaka, the sadhaka, the siddha, and the siddha of the siddha.
He who
has just begun religious life is a pravartaka. Such a man puts his
denominational
marks on his body and forehead, wears a rosary around his neck,
and scrupulously follows other outer conventions. The sadhaka has
advanced
farther. His desire for outer show has become less. He longs for the
realization
of God and prays to Him sincerely, He repeats the name of God and
calls on Him with a guileless heart. Now, whom should we call the
siddha?
He who has the absolute conviction that God exists and is the sole
Doer; he
who has seen God. And who is the siddha of the siddha? He who has not
merely seen God, but has intimately talked with Him as Father, Son, or
Beloved.

"It is one thing to believe beyond a doubt that fire exists in wood,
but it is
quite another to get the fire from the wood, cook rice with its help,
appease
one's hunger, and so be satisfied. These are two entirely different
things.

"No one can put a limit to spiritual experience. If you refer to one
experience,
there is another beyond that, and still another, and so on.

(In an ecstatic mood, referring to the Brahmos)
"They are Brahmajnanis.
They believe in the formless Deity. That is good.

(To the Brahmo devotees) "Be firm in one ideal —
either in God with
form or in the formless God. Then alone will you realize God; otherwise
not. With firm and unwavering belief the followers of God with form
will
realize Him, as will those who speak of Him as formless. You may eat a
cake with icing either straight or sidewise; it will taste sweet either
way.
(All laugh)

"But you must have firm conviction, you must pray to Him
whole-heartedly.
Do you know what the God of worldly people is like? It is like
children's saying to one another while at play, 'I swear by God.' They
have
learnt the word from the quarrels of their aunts or grandmothers. Or it
is
like God to a dandy. The dandy, all spick and span, his lips red from
chewing
betel-leaf, walks in the garden, cane in hand, and, plucking a flower,
exclaims
to his friend, 'Ah! What a beautiful flower God has made!' But this
feeling of a worldly person is momentary. It lasts as long as a drop of
water
on a red-hot frying-pan.

"You must be firm in one ideal. Dive deep. Otherwise you cannot get the
gems at the bottom of the ocean. You cannot pick up the gems if you
only
float on the surface."

With these words the Master sang in the sweet voice that had bewitched
the hearts of devotees like Keshab:

Dive deep, O mind, dive deep in the Ocean
of God's Beauty;

If you descend to the uttermost depths,

There you will find the gem of Love. . . .

The devotees felt as if they were in paradise itself.

MASTER (to the Brahmos): "Dive deep. Learn to love God. Plunge into
divine love. You see, I have heard how you pray. Why do you Brahmos
dwell so much on the glories of God? Is there such great need of your
saying over and over again, 'O God, You have created the sky, the great
oceans, the lunar world, the solar world, and the stellar world'?

"Everybody is wonder-struck at the mere sight of a rich man's garden
house. People become speechless at the sight of the trees, the flowers,
the
ponds, the drawing-room, the pictures. But alas, how few are they who
seek
the owner of all these! Only one or two inquire after him. He who seeks
God with a longing heart can see Him, talk to Him as I am talking to
you.
Believe my words when I say that God can be seen. But ah! To whom am
I saying these words? Who will believe me?

"Can one find God in the sacred books? By reading the scriptures one
may feel at the most that God exists. But God does not reveal Himself
to a
man unless he himself dives deep. Only after such a plunge, after the
revelation of God through His grace, is one's doubt destroyed. You may
read scriptures by the thousands and recite thousands of texts; but
unless
you plunge into God with yearning of heart, you will not comprehend
Him.
By mere scholarship you may fool man, but not God.

"Scriptures and books — what can one achieve with these alone? Nothing
can be realized without His grace. Strive with a longing heart for His
grace.
Through His grace you will see Him and He will talk to you."

SUB-JUDGE: "Sir, does God show more grace to one than to another? If
so,
He can be accused of the fault of partiality."

MASTER: "What are you saying? Do you mean to say that the moon and
a glow-worm are the same, though both give light? Iswar Vidyasagar
asked
me the same question. He said, 'Is it a fact, sir, that God gives more
power
to one and less to another?' 'God', I said, 'exists in every being as
the
All-pervading Spirit. He is in the ant as well as in me. But there are
different
manifestations of His Power in different beings. If all are the same,
then
why have we come here to see you, attracted by your renown? Have you
grown a pair of horns? Oh, no! It is not that. You have compassion; you
have scholarship; there is a greater degree of these virtues in you
than in
others. That is the reason you are so well known.' Don't you see that
there
are men who, single-handed, can defeat a hundred persons? Again, one
man takes to his heels in fear of another; you see such a person, too.
If
there are not different manifestations of power in different beings,
then why
did people respect Keshab Sen so much?

"It is said in the Gita that if a man is respected
and honoured by many,
whether it be for his scholarship or his music or his oratory or
anything else,
then you may know for certain that he is endowed with a special divine
power."

A BRAHMO (to the sub-judge): "Why don't you accept
what he says?"

MASTER (sharply, to the Brahmo): "What sort of man
are you? To accept
words without conviction! Why, that is hypocrisy! I see you are only a
counterfeit."

The Brahmo was much embarrassed.

SUB-JUDGE: "Sir, must we renounce the world?"

MASTER: "No. Why should you? A man can realize God even in the
world. But at the beginning he must spend a few days in solitude. He
must
practise spiritual discipline in a solitary place. He should take a
room near
his house, so that he may come home only for his meals. Keshab, Pratap,
and others said to me, 'Sir, we follow the ideal of King Janaka.' 'Mere
words
don't make a King Janaka', I replied. 'How many austerities King Janaka
first had to perform in solitude — standing on his head,1
and so on! Do something first; then you may become a King Janaka.' You
see a man writing
English fluently; but could he do that at the very start? Perhaps he
was the
son of poor parents; he was cook in a family and earned his meals by
his
service. Perhaps he had to struggle hard to go on with his studies. It
is after
all these efforts that he can now write such fluent English.

"I said to Keshab Sen further, 'How can the worldly man be cured of his
serious disease unless he goes into solitude?' A worldly man is
suffering from
delirious fever, as it were. Suppose there are pickled tamarind and
jars of
water in the room of such a patient. Now, how can you expect him to get
rid of the disease? Just see, the very mention of pickled tamarind is
making
my mouth water! (All laugh.) You can very well
imagine what will happen
if the tamarind is actually put in front of me. To a man, a woman is
the
pickled tamarind, and his desire for enjoyment, the jars of water.
There is
neither end nor limit to this desire for worldly enjoyment. And the
things
are in the patient's very room. Can you expect the patient to get rid
of the
delirious fever in this fashion? He must be removed for a few days to
another
place where there are neither pickled tamarind nor water-jars. Then he
will be cured. After that if he returns to his old room he will have
nothing
to fear. 'Woman and gold' cannot do any harm to the man who lives in
the
world after attaining God. Only then can he lead a detached life in the
world
as King Janaka did. But he must be careful at the beginning. He must
practise
spiritual discipline in strict solitude. The peepal-tree, when young,
is
fenced around to protect it from cattle. But there is no need for the
fence
when the trunk grows thick and strong. Then no harm will be done to the
tree
even if an elephant is tied to it. 'Woman and gold' will not be able to
harm
you in the least, if you go home and lead a householder's life after
increasing
your spiritual strength and developing love for the Lotus Feet of God
through
the practice of spiritual discipline in solitude.

"A man sets milk in a quiet place to curdle, and then he extracts
butter
from the curd. After once extracting the butter of Devotion and
Knowledge
from the milk of the mind, if you keep that transformed mind in the
water
of the world, it will float in the world unattached. But if the mind in
its
'unripe' state — that is to say, when it is just like liquid milk — is
kept in the
water of the world, then the milk and water will get mixed. In that
case it
will be impossible for the mind to float unattached in the world.

"Live in the world but, in order to realize God, hold fast to His Lotus
Feet
with one hand and with the other do your duties. When you get a respite
from your duties, cling to God's Lotus Feet with both hands — live in
solitude
and meditate on Him and serve Him ceaselessly."

SUB-JUDGE (joyously): "Sir, these are very beautiful
words indeed. Of
course one must practise spiritual discipline in solitude. But we
forget all
about it. We think we have become King Janaka outright! (The
Master
and the devotees laugh.) I feel very happy and peaceful even
to hear that
there is no need to give up the world and that God can be realized from
home as well."

MASTER: "Why should you give up the world? Since you must fight, it
is wise for you to fight from a fort. You must fight against your
sense-organs,
against your hunger and thirst. Therefore you will be wise to face the
battle
from the world. Further, in the Kaliyuga the life of a man depends on
his
food. If one day you have nothing to eat, then you will forget all
about God.
A man once said to his wife, 'I am going to leave the world.' She was a
sensible woman. She said: 'Why should you wander about? If you don't
have to knock at ten doors for your stomach's sake, go. But if that is
the
case, then better live in this one place.'

"Again I say, why should you give up the world? You will find it more
convenient at home. You won't have to worry about food. You may even
live with your wife. It isn't harmful. You will find near at hand all
that the
body needs at different times. When you are ill, you will have someone
near
you to nurse you.

"Sages like Janaka, Vyasa, and Vasishtha lived in the world after
attaining
Knowledge. They fenced with two swords, the one of Knowledge and the
other of action."

SUB-JUDGE: "How can we know that we have Knowledge?"

MASTER: "When one has Knowledge one does not see God any more at
a distance. One does not think of Him any more as 'He'. He becomes
'This'.
Then He is seen in one's own heart. God dwells in every man. He who
seeks God realizes Him."

SUB-JUDGE: "Sir, I am a sinner. How can I say that God dwells in me?"

MASTER: "That's the one trouble with you Brahmos. With you it is always
sin and sin! That's the Christian view, isn't it? Once a man gave me a
Bible.
A part of it was read to me, and it was full of that one thing — sin
and sin!
One must have such faith that one can say: 'I have uttered the name of
God; I have repeated the name of Rama or Hari. How can I be a sinner?'
One must have faith in the glory of God's name."

SUB-JUDGE: "Sir, how can one have such faith?"

MASTER: "Have passionate love for God. One of your Brahmo songs says:

O Lord, is it ever possible to know Thee without love,

However much one may perform worship and sacrifice?

Pray to God in secret and with yearning, that you may have
that passionate
attachment and devotion to Him. Shed tears for Him. A man sheds a
jugful
of tears because his wife is sick or because he is losing money or
because
he is worrying about getting a job. But tell me, who ever weeps for
God?"

TRAILOKYA: "Sir, where is people's leisure? They must serve their
English masters."

MASTER: "Well, then give God the power of attorney. If a man entrusts
his affairs to a good person, will the latter do him any harm? With all
the
sincerity of your heart resign yourself to God and drive all your
worries out
of your mind. Do whatever duties He has assigned to you. The kitten
does
not have a calculating mind. It only cries, 'Mew, mew!' It lies in the
kitchen
contentedly if the mother cat leaves it there, and only calls the
mother,
crying, 'Mew, mew!' It has the same feeling of contentment when the
mother
cat puts it on the soft bed of the master of the house. It only cries
for its
mother."

SUB-JUDGE: "Sir, we are householders. How long should we perform our
worldly duties?"

MASTER: "Surely you have duties to perform. You must bring up your
children, support your wife, and provide for her in ease of your death.
If
you don't, then I shall call you unkind. Sages like Sukadeva had
compassion.
He who has no compassion is no man."

SUB-JUDGE: "How long should one support one's children?"

MASTER: "As long as they have not reached their majority. When the
chick becomes a full-grown bird and can look after itself, then the
mother
bird pecks it and doesn't allow it to come near her." (All
laugh.)

SUB-JUDGE: "What is a householder's duty to his wife?"

MASTER: "You should give her spiritual advice and support her during
your lifetime and provide for her livelihood after your death, if she
is a
chaste wife.

"But if you are intoxicated with the Knowledge of God, then you have
no more duties to perform. Then God Himself will think about your
morrow
if you yourself cannot do so. God Himself will think about your family
if you are intoxicated with Him. If a landlord dies leaving behind a
minor
son, then a guardian appointed by the court takes charge of the son.
These
are all points of law; you know them."

SUB-JUDGE: "Yes, sir."

VIJAY: "Ah! Priceless words! God Himself carries on His shoulders all
the responsibilities of a person who thinks of Him with single-minded
devotion
and is mad with divine love. A minor gets his guardian without seeking
him. Alas, when shall I have that state of mind? How lucky they are
who feel that way!"

TRAILOKYA: "Is it ever possible, sir, to have true knowledge of God
while
living in the world? Can one realize God here?"

MASTER (with a smile): "Why do you worry? You are
enjoying both
treacle and refined sugar. (All laugh.) You are
living in the world with
your mind in God. Isn't that true? Why shouldn't a man realize God in
the
world? Certainly he can."

TRAILOKYA: "What are the signs of a householder's having attained
Knowledge?"

MASTER : "His tears will flow, and the hair on his body will stand on
end.
No sooner does he hear the sweet name of God than the hair on his body
stands on end from sheer delight, and tears roll down his cheeks.

"A man cannot get rid of body-consciousness as long as he is attached
to
worldly things and loves 'woman and gold'. As he becomes less and less
attached
to worldly things, he approaches nearer and nearer to the Knowledge of
Self. He also becomes less and less conscious of his body. He attains
Self-Knowledge when his worldly attachment totally disappears. Then he
realizes
that body and soul are two separate things. It is very difficult to
separate
with a knife the kernel of a coconut from the shell before the milk
inside
has dried up. When the milk dries up, the kernel rattles inside the
shell.
At that time it loosens itself from the shell. Then the fruit is called
a dry
coconut.

"The sign of a man's having realized God is that he has become like a
dry
coconut. He has become utterly free from the consciousness that he is
the
body. He does not feel happy or unhappy with the happiness or
unhappiness
of the body. He does not seek the comforts of the body. He roams about
in
the world as a jivanmukta, one liberated in life. 'The devotee of Kali
is a
jivanmukta, full of Eternal Bliss.'

"When you find that the very mention of God's name brings tears to your
eyes and makes your hair stand on end, then you will know that you have
freed yourself from attachment to 'woman and gold' and attained God. If
the matches are dry, you get a spark by striking only one of them. But
if
they are damp, you don't get a spark even if you strike fifty. You only
waste matches. Similarly, if your mind is soaked in the pleasure of
worldly
things, in 'woman and gold', then God-Consciousness will not be kindled
in you. You may try a thousand times, but all your efforts will be
futile.
But no sooner does attachment to worldly pleasure dry up than the spark
of God flashes forth."

TRAILOKYA: "What is the way to dry up the craving for worldly pleasure?"

MASTER: "Pray to the Divine Mother with a longing heart. Her vision
dries up all craving for the world and completely destroys all
attachment to
'woman and gold'. It happens instantly if you think of Her as your own
mother. She is by no means a godmother. She is your own mother. With a
yearning heart persist in your demands on Her. The child holds to the
skirt
of its mother and begs a penny of her to buy a kite. Perhaps the mother
is
gossiping with her friends. At first she refuses to give the penny and
says to
the child: 'No, you can't have it. Your daddy has asked me not to give
you
money. When he comes home I'll ask him about it. You will get into
trouble
it you play with a kite now.' The child begins to cry and will not give
up
his demand. Then the mother says to her friends: 'Excuse me a moment.
Let me pacify this child.' Immediately she unlocks the cash-box with a
click
and throws the child a penny.

"You too must force your demand on the Divine Mother. She will come
to you without fail. I once said the same thing to some Sikhs when they
visited the temple at Dakshineswar. We were conversing in front of the
Kali temple. They said, 'God is compassionate.' 'Why compassionate?' I
asked. They said, 'Why, revered sir, He constantly looks after us,
gives us
righteousness and wealth, and provides us with our food.' 'Suppose', I
said,
'a man has children. Who will look after them and provide them with
food
— their own father, or a man from another village?'"

SUB-JUDGE: "Is not God, then, compassionate, sir?"

MASTER: "Why should you think that? I just made a remark. What I
mean to say is that God is our very own. We can exert force on Him.
With
one's own people one can even go so far as to say, 'You rascal! Won't
you
give it to me?'

(To the sub-judge) "Let me ask you one thing. Are
vanity and egotism
the result of knowledge or of ignorance? Egotism is of the nature of
tamas;
it is begotten by ignorance. On account of the barrier of ego one does
not see
God. 'All troubles come to an end when the ego dies.' It is futile to
be
egotistic. Neither body nor wealth will last. Once a drunkard was
looking at the
image of Durga. At the sight of Her decorations, he said, 'Well,
Mother!
However You may fix Yourself up, after two or three days they will drag
You out and throw You into the Ganges.'2
(All laugh.)

"So I say to you all, you may be a judge or anybody else, but it is all
for
two days only. Therefore you should give up vanity and pride.

"The characteristics of sattva, rajas, and tamas are very different.
Egotism,
sleep, gluttony, lust, anger, and the like, are the traits of people
with tamas.
Men with rajas entangle themselves in many activities. Such a man has
clothes all spick and span. His house is immaculately clean. A portrait
of
the Queen (Queen Victoria.) hangs on a wall in his drawing-room. When
he worships God
he wears a silk cloth. He has a string of rudraksha beads around his
neck,
and in between the beads he puts a few gold ones. When someone comes to
visit the worship hall in his house, he himself acts as guide. After
showing
the hall, he says to the visitor: 'Please come this way, sir. There are
other
things too — the floor of white marble and the natmandir with its
exquisite
carvings.' When he gives in charity he makes a show of it. But a man
endowed with sattva is quiet and peaceful. So far as dress is
concerned, anything
will do. He earns only enough money to give his stomach the simplest
of food; he never flatters men to get money. His house is out of
repair. He
never worries about his children's clothing. He does not hanker for
name
and fame. His worship, charity, and meditation are all done in secret;
people
do not know about them at all. He meditates inside his mosquito
curtain.
People think he doesn't sleep well at night and for that reason sleeps
late in
the morning. Sattva is the last step of the stairs; next is the roof.
As
soon as sattva is acquired there is no further delay in attaining God.
One
step forward and God is realized. (To the sub-judge)
Didn't you say that
all men were equal? Now you see that there are so many varieties of
human nature.

"There are still other classes and kinds of people. For instance, there
are
those who are eternally free, those who have attained liberation, those
struggling
for liberation, and those entangled in the world. So many varieties of
men! Sages like Narada and Sukadeva are eternally free. They are like a
steamship, which not only crosses the ocean but can carry big animals,
even
an elephant. Further, the soul that is eternally free is like the
superintendent
of an estate. After bringing one part of the estate under control, he
goes to
another. Those struggling for liberation strive heart and soul to free
themselves from the net of the world. One or two of them may get out of
the
net. They are called the liberated. The souls that are eternally free
are like
clever fish; they are never caught in the net.

"But the souls that are entangled, involved in worldliness, never come
to
their senses. They lie in the net but are not even conscious that they
are
entangled. If you speak of God before them, they at once leave the
place.
They say: 'Why God now? We shall think of Him in the hour of death.'
But when they lie on their death-beds, they say to their wives or
children;
'Why have you put so many wicks in the lamp? Use only one wick.
Otherwise
too much oil will be burnt.' While dying they think of their wives and
children, and weep, 'Alas! What will happen to them after my death?'

'The entangled souls repeat those very actions that make them suffer so
much. They are like the camel, which eats thorny bushes till the blood
streams from its mouth, but still will not give them up. Such a man may
have lost his son and be stricken with grief, but still he will have
children
year after year. He may ruin himself by his daughter's marriage, but
still
he will go on having daughters every year. And he says: 'What can I do?
It's just my luck!' When he goes to a holy place he doesn't have any
time
to think of God. He almost kills himself carrying bundles for his wife.
Entering the temple, he is very eager to give his child the holy water
to drink
or make him roll on the floor; but he has no time for his own
devotions.
These bound creatures slave for their masters to earn food for
themselves and
their families; and they earn money by lying, cheating, flattery. They
laugh
at those who think of God and meditate on Him, and call them lunatics.

"So you see how many different kinds of men there are. You said that
all
men were equal. But how many varieties of men there are! Some have more
power and some less.

"The entangled creatures, attached to worldliness, talk only of worldly
things in the hour of death. What will it avail such men if they
outwardly
repeat the name of God, take a bath in the Ganges, or visit sacred
places?
If they cherish within themselves attachment to the world, it must show
up
at the hour of death. While dying they rave nonsense. Perhaps they cry
out
in a delirium, 'Turmeric powder! Seasoning! Bay-leaf!' The singing
parrot,
when at ease, repeats the holy names of Radha and Krishna, but when it
is
seized by a cat it utters its own natural sound; it squawks, 'Kaa!
Kaa!' It is
said in the Gita that whatever one thinks in the
hour of death, one becomes
in the after-life. King Bharata gave up his body exclaiming, 'Deer!
Deer!'
and was born as a deer in his next life. But if a man dies thinking of
God,
then he attains God, and he does not have to come back to the life of
this
world."

A BRAHMO DEVOTEE: "Sir, suppose a man has thought of God at other
times during his life, but at the time of his death forgets Him. Would
he,
on that account, come back to this world of sorrow and suffering? Why
should it be so? He certainly thought of God some time during his life."

MASTER: "A man thinks of God, no doubt, but he has no faith in Him.
Again and again he forgets God and becomes attached to the world. It is
like giving the elephant a bath; afterwards he covers his body with mud
and dirt again. 'The mind is a mad elephant.' But if you can make the
elephant go into the stable immediately after bathing him, then he
stays
clean. Just so, if a man thinks of God in the hour of death, then his
mind
becomes pure and it gets no more opportunity to become attached to
'woman
and gold'.

"Man has no faith in God. That is the reason he suffers so much. They
say that when you plunge into the holy waters of the Ganges your sins
perch on a tree on the bank. No sooner do you come out of the water
after
the bath than the sins jump back on your shoulders. (All laugh.)
A man
must prepare the way beforehand, so that he may think of God in the
hour
of death. The way lies through constant practice. If a man practises
meditation
on God, he will remember God even on the last day of his life."

BRAHMO DEVOTEE: "You have spoken very beautifully, sir. Beautiful
words, indeed."

MASTER: "Oh, this is just idle talk. But do you know my inner feeling?
I am the machine and God is the Operator. I am the house and He is the
Indweller. I am the engine and He is the Engineer. I am the chariot and
He is the Charioteer. I move as He moves me; I do as He makes me do."

Presently Trailokya began to sing to the accompaniment of drums and
cymbals. Sri Ramakrishna danced, intoxicated with divine love. Many
times
he went into samadhi. He stood still, his eyes fixed, his face beaming,
with
one hand on the shoulder of a beloved disciple. Coming down a little
from
the state of ecstasy, he danced again like a mad elephant. Regaining
consciousness of the outer world, he improvised lines to the music:

O Mother, dance about Thy devotees!

Dance Thyself and make them dance as well.

O Mother, dance in the lotus of my heart;

Dance, O Thou the ever blessed Brahman!

Dance in all Thy world-bewitching beauty.

An indescribable scene. The exquisite and celestial dance of a child
completely
filled with ecstatic love of God and identified heart and soul with
the Divine Mother! The Brahmo devotees danced around the Master again
and again, attracted like iron to a magnet. In ecstatic voices they
chanted
the name of Brahman. Again, they chanted the name of the Divine Mother.
Many of them wept like children, crying, "Mother! Mother!"

When the music was over, the devotees and the Master sat down. Although
it was about eight o'clock, the evening worship of the Brahmo Samaj
had not yet begun. In the joy of this divine music they had forgotten
all
about their formal worship. Vijay, who was to conduct the evening
service,
sat facing the Master. His mother-in-law and the other Brahmo ladies
wanted
to see Sri Ramakrishna; so the Master went to meet them in another room.

After a time the Master came back and said to Vijay: "What devotion to
God your mother-in-law has! About the worldly life she said to me: 'Oh,
you needn't tell me about the world. No sooner does one wave disappear
than another rises up.' 'But', I said, 'what is that to you? You have
knowledge.'
She replied: 'Where is my knowledge? I haven't yet been able to go
beyond vidyamaya and avidyamaya. It won't help me much to go beyond
just the illusion of ignorance; I shall have to transcend the illusion
of knowledge
as well. Only then shall I have true knowledge of God. I am quoting
your own words.'"

While they were talking, Beni Pal, their host, entered the room.

BENI (to Vijay): "Sir, please get up. It is already
late. Please begin the worship."

VIJAY: "What further need is there of worship? I find that according to
your arrangement the rice pudding is served first, and then the soup
and
other dishes."

MASTER (with a smile): "The devotees provide
offerings according to their
temperaments. The sattvic devotee offers the Deity simple rice pudding,
and
the rajasic devotee, fifty different dishes. The tamasic devotee
slaughters
goats, and other animals."

Vijay began to hesitate about going to the platform to conduct the
worship.
He said to the Master, "I shall conduct the worship from the platform
only
if you give me your blessing."

MASTER: "It will be all right if you don't feel any egotism, if you
don't
have the vain feeling: 'I am giving a lecture. Listen to me.' What
begets
egotism? Knowledge or ignorance? It is only the humble man who attains
Knowledge. In a low place rain-water collects. It runs down from a
mound.

"A man achieves neither Knowledge nor liberation as long as he has
egotism. He comes back again and again to the world. The calf bellows,
'Hamba! Hamba!', that is, 'I! I!' That is why it suffers such agony.
The
butcher slaughters it and the shoe-maker makes shoes from its hide.
Besides,
its hide is used for the drum, which is beaten mercilessly. Still no
end to its
misery! At long last a carding-machine is made from its entrails. While
carding the cotton the machine makes the sound 'Tuhu! Tuhu!', that is,
Thou! Thou!' Then the poor calf is released from all suffering. It no
longer
says, 'Hamba! Hamba!' but repeats, 'Tuhu! Tuhu!' The calf says, as it
were,
O God, Thou art the Doer and I am nothing. Thou art the Operator and I
am the machine. Thou art everything.'

"Three words — 'master', 'teacher', and 'father' — prick me like
thorns. I am
we son of God, His eternal child. How can I be a 'father'? God alone is
the
Master and I am His instrument. He is the Operator and I am the
machine.
"If somebody addresses me as guru, I say to him: 'Go away, you fool!
How
can I be a teacher?' There is no teacher except Satchidananda. There is
no
refuge except Him. He alone is the Ferryman to take one across the
ocean of
he world. (To Vijay) It is very difficult to act as
an acharya. It harms the
acharya himself. Finding a number of men doing him reverence, he sits
erect, crossing his legs, and says proudly: 'I am preaching. Hear ye
all!' This
is a very bad attitude. He gets a little prestige and it ends there.
People will
say at most: 'Ah! Vijay Babu has spoken very well. He knows a great
deal.'
Never cherish the attitude, "I am preaching.' I always say to the
Divine
Mother: 'O Mother! Thou art the Operator and I am the machine. I do as
Thou makest me do, I speak as Thou makest me speak.'"

VIJAY (humbly): "Please give me your permission.
Only then will I sit
on the platform."

MASTER (with a smile): "What shall I say? Pray to
God yourself. He
belongs to all, even as 'Uncle Moon'3
is the uncle of all children. You have nothing to tear if you are
sincere."

On being further requested by Vijay, the Master said': "Yes, go. Follow
the rules. Everything is all right if one has sincere love for God."

Vijay sat on the platform and conducted the worship according to the
rules of the Brahmo Samaj. At the time for prayer he repeatedly called
on
the Mother, touching the hearts of all. After the worship their host
entertained the Master and the devotees with a sumptuous feast.

Soon they were ready to return home. Sri Ramakrishna became engaged
in conversation with Vijay, no one else but M. being present.

MASTER: "You prayed to God, addressing Him as Mother. That is very
good. People say that the mother's attachment to the child is stronger
than
the father's. A son can force his demand on his mother but not on his
father. Once cartloads of money were coming from the estate of
Trailokya's
mother. They were guarded by many red-turbaned stalwarts armed with big
sticks. Trailokya, who had been waiting on the road with his men,
pounced
upon the money and took it away by force. A son has a very strong claim
on his mother's wealth. People say that a mother cannot very well sue
her
son in a court of law."

VIJAY: "If Brahman is our Mother, then has It any form or is It
formless?"

MASTER: "That which is Brahman is also Kali, the Mother, the Primal
Energy. When inactive It is called Brahman. Again, when creating,
preserving,
and destroying, It is called Sakti. Still water is an illustration of
Brahman.
The same water, moving in waves, may be compared to Sakti, Kali. What
is
the meaning of Kali? She who communes with Maha-Kala, the Absolute, is
Kali. She is formless and, again. She has forms. If you believe in the
form-less
aspect, then meditate on Kali as that. If you meditate on any aspect of
Her with firm conviction, She will let you know Her true nature. Then
you
will realize that not merely does God exist, but He will come near you
and
talk to you as I am talking to you. Have faith and you will achieve
everything.
Remember this, too. If you believe that God is formless, then stick to
that belief with firm conviction. But don't be dogmatic: never say
emphatically about God that He can be only this and not that. You may
say:
'I believe that God is formless. But He can be many things more. He
alone
knows what else He can be. I do not know; I do not understand.' How can
man with his one ounce of intelligence know the real nature of God? Can
you put four seers of milk in a one-seer jar? If God, through His
grace, ever
reveals Himself to His devotee and makes him understand, then he will
know; but not otherwise.

"That which is Brahman is Sakti, and That, again, is the Mother.

He it is, says Ramprasad, that I approach
as Mother;

But must I give away the secret, here in the market-place?

From the hints I have given, O mind, guess what that Being is!

Ramprasad implies that he has known the truth of Brahman. He
addresses
Brahman as Mother.

"In another song Ramprasad expresses the same idea thus:

Knowing the secret that Kali is one with the highest Brahman,

I have discarded, once for all, both dharma and adharma.

Adharma means unrighteous actions, actions forbidden by
religion. Dharma
means the pious actions prescribed by religion, as, for instance,
charity to
the poor, feeding the brahmins, and so on."

VIJAY : "What remains if one renounces both dharma and adharma?"

MASTER: "Pure love of God. I prayed to the Divine Mother: 'O Mother,
here, take Thy dharma; here, take Thy adharma; and give me pure love
for
Thee. Here, take Thy virtue; here, take Thy vice; and give me pure love
for
Thee. Here, take Thy knowledge; here, take Thy ignorance; and give me
pure love for Thee.' You see, I didn't ask even for knowledge or public
recognition. When one renounces both dharma and adharma, there remains
only pure love of God — love that is stainless, motiveless, and that
one feels
only for the sake of love."

A BRAHMO DEVOTEE: "Is God different from His Sakti?"

MASTER: "After attaining Perfect Knowledge one realizes that they are
not different. They are the same, like the gem and its brilliance.
Thinking
of the gem, one cannot but think of its brilliance. Again, they are
like milk
and its whiteness. Thinking of the one, you must also think of the
other.
But you cannot realize this non-duality before the attainment of
Perfect
Knowledge. Attaining Perfect Knowledge, one goes into samadhi, beyond
the twenty-four cosmic principles. Therefore the principle of 'I' does
not
exist in that stage. A man cannot describe in words what he feels in
samadhi.
Coming down, he can give just a hint about it. I come down a hundred
cubits, as it were, when I say 'Om' after samadhi. Brahman is beyond
the
injunctions of the Vedas and cannot be described. There neither 'I' nor
'you' exists.

"As long as a man is conscious of 'I' and 'you', and as long as he
feels
that it is he who prays or meditates, so long will he feel that God is
listening
to his prayer and that God is a Person. Then he must say: 'O God, Thou
art
the Master and I am Thy servant. Thou art the whole and I am a part of
Thee. Thou art the Mother and I am Thy child.' At that time there
exists a
feeling of difference: 'I am one and Thou art another.' It is God
Himself
who makes us feel this difference; and on account of this difference
one sees
man and woman, light and darkness, and so on. As long as one is aware
of
this difference, one must accept Sakti, the Personal God. It is God who
has
put 'I-consciousness' in us. You may reason a thousand times; still
this 'I'
does not disappear. As long as 'I-consciousness' exists, God reveals
Himself to
us as a Person.

"Therefore, as long as a man is conscious of 'I' and of
differentiation, he
cannot speak of the attributeless Brahman and must accept Brahman with
attributes. This Brahman with attributes has been declared in the
Vedas, the
Puranas, and the Tantra, to be Kali, the Primal Energy."

VIJAY: "How, sir, can one have the vision of the Primal Energy and
attain
Brahmajnana, the Knowledge of the attributeless Brahman?"

MASTER: "Pray to Him with a yearning heart, and weep. That will purify
your heart. You see the reflection of the sun in clear water. In the
mirror of
his 'I-consciousness' the devotee sees the form of the Primal Energy,
Brahman
with attributes. But the mirror must be wiped clean. One does not see
the
right reflection if there is any dirt on the mirror.

"As long as a man must see the Sun in the water of his
'I-consciousness'
and has no other means of seeing It, as long as he has no means of
seeing
the real Sun except through Its reflection, so long is the reflected
sun alone
one hundred per cent real to him. As long as the 'I' is real, so long
is the
reflected sun real — one hundred per cent real. That reflected sun is
nothing
but the Primal Energy.

"But if you seek Brahmajnana, the Knowledge of the attributeless
Brahman,
then proceed to the real Sun through Its reflection. Pray to Brahman
with attributes, who listens to your prayers, and He Himself will give
you
lull Knowledge of Brahman; for that which is Brahman with attributes is
verily Brahman without attributes, that which is Brahman is verily
Sakti.
One realizes this non-duality after the attainment of Perfect Knowledge.

"The Divine Mother gives Her devotee Brahmajnana too. But a true lover
of God generally does not seek the Knowledge of Brahman.

"There is another path, the path of knowledge, which is very difficult.
You members of the Brahmo Samaj are not jnanis. You are bhaktas. The
jnani believes that Brahman alone is real and the world illusory as a
dream.
To him, 'I' and 'you' are illusory as a dream.

"God is our Inner Controller. Pray to Him with a pure and guileless
heart.
He will explain everything to you. Give up egotism and take refuge in
Him.
You will realize everything."

The Master sang:

Dwell, O mind, within yourself;

Enter no other's home.

If you but seek there, you will find

All you are searching for.

God, the true Philosopher's Stone,

Who answers every prayer,

Lies hidden deep within your heart,

The richest gem of all.

How many pearls and precious stones

Are scattered all about

The outer court that lies before

The chamber of your heart!

He continued: "When you mix with people outside your Samaj,
love
them all. When in their company be one of them. Don't harbour malice
toward them. Don't turn up your nose in hatred and say: 'Oh, this man
believes in God with form and not in the formless God. That man
believes
in the formless God and not in God with form. This man is a Christian.
This man is a Hindu. And this man is a Mussalman.' It is God alone who
makes people see things in different ways. Know that people have
different
natures. Realize this and mix with them as much as you can. And love
all.
But enter your own inner chamber to enjoy peace and bliss.

Lighting the lamp of Knowledge in the chamber of your heart,

Behold the face of the Mother, Brahman's Embodiment.

You can see your true Self only within your own chamber. The
cowherds
take the cows to graze in the pasture. There the cattle mix. They all
form
one herd. But on returning to their sheds in the evening they are
separated.
Then each stays by itself in its own stall. Therefore I say, dwell by
yourself
in your own chamber."

It was ten o'clock in the evening. The Master got into a carriage to
return
to Dakshineswar. One or two attending devotees got in with him. The
carriage
stood under a tree, in deep darkness. Beni Pal wanted to send some
sweets and other food with Sri Ramakrishna for Ramlal, the Master's
nephew.

BENI PAL:
"Sir, Ramlal was not here this evening. With your permission
I should like to send some sweets for him by your attendants."

MASTER (with great anxiety): "Oh, Beni Pal! Oh, sir!
Please don't send
these things with me. That will do me harm. It is never possible for me
to
lay up anything. I hope you won't mind."

BENI PAL:
"As you please, sir. Please give me your blessing."

MASTER: "Oh, we have been very happy today! You see, he alone is a true
man who has made money his servant. But those who do not know the use
of money are not men even though they have human forms. They may have
human bodies, but they behave like animals. You are blessed indeed. You
have made so many devotees happy today."

Monday, October 20, 1884

Two days after the worship of Kali, the Marwaris of the Burrabazar
section of Calcutta were celebrating the Annakuta4
festival. Sri Ramakrishna
had been invited by the Marwari devotees to the ceremony at 12 Mallick
Street. It was the second day of the bright fortnight of the moon. The
festival
connected with the worship of Kali, known as the "Festival of Light",
still going on at Burrabazar.

About three o'clock in the afternoon M. and the younger Gopal came to
Burrabazar. M. had in his hand a bundle of cloths he had purchased for
Sri Ramakrishna. Mallick Street was jammed with people, bullock-carts,
and
carriages. As M. and Gopal approached 12 Mallick Street they noticed
Sri
Ramakrishna in a carriage, which could hardly move because of the jam.
Baburam and Ram Chakravarty were with the Master. He smiled at M.
and Gopal.

Sri Ramakrishna alighted from the carriage. With Baburam he proceeded
on foot to the house of his host, M. leading the way. They saw the
courtyard
of the house filled with big bales of clothes which were being loaded
into
bullock-carts for shipment. The Marwari host greeted the Master and led
him to the third floor of the house. A painting of Kali hung on the
wall. Sri
Ramakrishna bowed before it. He sat down and became engaged in
conversation
with the devotees. One of the Marwaris began to stroke his feet. The
Master asked him to stop. After reflecting a minute he said, "All
right, you
can stroke them a little." His words were full of compassion.

MASTER (to M.): "What about your school?"

M: "Today is a holiday, sir."

MASTER (smiling): "Tomorrow there will be a musical
recital of the
Chandi at Adhar's house."

The host sent a pundit to Sri Ramakrishna. He saluted the Master and
took a seat. Soon they were engaged in conversation. They talked about
spiritual things.

MASTER: "God incarnates Himself for the bhakta and not for the jnani."

PUNDIT: "'I incarnate Myself in every age for the protection of the
good,
for the destruction of the wicked, and for the establishment of
dharma.'
(Bhagavad Gita, IV, 8.)
God becomes man, first, for the joy of the bhakta, and secondly, for
the
destruction of the wicked. The jnani has no desire."

MASTER (smiling): "But I have not got rid of
all desires. I have the desire for love of God."

The pundit's son entered the room. He saluted the Master and took a
seat.

MASTER (to the pundit): "Well, what is bhava and
what is bhakti?"

PUNDIT: "Meditation on God mellows the mind. This mellowness is called
bhava. It is like the thawing of ice when the sun rises."

MASTER: "Well, what is prema?"

The pundit and Sri Ramakrishna were talking in Hindusthani. The
former gave some sort of explanation of prema.

MASTER (to the pundit): "No! No! That is not the
meaning. Prema
means such love for God that it makes a man forget the world and also
his
body, which is so dear to him. Chaitanyadeva had prema."

PUNDIT: "Yes, sir. One behaves like a drunkard."

MASTER: "Some people develop bhakti and others do not; how do you
explain that, sir?"

PUNDIT: "There is no partiality in God. He is the Wish-fulfilling Tree.
Whatever a man asks of God he gets. But he must go near the Tree to ask
the boon."

The pundit said all this in Hindusthani. The Master explained it to M.
in Bengali.

MASTER: "Sir, please describe samadhi to us."

PUNDIT: "There are two kinds of samadhi: savikalpa and nirvikalpa. In
nirvikalpa samadhi the functioning of the mind stops altogether."

MASTER: "Yes. 'The mind completely takes the form of Reality.' The
distinction between the meditator and the object of meditation does not
exist. There are two other kinds of samadhi: chetana and jada. Narada
and
Sukadeva attained chetana samadhi. Isn't that true, sir?"

PUNDIT: "Yes, sir, that is so."

MASTER: "Further, there are the unmana samadhi and the sthita samadhi.
Isn't that true, sir?"

The pundit remained silent. He did not venture an opinion.

MASTER: "Well, sir, through the practice of japa and austerity one can
get occult powers, such as walking on the water of the Ganges. Isn't
that true?"

PUNDIT: "Yes, one can. But a devotee doesn't want them."

The conversation continued for some time. The pundit said he would
visit the Master at Dakshineswar the next ekadasi day.

MASTER: "Ah! Your boy is very nice."

PUNDIT: "Well, revered sir, all this is transitory. It is like the
waves in a
river — one goes down and another comes up."

MASTER: "You have substance in you."

After a few minutes the pundit saluted Sri Ramakrishna. He said: "I
shall
have to perform my daily devotions. Please let me go."

MASTER: "Oh, sit down! Sit down!"

The pundit sat down again. The conversation turned to hathayoga. The
pundit discussed the subject with the Master in Hindusthani. Sri
Ramakrishna
said: "Yes, that is also a form of austerity. But the hathayogi
identifies himself with his body. His mind dwells on his body alone."
The
pundit took leave of the Master. Sri Ramakrishna conversed with the
pundit's son.

MASTER: "One can understand the Bhagavata well if
one
has already studied the Nyaya, the Vedanta, and the other systems of
philosophy. Isn't that so?"

PUNDIT'S SON: "Yes, sir. It is very necessary to study the Samkhya
philosophy."

The conversation went on. Sri Ramakrishna was leaning against a big
pillow; the devotees were sitting on the floor. Lying in that position,
the
Master began to sing:

Brother, joyfully cling to God;

Thus striving, some day you may attain Him.

Their host entered the room and saluted Sri Ramakrishna. He
was a pious
man and devoted to the Master. The pundit's son was still there. The
Master
asked if the Panini, the Sanskrit grammar, was
taught in the schools. He
further asked about the Nyaya and the Vedanta philosophies. The host
did
not show much interest in the discussion and changed the subject.

HOST: "Revered sir, what is the way for us?"

MASTER: "Chanting the name and glories of God, living in the company
of holy men, and earnestly praying to God."

HOST: "Please bless me, sir, that I may pay less and less attention to
worldly things."

MASTER (smiling): "How much attention do you give to
the world? Fifty
per cent?" (Laughter.)

HOST: "You know that, sir. We cannot achieve anything without the
grace of a holy person like yourself."

MASTER: "If you please God, everyone will be pleased. It is God alone
that exists in the heart of the holy man."

HOST: "Nothing, of course, remains unrealized when one attains God.
If a man attains God, he can give up everything else. If a man gets a
rupee,
he gives up the joy of a penny."

MASTER: "A little spiritual discipline is necessary. Through the
practice of
discipline one gradually obtains divine joy. Suppose a jar with money
inside
is hidden deep under the earth and someone wants to possess it. In that
case
he must take the trouble of digging for it. As he digs, he perspires.
After
much digging the spade strikes the metal jar. He feels a thrill at the
sound.
The more sound the spade makes, striking against the jar, the more joy
he feels.

"Pray to Rama. Meditate on Him. He will certainly provide you with
everything."

HOST: "Revered sir, you are Rama Himself."

MASTER: "How is that? The waves belong to the river; does the river
belong to the waves?"

HOST: "Rama dwells only in the hearts of holy men. He cannot be seen
in any other way. There is no Incarnation of God at the present time."

MASTER (smiling): "How do you know there is no
Divine Incarnation?"

The host remained silent.

MASTER: "All cannot recognize an Incarnation. When Narada visited
Rama, Rama prostrated Himself before Narada and said: 'We are worldly
creatures. How can we be sanctified unless holy men like you visit us?'
Further, Rama went into exile in the forest to redeem His father's
pledges.
He saw that, since hearing of His exile, the rishis of the forest had
been
fasting. Many of them did not know that Rama was none other than the
Supreme Brahman."

HOST: "You too are that same Rama."

MASTER: "For heaven's sake! Never say that."

As Sri Ramakrishna spoke these words, he bowed down to the host and
said, with folded hands: "'That Rama dwells in all beings; He exists
everywhere
in the universe.' I am your servant. It is Rama Himself who has
become all men, animals, and other living beings."

HOST: "But sir, we do not know that."

MASTER: "Whether you know it or not, you are Rama."

HOST: "You are free from love and hatred."

MASTER: "How so? I engaged a carriage to bring me to Calcutta and
advanced the coachman three annas. But he didn't turn up. I became very
angry with him. He is a very wicked man. He made me suffer a lot."

Sri Ramakrishna was resting. The Marwari devotees had been singing
bhajan on the roof. They were celebrating the Krishna festival.
Arrangements
had been made for worship and food offering. At the host's request
the Master went to see the image. He bowed down before the Deity.

Sri Ramakrishna was profoundly moved as he stood before the image.
With folded hands he said: "O Govinda, Thou art my soul! Thou art mv
life! Victory to Govinda! Hallowed be the name of Govinda! Thou art the
Embodiment of Satchidananda! Oh, Krishna! Ah, Krishna! Krishna is
knowledge. Krishna is mind. Krishna is life. Krishna is soul. Krishna
is
body. Krishna is caste. Krishna is family. O Govinda, my life and
soul!"
Uttering these words, Sri Ramakrishna went into samadhi. He remained
standing. Ram Chatterji supported him.

After a long time the Master regained consciousness of the world. The
Marwari devotees were about to take out the image. The offering of food
was to take place outside the room. The Master joined the procession of
devotees. The food was offered with arati and music. Sri Ramakrishna
fanned
the image.

Then began the ceremony of feeding the brahmins. They were seated on
the roof. The Master and his devotees also partook of the prasad.

Sri Ramakrishna took leave of the host. It was evening and the street
was
jammed as before with people and vehicles. He said: "Let us get out of
the
carriage. It can go by a back street." Proceeding on foot, he found
that a
betel-leaf seller had opened his stall in front of a small room that
looked
like a hole. One could not possibly enter it without bending one's
head.
The Master said: "How painful it is to be shut in such a small space!
That
is the way of worldly people. And they are happy in such a life."

The carriage came up after making the detour. The Master entered it
with Baburam, M., and Ram Chatterji. The younger Copal sat on the roof
of the carriage.

A beggar woman with a baby on her arm stood in front of the carriage
waiting for alms. The Master said to M., "Have you any money?" Gopal
gave her something.

The carriage rolled along Burrabazar. Everywhere there were signs of
great festivity. The night was dark but illuminated with myriads of
lights.
The carriage came to the Chitpur road, which was also brightly lighted.
The
people moved in lines like ants. The crowd looked at the gaily
decorated
stores and stalls on both sides of the road. There were sweetmeat
stores and
perfume stalls. Pictures, beautiful and gaudy, hung from the walls.
Well-dressed
shopkeepers sprayed the visitors with rose-water. The carriage stopped
in front of a perfume stall. The Master looked at the pictures and
lights and
felt happy as a child. People were talking loudly. He cried out: "Go
forward!
Move on!" He laughed. He said to Baburam with a loud laugh: "Move on!
What are you doing?" The devotees laughed too. They understood that the
Master wanted them to move forward to God and not to be satisfied with
their present state.

The carriage drove on. The Master noticed that M. had brought some
cloths for him. M. had with him two pieces of unbleached and two pieces
of washed cloth. But the Master had asked him only for the unbleached
ones. He said to M.: "Give me the unbleached ones. You may keep the
others. All right. You may give me one of them."

M: "Then shall I take back one piece?"

MASTER: "Then take both."

M; "As you please, sir."

MASTER: "You can give me those when I need them. You see, yesterday
Beni Pal wanted me to carry away some food for Ramlal. I told him I
couldn't. It is impossible for me to lay up for the future."

M: "That's all right, sir. I shall take back the two pieces of washed
cloth."

MASTER (tenderly): "Don't you see, if any desire
arises in my mind, it is
for the good of you all? You are my own. I shall tell you if I need
anything."

M. (humbly): "Yes, sir."

Referring to a devotee, Sri Ramakrishna said: "I said to him yesterday,
'Tomorrow I shall go to Burrabazar; please meet me there.' Do you know
what he said? He said: 'The tram fare will be one anna. Where shall I
get
it?' He had been to Beni Pal's garden yesterday and had officiated
there as
priest. No one had asked him to do it. He had put on the show himself.
He
wanted people to know that he was a member of the Brahmo Samaj. (To
M.)
Can you tell me what he meant when he said that the tram would cost him
one anna?"

The conversation turned to the Annakuta festival of the Marwaris.

MASTER (to the devotees): "What you have seen here
one sees at
Vrindavan too. Rakhal has been seeing the same thing there. But the
mound
of food at Vrindavan is higher, and more people gather there. There you
also see the Govardhan hill. That's the only difference.

"Did you notice the Marwaris' devotion? That is the real Hindu ideal.
That is the Sanatana Dharma. Did you notice their joy when they carried
the image in procession? They were happy to think that they bore the
throne of God on their shoulders.

"The Hindu religion alone is the Sanatana Dharma. The various creeds
you hear of nowadays have come into existence through the will of God
and
will disappear again through His will. They will not last forever.
Therefore
I say, 'I bow down at the feet of even the modern devotees.' The Hindu
religion has always existed and will always exist,"

M. was going home. He saluted the Master and got out of the carriage
near Sobhabazar. Sri Ramakrishna proceeded to Dakshineswar in a happy
mood.

^One
of the exercises sometimes practised by hathayogis; also an expression
to
describe the austerities of yoga in general.

^An
illusion to the immersion of the image after worship.

^In
the folk-lore of Bengal the moon is often pointed out to the children
as their
maternal uncle.

^Literally,
"hill of food". During this festival a vast quantity of cooked food is
offered to the Deity and later distributed among the devotees and the
poor.


=== 33_various_devotees.htm ===

With Various Devotees

←
Home
/ The Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna
/ Volume 2
/ →

WITH VARIOUS DEVOTEES

God in all beings — Master and Hriday — Bhava and mahabhava —
Discipline for God-vision — Futility of mere study — Yearning for God
— Work hard for His realization — Favourable conditions for realization
of God — See God in the world — Story of "the will of Rama" —
Master's first meeting with Keshab — Master and Devendra Tagore—
Colonel Viswanath — Essence of Vedanta — Qualified Advaita —
Synthesis of Sankara and Ramanuja — Explanation of "Aum" — Duty
to one's mother — God supplies the needs of devotees — Three classes
of sadhus — Faith in guru — "I-consciousness" — Sincere and formal
devotion — Sign of a true devotee — Advantage of a householder's life
— Master and Narayan.

Sunday, October 26, 1884

IT WAS AFTERNOON, and many devotees were present in the
Master's room.
Among them were Manomohan, Mahimacharan, and M. They were
joined later by Ishan and Hazra. Balaram and Rakhal were still staying
at Vrindavan. The many young boys who at this time began to seek the
Master's company later became his intimate disciples. Latu lived with
the
Master, and Jogin,1
who lived in the village, was a frequent visitor.

Sri Ramakrishna, happy child of the Divine Mother that he was, radiated
a joy and peace that were reflected in the hearts of his devotees and
found
expression in their happy faces. They were seated on the floor and had
their eyes fixed on the Master, who was standing in a pensive mood,
like
a boy.

MASTER (to Manomohan): "I see Rama in all things.
You are all sitting
here, but I see only Rama in every one of you."

MANOMOHAN: "Yes, sir. It is Rama who has become everything. But, as
you say, though all water is Narayana, yet some water is fit for
drinking,
some for washing the hands and face, and some only for cleaning pots
and
pans."

MASTER: "It is true. But I see that it is God Himself who has become
everything — the universe and its living beings."

Presently the Master sat down on the small couch near his bed.

MASTER (to Mahimacharan): "There is no question of
my being
truthful; but must I develop a mania for it? If I once say that I shall
not eat, then
it is impossible for me to eat, even if I am hungry. Again, if I ask a
particular man to take my water-jug to the pine-grove, he alone must
carry it.
If another man carries it, he will have to take it back. What a fix I
am in!
Is there no way out of it?

"Besides, I can't carry anything with me, neither food nor betel-leaf;
for
that means laying up for the future. I can't carry a little clay in my
hand."

Just then a man entered the room and told the Master that Hriday was
waiting to see him in Jadu Mallick's garden, near the gate.

The Master said to the devotees: "I shall have to see Hriday. Please
don't
leave the room." He put on his slippers and went toward the east gate
of
the temple garden, M. accompanying him. The road through the garden
was covered with red brick-dust. The manager of the temple, who was
standing on the road, saluted Sri Ramakrishna. The Master passed the
north entrance of the temple compound, where the bearded sentries sat.
On
his left he passed the kuthi, the building used by the proprietors of
the
temple. Then he walked on down the road which was lined on both sides
with flowering trees, passing the reservoir on his right, and went
outside
the temple garden. He found Hriday waiting for him near the gate of
Jadu
Mallick's garden.

At the sight of the Master, Hriday, who had been standing there with
folded hands, prostrated himself before him. When the Master told him
to
get up, he rose and began to cry like a child. How strange! Tears also
appeared in the Master's eyes. He wiped them away with his hands.
Hriday
had made him suffer endless agonies, yet the Master wept for him.

MASTER: "Why are you here now?"

HRIDAY (weeping): "I have come to see you. To whom
else shall I tell my sorrows?"

Sri Ramakrishna smiled and said to him by way of consolation: "One
cannot avoid such sorrows in the world. Pleasure and pain are
inevitable in
worldly life. (Pointing to M.) That is why they come here now and then.
They get peace of mind by hearing about God. What is your trouble?"

HRIDAY (weeping): "I am deprived of your company and
so I suffer."

MASTER: "Why, was it not you who said to me, 'You follow your ideal
and let me follow mine'?"

HRIDAY: "Yes, I did say that. But what did I know?"

MASTER: "I shall say good-bye to you now. Come another day and we
shall talk together. Today is Sunday and many people have come to see
me.
They are waiting in my room. Have you had a good crop in the country?"

HRIDAY: ""It isn't bad."

MASTER: "Let me say good-bye. Come another day."

Hriday again prostrated himself before the Master, who started back to
his room with M.

MASTER (to M.): "He tormented me as much as he
served me. When my
stomach trouble had reduced my body to a couple of bones and I couldn't
eat anything, he said to me one day: 'Look at me — how well I eat!
You've just
taken a fancy that you can't eat.' Again he said: 'You are a fool! If I
weren't
living with you, where would your profession of holiness be?' One day
he
tormented me so much that I stood on the embankment ready to give up
my body by jumping into the Ganges, which was then at flood-tide."

M. became speechless at these words of the Master. For such a man he
had shed tears a few minutes before!

MASTER (to M.): "Well, he served me a great deal;
then why should he
have fallen on such evil days? He took care of me like a parent
bringing up
a child. As for me, I would remain unconscious of the world day and
night.
Besides, I was ill for a long time. I was completely at his mercy."

M. did not know how to answer Sri Ramakrishna; so he kept silent.

Sri Ramakrishna returned to his room and sat on the small couch. The
devotees had been waiting for him eagerly. Several devotees from
Konnagar
had arrived. One of them came forward to question the Master.

DEVOTEE: "Sir, we hear that you go into samadhi and experience ecstasy.
Please explain why and how you get into that mood."

MASTER: "Sri Radha used to experience mahabhava. If any of her
companions wanted to touch her while she was in that state, another of
them
would say: 'Please do not touch that body, the playground of Sri
Krishna.
Krishna is now sporting in her body.' It is not possible to experience
bhava
or mahabhava without the realization of God. When a fish comes up from
a great depth, you see a movement on the surface of the water; and if
it is a
big one there, is much splashing about. That is why a devotee 'laughs
and
weeps and dances and sings in the ecstasy of God'.

"One cannot remain in bhava very long. People take a man to be crazy
if he sits before a mirror and looks at his face all the time."

DEVOTEE: "Sir, we hear that you see God. If you do, please show Him to
us."

MASTER: "Everything depends on God's will. What can a man do? While
chanting God's name, sometimes tears flow and at other times the eyes
remain
dry. While meditating on God, some days I feel a great deal of inner
awakening, and some days I feel nothing.

"A man must work. Only then can he see God. One day, in an exalted
mood, I had a vision of the Haldarpukur. I saw a low-caste villager
drawing
water after pushing aside the green scum. Now and then he took up the
water in the palm of his hand and examined it. In that vision it was
revealed to me that the water cannot be seen without pushing aside the
green
scum that covers it; that is to say, one cannot develop love of God or
obtain
His vision without work. Work means meditation, japa, and the like. The
chanting op God's name and glories is work too. You may also include
charity, sacrifice, and so on.

"If you want butter, you must let the milk turn to curd. It must be
left in
a quiet place. When the milk becomes curd, you must work hard to churn
it.
Only then can you get butter from the milk."

MAHIMACHARAN: "That is true, sir. Work is certainly necessary. One must
labour hard. Only then does one succeed. There is so much to read! The
scriptures are endless."

MASTER (to Mahimacharan): "How much of the
scriptures can you read?
What will you gain by mere reasoning? Try to realize God before
anything
else. Have faith in the guru's words, and work. If you have no guru,
then
pray to God with a longing heart. He will let you know what He is like.

"What will you learn of God from books? As long as you are at a
distance
from the market-place you hear only an indistinct roar. But it is quite
different when you are actually there. Then you hear and see everything
distinctly. You hear people saying: 'Here are your potatoes. Take them
and
give me the money.'

"From a distance you hear only the rumbling noise of the ocean. Go near
it and you will see many boats sailing about, birds flying, and waves
rolling.

"One cannot get true feeling about God from the study of books. This
feeling is something very different from book-learning. Books,
scriptures,
and science appear as mere dirt and straw after the realization of God.

"The one thing needful is to be introduced to the master of the house.
Why are you so anxious to know beforehand how many houses and gardens,
and how many government securities, the master possesses? The servants
of
the house would not allow you even to approach these, and they would
certainly
not tell you about their master's investments. Therefore, somehow or
other become acquainted with the master, even if you have to jump over
the fence or take a few pushes from the servants. Then the master
himself
will tell you all about his houses and gardens and his government
securities.
And what is more, the servants and the door-keeper will salute you when
you are known to the master." (All laugh.)

DEVOTEE: "Now the question is how to become acquainted with the
master." (Laughter.)

MASTER: "That is why I say that work is necessary. It will not do to
say
that God exists and then idle away your time. You must reach God
somehow
or other. Call on Him in solitude and pray to Him, 'O Lord! reveal
Thyself to me.' Weep for Him with a longing heart. You roam about in
search of 'woman and gold' like a madman; now be a little mad for God.
Let people say, 'This man has lost his head for God.' Why not renounce
everything for a few days and call on God in solitude?

"What will you achieve by simply saying that God exists and doing
nothing about it? There are big fish in the Haldarpukur; but can you
catch
them by merely sitting idly on the bank? Prepare some spiced bait and
throw
it into the lake. Then the fish will come from the deep water and you
will
see ripples. That will make you happy. Perhaps a fish will jump with a
splash and you will get a glimpse of it. Then you will be so glad!

"Milk must be turned to curd and the curd must be churned. Only then
will you get butter. (To Mahima) What a nuisance!
Someone must show
God to a man, while he himself sits idly by all the while! Someone must
extract the butter and hold it in front of his mouth! (All
laugh.) What a
bother! Someone else must catch the fish and give it to him!

"A man wanted to see the king. The king lived in the inner court of the
palace, beyond seven gates. No sooner did the man pass the first gate
than
he exclaimed, 'Oh, where is the king?' But there were seven gates, and
he
must pass them one after another before he could see the king."

MAHIMACHARAN: "By what kind of work can one realize God?"

MASTER: "It is not that God can be realized by this work and not by
that.
The vision of God depends on His grace. Still a man must work a little
with longing for God in his heart. If he has longing he will receive
the
grace of God.

"To attain God a man must have certain favourable conditions: the
company
of holy men, discrimination, and the blessings of a real teacher.
Perhaps
his elder brother takes the responsibility for the family; perhaps his
wife has
spiritual qualities and is very virtuous; perhaps he is not married at
all or
entangled in worldly life. He succeeds when conditions like these are
fulfilled.

"In a certain family a man lay seriously ill. He was at the point of
death.
Someone said: 'Here is a remedy: First it must rain when the star Svati
is
in the ascendant; then some of that rain-water must collect in a human
skull; then a frog must come there and a snake must chase it; and as
the
frog is about to be bitten by the snake, it must jump away and the
poison
of the snake must drop into the skull. You must prepare a medicine from
this poison and give it to the patient. Then he will live.' The head of
the
family consulted the almanac about the star and set out at the right
moment.
With great longing of heart he began to search for the different
ingredients.
He prayed to God, 'O Lord, I shall succeed only if You bring together
all
the ingredients.' As he was roaming about he actually saw a skull lying
on
the ground. Presently there came a shower of rain. Then the man
exclaimed:
'O gracious Lord, I have got the rain-water under Svati, and the skull
too.
What is more, some of the rain has fallen into the skull. Now be kind
enough to bring together the other ingredients.' He was reflecting with
a
yearning heart when he saw a poisonous snake approaching. His joy knew
no bounds. He became so excited that he could feel the thumping of his
own heart. 'O God,' he prayed, 'now the snake has come too. I have
procured
most of the ingredients. Please be gracious and give me the remaining
ones.' No sooner did he pray thus than a frog hopped up. The snake
pursued
it. As they came near the skull and the snake was about to bite the
frog, the
frog jumped over the skull and the snake's poison fell into it. The man
began to dance, clapping his hands for joy. — So I say that one gets
everything
through yearning.

"A man cannot realize God' unless he renounces everything mentally. A
sadhu cannot lay things up. 'Birds and wandering monks do not make
provision
for the morrow.' Such is the state of my mind that I cannot carry even
clay in my hand. Once, when Hriday tormented me, I thought of leaving
this place and going to Benares. I thought of taking some clothes with
me.
But how could I take money? So I could not go to Benares. (All
laugh.)

(To Mahima) "You are a householder. Therefore you
should hold both
to 'this' and to 'that' — both to the world and to God."

MAHIMA: "Sir, can one who holds to 'that' also hold to 'this'?"

MASTER: "Once, sitting on the bank of the Ganges near the Panchavati,
holding a rupee in one hand and clay in the other, I discriminated,
'The
rupee is the clay — the clay is verily the rupee, and the rupee is
verily the
clay', and then threw the rupee into the river. But I was a little
frightened.
'How foolish of me to offend the goddess of fortune!' I thought. 'What
shall I do if she doesn't provide me with food any more?' Then, like
Hazra,
I sought help in a ruse. I said to the goddess, 'Mother, may you dwell
in my
heart.' Once the Divine Mother was pleased with a man's austerities and
said to him, 'You may ask a favour of Me.' 'O Mother,' said he, 'if You
are
so pleased with me, then grant that I may eat from a gold plate with my
grandchildren.' Now, in one boon the man got everything: grandchildren,
wealth, and gold plate. (All laugh.)

"When the mind is freed from 'woman and gold', it can be directed to
God and become absorbed in Him. It is the bound alone who can be freed.
The moment the mind turns away from God, it is bound. When does the
lower needle of a pair of scales move away from the upper one? When one
pan is pressed down by a weight. 'Woman and gold' is the weight.

"Why does a child cry on coming out of its mother's womb? With its cry
it says, as it were: 'Just see where I am now! In my mother's womb I
was
meditating on the Lotus Feet of God; but see where I am now!'

(To Mahima) "You should renounce mentally. Live the
life of a
householder in a spirit of detachment."

MAHIMA: "Can a man live in the world if his mind is once directed to
God?"

MASTER: "Why not? Where will he go away from the world? I realize
that wherever I live I am always in the Ayodhya of Rama. This whole
world
is Rama's Ayodhya. After receiving instruction from His teacher, Rama
said
that He would renounce the world. Dasaratha sent the sage Vasishtha to
Rama to dissuade Him. Vasishtha found Him filled with intense
renunciation.
He said to Rama: 'First of all, reason with me, Rama; then You may
leave the world. May I ask You if this world is outside God? If that is
so,
then You may give it up.' Rama found that it is God alone who has
become
the universe and all its living beings. Everything in the world appears
real
on account of God's reality behind it. Thereupon Rama became silent.

"In the world a man must fight against passions like lust and anger,
against many desires, against attachment. It is convenient to fight
from
inside a fort — from his own home. At home he gets his food and other
help
from his wife. In the Kaliyuga the life of a man depends entirely on
food. It
is better to get food at one place than to knock at seven doors for it.2
Living at home is like facing the battle from a fort.

"Live in the world like a cast-off leaf in a gale. Such a leaf is
sometimes
blown inside a house and sometimes to a rubbish heap. The leaf goes
wherever the wind blows — sometimes to a good place and sometimes to a
bad. Now God has put you in the world. That is good. Stay here. Again,
when He lifts you from here and puts you in a better place, that will
be
time enough to think about what to do then.

"God has put you in the world. What can you do about it? Resign
everything
to Him. Surrender yourself at His feet. Then there will be no more
confusion. Then you will realize that it is God who does everything.
All
depends on 'the will of Rama'."

A DEVOTEE: "What is that story about 'the will of Rama'?"

MASTER: "In a certain village there lived a weaver. He was a very pious
soul. Everyone trusted him and loved him. He used to sell his goods in
the
market-place. When a customer asked him the price of a piece of cloth,
the
weaver would say: 'By the will of Rama the price of the yarn is one
rupee
and the labour four annas; by the will of Rama the profit is two annas.
The
price of the cloth, by the will of Rama, is one rupee and six annas.'
Such
was the people's faith in the weaver that the customer would at once
pay the
price and take the cloth. The weaver was a real devotee of God. After
finishing his supper in the evening, he would spend long hours in the
worship hall meditating on God and chanting His name and glories. Now,
late one night the weaver couldn't get to sleep. He was sitting in the
worship
hall, smoking now and then, when a band of robbers happened to pass
that
way. They wanted a man to carry their goods and said to the weaver,
'Come
with us.' So saying, they led him off by the hand. After committing a
robbery
in a house, they put a load of things on the weaver's head, commanding
him to carry them. Suddenly the police arrived and the robbers ran
away.
But the weaver, with his load, was arrested. He was kept in the lock-up
for
the night. Next day he was brought before the magistrate for trial. The
villagers learnt what had happened and came to court. They said to the
magistrate, 'Your Honour, this man could never commit a robbery.'
Thereupon the magistrate asked the weaver to make his statement.

"The weaver said: 'Your Honour, by the will of Rama I finished my meal
at night. Then by the will of Rama I was sitting in the worship hall.
It
was quite late at night by the will of Rama. By the will of Rama I had
been
thinking of God and chanting His name and glories, when by the will of
Rama a band of robbers passed that way. By the will of Rama they
dragged
me with them; by the will of Rama they committed a robbery in a house;
and by the will of Rama they put a load on my head. Just then, by the
will
of Rama the police arrived, and by the will of Rama I was arrested.
Then by
the will of Rama the police kept me in the lock-up for the night, and
this
morning by the will of Rama I have been brought before Your Honour.'
The magistrate realized that the weaver was a pious man and ordered his
release. On his way home the weaver said to his friends, 'By the will
of
Rama I have been released.'

"Whether a man should be a householder or a monk depends on the will
of Rama. Surrender everything to God and do your duties in the world.
What
else can you do? A clerk was once sent to prison. After the prison term
was
over he was released. Now, what do you think he did? Cut capers or do
his
old clerical work?

"If the householder becomes a jivanmukta, then he can easily live in
the
world if he likes. A man who has attained Knowledge does not
differentiate
between 'this place' and 'that place'. All places are the same to him.
He
who thinks of 'that place' also thinks of 'this place'.

"When I first met Keshab at Jaygopal's garden house, I remarked, 'He is
the only one who has dropped his tail.' At this people laughed. Keshab
said
to them: 'Don't laugh. There must be some meaning in his words. Let us
ask him.' Thereupon I said to Keshab: 'The tadpole, so long as it has
not
dropped its tail, lives only in the water. It cannot move about on dry
land.
But as soon as it drops its tail it hops out on the bank; then it can
live both
on land and in water. Likewise, as long as a man has not dropped his
tail of
ignorance, he can live only in the water of the world. But when he
drops
his tail, that is to say, when he attains the Knowledge of God, then he
can
roam about as a free soul, or live as a householder if he likes.'"

Mahimacharan and the other devotees remained spellbound, listening to
the Master's words.

MASTER: "Once I visited Devendranath Tagore
(The father of Rabindranath Tagore.) with Mathur Babu. I
said to Mathur: 'I have heard that Devendra Tagore thinks of God. I
should
like to see him.' 'All right,' said Mathur, 'I will take you to him. We
were
fellow students in the Hindu College and I am very friendly with him.'
We
went to Devendra's house. Mathur and Devendra had not seen each other
for a long time. Devendra said to Mathur: 'You have changed a little.
You
have grown fat around the stomach.' Mathur said, referring to me: 'He
has
come to see you. He is always mad about God.' I wanted to see
Devendra's
physical marks and said to him, 'Let me see your body.' He pulled up
his
shirt, and I found that he had very fair skin tinted red. His hair had
not yet turned grey.

"At the outset I noticed a little vanity in Devendra. And isn't that
natural?
He had such wealth, such scholarship, such name and fame! Noticing that
streak of vanity, I asked Mathur: 'Well, is vanity the outcome of
knowledge
or ignorance? Can a knower of Brahman have such a feeling as, "I am a
scholar; I am a jnani; I am rich"?'

"While I was talking to Devendra, I suddenly got into that state of
mind
in which I can see a man as he really is. I was convulsed with laughter
inside. In that state I regard scholars and the book-learned as mere
straw. If
I see that a scholar has no discrimination and renunciation, I regard
him as
worthless straw. I see that he is like a vulture, which soars high but
fixes its
look on a charnel-pit down below.

"I found that Devendra had combined both yoga and bhoga in his life.
He had a number of children, all young. The family physician was there.
Thus, you see, though he was a jnani, yet he was preoccupied with
worldly
life. I said to him: 'You are the King Janaka of this Kaliyuga.

Holding to one as well as the other,

He drank his milk from a brimming cup!

I have heard that you live in the world and think of God; so I
have come
to see you. Please tell me something about God.'

"He recited some texts from the Vedas. He said, 'This universe is like
a
chandelier and each living being is a light in it.' Once, meditating in
the
Panchavati, I too had had a vision like that. I found his words agreed
with my
vision, and I thought he must be a very great man. I asked him to
explain
his words. He said; 'God has created men to manifest His own glory;
otherwise,
who could know this universe? Everything becomes dark without the
lights in the chandelier. One cannot even see the chandelier itself.'

"We talked a long time. Devendra was pleased and said to me, 'You must
come to our Brahmo Samaj festival.' 'That', I said, 'depends on the
will of
God. You can see the state of my mind. There's no knowing when God will
put me into a particular state.' Devendra insisted: 'No, you must come.
But
put on your cloth and wear a shawl over your body. Someone might say
something unkind about your untidiness, and that would hurt me.' 'No,'
I
replied, 'I cannot promise that. I cannot be a babu.' Devendra and
Mathur laughed.

"The very next day Mathur received a letter from Devendra forbidding
me to go to the festival. He wrote that it would be ungentlemanly of me
not
to cover my body with a shawl. (All laugh.)

"There is another big man: Captain. Though a man of the world, he is a
great lover of God. (To Mahima) Talk to him some
time. He knows the
Vedas, the Vedanta, the Bhagavata, the Gita,
the Adhyatma Ramayana, and
other scriptures by heart. You will find that out when you talk to him.

"He has great piety. Once I was going along a street in Baranagore and
he held an umbrella over my head. He invites me to his house and shows
me
great attention. He fans me, massages my feet, and feeds me with
various
dishes. Once at his house I went into samadhi in the toilet; and he
took
care of me there though he is so particular about his orthodox habits.
He
didn't show any abhorrence for the place.

"He has many expenses. He supports his brothers who live in Benares.
His
wife was a miserly woman at first. Now she is so burdened by the
expenses
of the family that she cannot spend all the money she would like to.

"Captain's wife said to me: 'He doesn't enjoy worldly life. That is why
he
once said he would renounce the World.' True, every now and then he
expressed that desire.

"Captain was born in a family of devotees. His father was a soldier. I
have heard that on the battle-field he would worship Siva with one hand
and hold a naked sword in the other.

"Captain is a strong upholder of orthodox conventions. Because of my
visiting Keshab Chandra Sen, he stopped coming here for a month. He
said
to me that Keshab had violated the social conventions: he dined with
the
English, had married his daughter into another caste, and had lost his
own
caste. I said to Captain: 'What do I care for such things? Keshab
chants
the name of God; so I go to him to hear about God. I eat only the plum;
what do I care about the thorns?' But Captain remained stubborn. He
said
to me, 'Why do you see Keshab?' I answered him rather sharply: 'But I
don't go to him for money; I go there to hear the name of God. And how
is
it that you visit the Viceroy's house? He is a mlechchha. How can you
be
in his company?' That silenced him a little.

"But he is a great devotee. When he worships he performs arati with
camphor. When he recites hymns he becomes a totally different person.
He
becomes absorbed.

(To Mahimacharan) "In the light of Vedantic
reasoning the world is
illusory, unreal as a dream. The Supreme Soul is the Witness — the
witness
of the three states of waking, dream, and deep sleep. These things are
in your
line of thought. The waking state is only as real as the dream. Let me
tell
you a story that agrees with your attitude.

"There was a farmer who lived in the countryside. He was a real jnani.
He earned his living by farming. He was married, and after many years a
son was born to him, whom he named Haru. The parents loved the boy
dearly. This was natural, since he was the one precious gem in the
family.
On account of his religious nature the farmer was loved by the
villagers. One
day he was working in the field when a neighbour came and told him that
Haru had had an attack of cholera. The farmer at once returned home and
arranged tor treatment for the boy. But Haru died. The other members of
the family were grief-stricken, but the farmer acted as if nothing had
happened. He consoled his family and told them that grieving was
futile. Then
he went back to his field. On returning home he found his wife weeping
even more bitterly. She said to him: 'How heartless you are! You
haven't
shed one tear for the child.' The farmer replied quietly: 'Shall I tell
you
why I haven't wept? I had a very vivid dream last night. I dreamt I had
become a king; I was the father of eight sons and was very happy with
them.
Then I woke up. Now I am greatly perplexed. Should I weep for those
eight
sons or for this one Haru?'

"The farmer was a jnani; therefore he realized that the waking state is
as
unreal as the dream state. There is only one eternal Substance, and
that is
the Atman.

"But for my part I accept everything: Turiya and also the three states
of
waking, dream, and deep sleep. I accept all three states. I accept all
—
Brahman and also maya, the universe, and its living beings. If I
accepted less I
should not get the full weight."

A DEVOTEE: "The full weight? How is that?" (All laugh.)

MASTER: "Brahman is qualified by the universe and its living beings. At
the beginning, while following the method of 'Not this, not this', one
has to
eliminate the universe and its living beings. But as long as
'I-consciousness'
remains, one cannot but feel that it is God Himself who has become
everything.
He alone has become the twenty-four cosmic principles.

"When a man speaks of the essential part of the bel-fruit, he means its
flesh only, and not the seeds and shell. But if he wants to speak of
the total
weight of the fruit, it will not do for him to weigh only the flesh. He
must
accept the whole thing: seeds and shell and flesh. Seeds and shell and
flesh
belong to one and the same fruit.

"The Nitya and the Lila belong to the same Reality. Therefore I accept
everything, the Relative as well as the Absolute. I don't explain away
the
world as maya. Were I to do that I should get short weight."

MAHIMACHARAN: "It is a good synthesis: from the Absolute to the
Relative, and from the Relative to the Absolute."

MASTER: "The jnanis regard everything as illusory, like a dream; but
the
bhaktas accept all the states. The milk flows only in dribblets from
the jnani.
(All laugh.) There are some cows that pick and
choose their fodder; hence
their milk flows only in dribblets. But cows that don't discriminate so
much,
and eat whatever they get, give milk in torrents. A superior devotee of
God
accepts both the Absolute and the Relative; therefore he is able to
enjoy the
Divine even when his mind comes down from the Absolute. Such a devotee
is like the cows that give milk in torrents." (All laugh.)

MAHIMA: "But the milk of a cow that eats without discrimination smells
a little." (Laughter.)

MASTER (with a smile): "That's true, no doubt.
Therefore that milk
should be boiled. One should boil such milk over the fire a little
while;
there will be no smell whatever if you boil the milk over the fire of
Knowledge. (All laugh)

(To Mahima) "You explain 'Aum' with reference to
'a', 'u', and 'm' only."

MAHIMA: "'A', 'u', and 'm' mean creation, preservation, and
destruction."

MASTER: "But I give the illustration of the sound of a gong: 'torn',3
t—o—m. It is the merging of the Lila in the Nitya: the gross, the
subtle,
and the causal merge in the Great Cause; waking, dream, and deep sleep
merge in Turiya. The striking of the gong is like the falling of a
heavy
weight into a big ocean. Waves begin to rise; the Relative rises from
the
Absolute; the causal, subtle, and gross bodies appear out of the Great
Cause;
from Turiya emerge the states of deep sleep, dream, and waking. These
waves arising from the Great Ocean merge again in the Great Ocean. From
the Absolute to the Relative, and from the Relative to the Absolute.
Therefore
I give the illustration of the gong's sound, 'tom'. I have clearly
perceived
all these things. It has been revealed to me that there exists an Ocean
of
Consciousness without limit. From It come all things of the relative
plane,
and in It they merge again. Millions of Brahmandas rise in that
Chidakasa
and merge in It again. All this has been revealed to me; I don't know
much
about what your books say."

MAHIMA: "Those to whom such things were revealed did not write the
scriptures. They were rapt in their own experiences; when would they
write?
One needs a somewhat calculating mind to write. Others learnt these
things
from the seers and wrote the books."

MASTER: "Worldly people ask why one does not get rid of attachment to
'woman and gold'. That attachment disappears after the realization of
God.
If a man once tastes the Bliss of Brahman, then his mind no longer runs
after the enjoyment of sense pleasures or wealth or name and fame. It
the
moth once sees the light, it no longer goes into the darkness.

"Some friends said to Ravana: 'You have been assuming different forms4
for Sita. Why don't you go to her in the form of Rama?' Ravana replied:
'When I contemplate Rama, even the position of Brahma appears
insignificant
to me, not to speak of the company of another man's wife! How
could I take the form of Rama for such a purpose?'

"All worship and spiritual discipline are directed to one end alone,
namely,
to get rid of worldly attachment. The more you meditate on God, the
less
you will be attached to the trifling things of the world. The more you
love
the Lotus Feet of God, the less you will crave the things of the world
or
pay heed to creature comforts. You will look on another man's wife as
your
mother and regard your own wife as your companion in spiritual life.
You
will get rid of your bestial desires and acquire godly qualities. You
will be
totally unattached to the world. Though you may still have to live in
the
world, you will live as a jivanmukta. The disciples of Sri Chaitanya
lived
as householders in a spirit of detachment.

"You may quote thousands of arguments from Vedanta philosophy to a
true lover of God, and try to explain the world as a dream, but you
cannot
shake his devotion to God.5
In spite of all your efforts he will come back to his devotion.

"A man born with an element of Siva becomes a jnani; his mind is always
inclined to the feeling that the world is unreal and Brahman alone is
real.
But when a man is born with an element of Vishnu he develops ecstatic
love of God. That love can never be destroyed. It may wane a little now
and
then, when he indulges in philosophical reasoning, but it ultimately
returns.
to him increased a thousandfold."

After the devotees had left the Master, Mahimacharan brought Hazra to
the room. M. was present. Mahima said to Sri Ramakrishna: "Sir, I have
a
complaint against you. Why have you asked Hazra to go home? He has no
desire to return to his family."

MASTER: "His mother has told Ramlal how much she is suffering on
account of his being away from home; so I have asked Hazra to go home,
at least for three days, and see her. Can anyone succeed in spiritual
discipline
if it causes suffering to his mother? While visiting Vrindavan I had
almost made up my mind to live there, when I remembered my mother. I
said to myself, 'My mother will weep if I stay away from her.' So I
returned
here with Mathur Babu. Besides, why should a jnani like Hazra be afraid
of
going back to the world?"

MAHIMA (with a smile): "Sir, that would be a
pertinent question if
Hazra were a jnani."

MASTER (smiling): "Oh, Hazra has attained
everything. He has just a
little attachment to the world because of his children and a small
debt. As
people say, my aunt is now in perfect health, only she is slightly ill!"

MAHIMA: "Where, sir, is Hazra's knowledge?"

MASTER (smiling): "Oh, you don't know! Everybody
says Hazra is quite
a man. Everybody knows that he lives in the Dakshineswar temple garden.
People talk of nothing but Hazra. Who would bother to mention my name?"
(All laugh.)

HAZRA: "You, sir, are incomparable. You have no peer in the world.
Therefore nobody understands you."

MASTER: "There you are! To be sure, no one can have dealings with the
incomparable. So why should people mention me at all?"

MAHIMA: "What does he know, sir? He will do your bidding."

MASTER: "That is not so. You had better ask him about it. He said to
me,
'You and I are on even terms.'"

MAHIMA: "He argues a great deal."

MASTER: "Now and then he teaches me a lesson. (All laugh.)
Sometimes
I scold him when he argues too much. Later, when I am lying in bed
inside
the mosquito curtain, I feel unhappy at the idea of having offended
him.
So I leave the bed, go to Hazra, and salute him. Then I feel peace of
mind.

(To Hazra) "Why do you address the Pure Atman as
'Isvara'? The Pure
Atman is inactive and is the Witness of the three states. When I think
of the
acts of creation, preservation, and destruction, then I call the Pure
Atman
'Isvara'. What is the Pure Atman like? It is like a magnet lying at a
great
distance from a needle. The needle moves, but the magnet lies
motionless,
inactive."

Toward evening Sri Ramakrishna was pacing the room. M. was sitting
alone, thinking. Suddenly the Master said to him tenderly: "Please give
me
a couple of linen shirts. As you know, I cannot use everybody's things.
I
thought of asking Captain for the shirts, but you had better give them
to
me." M. felt highly gratified and said, "As you please, sir."

At dusk incense was burnt in Sri Ramakrishna's room, and, as usual, he
bowed before the pictures of gods and goddesses on the walls and
chanted
their names softly. From outside one could hear the murmuring of the
Ganges and the music of the evening worship in the temples of Kali,
Vishnu,
and Siva. Through the door one could see the priest at a distance
moving
from one temple to another, a bell in his left hand and a light in his
right,
an attendant carrying the gong. The evening melody was in harmony with
the spirit of the hour and place and with the innermost thoughts of the
worshippers. For the time being the sordid things of daily life were
forgotten.

Later Sri Ramakrishna was seated in his room in his usual blissful
mood.
Ishan had come from Calcutta. He had burning faith in God. He used to
say, "If a man leaves the house with the hallowed name of Durga on his
lips, then Siva Himself protects him with His celestial weapons."

MASTER (to Ishan): "You nave great faith. But I
haven't so much. (All
laugh.) God can be realized only through faith."

ISHAN: "Yes, sir."

MASTER: "You practise religious rites — japa, fasting, and the like.
That is
very good. If a man feels sincerely drawn to God, then God makes him
practise all these disciplines. The devotee will certainly realize God
if he
practises them without desiring their results. A devotee observes many
rites
because of the injunctions of the scriptures. Such devotion is called
vaidhi-bhakti. But there is a higher form of devotion known as
raga-bhakti, which
springs from yearning and love for God. Prahlada had such devotion.
When
the devotee develops that love, he no longer needs to perform
prescribed
rites."

November 9, 1884

Sri Ramakrishna was in his room, seated on the small couch and
facing
the east. The devotees were sitting on the floor. It was about midday
when
M. arrived and took a seat after saluting the Master. Gradually other
devotees
began to gather. Vijaykrishna Goswami was there with several Brahmo
devotees. The priest Ram Chakravarty was present also. Mahimacharan,
Narayan, and Kishori arrived a few minutes later.

It was the beginning of winter. Sri Ramakrishna had felt the need of
some
shirts and had asked M. to bring them. Besides two broadcloth shirts,
M.
had brought another of a heavy material, for which Sri Ramakrishna had
not
asked.

MASTER (to M.): "You had better take that one back
with you. You can
use it yourself. There is nothing wrong in that. Tell me, what kind of
shirt
did I ask you to bring?"

M: "Sir, you told me to get you plain ones. You didn't ask me to buy
the heavier one."

MASTER: "Then please take that one hack. (To Vijay and the
others)
You see, Dwarika Babu gave me a shawl. The Marwari devotees also
brought
one for me. I couldn't accept —"

Vijay interrupted the Master, saying: "That is right, sir. If a man
needs
a thing, he must accept it. And there must be a man to give it. Who but
a
man will give?"

MASTER: "The giver is the Lord Himself. The mother-in-law said to her
daughter-in-law: 'My child, I see that everybody has someone to render
him
a little personal service. It would be so nice if you could find
someone to
massage your feet.' The daughter-in-law said: 'Mother, God Himself will
massage my feet. I don't need anyone else.' She spoke thus because she
was
a sincere lover of God.

'Once a fakir went to the Emperor Akbar to ask for money. The Emperor
was saying his prayers. He prayed, 'O Lord, give me money; give me
wealth.'
The fakir started to leave the palace, but the Emperor motioned to him
to
wait. After finishing his prayers, Akbar came to the holy man and said,
'Why were you going away?' The fakir replied, You yourself were begging
for money and wealth; so I thought that if I must beg, I would beg of
God
and not of a beggar.'"

VIJAY: "I saw a sadhu at Gaya. He did not take the initiative in
anything.
One day he wanted to feed some devotees. Suddenly we found that butter,
flour, fruits, and other food-stuff had arrived from no one knew where."

MASTER (to Vijay and the others): "There are three
classes of sadhus:
good, mediocre, and bad. The good sadhu makes no effort to get his
food.
The dandis, among others, belong to the mediocre and bad classes. To
get
food the mediocre sadhu will knock at the door of a house and say,
'Namo
Narayana'.6
The bad sadhu starts a quarrel if he doesn't get his alms.

"The good sadhu behaves like a python. He sits in one place and the
food
comes to him. The python doesn't move from where it is. A young sadhu,
who had been a brahmachari from his boyhood, went out to beg. A young
girl offered him alms. The sadhu saw her breasts and thought she had
abscesses. He asked about them. The elderly women of the family
explained
that she would some day be a mother and that God had given her breasts
to give milk to her children; God had provided for all this beforehand.
At
these words the sadhu was struck with wonder. He said: 'Then I don't
need
to beg. God must have provided for me too.'"

Some of the devotees thought that in that case they should not take any
initiative either.

MASTER: "But those who think that an effort is needed must make the
effort."

VIJAY: "There is a nice story about that in the Bhaktamala."

MASTER: "Tell it to us."

VIJAY: "Please tell us yourself."

MASTER: "No, you tell it. I don't remember it very well.

"One should hear these things at the beginning. That is why I listened
to them years ago. But now I am no longer in that mood. Hanuman said:
'I don't know the position of the stars or the phase of the moon. I
only think of Rama.'

"The chatak bird craves only rain-water. Even when it is dying of
thirst,
it turns its beak upward and wants only water from the sky. The Ganges,
the Jamuna, and the seven oceans are filled to the brim, but still it
will not
touch the water of the earth.

"Rama and Lakshmana visited Pampa Lake. Lakshmana saw a crow very
eager for water. Again and again it went to the edge of the water but
would
not drink. Lakshmana asked Rama about it. Rama said: 'Brother, this
crow
is a great devotee of God. Day and night it repeats the name of Rama.
Its
throat is parched with thirst, but still it won't drink for tear of
missing a
repetition of Rama's name.'

"On a full-moon night I said to Haladhari, 'Brother, is it the night of
the
new moon?' (All laugh.)

(Smiling) "Yes, it is true. Once I was told that a
characteristic of a man
of Perfect Knowledge is that he cannot distinguish between the full
moon
and the new moon. But how could one convince Haladhari of that? He
said: 'This is certainly the dark Kaliyuga. He cannot distinguish the
full
moon from the new moon! And people respect him!'"

Mahimacharan entered the room.

MASTER (respectfully): "Come in. Come in, sir.
Please take a seat.

(To Vijay and the other devotees) "In the ecstatic
state of mind I cannot
remember a date. The other day there was a religious festival at Beni
Pal's
garden. I forgot the date. I can no longer remember the last day of the
month, when it is very auspicious to repeat the name of God."

Sri Ramakrishna remained thoughtful a few minutes.

MASTER: "But I remember if a man makes an engagement to visit me.

"A man attains this state when his mind is one hundred per cent
absorbed
in God. When Hanuman returned from Ceylon, Rama said to him: 'You
have seen Sita. Tell me, how did you find her?' Hanuman said: 'O Rama,
I saw that only the body of Sita lay there; it held neither her mind
nor her
soul. She has indeed consecrated her mind and soul to Your Lotus Feet.
Therefore I saw only her body in Ceylon. Further, I saw the King of
Death
prowling about. But what could he do? It was only a body; it had
neither
mind nor soul.'

It you meditate on an ideal you will acquire its nature. If you think
of
God day and night, you will acquire the nature of God. A salt doll went
into the ocean to measure its depth. It became one with the ocean. What
is
the goal of books or scriptures? The attainment of God. A man opened a
book belonging to a sadhu. He saw the word Rama written on every page.
There was nothing else.

"If a man loves God, even the slightest thing kindles spiritual feeling
in him. Then, repeating the name of Rama but once, he gets the fruit of
ten million sandhyas. At the sight of a cloud the peacock's emotion is
awakened: he dances, spreading his tail. Radha had the same experience.
Just the
sight of a cloud recalled Krishna to her mind.

"Chaitanyadeva was passing a village. He heard that drums were made
from the earth of that place. At once he was overwhelmed with ecstasy
because drums are used in kirtan.

"But who can have this spiritual awakening? Only he who has renounced
his attachment to worldly things. If the sap of attachment is totally
dried up
in a man, the slightest suggestion kindles, his spiritual emotion.
Though
you strike a wet match a thousand times, it will not produce a spark.
But
if it is dried, the slightest rubbing will set it aflame.

"Pain and pleasure are inevitable in a body. He who has realized God
dedicates his mind and life, his body and soul, to God. When Rama and
Lakshmana went to take their bath in Pampa Lake, they thrust their bows
into the ground. Coming out of the water, Lakshmana took out his bow
and
found its tip stained with blood. Rama said to him: 'Look, brother!
Look.
Perhaps we have hurt some creature.' Lakshmana dug in the earth and
found a big bullfrog. It was dying. Rama said to the frog in a
sorrowful
voice: 'Why didn't you croak? We should have tried to save you. You
croak
lustily enough when you are in the jaws of a snake.' The frog said: 'O
Lord, when I am attacked by a snake I croak, saying: "O Rama, save me!
O Rama, save me!" This time I found that it was Rama who was killing
me; so I kept still.'"

Sri Ramakrishna remained silent a few moments watching the devotees.
He had heard that Mahimacharan did not believe in following a guru. He
began the conversation again.

MASTER: "A man should have faith in the words of his guru. He doesn't
have to look into his guru's character. 'Though, my guru visits the
grog-shop,
still he is the Embodiment of Eternal Bliss.'

"A man who used to give recitals of the Chandi and
the Bhagavata
once said, 'A broomstick is itself unclean, but it cleans dirty
places.'"

Mahimacharan studied the Vedanta. His aim was to attain Brahmajnana.
He followed the path of knowledge and was always reasoning.

MASTER (to Mahima): "The aim of the jnani is to know
the' nature of
his own Self. This is Knowledge; this is liberation. The true nature of
the
Self is that It is the Supreme Brahman: I and the Supreme Brahman are
one. But this Knowledge is hidden on account of maya.

"I said to Harish, 'This is the whole thing: the gold is hidden under a
few basketfuls of earth, and you must remove the earth.'

"The bhaktas retain 'I-consciousness'; the jnanis do not. Nangta used
to
teach how to establish oneself in the true Self, saying, 'Merge the
mind in
the buddhi and the buddhi in the Atman; then you will be established in
your true Self.'

"But the 'I' persists. It cannot be got rid of. Imagine a limitless
expanse
of water: above and below, before and behind, right and left,
everywhere
there is water. In that water is placed a jar filled with water. There
is water
inside the jar and water outside, but the jar is still there. The 'I'
is the jar.

"Even after attaining Knowledge, the jnani keeps his body as before.
But
the fire of Knowledge burns away his lust and other passions. Many days
ago, during an electric storm, a thunderbolt struck the Kali temple. We
saw
that no injury had been done to the doors; only the points of the
screws were
broken. The doors are the body, and the passions — lust and so forth —
are
the screws.

"A jnani loves to talk only about God. He feels pained if one talks
about
worldly things. But a worldly man belongs to a different class. He
always
has the turban of ignorance on his head. He always comes back to
worldly
topics.

"The Vedas speak of the 'seven planes' of mind. When the jnani's mind
ascends to the fifth plane, he cannot listen to anything or talk of
anything
but God. At that stage only words of wisdom come from his lips.

"The Vedas speak of Satchidananda Brahman. Brahman is neither one
nor two; It is between one and two. It cannot be described either as
existence
or as non-existence; It is between existence and non-existence.

"When the devotee develops raga-bhakti, passionate love of God, he
realizes
Him. But one loses vaidhi-bhakti, formal devotion, as easily as one
gains it.
This is formal devotion: so much japa, so much meditation, so much
sacrifice
and homa, so many articles of worship, and the recitation of so many
mantras before the Deity. Such devotion comes in a moment and goes in
a moment. Many people say: 'Well, friend, we have lived on havishya for
so many days! How many times we have worshipped the Deity at our home!
And what have we achieved?' But there is no falling away from
raga-bhakti.
And who gets this passionate love for God? Those who have performed
many meritorious deeds in their past births, or those who are eternally
perfect.
Think of a dilapidated house, for instance: while clearing away the
undergrowth
and rubbish one suddenly discovers a fountain fitted with a pipe. It
has been covered with earth and bricks, but as soon as they are removed
the water shoots up.

"Those who have passionate love for God do not say any such thing as:
'O brother, how strict I have been about food! But what have I
achieved?'
New farmers give up cultivating if their fields do not yield any crops.
But hereditary farmers will continue to cultivate their fields whether
they get
a crop or not. Their fathers and grandfathers were farmers; they know
that
they too must accept farming as their means of livelihood.

"Only those who have developed raga-bhakti for God may be called His
sincere devotees. God becomes responsible for them. If you enter your
name
in a hospital register, the doctor will not discharge you until you are
cured.
Those who are held by God have nothing to fear. The son who holds to
his father, while walking along the narrow ridge of a paddy-field, may
slip
if he absent-mindedly lets go his father's hand; but if the father
holds the
son by the hand, there is no such danger.

"Is there anything that is impossible for faith? And a true devotee has
faith in everything: the formless Reality, God with form, Rama,
Krishna,
and the Divine Mother.

"Once, while, going to Kamarpukur, I was overtaken by a storm. I was in
the middle of a big meadow. The place was haunted by robbers. I began
to repeat the names of all the deities: Rama, Krishna, and Bhagavati. I
also repeated the name of Hanuman. I chanted the names of them all.
What does that mean? Let me tell you. While the servant is counting out
the money to purchase supplies, he says, These pennies are for
potatoes,
these for egg-plants, these for fish.' He counts the money separately,
but
after the list is completed, he puts the coins together.

"When one develops love of God, one likes to talk only of God. If you
love a person, you love to talk and hear about him. A worldly person's
mouth
waters while he talks about his son. If someone praises his son, he
will at
once say to the boy, 'Go and get some water for your uncle to wash his
feet.'

"Those who love pigeons are highly pleased if you praise pigeons before
them. But if you speak ill of pigeons, they will at once exclaim, 'Has
anyone
in your line for fourteen generations ever raised pigeons?'"

Sri Ramakrishna now addressed Mahimacharan, who was a householder.

MASTER: "What need is there of renouncing the world altogether? It is
enough if you can rid yourself of attachment. But you must have
sadhana;
you have to fight the sense-organs.

"It is a great advantage to fight from inside a fort. You get much help
from the fort. The world is the place for enjoyment. After enjoying
different
things, you should give them up one by one. Once I had a desire to put
a
gold chain around my waist. I obtained one at last and put it on, but I
had
to take it off immediately.

"Once I ate some onion.7
While eating it I discriminated, 'O mind, this is
onion.' Then I moved it to different places in my mouth and at last
spat it out."

A musician was expected. He was to sing with his party. Sri Ramakrishna
asked the devotees every now and then, "Where is the musician?"

MAHIMA: "We are quite all right as we are."

MASTER: "No, sir. You get this all through the year."

A devotee outside the room said, "The musician has come."

Sri Ramakrishna was filled with joy and said, "Ah! Has he?"

Mats were spread on the floor of the long verandah northeast of the
Master's room. Sri Ramakrishna said: "Sprinkle a little Ganges water on
the
mats. Many worldly people have sat on them."

The ladies of Pyari Babu's family, from Bali, had come to visit the
temples. They wanted to listen to the kirtan. A devotee said to Sri
Ramakrishna: "These ladies have been inquiring whether there would be
any
place in the room for them. Can they have seats?" The kirtan had
already
begun. The Master said, "No, no! Where is any room here?"

Narayan arrived and saluted Sri Ramakrishna. The latter said tenderly:
"Why have you come? Your people at home have beaten you so much!" He
signed to Baburam to give Narayan something to eat. Narayan entered the
Master's room. Suddenly Sri Ramakrishna followed him. He wanted to feed
Narayan with his own hands. Afterwards he returned to the verandah.

Many devotees were present, including Vijay, Mahimacharan, Narayan,
M., and the younger Gopal. Soon Narayan came back to the verandah and
took his seat by the Master.

About three o'clock Adhar arrived. At the sight of him Sri Ramakrishna
appeared excited. The devotee saluted the Master and sat on the floor.
Sri
Ramakrishna beckoned to him to come nearer.

When the music was over the gathering of devotees broke up. Some
began to stroll in the garden and some went to the temples to watch the
evening service.

In the evening arrangements were made for kirtan inside the Master's
room. Sri Ramakrishna eagerly asked a devotee to have an extra lamp.
The
two lamps lit the room brightly.

Sri Ramakrishna said to Vijay: "Why are you sitting there? Come nearer
to me." This time the kirtan created an intense atmosphere. The Master
danced in an ecstasy of joy; the devotees also danced encircling him.
While
Vijay was dancing his cloth dropped. He was unconscious.

When the music was over, Vijay began to look for his key, which had
fallen somewhere. The Master said to him with a laugh, "Why bother
about
it any more?" He meant that Vijay should have nothing more to do with
boxes and keys.

Kishori saluted Sri Ramakrishna and was about to take his leave. The
Master blessed him, touching his chest tenderly, and bade him good-bye.
His words were full of love. M. and Gopal saluted the Master. They too
were about to take their leave. He said to them with the same
affection:
"Couldn't you go tomorrow morning? You may catch cold at night."

M. and Gopal decided to spend the night with Sri Ramakrishna. They sat
on the floor with a few other devotees.

Sri Ramakrishna had had no rest the whole day: the devotees had been
with him all the time. He went out for a few minutes. Returning to the
room he saw M. taking down a song from Ramlal.

MASTER: "What are you doing?"

M. said that he was writing down a song. On being told what the song
was, the Master remarked that it was a rather long song. M. wrote a
line
or two and then stopped writing.

A little later Sri Ramakrishna took his supper of farina pudding and
one
or two luchis. A lighted lamp stood on a stand by his side. M. sat near
him.
The Master asked if there were any sweets in the room. M. had brought
some sandesh which he had put on the shelf. Sri Ramakrishna asked M. to
give him a sweet. M. searched for the sweets but could not find them.
He
was embarrassed. They had been given to the devotees.

After finishing his supper, Sri Ramakrishna sat on the small couch and
M. seated himself on the foot-rug. The Master, talking about Narayan,
was
overcome with emotion.

MASTER: "I saw Naran today."

M: "Yes, sir. His eyes were moist. When I looked at his face I felt
like weeping."

MASTER: "The sight of him arouses a mother's love in me, as it were.
His
relatives beat him at home because he comes here. There is none to
defend him."

M: "The other day he left his books at Haripada's house and fled to
you."

MASTER: "It was not good for him to do that."

Sri Ramakrishna was silent. After a few minutes he continued.

MASTER: "You see, he has much substance in him. Otherwise, how could
I be attracted to him even though I was listening to the kirtan at the
time?
I had to leave the music and go into the room. That never happened
before."

Again Sri Ramakrishna fell silent. A few minutes later he began to talk.

MASTER: "In an ecstatic state I asked him how he was feeling. He just
said he was happy. (To M.) Feed him now and then—as
parents do their child."

Sri Ramakrishna then spoke about Tejchandra.

MASTER (to M.): "Please ask him what he thinks of
me. Does he think
of me as a jnani? Or what does he say about me? I understand that he is
very reticent. (To Gopal) Ask Tejchandra to come
here Saturdays and
Tuesdays. (To M.) Suppose I go to your school and
look for —"

M. thought that Sri Ramakrishna wanted to go to his school to see
Narayan. He said to the Master, "You might as well wait at our house."

MASTER: "No, I have something else in mind. I should like to see
whether
there are other worth-while boys in the school."

M: "Of course you can go. Other visitors come to the school. You can
come too."

Sri Ramakrishna was smoking. M. and Gopal finished their supper. They
decided to sleep in the nahabat. M. again sat on the floor near Sri
Ramakrishna.

MASTER (to M.): 'There may be some pots and pans in
the nahabat.
Why not sleep here in this room?"

M: "Very well, sir."

It was ten or eleven o'clock at night. Sri Ramakrishna was sitting on
the
small couch, resting against a pillow. M. sat on the floor. The Master
was
conversing with him. A lamp burnt on a stand near the wall.

The Master felt great compassion for his devotees. He wanted to bless
M.
by accepting his personal service.

MASTER: "My feet ache. Please rub them gently."

M. seated himself on the small couch and took the Master's feet on his
lap. He stroked them. Now and then Sri Ramakrishna would ask his
disciple
a question.

MASTER (smiling): "How did you like today's
conversation?"

M: "Very much indeed."

MASTER (smiling): "How I spoke about the Emperor
Akbar!"

M: "It was very good."

MASTER: "Repeat it to me."

M: "A fakir came to visit Akbar. The Emperor was saying his prayers.
In his prayers he was asking God to give him wealth and riches.
Thereupon
the fakir was about to leave the room quietly. Later, when the Emperor
asked him about it, the fakir said, 'It I must beg, why should I beg of
a
beggar?'"

MASTER: "What else did we talk about?"

M: "You told us a great deal about saving up for the future."

MASTER (smiling): "What did I say?"

M: "As long as a man feels that he must try, he should make an effort.
How well you told us about it at Sinthi!"

MASTER: "What did I say?"

M: "God takes upon Himself complete responsibility for one who totally
depends upon Him. It is like a guardian taking charge of a minor. You
also
told us that at a feast a child cannot by himself find a place to eat
his meal;
someone finds a place for him."

MASTER: "No, that is not quite to the point. I said that the child
doesn't
fall if the father leads him and holds his hand."

M: "You also described the three classes of sadhus. The best sadhu does
not move about to get his food; he lives in one place and gets his food
there.
You told us about that young sadhu who said, when he saw the breasts of
a young girl, 'Why has she those abscesses?' You told us many other
things."

MASTER (smiling): "What else?"

M: "About the crow of Pampa Lake. He repeated the name of Rama
day and night. That is why he couldn't drink the water though he went
to
its edge. And about the holy man in whose book was written only 'Om
Rama'. And what Hanuman said to Rama."

MASTER: "What did he say?"

M: "Hanuman said to Rama: 'I saw Sita in Ceylon; but it was only her
body. Her mind and soul were lying at Your feet.'

"And about the chatak bird. He will not drink anything but rain-water.
And about jnanayoga and bhaktiyoga."

MASTER: "What did I say about them?"

M: "As long as one is conscious of the 'jar', the ego will certainly
remain.
As long as one is conscious of 'I', one cannot get rid of the idea, 'I
am the
devotee and Thou art God'."

MASTER: "No, it is not that; the 'jar' doesn't disappear whether one is
conscious of it or not. One cannot get rid of the 'I'. You may reason a
thousand times; still it will not go."

M. remained silent a few moments.

M: "You had that talk with Ishan Mukherji in the Kali temple. We were
very lucky to be there."

MASTER (smiling): "Yes, yes. Tell me, what did I
say?"

M: "You said that work is only the first step. You told us that you
said to
Sambhu Mallick, 'If God appears before you, will you ask Him for a
number
of hospitals and dispensaries?'

You said another thing: God does not reveal Himself to a person as long
as he is attached to work. You said that to Keshab Sen."

MASTER: "What did I say?"

M: "As long as the baby plays with the toy and forgets everything else,
its mother looks after her cooking and other household duties; but when
the baby throws away the toy and cries, then the mother puts down the
rice-pot and comes to the baby.

"You said another thing that day: Lakshmana asked Rama where one
could find God; after a great deal of explanation, Rama said to him,
'Brother,
I dwell in the man in whom you find ecstatic love — a love which makes
him
laugh and weep and dance and sing.'"

MASTER: "Ah me! Ah me!"

Sri Ramakrishna sat in silence a few minutes.

M: "That day you spoke only words of renunciation to Ishan. Since then
many of us have come to our senses. Now we are eager to reduce our
duties.
You said that day, 'Ravana died in Ceylon and Behula wept bitterly for
him.'"

Sri Ramakrishna laughed aloud.

M. (humbly): "Sir, isn't it desirable to reduce the
number of one's duties
and entanglements?"

MASTER: "Yes. But it is a different thing if you happen to come across
a
sadhu or a poor man. Then you should serve him."

M: "And that day you spoke very rightly to Ishan about flatterers. They
are like vultures on a carcass. You once said that to Padmalochan also."

MASTER: "No, to Vamandas of Ulo."

After a while M. sat on the floor near the small couch. Sri Ramakrishna
felt sleepy; he said to M.: "Go to sleep. Where is Gopal? Please shut
the
door."

Next morning Sri Ramakrishna left his bed very early. As usual, he
chanted the holy names of the different gods and goddesses. Now and
then
he looked at the sacred river. The morning worship began in the temples
of
Radhakanta and Mother Kali. M. had spent the night on the floor of the
Master's room. He left his bed and watched the worship in the different
temples.

Sri Ramakrishna finished his bath and went with M. to the Kali temple.
He asked the disciple to lock the door of his room.

In the temple he took the seat in front of the image of Kali and
offered
flowers, sometimes at Her feet and sometimes on his own head. He fanned
the Deity. Then he returned to his room and asked M. to unlock the
door.
Entering the room, he sat on the small couch. He was completely
overwhelmed with divine fervour and began to chant the name of God. M.
sat
alone on the floor. Sri Ramakrishna began to sing about the Divine
Mother:

Who is there that can understand what
Mother Kali is?

Even the six darsanas are powerless to reveal Her.

It is She, the scriptures say, that is the Inner Self

Of the yogi, who in Self discovers all his joy;

She that, of Her own sweet will, inhabits every living thing. . . .

Then he sang:

All creation is the sport of my mad Mother Kali;

By Her maya the three worlds are bewitched. . . .

He continued:

O Kali, who can know Thee? Numberless are Thy forms. . . .

Again he sang:

O Mother, redeem me speedily!

From terror of the King of Death I am about to die. . . .

M. said to himself, "I wish he would sing:

Mother, Thou canst not trick me any more,

For I have seen Thy crimson Lotus Feet."

Strangely enough, no sooner had the thought passed through
M.'s mind
than Sri Ramakrishna sang the song. A few minutes later he said to M.,
"What do you think of the present state of my mind?"

M. (smiling): "It is your simple and natural state."

Sri Ramakrishna sang to himself the following refrain of a song:

Unless a man is simple, he cannot recognize God, the Simple One.

^A
monastic disciple of Sri Ramakrishna, later known as Swami Jogananda.

^It
is the custom of monks in India to beg their food from householders.

^The
"o" is to be pronounced as "aw" in dawn.

^During
the period when Sita was kept in prison in his capital, Ravana used to
visit her in various forms in order to court her favour.

^According
to the non-dualistic Vedanta the Personal God is as illusory as the
relative universe; but to a bhakta, a devotee, He is real.

^"Salutations
to God." With these words a sadhu greets another person.

^The
onion is considered a rajasic food and not conducive to spiritual life.


=== 34_bankim_chandra.htm ===

Bankim Chandra

←
Home
/ The Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna
/ Volume 2
/ →

BANKIM CHANDRA

Adhar — Meaning of Radha and Krishna — Purusha and Prakriti imply
each other — Their inner harmony — Master and preaching — Preaching
without God's command — Life after death — Duties of life — Master
scolds Bankim — Devotees and tlie worldly-minded — Charity — The
sannyasi's duty — The householder's duty — Difficulty of karmayoga —
Spirituality and book-learning — God and the world — Faith in guru —
Yearning for God-vision.

Saturday, December 6, 1884

ADHAR, A GREAT DEVOTEE of Sri Ramakrishna, lived in Sobhabazar
in the
northern section of Calcutta. Almost every day, after finishing his
hard work at the office and returning home in the late afternoon, he
paid Sri Ramakrishna a visit. From his home in Calcutta he would go to
Dakshineswar in a hired carriage. His sole delight was to visit the
Master.
But he would hear very little of what Sri Ramakrishna said; for, after
saluting
the Master and visiting the temples, he would lie down, at the Master's
request, on a mat spread on the floor and would soon fall asleep. At
nine or
ten o'clock he would he awakened to return home. However, he considered
himself blessed to be able to visit the God-man of Dakshineswar. At
Adhar's
request Sri Ramakrishna often visited his home. His visits were
occasions for
religious festivals. Devotees in large numbers would assemble, and
Adhar
would feed them sumptuously. One day, while Sri Ramakrishna was
visiting
his home, Adhar said to him: "Sir, you haven't come to our house for a
long
time. The rooms seemed gloomy; they had a musty smell. But today the
whole house is cheerful; the sweetness of your presence fills the
atmosphere.
Today I called on God earnestly. I even shed tears while praying." "Is
that
so?" the Master said tenderly, casting a kindly glance on his disciple.

Sri Ramakrishna arrived at Adhar's house with his attendants. Everyone
was in a joyous mood. Adhar had arranged a rich feast. Many strangers
were
present. At Adhar's invitation, several other deputy magistrates had
come;
they wanted to watch the Master and judge his holiness. Among them was
Bankim Chandra Chatterji, perhaps the greatest literary figure of
Bengal
during the later part of the nineteenth century. He was one of the
creators
of modern Bengali literature and wrote on social and religious
subjects.
Bankim was a product of the contact of India with England. He gave
modern
interpretations of the Hindu scriptures and advocated drastic social
reforms.

Sri Ramakrishna had been talking happily with the devotees when Adhar
introduced several of his personal friends to him.

ADHAR (introducing Banking): "Sir, he is a great
scholar and has written
many books. He has come here to see you. His name is Bankim Babu."

MASTER (smiling): "Bankim!
(Literally the word means "bent" or "curved".) Well, what has made you
bent?")

BANKIM (smiling): "Why, sir, boots are responsible
for it. The kicks of
our white masters have bent my body."

MASTER: "No, my dear sir! Sri Krishna was bent on account of His
ecstatic love. His body was bent in three places owing to His love for
Radha.
That is how some people explain Sri Krishna's form. Do you know why He
has a deep-blue complexion? And why He is of such small stature — only
three and a half cubits measured by His own hand? God looks so as long
as He is seen from a distance. So the water of the ocean looks blue
from
afar. But if you go near the ocean and take the water in your hand, you
will no longer find it blue; it will be very clear, transparent. So the
sun
appears small because it is very far away; if you go near it, you will
no
longer find it small. When one knows the true nature of God, He appears
neither blue nor small. But that is a far-off vision: one does not see
it except
in samadhi. As long as 'I' and you' exist, name and form will also
exist.
Everything is God's lila, His sportive pleasure. As long as a man is
conscious
of 'I' and 'you', he will experience the manifestations of God through
diverse
forms.

"Sri Krishna is the Purusha; Srimati (Radhika, the Divine Consort of
Krishna.)
is His Sakti, the Primal Power. The
two are Purusha and Prakriti. What is the meaning of the Yugala Murti,
the conjoined images of Radha and Krishna? It is that Purusha and
Prakriti
are not different; there is no difference between them. Purusha cannot
exist
without Prakriti, and Prakriti cannot exist without Purusha. If you
mention
the one, the other is understood. It is like fire and its power to
burn: one
cannot think of fire without its power to burn; again, one cannot think
of
fire's power to burn without fire. Therefore in the conjoined images of
Radha and Krishna, Krishna's eyes are fixed on Radha and Radha's on
Krishna. Radha's complexion is golden, like lightning; so Krishna wears
yellow apparel. Krishna's complexion is blue, like a dark cloud; so
Radha
wears a blue dress; she has also decked herself with blue sapphires.
Radha
has tinkling anklets; so Krishna has them too. In other words, there is
inner
and outer harmony between Purusha and Prakriti."

As Sri Ramakrishna finished these words, Bankim and his friends began
to whisper in English.

MASTER (smiling, to Bankim and the others): "Well,
gentlemen! What
are you talking about in English?"

ADHAR: "We are discussing what you have just said, your explanation of
Krishna's form."

MASTER (smiling): "That reminds me of a funny story.
It makes me want
to laugh. Once a barber was shaving a gentleman. The latter was cut
slightly
by the razor. At once he cried out, 'Damn!' But the barber didn't know
the
meaning of the word. He put his razor and. other shaving articles
aside, tucked
up his shirt-sleeves — it was winter —, and said: 'You said "damn" to
me.
Now you must tell me its meaning.' The gentleman said: 'Don't be silly.
Go
on with your shaving. The word doesn't mean anything in particular; but
shave a little more carefully.' But the barber wouldn't let him off so
easily.
said, 'If "damn" means something good, then I am a "damn", my father
is a "damn", and all my ancestors are "damns". (All laugh.') But if it
means
something bad, then you are a "damn", your father is a "damn", and all
your
ancestors are "damns". (All laugh.) They are not
only "damns", but "damn
— damn — damn — da-damn — damn".'" (Loud laughter.)

As the laughter stopped, Bankim began the conversation.

BANKIM: "Sir, why don't you preach?"

MASTER (smiling): "Preaching? It is only a man's
vanity that makes him
think of preaching. A man is but an insignificant creature. It is God
alone
who will preach — God who has created the sun and moon and so illumined
the universe. Is preaching such a trifling affair? You cannot preach
unless
God reveals Himself to you and gives you the command to preach. Of
course, no one can stop you from preaching. You haven't received the
command,
but still you cry yourself hoarse. People will listen to you a couple
of
days and then forget all about it. It is like any other sensation: as
long as
you speak, people will say, 'Ah! He speaks well'; and the moment you
stop,
everything will disappear.

"The milk in the pot hisses and swells as long as there is heat under
it.
Take away the heat, and the milk will quiet down as before.

"One must increase one's strength by sadhana; otherwise one cannot
preach. As the proverb goes: 'You have no room to sleep yourself and
you
invite a friend to sleep with you.' There is no place for you to lie
down and
you say: 'Come, friend! Come and lie down with me.' (Laughter.)

"Some people used to befoul the bank of the Haldarpukur at Kamarpukur
every morning. The villagers would notice it and abuse the offenders.
But
that didn't stop it. At last the villagers filed a petition with the
Government.
An officer visited the place and put up a sign: 'Commit no nuisance.
Offenders
fenders will be punished.' That stopped it completely. Afterwards there
was
no more trouble. It was a government order, and everyone had to obey it.

"Likewise, if God reveals Himself to you and gives you the command,
then you can preach and teach people. Otherwise, who will listen to
you?"

The visitors were listening seriously.

MASTER (to Bankim): "I understand you are a great
pundit and have
written many books. Please tell me what you think about man's duties?
What will accompany him after death? You believe in the hereafter,
don't you?"

BANKIM: "The hereafter? What is that?"

MASTER: "True. When a man dies after attaining Knowledge, he doesn't
have to go to another plane of existence; he isn't born again. But as
long as
he has not attained Knowledge, as long as he has not realized God, he
must
come back to the life of this earth; he can never escape it. For such a
person
there is a hereafter. A man is liberated after attaining Knowledge,
after
realizing God. For him there is no further coming back to earth. If a
boiled
paddy-grain is sown, it doesn't sprout. Just so, if a man is boiled by
the
fire of Knowledge, he cannot take part any more in the play of
creation; he
cannot lead a worldly life, for he has no attachment to 'woman and
gold'.
What will you gain by sowing boiled paddy?"

BANKIM (smiling): "Sir, neither does a weed serve
the purpose of a tree.
MASTER: "But you cannot call a jnani a weed. He who has realized God
has obtained the fruit of Immortality — not a common fruit like a gourd
or a
pumpkin. He is free from rebirth. He is not born anywhere — on earth,
in
the solar world, or in the lunar world.

"Analogy is one-sided. You are a pundit; haven't you read logic?
Suppose
you say that a man is as terrible as a tiger. That doesn't mean that he
has a
fearful tail or a tiger's pot-face! (All laugh.)

"I said the same thing to Keshab. He asked me, 'Sir, is there an
after-life?'
I didn't commit myself either way. I said that the potters put their
pots in
the sun to bake. Among them you see both baked and soft pots. Sometimes
cattle trample over them. When the baked pots are broken, the potters
throw
them away; but when the soft ones are broken they keep them. They mix
them with water and put the clay on the wheel and make new pots. They
don't throw away the unbaked pots. So I said to Keshab: 'The Potter
won't
let you go as long as you are unbaked. He will put you on the wheel of
the world as long as you have not attained Knowledge, as long as you
have
not realized Him. He won't let you go. You will have to return to the
earth
again and again: there is no escape. You will be liberated only when
you
realize God. Then alone will the Potter let you go. It is because then
you
won't serve any purpose in this world of maya.' The jnani has gone
beyond
maya. What will he do in this world of maya?

"But God keeps some jnanis in the world of maya to be teachers of men.
In order to teach others the jnani lives in the world with the help of
vidyamaya. It is God Himself who keeps the jnani in the world for His
work. Such was the case with Sukadeva and Sankaracharya.

(To Bankim, smiling) "Well, what do you say about
man's duties?"

BANKIM (smiling): "If you ask me about them, I
should say they are
eating, sleeping, and sex-life."

MASTER (sharply): "Eh? You are very saucy! What you
do day and night
comes out through your mouth. A man belches what he eats. If he eats
radish, he belches radish; if he eats green coconut, he belches green
coconut.
Day and night you live in the midst of 'woman and gold'; so your mouth
utters words about that alone. By constantly thinking of worldly things
a
man becomes calculating and deceitful. On the other hand, he becomes
guileless by thinking of God. A man who has seen God will never say
what
you have just said. What will a pundit's scholarship profit him if he
does
not think of God and has no discrimination and renunciation? Of what
use
is erudition if the mind dwells on 'woman and gold'?

"Kites and vultures soar very high indeed, but their gaze is fixed only
on
the charnel-pit. The pundit has no doubt studied many books and
scriptures;
he may rattle off their texts, or he may have written books. But if he
is
attached to women, if he thinks of money and honour as the essential
things,
will you call him a pundit? How can a man be a pundit if his mind does
not dwell on God?

Some may say about the devotees: 'Day and night these people speak
shout God. They are crazy; they have lost their heads. But how clever
we
are. How we enjoy pleasure — money, honour, the senses!' The crow, too
thinks he is a clever bird; but the first thing he does when he wakes
up in
the early morning is to fill his stomach with nothing but others'
filth.
Haven't you noticed how he struts about? Very clever indeed!"

There was dead silence.

Sri Ramakrishna continued: "But like the swan are those who think of
God, who pray day and night to get rid of their attachment to worldly
things
and their love for 'woman and gold', who do not enjoy anything except
the
nectar of the Lotus Feet of the Lord, and to whom worldly pleasures
taste
bitter. If you put a mixture of milk and water before the swan, it will
leave
the water and drink only the milk. And haven't you noticed the gait of
a
swan? It goes straight ahead in one direction. So it is with genuine
devotees:
they go toward God alone. They seek nothing else; they enjoy nothing
else.

(Tenderly, to Bankim) "Please don't take offence at
my words."

BANKIM: "Sir, I haven't come here to hear sweet things."

MASTER (to Bankim):" 'Woman and gold' alone is the
world; that alone
is maya. Because of it you cannot see or think of God. After the birth
of one
or two children, husband and wife should live as brother and sister and
talk
only of God. Then both their minds will be drawn to God, and the wife
will
be a help to the husband on the path of spirituality. None can taste
divine
bliss without giving up his animal feeling. A devotee should pray to
God to
help him get rid of this feeling. It must be a sincere prayer. God is
our
Inner Controller; He will certainly listen to our prayer if it is
sincere.

"And 'gold'. Sitting on the bank of the Ganges below the Panchavati, I
used to say, 'Rupee is clay and clay is rupee.' Then I threw both into
the
Ganges."

BANKIM: "Indeed! Money is clay! Sir, if you have a few pennies you can
help the poor. If money is clay, then a man cannot give in charity or
do good to others."

MASTER (to 'Bankim'): "Charity! Doing good! How dare
you say you can
do good to others? Man struts about so much; but if one pours foul
water
into his mouth when he is asleep, he doesn't even know it; his mouth
overflows
with it. Where are his boasting, his vanity, his pride, then?

"A sannyasi must give up 'woman and gold'; he cannot accept it any
more. One must not swallow one's own spittle. When a sannyasi gives
something
to another, he knows that it is not himself who gives. Kindness belongs
to God alone. How can a man lay claim to it? Charity depends on the
will
of Rama. A true sannyasi renounces 'woman and gold' both mentally and
outwardly. He who eats no molasses must not even keep molasses about.
If
he does, and yet tells others not to eat it, they won't listen to him.

"A householder, of course, needs money, for he has a wife and children.
He should save up to feed them. They say that the bird and the sannyasi
should not provide for the future. But the mother bird brings food in
her
mouth for her chicks; so she too provides. A householder needs money He
has to support his family.

"If a householder is a genuine devotee he performs his duties without
attachment; he surrenders the fruit of his work to God. — his gain or
loss, his
pleasure or pain — and day and night he prays for devotion and for
nothing
else. This is called motiveless work, the performance of duty without
attachment. A sannyasi, too, must do all his work in that spirit of
detachment; but
he has no worldly duties to attend to, like a householder.

"If a householder gives in charity in a spirit of detachment, he is
really
doing good to himself and not to others. It is God alone that he serves
—
God, who dwells in all beings; and when he serves God, he is really
doing
good to himself and not to others. If a man thus serves God through all
beings, not through men alone but through animals and other living
beings
as well; if he doesn't seek name and fame, or heaven after death; if he
doesn't seek any return from those he serves; if he can carry on his
work of
service in this spirit — then he performs truly selfless work, work
without
attachment. Through such selfless work he does good to himself. This is
called karmayoga. This too is a way to realize God. But it is very
difficult,
and not suited to the Kaliyuga.

"Therefore I say, he who works in such a detached spirit — who is kind
and charitable — benefits only himself. Helping others, doing good to
others
— this is the work of God alone, who for men has created the sun and
moon, father and mother, fruits, flowers, and corn. The love that you
see in
parents is God's love: He has given it to them to preserve His
creation. The
compassion that you see in the kind-hearted is God's compassion: He has
given it to them to protect the helpless. Whether you are charitable or
not,
He will have His work done somehow or other. Nothing can stop His work.

"What then is man's duty? What else can it be? It is just to take
refuge in
God and to pray to Him with a yearning heart for His vision.

"Sambhu said to me: 'It is my desire to build a large number of
hospitals
and dispensaries. Thus I can do much good to the poor.' I said to him:
'Yes,
that is not bad if you can do it in a detached spirit. But to be
detached is
very difficult unless you sincerely love God. And further, if you
entangle
yourself in many activities, you will be attached to them in a way
unknown
to yourself. You may think you have no motive behind your work, but
perhaps there has already grown a desire for fame and the advertising
of
your name. Then again, if you are entangled in too many activities, the
pressure of them will make you forget God.' I also said to him:
'Sambhu, let
me ask you one thing. If God appears before you, will you want Him or a
number of hospitals and dispensaries?' If one realizes God, one doesn't
enjoy anything else. One who has tasted syrup of sugar candy cannot
enjoy
a drink made from common treacle.

'Those who build hospitals and dispensaries, and get pleasure from
that,
are no doubt good people; but they are of a different type. He who is a
real
devotee of God seeks nothing but God. If he finds himself entangled in
too
much work, he earnestly prays, 'Lord, be 'gracious and reduce my work;
my
mind, which should think of Thee day and night, has been wasting its
power; it thinks of worldly things alone.' Pure-souled devotees are in
a class
by themselves. You cannot have real love of God unless you know that
God
alone is real and all else illusory. You cannot have real love of God
unless
you know that the world is impermanent, only of two days' existence,
while
its Creator alone is real and eternal.

"Janaka and sages like him worked in the world at the command of God.

(To Bankim) "Some people think that God cannot be
realized without
the study of books and scriptures. They think that first of all one
should
learn of this world and its creatures; that first of all one should
study
'science'. (All laugh.) They think that one cannot
realize God without first
understanding His creation. Which comes first, 'science' or God? What
do
you say?"

BANKIM: "I too think that we should first of all know about the
different
things of the world. How can we know of God without knowing something
of this world? We should first learn from books."

MASTER: "That's the one cry from all of you. But God comes first and
then the creation. After attaining God you can know everything else, if
it is necessary.

"If you can somehow get yourself introduced to Jadu Mallick, then you
will be able to learn, if you want to, the number of his houses and
gardens
and the amount of his money invested in government securities. Jadu
Mallick himself will tell you all about them. But if you haven't met
him
and if you are stopped by his door-keepers when you try to enter his
house,
then how will you get the correct information about his houses,
gardens,
and government securities? When you know God you know all else; but
then you don't care to know small things. The same thing is stated in
the
Vedas. You talk about the virtues of a person as long as you haven't
seen
him, but no sooner does he appear before you than all such talk stops.
You
are beside yourself with joy simply to be with him. You feel
overwhelmed by
simply conversing with him. You don't talk about his virtues any more.

"First realize God, then think of the creation and other things.
Valmiki
was given the name of Rama to repeat as his mantra, but was told at
first
to repeat 'mara'. 'Ma' means God and 'ra' the world. First God and then
the
world. If you know one you know all. If you put fifty zeros after a
one, you
have a large sum; but erase the one and nothing remains. It is the one
that
makes the many. First one, then many. First God, then His creatures and
the world.

"The one thing you need is to realize God. Why do you bother so much
about the world, creation, 'science', and all that? Your business is to
eat
mangoes. What need have you to know how many hundreds of trees there
are in the orchard, how many thousands of branches, and how many
millions
of leaves? You have come to the garden to eat mangoes. Go and eat them.
Man is born in this world to realize God; it is not good to forget that
and
divert the mind to other things. You have come to eat mangoes. Eat the
mangoes and be happy."

BANKIM: "Where do we get the mangoes?"

MASTER: "Pray to God with a longing heart. He will surely listen to
your
prayer if it is sincere. Perhaps He will direct you to holy men with
whom
you can keep company; and that will help you on your spiritual path.
Perhaps someone will tell you, 'Do this and you will attain God.'"

BANKIM: "Who? The guru? He enjoys all the good mangoes himself and
gives us the bad ones!" (Laughter.)

MASTER: "Why should that be so? The mother, knows what food suits the
stomachs of her different children. Can all of them digest pilau and
kalia?
Suppose a fish has been procured. The mother doesn't give pilau and
kalia
to all the children. For the weak child with a poor stomach she
prepares
simple soup. But does that mean she loves him the less?

"One must have faith in the guru's words. The guru is none other than
Satchidananda. God Himself is the Guru. If you only believe his words
like
a child, you will realize God. What faith a child has! When a child's
mother
says to him about a certain man, 'He is your brother', the child
believes he
really is his brother. The child believes it one hundred and
twenty-five per
cent, though he may be the son of a brahmin, and the man the son of a
blacksmith. The mother says to the child, 'There is a bugaboo in that
room',
and the child really believes there is a bugaboo in the room. Such is
the
faith of a child! One must have this childlike faith in the guru's
words. God
cannot be realized by a mind that is hypocritical, calculating, or
argumentative. One must have faith and sincerity. Hypocrisy will not
do. To the
sincere, God is very near; but He is far, far away from the hypocrite.

"One must have for God the yearning of a child. The child sees nothing
but confusion when his mother is away. You may try to cajole him by
putting a sweetmeat in his hand; but he will not be fooled. He only
says,
'No, I want to go to my mother.' One must feel such yearning for God.
Ah,
what yearning! How restless a child feels for his mother! Nothing can
make
him forget his mother. He to whom the enjoyment of worldly happiness
appears tasteless, he who takes no delight in anything of the world —
money,
name, creature comforts, sense pleasure —, becomes sincerely
grief-stricken
for the vision of the Mother. And to him alone the Mother comes
running,
leaving all Her other duties.

"Ah, that restlessness is the whole thing. Whatever path you follow —
whether you are a Hindu, a Mussalman, a Christian, a Sakta, a
Vaishnava,
or a Brahmo — the vital point is restlessness. God is our Inner Guide.
It
doesn't matter if you take a wrong path — only you must be restless for
Him.
He Himself will put you on the right path.

"Besides, there are errors in all paths. Everyone thinks his watch is
right;
but as a matter of fact no watch is absolutely right. But that doesn't
hamper
one's work. If a man is restless for God he gains the company of sadhus
and
as far as possible corrects his own watch with the sadhus' help."

Trailokya of the Brahmo Samaj began to sing. Presently Sri Ramakrishna
stood up and lost consciousness of the outer world. He became
completely
indrawn, absorbed in samadhi. The devotees stood around him in a
circle.
Pushing aside the crowd, Bankim came near the Master and began to watch
him attentively. He had never seen anyone in samadhi.

After a few minutes Sri Ramakrishna regained partial consciousness and
began to dance in an ecstatic mood. It was a never-to-be-forgotten
scene.
Bankim and his Anglicized friends looked at him in amazement. Was this
he God-intoxicated state? The devotees also watched him with wondering
eyes.

The singing and dancing over, the Master touched the ground with his
forehead, saying, "Bhagavata — Bhakta — Bhagavan! Salutations to the
jnanis,
yogis, and bhaktas! Salutations to all!" He sat down again and all sat
around him.

BANKIM (to the Master): "Sir, how can one develop
divine love?"

MASTER: "Through restlessness — the restlessness a child feels for his
mother. The child feels bewildered when he is separated from his
mother,
and weeps longingly for her. If a man can weep like that for God he can
even see Him.

"At the approach of dawn the eastern horizon becomes red. Then one
knows it will soon be sunrise. Likewise, if you see a person restless
for God,
you can be pretty certain that he hasn't long to wait for His vision.

"A disciple asked his teacher, 'Sir, please tell me how I can see God.'
Come with me,' said the guru, 'and I shall show you.' He took the
disciple
to a lake, and both of them got into the water. Suddenly the teacher
pressed
the disciple's head under the water. After a few moments he released
him
and the disciple raised his head and stood up. The guru asked him, 'How
did you feel?' The disciple said, 'Oh! I thought I should die; I was
panting
for breath.' The teacher said, 'When you feel like that for God, then
you
will know you haven't long to wait for His vision.'

(To Bankim) "Let me tell you something. What will
you gain by floating
on the surface? Dive a little under the water. The gems lie deep under
the
water; so what is the good of throwing your arms and legs about on the
surface? A real gem is heavy. It doesn't float; it sinks to the bottom.
To get
the real gem you must dive deep."

BANKIM: "Sir, what can we do? We are tied to a cork.
It prevents us from diving." (All laugh.)

MASTER: "All sins vanish if one only remembers God. His name breaks the
fetters of death. You must dive; otherwise you can't get the gem.
Listen to a song."

The Master sang in his sweet voice:

Dive deep, O mind, dive deep in the Ocean of God's Beauty;

If you descend to the uttermost depths,

There you will find the gem of Love.

Go seek, O mind, go seek Vrindavan in your heart,

Where with His loving devotees

Sri Krishna sports eternally.

Light up, O mind, light up true wisdom's shining lamp,

And let it bum with steady flame

Unceasingly within your heart.

Who is it that steers your boat across the solid earth?

It is your guru, says Kuhir;

Meditate on his holy feet.

All listened spellbound. Again Sri Ramakrishna began to talk.

MASTER (to Bankim): "There are some who do not want
to dive. They
say, 'Won't we become deranged it we go to excess about God?' Referring
to those who are intoxicated with divine love, they say, 'These people
have
lost their heads.' But they don't understand this simple thing: God is
the
Ocean of Amrita, Immortality. Once I said to Narendra: 'Suppose there
were a cup of syrup and you were a fly. Where would you sit to drink
the
syrup?' Narendra said, 'I would sit on the edge of the cup and stretch
out
my neck to drink it.' 'Why?' I asked. 'What's the harm of plunging into
the middle of the cup and drinking the syrup?' Narendra answered, 'Then
I should stick in the syrup and die.' 'My child,' I said to him, 'that
isn't the
nature of the Nectar of Satchidananda. It is the Nectar of Immortality.
Man
does not die from diving into It. On the contrary he becomes immortal.'

"Therefore I say, dive deep. Don't be afraid. By diving deep in God one
becomes immortal."

Bankim bowed low before the Master. He was about to take his leave.

BANKIM: "Sir, I am not such an idiot as you may think. I have a prayer
to make. Please be kind enough to grace my house with the dust of your
holy feet."

MASTER: "That's nice. I shall go if God wills."

BANKIM: "There too you will see devotees of God."

MASTER (smiling): "How so? What kind of devotees are
they? Are they
like those who said, 'Gopal! Gopal! Kesava! Kesava!'?" (All
laugh.)

A DEVOTEE: "What is the story of 'Gopal', sir?"

MASTER (smiling): "Let me tell you. At a certain
place there is a
gold-smith's shop. The workers there are known as pious Vaishnavas:
they have
strings of beads around their necks, religious marks on their
foreheads, and
bags containing rosaries in their hands. They repeat the names of God
aloud.
One can almost call them sadhus; only they have to work as goldsmiths
to
earn their bread and support their wives and children. Many customers,
hearing of their piety, come to the shop because they believe that in
that
shop there will be no trickery with their gold or silver. When the
customers
enter the shop, they see the workers repeating the name of Hari with
their
tongues and doing their work with their hands. No sooner do the
customers
take seats in the shop than one of the workers cries out, 'Kesava!
Kesava!
Kesava!' A few minutes later another says, 'Gopal! Gopal! Gopal!' After
they
talk a little while, the third man cries out, 'Hari! Hari! Hari!' In
the mean
time the customers have almost finished their transactions. Then the
fourth
exclaims, 'Hara! Hara! Hara!' The customers are very much impressed
with
the devotion and fervour of the owners and feel themselves quite secure
in
handing them the money. They are sure they won't be cheated.

"But do you know what lies behind all this? The man who says 'Kesava!
Kesava!1
after the arrival of the customers means, 'Who are they?'
In other
words, he wants to know how intelligent they are. The man who says
'Gopal! Gopal!' means to say he finds them no better than a herd
of cows.
The man saying 'Hari! Hari!' means, 'May I rob them?';
he suggests that
since they are like a herd of cows they can be robbed. And the last
man,
who says 'Hara! Hara!', replies, 'Yes, rob them.'
He means that since the
customers are like a herd of cows, they can certainly be robbed. Here,
too,
you see a group of pious men, very much devoted to God!" (All
laugh.)

Bankim took his leave; but he was absent-minded. When he reached the
door he discovered that he had dropped his shawl in the room; he was in
his shirt-sleeves. A gentleman handed him his shawl.

Of the devotees at Adhar's house, Sarat2
and Sannyal were brahmins. But
Adhar belonged to the lower caste of the goldsmiths, and so the two
brahmins
quickly left, lest they should be pressed by their host to take their
meal
there. Sarat and Sannyal had been coming to the Master only a short,
time
and did not know how fond the Master was of Adhar. The Master used to
say that the devotees formed a separate caste by themselves; among them
there could be no caste distinction.

Adhar entertained the Master and the devotees with a feast. It was
quite
late in the evening when the devotees returned home, cherishing in
their
hearts the image of the Master in his spiritual ecstasy and remembering
his
words of great wisdom.

Since Bankim had invited Sri Ramakrishna to visit his home, the Master
a few days later sent Girish and M. to his Calcutta residence. At that
time
Bankim had a long discussion with these two devotees about the Master.
He
told them that he wanted to visit Sri Ramakrishna again. But his desire
was
not fulfilled.

^These
four names of God have a double meaning in Bengali. The second
meaning of each word is given in italics.

^Sarat
became a monastic disciple of Sri Ramakrishna under the name of Swami
Saradananda.


=== 35_star_theatre_ii.htm ===

At the Star Theatre (II)

←
Home
/ The Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna
/ Volume 2
/ →

AT THE STAR THEATRE (II)

Assimilation of spiritual ideas — Master sees a performance — Signs of
God-vision — Different moods of liberated souls — The ego of the
devotee — Three classes of devotees — Restlessness for God-vision —
Worldly man's spiritual discipline — Master and Girish — Master and
book-learning — First God and then the world — Master's spiritual
experiences — Chaitanya — The Divine Incarnation and the ordinary
man — Yoga and God-vision.

Sunday, December 14, 1884

SRI RAMAKRISHNA arrived at the Star Theatre on Beadon Street
in
Calcutta to see a play about the life of Prahlada. M., Baburam,
Narayan,
and other devotees were with him. The hall was brightly lighted. The
play had not yet begun. The Master was seated in a box, talking with
Girish.

MASTER (smiling): "Ah! You have written nice plays."

GIRISH: "But, sir, how little I assimilate! I just write."

MASTER: "No, you assimilate a great deal. The other day I said to you
that no one could sketch a divine character unless he had love of God
in his heart.

"Yes, one needs to assimilate spiritual ideas. I went to Keshab's house
to
see the play, Nava-Vrindavan. I saw a deputy
magistrate there who earned
eight hundred rupees a month. Everyone said that he was a very learned
man; but I found him restless because of a boy, his son. He was very
anxious
to find a good seat for the boy; he paid no attention to the spiritual
conversation of the players. The boy was pestering him with questions:
'Father!
What is this? What is that?' He was extremely busy with the boy. You
see,
he merely read books; but he didn't assimilate their ideas."

GIRISH: "I often ask myself, 'Why bother about the theatre any more?'"

MASTER: "No, no! Let things be as they are. People will learn much from
your plays."

The performance began. Prahlada was seen entering the schoolroom as a
student. At the sight of him Sri Ramakrishna uttered once or twice the
word "Prahlada" and went into samadhi.

During another scene Sri Ramakrishna wept to see Prahlada under an
elephant's feet. He cried when the boy was thrown into the fire.

The scene changed. Lakshmi and Narayana were seen seated in Goloka.
Narayana was worried about Prahlada. This scene, too, threw Sri
Ramakrishna into an ecstatic mood.

After the performance Girish conducted Sri Ramakrishna to his private
room in the theatre. He said to the Master, "Would you care to see the
farce,
Vivaha Vibhrata [The Confusion of Marriage']?"

MASTER: "Oh, no! Why something like that after the life of Prahlada? I
once said to the leader of a theatrical troupe, 'End your performance
with
some religious talk.' We have been listening to such wonderful
spiritual
conversation; and now to see 'The Confusion of Marriage'! A worldly
topic!
We should become our old selves again. We should return to our old
mood."

GIRISH: "How did you like the performance?"

MASTER: "I found that it was God Himself who was acting the different
parts. Those who played the female parts seemed to me the direct
embodiments
of the Blissful Mother, and the cowherd boys of Goloka the embodiments
of Narayana Himself. It was God alone who had become all these.

"There are signs by which you can know whether a man has truly seen
God. One of these is joy; there is no hesitancy in him. He is like the
ocean:
the waves and sounds are on the surface; below are profound depths. The
man who has seen God behaves sometimes like a madman; sometimes like a
ghoul, without any feeling of purity or impurity; sometimes like an
inert
thing, remaining speechless because he sees God within and without;
sometimes like a child, without any attachment, wandering about
unconcernedly
with his cloth under his arm. Again, in the mood of a child, he
acts in different ways: sometimes like a boy, indulging in frivolity;
sometimes like a young man, working and teaching with the strength of a
lion.

"Man cannot see God on account of his ego. You cannot see the sun
when a cloud rises in the sky. But that doesn't mean there is no sun;
the
sun is there just the same.

"But there is no harm in the 'ego of a child'. On the contrary, this
ego is
helpful. Greens are bad for the stomach; but hinche is good. So hinche
cannot properly be called greens. Sugar candy, likewise, cannot be
classed
with other sweets. Other sweets are injurious to the health, but not
sugar
candy.

"So I said to Keshab, 'If I tell you more than I have already said, you
won't be able to keep your organization together.' That frightened him.
Then I said to him, 'There is no harm in the "ego of a child" or the
"ego
of a servant".'

"He who has seen God finds that God alone has become the world and
all its living beings; it is He who has become all. Such a person is
called a
superior devotee."

GIRISH (smiling): "Yes, God is everything. But the
devotee keeps a trace
of ego; that is not harmful."

MASTER (smiling): "Yes, there is no harm in that.
That trace of ego is
kept in order to enjoy God. You can enjoy divine bliss only when you
make
a distinction between yourself and God — the distinction between the
servant
and the Master.

"There is also the devotee of the mediocre class: he sees that God
dwells
in all beings as their Inner Guide. But the inferior devotee says, 'God
exists; He is up there', that is to say, beyond the sky. (All
laugh.)

"When I saw the cowherd boys of Goloka in your performance I felt that
God has become all. He who has seen God knows truly that God alone is
the Doer, that it is He who does everything."

GIRISH: "Sir, I know truly that it is God who does everything."

MASTER: "I say, 'O Mother, I am the machine and You are the Operator;
I am inert and You make me conscious; I do as You make me do; I speak
as
You make me speak.' But the ignorant say, 'I am partly responsible, and
God is partly responsible.'"

GIRISH: "Sir, I am not really doing anything. Why should I bother about
work at all?"

MASTER: "No, work is good. When the ground is well cultivated and
cleared of stones and pebbles, whatever you plant will grow. But one
should
work without any personal motive.

"There are two types of paramahamsas: the jnani and the premi.
(Lover of God.) The
jnani is self-centred; he feels that it is enough to have Knowledge for
his
own self. The premi, like Sukadeva, after attaining his own
realization,
teaches men. Some eat mangoes and wipe off the traces from their
mouths;
but some share their mangoes with others. Spades and baskets are needed
to
dig a well. After the digging is over, some throw the spades and
baskets into
the well. But others put them away; for a neighbour may use them.
Sukadeva
and a few others kept the spades and baskets for the benefit of others.
(To
Girish) You should do the same."

GIRISH: "Please bless me, sir."

MASTER: "Have faith in the Divine Mother and you will attain
everything."

GIRISH: "But I am a sinner."

MASTER: "The wretch who constantly harps on sin becomes a sinner."

GIRISH: "Sir, the very ground where I used to sit would become unholy."

MASTER: "How can you say that? Suppose a light is brought into a room
that has been dark a thousand years; does it illumine the room little
by little,
or all in a flash?"

GIRISH: "Then you have blessed me."

MASTER: "If you sincerely believe it. What more shall I say? I eat and
drink and chant the name of God."

GIRISH: "I have no sincerity. Please give it to me."

MASTER: "I? Sages like Narada and Sukadeva could have done that."

GIRISH: "I don't see Narada and Sukadeva. But you are here before me."

MASTER (smiling): "All right. You have faith."

All remained silent. The conversation began again.

GIRISH: "I have one desire: love of God for its own sake."

MASTER: "Only the Isvarakotis have such love. It is not for ordinary
men."

All sat in silence. The Master began to sing in an absent-minded mood,
his gaze turned upward:

Can everyone have the vision of Syama? Is Kali's treasure for everyone?

Oh, what a pity my foolish mind will not see what is true!

Even with all His penances, rarely does Siva Himself behold

The mind-bewitching sight of Mother Syama's crimson feet.

To him who meditates on Her the riches of heaven are poor indeed;

If Syama casts Her glance on him, he swims in Eternal Bliss.

The Prince of yogis, the King of the gods, meditate on Her feet in vain;

Yet worthless Kamalakanta yearns for the Mother's blessed feet!

Girish repeated:

Yet worthless Kamalakanta yearns for the Mother's blessed feet!

MASTER (to Girish): "One can realize God through
intense renunciation.
But the soul must be restless for Him, as restless as one feels for a
breath of
air when one's head is pressed under water.

"A man can see God if he unites in himself the force of these three
attractions:
the attraction of worldly possessions for the worldly man, the
husband's
attraction for the chaste wife, and the child's attraction for its
mother.
If you can unite these three forms of love and give it all to God, then
you
can see Him at once.

Cry to your Mother Syama with a real cry, O mind!

And how can She hold Herself from you?

"If a devotee prays to God with real longing, God cannot help
revealing
Himself to him.

"The other day I told you the meaning of bhakti. It is to adore God
with
body, mind, and words. 'With body' means to serve and worship God with
one's hands, go to holy places with one's feet, hear the chanting of
the name
and glories of God with one's ears, and behold the divine image with
one's
eyes. 'With mind' means to contemplate and meditate on God constantly
and to remember and think of His lila. 'With words' means to sing hymns
to
Him and chant His name and glories.

"Devotion as described by Narada is suited to the Kaliyuga. It means to
chant constantly the name and glories of God. Let those who have no
leisure
worship God at least morning and evening by whole-heartedly chanting
His name and clapping their hands.

"The 'ego of a devotee' begets no pride; it does not create ignorance.
On
the contrary it helps one realize God. This ego is no more like the
ordinary
ego than hinche is like ordinary greens. One generally becomes
indisposed
by eating greens; but hinche removes excessive bile; it does one good.
Sugar
candy is not like ordinary sweets. Sweets are generally harmful, but
sugar
candy removes acidity.

"Nishtha leads to bhakti; bhakti, when mature, becomes bhava; bhava,
when concentrated, becomes mahabhava; and last of all is prema. Prema
is
like a cord: by prema God is bound to the devotee; He can no longer run
away. An ordinary man can at best achieve bhava. None but an Isvarakoti
attains mahabhava and prema. Chaitanyadeva attained them.

"What is the meaning of jnanayoga? It is the path by which a man can
realize the true nature of his own Self; it is the awareness that
Brahman
alone is his true nature. Prahlada sometimes was aware of his identity
with
Brahman. And sometimes he would see that God was one and he another;
at such times he would remain in the mood of bhakti.

"Hanuman said, 'O Rama, sometimes I find that You are the whole and I
a part, sometimes that You are the Master and I Your servant; but, O
Rama,
when I have the Knowledge of Reality, I see that You are I and I am
You.'"

GIRISH: "Ah!."

MASTER: "Why shouldn't a man be able to realize God in the world? But
he must have discrimination and dispassion; he must have the unshakable
awareness that God alone is real and all else is unreal and has but a
two-day's
existence. It will not do to float on the surface. You must dive deep."

With these words, the Master sang:

Dive deep, O mind, dive deep in the Ocean of God's Beauty;

If you descend to the uttermost depths,

There you will find the gem of Love. . . .

MASTER: "You must remember another thing: in the ocean there
is danger
of alligators, that is to say, of lust and the like."

GIRISH: "I am not afraid of the King of Death."

MASTER: "But I am speaking of the danger of the alligators of lust and
the like. Because of them one should smear one's body with turmeric
before
diving in — the turmeric of discrimination and dispassion.

"Some attain knowledge of God in the world. Mention is made of two
classes of yogis: the hidden and the known. Those who have renounced
the world are 'known' yogis: all recognize them. But the 'hidden' yogis
live
in the world. They are not known. They are like the maidservant who
performs
her duties in the house but whose mind is fixed on her children in
the country. They are also, as I have told you, like the loose woman
who
performs her household duties zealously but whose mind constantly
dwells
on her lover. It is very hard to cultivate discrimination and
dispassion. It is
not easy to get rid of the idea, 'I am the master and all these are
mine.' I
saw a deputy magistrate, who earns a salary of eight hundred rupees,
paying
no attention to a religious discourse. He had brought one of his
children
with him and was busy finding a good place for him to sit. I know
another
man, whom I shall not name, who used to devote a great deal of time to
japa; but he bore false witness in court for the sake of ten thousand
rupees.
Therefore I say that a man can realize God in the world, too, but only
if
he has discrimination and dispassion."

GIRISH: "What will happen to this sinner?"

Sri Ramakrishna sang in a tender voice, turning his eyes upward:

Meditate on the Lord, the Slayer of hell's dire woes,

He who removes the fear of death;

Thinking of Him, the soul is freed from worldly grief

And sails across the sea of life in the twinkling of an eye.

Consider, O my mind, why you have come to earth;

What gain is there in evil thoughts and deeds?

Your way lies not through these: perform your penance here

By meditating long and deep on the everlasting Lord.

MASTER: "'Sails across the sea of life in the twinkling of an
eye.' One
attains the vision of God if Mahamaya steps aside from the door.
Mahamaya's
grace is necessary: hence the worship of Sakti. You see, God is near
us, but
it is not possible to know Him because Mahamaya stands between. Rama,
Lakshmana, and Sita were walking along. Rama walked ahead, Sita in the
middle, and Lakshmana last. Lakshmana was only two and a half cubits
away from Rama, but he couldn't see Rama because Sita — Mahamaya — was
in the way.

"While worshipping God, one should assume a definite attitude. I have
three attitudes: the attitude of a child, the attitude or a
maidservant, and
the attitude of a friend. For a long time I regarded myself as a
maidservant
and a woman companion of God; at that time I used to wear skirts and
ornaments, like a woman. The attitude of a child is very good.

"The attitude of a 'hero' is not good. Some people cherish it. They
regard
themselves as Purusha and woman as Prakriti; they want to propitiate
woman through intercourse with her. But this method often causes
disaster."

GIRISH: "At one time I too cherished that idea."

Sri Ramakrishna looked at Girish pensively.

GIRISH: "I still have that twist in my mind. Tell me what I should do."
Sri Ramakrishna reflected a minute and said, "Give God your power of
attorney. Let Him do whatever He likes."

The conversation then turned to Sri Ramakrishna's young devotees.

MASTER (to Girish and the others): "In meditation I
see the inner traits
of these youngsters. They have no thought of acquiring house and
property.
They do not crave sex pleasure. Those of the youngsters who are married
do not sleep with their wives. The truth is that unless a man has got
rid of
rajas and has acquired sattva, he cannot steadily dwell in God; he
cannot
love God and realize Him."

GIRISH: "You have blessed me."

MASTER: "How is that? I said that you would succeed if you were
sincere."

Saying this, the Master exclaimed, "Anandamayi!" and went into samadhi.
He remained in that state a long time. Regaining partial consciousness,
he
said, "Where are those rascals?" M. brought Baburam to him. Sri
Ramakrishna
looked at Baburam and the other devotees and said, still in ecstasy,
"The bliss of Satchidananda is indeed good; but what about the bliss of
divine inebriation?"

He began to sing:

Once for all, this time, I have thoroughly understood;

From One who knows it well, I have learnt the secret of bhava. . . .

Again he sang:

Why should I go to Ganga or Gaya, to Kasi, Kanchi, or Prabhas,

So long as I can breathe my last with Kali's name upon my lips? . . .

The Master continued, saying, "While praying to the Divine
Mother, I
said, 'O Mother, I don't seek anything else: give me only pure love for
Thee.'"

Sri Ramakrishna was pleased with Girish's calm mood. He said to him,
"This mood of yours is good; the calm mood is the best."

The Master was seated in the manager's room. A man entered and said,
"Will you see the farce. 'The Confusion of Marriage'? It is being
played
now."

Sri Ramakrishna said to Girish: "What have you done? This farce after
the life of Prahlada! First sweets and rice pudding and then a dish of
bitter herbs!"

After the theatre, the actresses, following Girish's instructions, came
to
the room to salute Sri Ramakrishna. They bowed before him, touching the
ground with their foreheads. The devotees noticed that some of the
actresses,
in saluting the Master, touched his feet. He said to them very
tenderly,
"Please don't do that, mother!"

After the actresses had left the room, Sri Ramakrishna said to the
devotees,
"It is all He, only in different forms."

The carriage was ready at the door. Girish and the others came to the
street to see the Master off. As soon as Sri Ramakrishna stepped into
the
carriage, he went into deep samadhi. Narayan and several other devotees
were with him. The carriage started for Dakshineswar.

Saturday, December 27, 1884

It was the Christmas season. Taking advantage of the holiday, many
devotees came to the temple garden to visit the Master, some of them
arriving
in the morning. Among these were Kedar, Ram, Nityagopal, Tarak,
Surendra, M., Sarada Prasanna, and a number of young devotees. This was
Sarada Prasanna's first visit.

MASTER (to M.): "Where is Bankim? Haven't you
brought him with
you?"

Bankim was a schoolboy whom Sri Ramakrishna had met in Baghbazar.
Noticing him even from a distance, the Master had said that he was a
fine boy.

After a while Sri Ramakrishna went to the Panchavati with the devotees.
They surrounded him, some sitting and some standing. He was seated on
the cement platform around the tree, facing the southwest. He asked M.
with a smile, "Have you brought the book?"

M: "Yes, sir."

MASTER: "Read a little to me."

The devotees were eager to know the name of the book. It was called
Devi Choudhurani. The Master had heard that the book
dealt with motiveless
action. He had also heard of the great renown of its author, Bankim
Chandra Chatterji, whom he had met some days before, and he wanted to
gauge the author's mind from the book.

M. said: "A young girl — the heroine — fell into the hands of a robber
named Bhavani Pathak. Her name had been Prafulla, but the robber
changed it to 'Devi Choudhurani'. At heart Bhavani was a good man. He
made Prafulla go through many spiritual disciplines; he also taught her
how
to perform selfless action. He robbed wicked people and with that money
fed the poor and helpless. He said to Prafulla, 'I chastise the wicked
and
protect the virtuous.'"

MASTER: "But that is a king's duty."

M: "In one place the author writes of bhakti. Bhavani Pathak sent a
girl
named Nishi to keep Prafulla company. Nishi was full of piety and
looked
on Krishna as her husband. Prafulla was already married; she had lost
her
father and lived with her mother. The neighbours had created a scandal
about her character and avoided her, and so her father-in-law had not
allowed her to live with his son. Later her husband had married again;
but
Prafulla was extremely devoted to her husband.

(To Sri Ramakrishna) "Now, sir, you can follow the
story."

M. read:

NISHI: "I am a daughter of Bhavani Pathak.
He is my father. He
has also, in a way, given me in marriage."

PRAFULLA: "What do you mean?"

NISHI: "I have surrendered my all to Krishna."

PRAFULLA: "How is that?"

NISHI: "My beauty, youth, and soul."

PRAFULLA: "Then He is your husband."

NISHI: "Yes, because he alone is my husband who completely
possesses me."

PRAFULLA (with a sigh): "I do not know. You talk
that way because
you do not know what a husband is. If you had a real husband, you
could never have liked Sri Krishna."

The foolish Brajeswar — Prafulla's husband — was unaware that his
wife loved him so much.

NISHI: "All can love Sri Krishna, because He has infinite beauty,
infinite youth, and infinite splendour."

This young lady was a disciple of Bhavani and well-versed in logic.
But Prafulla was illiterate; she could not answer Nishi's arguments.
But the writers of the Hindu social laws knew the reply. God is
infinite,
no doubt; but one cannot keep the infinite in the small cage of the
heart. One can do so only with the finite. Therefore the infinite
Creator of the universe is worshipped by the Hindu in the cage of his
heart as Sri Krishna, the finite Personal God. The husband of a woman
has a still more definite form. Therefore if the wife cherishes pure
conjugal love, the husband becomes the first step toward God. Hence
the husband is the only Deity to the Hindu woman. Other societies are
inferior to Hindu society in this respect.

Prafulla was an ignorant girl; she could not understand Nishi's
arguments.
She said, "Friend, I do not understand all these arguments; but
you haven't yet told me your name."

NISHI: "Bhavani Pathak has given me the name of Nishi, Night. I
am the sister of Diva, Day. One day I shall introduce my sister to you.
Let me continue what I was saying. God alone is the real Husband; and
to a woman the husband is her only God. Sri Krishna is the God of
all. Why should we cherish two Deities, two Gods? If you divide the
little bhakti of this small heart, how little there will be!"

PRAFULLA: "Don't be silly. Is there any limit to a woman's bhakti?"
NISHI: "There is no end to a woman's love. But bhakti is one thing,
and love another."

Summarizing part of the book, M. said that Bhavani initiated
Prafulla
into spiritual life.

He continued reading:

During the first year Bhavani did not allow any man to enter Prafulla's
house nor did he allow her to speak to any man outside the house.
During the second year the rule about speaking was withdrawn, but no
man was allowed inside her house. In the third year Prafulla shaved
her head. Now Bhavani allowed his select disciples to see her. The
shaven-headed disciple would converse with them on scriptural topics,
keeping her eyes cast on the ground.

M. then read that Prafulla began the study of the scriptures;
that she
finished grammar and read Raghuvamsa, Kumara
Sambhava, Sakuntala,
and Naishadha; and that she studied a little of the
Samkhya, Vedanta, and
Nyaya philosophies.

MASTER: "Do you know what that means? People like the author of this
book believe that knowledge is impossible without the study of books.
They
think that first comes the knowledge of books and then comes the
knowledge
of God. In order to know God one must read books! But if I want to know
Jadu Mallick, must I first know the number of his houses and the amount
of
money he has in government securities? Do I really need all this
information?
Rather I should somehow enter his house, be it by flattering his
gate-keepers
or by disregarding their rough treatment, and talk to Jadu Mallick
himself.
Then, if I want to know about his wealth or possessions, I shall only
have
to ask him about them. Then it will be a very easy matter for me. First
comes
Rama, then His riches, that is, the universe. This is why Valmiki
repeated
the mantra, 'mara'. 'Ma' means God, and 'ra' the world, that is to say,
His
riches."

The devotees listened to the Master's words with rapt attention.

M. continued with the story of Prafulla:

Prafulla finished her studies and then practised spiritual austerity
for
many days. Then one day Bhavani visited her; he wanted to instruct her
about selfless work. He quoted to her from the Gita:
"Therefore do thou
always perform obligatory actions without attachment; by performing
action without attachment one attains to the highest."

He told her the three characteristics of disinterested action: first,
control of the sense-organs; second, absence of egotism; and third,
surrendering the fruit of action to Sri Krishna. He further told her
that
no dharma is possible for the egotistic person. Quoting from the Gita,
he said: "The gunas of Prakrit; perform all action. With the
understanding deluded by egotism, man thinks, I am the doer."

Bhavani next spoke to her about surrendering the fruit of action to
Sri Krishna. Again he quoted from the Gita:
"Whatever thou doest,
whatever thou eatest, whatever thou givest away, whatever austerity
thou practisest, O son of Kunti, do that as an offering unto Me."

MASTER: "This is fine. These are the
words of the Gita; one cannot refute
them. But something else must be noted. The author speaks about
surrendering
the fruit of action to Sri Krishna, but not about cultivating bhakti
for Him."

M: "No, that is not especially mentioned here.

"Next Prafulla and Bhavani talked about the use of money. Prafulla said
that she offered all her wealth to Krishna."

M. read from the book again.

PRAFULLA: "Like my actions, I offer all my wealth to Sri Krishna."

BHAVANI: "All?"

PRAFULLA: "Yes, all."

BHAVANI: "In that case you won't be able to perform action in a
detached spirit. If you have to work to earn your food, you will be
attached to that work. Hence there are two alternatives before you:
either you will have to get your food by begging, or you will have to
live on your money. Even a beggar becomes attached to the alms he
receives; therefore you must use your own money to maintain your body."

M. (to the Master, smiling): "That is the nature of
the calculating mind."

MASTER: "Yes, that is the nature of the calculating mind; that is the
way
the worldly man thinks. But he who seeks God plunges headlong; he
doesn't
calculate about how much or how little he needs for the protection of
his
body."

M: "Next Bhavani asked Prafulla, 'How will you offer all this money to
Sri Krishna?' Prafulla said: 'Why, Sri Krishna dwells in all beings. I
shall
distribute the money among them.' Bhavani answered, 'Good! Good!'

"Quoting from the Gita, Bhavani said: 'He who sees
Me in all things
and all things in Me, never becomes separated from Me, nor do I become
separated from him. That yogi who, established in unity, worships Me
dwelling in all beings, abides in Me, whatever his mode of life. O
Arjuna,
that yogi is regarded as the highest who judges the pleasure and pain
of all
beings by the same standard that he applies to himself."

MASTER: "These are the characteristics of the highest bhakta."

M. again read from the book:

A man must work hard if he wants to help
all beings with charity.
Hence it is necessary for him to make a little display of clothes, of
pomp
and luxury. Therefore Bhavani said, "A little shopkeeping is necessary."

MASTER (sharply): "'A little shopkeeping is
necessary'! One speaks as
one thinks. If a man thinks of worldly things day and night, and deals
with people hypocritically, then his words are coloured by his
thoughts. If
one eats radish, one belches radish. Instead of talking about
'shopkeeping',
he should rather have said, 'A man should act as if he were the doer,
knowing
very well that he is really not the doer.' The other day a man was
singing
here. The song contained words like 'profit' and 'loss'. I stopped him.
If one contemplates a particular subject day and night, one cannot talk
of
anything else."

The reading continued. The author was describing the realization of
God.
Prafulla had become Devi Choudhurani. It was the month of Vaisakh. Devi
was seated on the roof of her house-boat talking with Diva and another
woman companion. The moon was up. The boat had cast anchor in the
Ganges. The conversation turned to the question of whether one could
see
God. Devi said, "As the aroma of a flower is directly perceived by the
nose,
so God is directly perceived by the mind."

At this point the Master interrupted and said: "Yes, God is directly
perceived
by the mind, but not by this ordinary mind. It is the pure mind that
perceives God, and at that time this ordinary mind does not function. A
mind that has the slightest trace of attachment to the world cannot be
called
pure. When all the impurities of the mind are removed, you may call
that
mind Pure Mind or Pure Atman."

M: "The author says a little later that God cannot easily be perceived
by
the mind. He says that one needs a telescope to have that direct
vision. Yoga
is the telescope. Yoga, as it is described in the Gita,
is of three kinds: jnana,
bhakti, and karma. One is able to see God through this telescope of
yoga."

MASTER: "That is very good. These are the words of the Gita."

M: "At last Devi Choudhurani met her husband. She showed him great
devotion and said to him: 'You are my God. I wanted to learn the
worship
of another God but I did not succeed. You have taken the place of all
gods.'"

MASTER (smiling): "'I did not succeed.' This is the
dharma of a woman
totally devoted to her husband. This also is a path."

The reading was over. The Master was smiling. The devotees looked at
him, eagerly waiting to hear what he would say.

MASTER (to the devotees, smiling): "This is not so
bad; it is called the
dharma of chastity, the single-minded devotion of a wife to her
husband. If
God can be worshipped through an image, why shouldn't it be possible to
worship Him through a living person? It is God Himself who sports in
the
world as men.

"Oh, what a state I passed through! I passed some days absorbed in Siva
and Durga, some days absorbed in Radha and Krishna, and some days
absorbed
in Sita and Rama. Assuming Radha's attitude, I would cry for
Krishna, and assuming Sita's attitude, I would cry for Rama.

"But lila is by no means the last word. Passing through all these
states, I
said to the Divine Mother: 'Mother, in these states there is
separation. Give
me a state where there is no separation.' Then I remained for some time
absorbed in the Indivisible Satchidananda. I removed the pictures of
the
gods and goddesses from my room. I began to perceive God in all beings.
Formal worship dropped away. You see that bel-tree. I used to go there
to
pluck its leaves. One day, as I plucked a leaf, a bit of the bark came
off. I
round the tree full of Consciousness. I felt grieved because I had hurt
the
tree. One day I tried to pluck some durva grass, but I found I couldn't
do it
very well. Then I forced myself to pluck it.

"I cannot cut a lemon. The other day I managed to cut one only with
great difficulty; I chanted the name of Kali and cut the fruit as they
slaughter
an animal before the Goddess. One day I was about to gather some
flowers.
They were everywhere on the trees. At once I had a vision of Virat; it
appeared that His worship was just over. The flowers looked like a
bouquet
placed on the head of the Deity. I could not pluck them.

"God sports through man as well. I see man as the embodiment of
Narayana. As fire is kindled when you rub two pieces of wood together,
so
God can be seen in man if you have intense devotion. If there is
suitable
bait, big fish like carp gulp it down at once. When one is intoxicated
with
prema, one sees God in all beings. The gopis saw Krishna in everything;
to
them the whole world was filled with Krishna. They said that they
themselves
were Krishna. They were then in a God-intoxicated state. Looking at
the trees, they said, These are hermits absorbed in meditation on
Krishna.'
Looking at the grass they said, The hair of the earth is standing on
end at
the touch of Krishna.'

"Devotion to the husband is also a dharma. The husband is God. Why
shouldn't it be so? If God can be worshipped through an image, why not
also through a living man? But three things are necessary in order to
feel the
presence of God in an image: first, the devotion of the priest; second,
a
beautiful image; and third, the devotion of the householder.
Vaishnavcharan
once said that in the end the mind of the devotee is absorbed in the
human
manifestation of God.

"But you must remember one thing. One cannot see God sporting as man
unless one has had the vision of Him. Do you know the sign of one who
has God-vision? Such a man acquires the nature of a child. Why a child?
Because God is like a child. So he who sees God becomes like a child.

"God-vision is necessary. Now the question is, how can one get it?
Intense
renunciation is the means. A man should have such intense yearning for
God that he can say, 'O Father of the universe, am I outside Your
universe?
Won't You be kind to me, You wretch?'

"You partake of the nature of him on whom you meditate. By worshipping
Siva you acquire the nature of Siva. A devotee of Rama meditated on
Hanuman day and night. He used to think he had become Hanuman. In
the end he was firmly convinced that he had even grown a little tail.
Jnana
is the characteristic of Siva, and bhakti of Vishnu. One who partakes
of
Siva's nature becomes a jnani, and one who partakes of Vishnu's nature
becomes a bhakta."

M: "But what about Chaitanyadeva? You said he had both knowledge
and devotion."

MASTER (sharply): "His case was different. He was an
Incarnation of
God. There is a great difference between him and an ordinary man. The
fire
of Chaitanya's renunciation was so great that when Sarvabhauma poured
sugar on his tongue, instead of melting, it evaporated into air. He was
always
absorbed in samadhi. How great was his conquest of lust! To compare him
with a man! A lion eats meat and yet it mates only once in twelve
years;
but a sparrow eats grain and it indulges in sex-life day and night.
Such is
the difference between a Divine Incarnation and an ordinary human
being.
An ordinary man renounces lust; but once in a while he forgets his vow.
He
cannot control himself.

(To M.) "He who has realized God looks on man as a
mere worm. 'One
cannot succeed in religious life if one has shame, hatred, or fear.'
These are
fetters. Haven't you heard of the eight fetters?

"How can one who is eternally perfect be afraid of the world? He knows
how to play his game. An eternally perfect soul can even lead a worldly
life if he desires. There are people who can fence with two swords at
the
same time; they are such expert fencers that, if stones are thrown at
them,
the stones hit the swords and come back."

A DEVOTEE: "Sir, how can one see God?"

MASTER: "Can you ever see God if you do not direct your whole mind
toward Him? The Bhagavata speaks about Sukadeva.
When he walked about
he looked like a soldier with fixed bayonet. His gaze did not wander;
it had
only one goal and that was God. This is the meaning of yoga.

"The chatak bird drinks only rain-water. Though the Ganges, the Jamuna,
the Godavari, and all other rivers are full of water, and though the
seven
oceans are full to the brim, still the chatak will not touch them. It
will drink
only the water that falls from the clouds.

"He who has developed such yoga can see God. In the theatre the
audience
remains engaged in all kinds of conversation, about home, office, and
school, till the curtain goes up; but no sooner does it go up than all
conversation comes to a stop, and the people watch the play with fixed
attention.
If after a long while someone utters a word or two, it is about the
play.

"After a drunkard has drunk his liquor he talks only about the joy of
drunkenness."

Nityagopal was seated in front of Sri Ramakrishna. He was always in
ecstasy. He sat there in silence.

MASTER (to Nityagopal, smiling): "Gopal! Why are you
always silent?"
Nityagopal answered like a child, "I — do — not — know."

MASTER: "I understand why you don't say anything, perhaps you are
afraid of committing a transgression. You are right. Jaya and Vijaya
were
gate-keepers for Narayana. They refused Sanaka, Sanatana, and other
rishis
admission into His palace. For this transgression Jaya and Vijaya had
to be
born three times on earth.

"Again, there is the instance of Sridama; he was Viraja's (A
woman companion of Krishna) gate-keeper in
Goloka. Sri Krishna was in Viraja's house. Radhika went there to
surprise
Krishna and wanted to enter the house. Sridama would not admit her, and
so Radhika cursed him to be born as a demon on earth. But Sridama, too
cursed her.

But there is one thing you should remember. When a boy walks holding
his father's hand, he may fall into the gutter; but what has he to fear
if the
father holds him by the hand?"

The story of Sridama is narrated in the Brahmavaivarta Purana.

Kedar, who was a government official, had been living at Dacca for some
time. He had been transferred there from Calcutta. He was a devotee of
Sri
Ramakrishna and had gathered together at Dacca many devotees, who came
to him regularly for spiritual instruction. As one should not come
empty-handed to a religious man, the devotees would bring Kedar sweets
and other
offerings.

KEDAR (to the Master, humbly): "Should I eat those
offerings?"

MASTER: "It won't injure you it the offerings are given out of love for
God. But they are harmful if they are given with any selfish motive."

KEDAR: "I have explained everything to the devotees and now I feel
relieved. I have told them that he (Sri Ramakrishna) who has given me
his blessing knows all."

MASTER (smiling): "That is true. You see, people of
all sorts come here.
So they find here different things."

KEDAR: "I do not need to know different things."

MASTER (smiling): "Why not? One should know a little
of everything. If
a man starts a grocery-shop, he keeps all kinds of articles there,
including a
little lentil and tamarind. An expert musician knows how to play a
little
on all instruments."

Sri Ramakrishna left the room and went toward the pine-grove. The
devotees began to walk about in the garden. Several went to the
Panchavati.
Sri Ramakrishna met them there and said: "I have indigestion. I took a
meal'
at the Mallicks'. They are very worldly people."

A few of the Master's personal things lay scattered on the cement
platform
of the Panchavati, and he asked M. to bring them. He proceeded to his
room and the devotees followed.

In the afternoon the Master rested awhile. Afterwards a few devotees
arrived. The Master sat on the small couch reclining against a pillow.

A DEVOTEE: "Sir, can one know God's attributes through the intellect?"

MASTER: "Certainly not by this ordinary intellect. Can one know God so
easily? One must practise sadhana. One must also adopt a particular
attitude
toward God, for instance, the attitude of a servant toward his master.
The.
rishis of old had the attitude of santa. Do you know the attitude of
the
jnanis? It is to meditate on one's own Self. (To a devotee,
with a smile)
What is your attitude?"

The devotee gave no answer.

MASTER (smiling): "You have two attitudes: you
meditate on your own
Self and also cherish toward God the attitude of a servant. Am I not
right?"

DEVOTEE (hesitating and smiling): "Yes, sir."

MASTER (smiling): "You see, as Hazra says, I can
read people's thoughts.

"One can maintain those two attitudes only at a very advanced stage.
Prahlada maintained them. But one must work hard in order to practise
this ideal.

"Let me give an illustration. Suppose a man is grasping the thorny
branch
of a plum-tree. His hand bleeds profusely; but he says, There is
nothing the
matter with me; I am not hurt.' If you ask him about his wound, he will
say, 'It's all right; I am quite well.' Now is there any meaning in the
mere
utterance of these words? One must practise discipline in keeping with
this ideal."

The devotees were giving their whole attention to what the Master was
saying.


=== 36_masters_birthday.htm ===

The Master's Birthday

←
Home
/ The Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna
/ Volume 2
/ →

THE MASTER'S BIRTHDAY

Master's love for Narendra — Master's samadhi — Hazra's eccentricities
— Goal of scriptural study — Occult powers — Go beyond duality —
Advice to Surendra — Duties of householders — Master praises charity
— Master and Girish — Selfless divine love — Knowledge of Brahman
— Two paths of Brahmajnana — The ego of the Divine Incarnation —
The path of bhakti — Meaning of liberation — Master warns against
lust — Sannyasi's discipline — Householder's discipline — Different
aspects of bhakti — Different kinds of samadhi — How to cultivate
longing
for God — Master at the theatre.

Sunday, February 22, 1885

SRI RAMAKRISHNA was sitting on the northeast verandah outside
his room
at Dakshineswar. It was about eight o'clock in the morning. Many
devotees, including Narendra, Rakhal, Girish, Baburam, and Surendra,
were present. They were celebrating the Master's birthday, which had
fallen on the previous Monday. M. arrived and saluted him. The Master
signed to him to take a seat near him.

Narottam was singing kirtan. Sri Ramakrishna was in partial ecstasy.
The
subject was Krishna's meeting with His cowherd friends in the meadow.
Krishna had not yet arrived. The cowherd boys were restless for Him.
One
of them said that Mother Yasoda was preventing Krishna from coming.
Balai said in a determined voice that he would bring Krishna with the
sound of his horn. Balai's love for Krishna knew no bounds. The music
went
on. The cowherd boys and girls heard Krishna's flute and were filled
with
spiritual emotion.

Suddenly Sri Ramakrishna's eyes fell on Narendra, who was sitting very
near him. He stood up and went into samadhi; he stood there touching
Narendra's knee with his foot. Regaining consciousness he took his seat
again. Narendra left the room. The music went on.

Sri Ramakrishna whispered to Baburam: "There is kshir in the room.
Give Narendra some."

Did the Master see Narendra as the embodiment of God?

After the kirtan Sri Ramakrishna returned to his room. Tenderly he
began to feed Narendra with sweets.

It was Girish's belief that God Himself had been born in the person of
Sri Ramakrishna.

GIRISH (to the Master): "Your ways are like
Krishna's. He too pretended
many things to His mother Yasoda."

MASTER: "True. It was because Krishna was an Incarnation of God. When
God is born as a man He acts that way. You see, Krishna easily lifted
the
hill of Govardhan with His hand, but He made Nanda believe that He
found it very hard to carry a footstool."

GIRISH: "Yes, sir, I have understood you now."

Sri Ramakrishna was sitting on the small couch. It was about eleven
o'clock. Ram and the other devotees wanted to dress him in a new cloth.
The Master said, "No, no." Pointing to an English-educated man, he
said,
"What will he say about it?" At the earnest request of the devotees he
said,
"Well, since you insist, I shall have to agree."

The devotees were arranging the Master's meal in the room. He asked
Narendra to sing.

Narendra sang:

In dense darkness, O Mother, Thy formless beauty sparkles;

Therefore the yogis meditate in a dark mountain cave.

In the lap of boundless dark, on Mahanirvana's waves upborne,

Peace flows serene and inexhaustible.

Taking the form of the Void, in the robe of darkness wrapped,

Who art Thou, Mother, seated alone in the shrine of samadhi?

From the Lotus of Thy fear-scattering Feet flash Thy love's lightnings;

Thy Spirit-Face shines forth with laughter terrible and loud!

As Narendra sang the line, "Who art Thou, Mother, seated alone
in the
shrine of samadhi?", Sri Ramakrishna went into deep samadhi and lost
all
outer consciousness. After a long time, when he was regaining partial
consciousness, the devotees seated him on the carpet and placed a plate
of food
before him. Still overcome with divine emotion, he began to eat the
rice
with both hands. He said to Bhavanath, "Feed me." Because of his
ecstatic
mood he could not use his own right hand. Bhavanath began to feed him.
Sri Ramakrishna could eat very little. Ram said to him, "Nityagopal
will
eat from your plate."

MASTER: "Why from my plate? Why?"

RAM: "Why not?"

Nityagopal was also in an ecstatic mood. The Master put a morsel or
two into his mouth with his own hand.

Some devotees from Konnagar arrived by boat. They entered Sri
Ramakrishna's
room singing kirtan; afterwards they went out to take some
refreshments.
Narottam was in the room. The Master said to him and the other
devotees: "The music of the Konnagar devotees was dull. Music should be
so lively as to make everyone dance. One should sing a song like this:

See how all Nadia is shaking

Under the waves of Gauranga's love!

And along with it these lines:

Behold, the two brothers1
have come, who weep while chanting Hari's name,

The brothers who, in return for blows, offer to sinners Hari's love. .
. .

And these too:

Gaur and Nitai, ye blessed brothers!

I have heard how kind you are,

And therefore I have come to you. . . ."

The devotees were taking the prasad. It was a sumptuous feast.
Sri
Ramakrishna said to M.: "Haven't you invited the Mukherjis? Ask
Surendra to
feed the musicians."

Bepin Sarkar arrived. The devotees introduced him to the Master. Sri
Ramakrishna sat up and said to the devotees, "Give him a seat and some
betel-leaf." He said to Bepin humbly: "I am sorry not to be able to
talk
to you. There is a great crowd today."

Pointing to Girindra, Sri Ramakrishna said to Baburam, "Give him a
carpet."
Nityagopal was sitting on the floor. The Master asked a devotee to give
him a carpet too.

Physician Mahendra of Sinthi arrived. The Master, smiling, asked Rakhal
by a sign to have the physician examine his pulse.

Turning to Ramlal, the Master said, "Be friendly with Girish Ghosh;
then you will get a free ticket to the theatre."

Narendra had been talking a long time with Hazra on the porch. Since
his father's death Narendra had been having financial worries. He
entered
the room and took a seat.

MASTER (to Narendra): "Were you with Hazra? Both of
you are in the
same boat. You know the saying about the two friends: 'You are away
from
your country and he is away from his beloved.' Hazra, too, needs
fifteen
hundred rupees (laughter.)

"Hazra says: 'Narendra has acquired one hundred per cent sattva, though
still there is in him a pink glow of rajas. But I have one hundred and
twenty-five per cent pure sattva.' (All laugh.)

"I say to Hazra, 'You indulge in reasoning only: that is why you are so
dry.' He retorts, 'No, I am dry because I drink the nectar of the sun.'

"Speaking of pure bhakti, I say to Hazra, 'A real devotee does not pray
to God for money or riches.' Hazra replies: 'When the flood of divine
grace
descends, the rivers overflow; and further, the pools and canals are
filled. By
the grace of God one gets not only pure devotion but also the six
super-natural powers, and money too.'"

Narendra and many other devotees were seated on the floor. Girish
entered
the room and joined them.

MASTER (to Girish): "I look on Narendra as Atman. I
obey him."

GIRISH: "Is there anyone you don't obey?"

MASTER (smiling): "He has a manly nature and I have
the nature of a
woman. He is a noble soul and belongs to the realm of the Indivisible
Brahman."

Girish went out to have a smoke.

NARENDRA (to the Master): "I had a talk with Girish
Ghosh. He is indeed
a great man. We talked about you."

MASTER: "What did you say about me?"

NARENDRA: "That you are illiterate and we are scholars. Oh, we talked
in that vein!" (Laughter.)

MANI MALLICK
(to the Master): "You have become a pundit without
reading a book."

MASTER (to Narendra and the others): "Let me tell
you this: really and
truly I don't feel sorry in the least that I haven't read the Vedanta
or the
other scriptures. I know that the essence of the Vedanta is that
Brahman
alone is real and the world illusory. And what is the essence of the Gita?
It
is what you get by repeating the word ten times. Then it is reversed
into
'tagi', which refers to renunciation. The pupil should hear the essence
of
the scriptures from the guru; then he should practise austerity and
devotions.
A man needs the letter he has received from home as long as he has not
learnt its contents. After reading it, however, he sets out to get the
things
he has been asked to send. Likewise, what need is there of the
scriptures if
you know their essence? The next thing is the practice of spiritual
discipline."

Girish entered the room.

MASTER (to Girish): "Hello! What were you saying
about me? I eat,
drink, and make merry."

GIRISH: "What should we have been saying about you? Are you a holy
man?"

MASTER: "No, nothing of the sort. Truly I do not feel I am a holy man."

GIRISH: "I am not your equal even in joking."

MASTER: "I once went to Jaygopal Sen's garden house wearing a
red-bordered cloth. Keshab was there. Looking at the red borders Keshab
said:
'What's this? Such a flash of colour today! Such a display of red
borders!'
I said, 'I have to cast a spell on Keshab; hence this display.'"

Narendra was going to sing again. Sri Ramakrishna asked M. to take
down the tanpura from the wall. Narendra was a long time tuning it. The
Master and the devotees became impatient. Binode said, "He will tune it
today and sing another day." (Laughter.)

Sri Ramakrishna laughed. He said: "I feel like breaking the tanpura to
pieces! What is this? Only Tong — tong'! Then he will practise:
'Tana-nana-nere-num'!" (The sound of a stringed instrument.)

BHAVANATH: "Everybody feels annoyed like this before a musical
performance begins."

NARENDRA (still tuning): "If you don't understand
it."

MASTER (smiling): "There! He explains away our
complaints!"

Narendra began to sing. Sri Ramakrishna was seated on the small couch.
Nityagopal and the other devotees were on the floor.

Narendra sang:

O Mother, Thou my Inner Guide, ever awake within my heart!

Day and night Thou boldest me in Thy lap.

Why dost Thou show such tenderness to this unworthy child of Thine? . .
.

Then he sang:

O my lute of a single string!

Sing the blessed Mother's name,

For She is the solace of my soul. . . .

And again:

In dense darkness, O Mother, Thy formless beauty sparkles;

Therefore the yogis meditate in a dark mountain cave. . . .

In an ecstatic mood Sri Ramakrishna came down and sat by
Narendra's
side. He began to talk, still in ecstasy.

MASTER: "Shall I sing? Fie! (To Nityagopal) What do
you say? One
should listen to singing to awaken the inner spirit. Nothing matters
afterwards.

"He has kindled the fire. That is nice. Now all is silence. That's nice
too.
I am silent; you be silent too. The thing is to dive into the Elixir of
Bliss.

"Shall I sing? Well, I may. Water is water whether it is still or in
waves."

Narendra was seated near the Master. He was constantly worried about
his financial difficulties at home. He was now twenty-three years old.
Sri
Ramakrishna looked at him intently.

MASTER (to Narendra, smiling): "Undoubtedly you are
'Kha'. But you
have to worry about 'taxes'; that's the trouble."

By "taxes" the Master meant Narendra's financial difficulties at home.

MASTER: "Krishnakishore used to say that he was 'Kha'. One day I
visited
him at his home and found him worried. He wouldn't talk to me freely. I
asked him: 'What's the matter? Why are you brooding like this?'
Krishnakishore
said: 'The tax-collector came today. He said my pots and pans would
be sold at auction if I didn't pay my taxes. That's what I am worrying
about.'
I laughed and said: 'How is that? You are surely 'Kha', the akasa. Let
the
rascals take away your pots and pans. What is that to you?'

(To Narendra) "So I am saying that you are 'Kha'.
Why are you so
worried? Don't you know that Sri Krishna said to Arjuna, 'If you have
one
of the eight siddhis, you may get a little power, but you will not
realize Me.'
By siddhis one may acquire powers, strength, money, and such things,
but
not God.

"Let me tell you something else. Go beyond knowledge and ignorance.
People say that such and such a one is a jnani; but in reality it is
not so.
Vasishtha was a great jnani, but even he was stricken with grief on
account
of the death of his sons. At this Lakshmana said to Rama: 'This is
amazing,
Rama. Even Vasishtha is so grief-stricken!' Rama said: 'Brother, he who
has
knowledge has ignorance as well. He who is aware of light is also aware
of
darkness. He who knows good also knows bad. He who knows happiness
also knows misery. Brother, go beyond duality, beyond pleasure and
pain,
beyond knowledge and ignorance.' (To Narendra) So I
am asking you to go
beyond both knowledge and ignorance."

Sri Ramakrishna went back to his small couch. The devotees were seated
on the floor. Surendra sat by his side. The Master cast an affectionate
look
on him and began to give him advice.

MASTER (to Surendra): "Come here every now and then.
Nangta used
to say that a brass pot must be polished every day; otherwise it gets
stained.
One should constantly live in the company of holy men.

"The renunciation of 'woman and gold' is for sannyasis. It is not for
you.
Now and then you should go into solitude and call on God with a
yearning
heart. Your renunciation should be mental.

"Unless a devotee is of the heroic type he cannot pay attention to both
God and the world. King Janaka lived a householder's life only after
attaining
perfection through austerity and prayer. He fenced with two swords, the
one of Knowledge and the other of action."

The Master sang:

This very world is a mansion of mirth;

Here I can eat, here drink and make merry.

Janaka's might was unsurpassed;

What did he lack of the world or the Spirit?

Holding to one as well as the other,

He drank his milk from a brimming cup!

MASTER: "For you, as Chaitanya said, the disciplines to be
practised are
kindness to living beings, service to the devotees, and chanting the
name of God.

(To Surendra) "Why do I say all this to you? You
work in a merchant's
office. I say this to you because you have many duties to perform there.

"You tell lies at the office. Then why do I eat the food you offer me?
Because you give your money in charity; you give away more than you
earn.
The seed of the melon is bigger than the fruit', as the saying goes.

"I cannot eat anything offered by miserly people. Their wealth is
squandered
in these ways: first, litigation; second, thieves and robbers; third,
physicians; fourth, their wicked children's extravagance. It is like
that.

'"Your giving money away in charity is very good. Those who have money
should give in charity. The miser's wealth is spirited away, but the
money
of the charitable person is saved. He spends it for a righteous
purpose. At
Kamarpukur I have seen the farmers cutting channels to irrigate their
fields. Sometimes the water rushes in with such force that the ridges
around
the fields are washed away and the crops destroyed. For this reason the
farmers make holes here and there in the ridges. Since the water
escapes
through the holes, the ridges are not destroyed by the rush of the
water.
Furthermore, the escaping water deposits soft clay in the fields, which
increases their fertility and gives a richer crop. He who gives away in
charity
achieves great results. He achieves the four fruits; dharma, artha,
kama, and
moksha."

The devotees listened with great attention to Sri Ramakrishna's words.

SURENDRA: "I cannot meditate well. I repeat the Divine Mother's name
now and then. Lying in bed, I repeat Her name and fall asleep."

MASTER: "That is enough. You remember Her, don't you?

"There are two kinds of yoga: manoyoga and karmayoga. To perform,
following the guru's instructions, such pious acts as worship,
pilgrimage, and
service to living beings is called karmayoga. The duties that Janaka
performed
are also called karmayoga. The meditation and contemplation of the
yogis is called manoyoga.

"Sometimes I say to myself in the Kali temple, 'O Mother, the mind is
nothing but Yourself.' Therefore Pure Mind, Pure Buddhi, and Pure Atman
are one and the same thing."

It was about dusk. Many of the devotees saluted Sri Ramakrishna and
started to go home. The Master went to the west porch. Bhavanath and M.
were with him.

MASTER (to Bhavanath): "Why do you come here so
seldom?"

BHAVANATH (smiling): "Sir, I visit you once in a
fortnight. I saw you in
the street the other day, so I didn't come here."

MASTER: "What do you mean? What can you gain by mere seeing?
Touch and talk are also necessary."

The evening worship had begun in the temples. It was the eighth day of
the bright fortnight of the moon; the temple domes, the courtyard, the
gardens, and the trees were shining in the moonlight. The Ganges was
flowing north with a murmuring sound. Sri Ramakrishna sat on the small
couch in his room absorbed in contemplation of the Divine Mother.

The evening worship was over. One or two devotees were still in the
temple garden. Narendra had left. Sri Ramakrishna was pacing the
verandah
northeast of his room. M. stood there looking at him. Suddenly he said
to
M., "Ah, how sweet Narendra's music is!"

M: "Yes, sir. That song beginning with 'In dense darkness' is
particularly
beautiful."

MASTER: "You are right. That song has a deep meaning. A part of my
mind is still drawn to it."

M: "Yes, sir."

MASTER: "Meditation in darkness is prescribed in the Tantra."

Girish Ghosh came and stood by Sri Ramakrishna, who had started to sing:

Is Kali, my Mother, really black?

The Naked One, of blackest hue,

Lights the Lotus of the Heart. . . .

Sri Ramakrishna was filled with divine fervour. Standing with
one arm
resting on Girish's body he sang:

Why should I go to Ganga or Gaya, to Kasi, Kanchi, or Prabhas,

So long as I can breathe my last with Kali's name upon my lips?

What need of rituals has a man, what need of devotions any more,

If he repeats the Mother's name at the three holy hours?

Rituals may pursue him close, but never can they overtake him. . . .

Then he sang:

Once for all, this time, I have thoroughly understood;

From One2
who knows it well, I have learnt the secret of bhava.

A man has come to me from a country where there is no night,

And now I cannot distinguish day from night any longer;

Rituals and devotions have all grown profitless for me.

My sleep is broken; how can I slumber any more?

For now I am wide awake in the sleeplessness of yoga.

O Divine Mother, made one with Thee in yoga-sleep3
at last,

My slumber I have lulled asleep for evermore.

I bow my head, says Prasad, before desire and liberation;

Knowing the secret that Kali is one with the highest Brahman,

I have discarded, once for. all, both righteousness and sin.

As Sri Ramakrishna looked at Girish, his ecstatic fervour
became more intense.

He sang:

I have surrendered my soul at the fearless feet of the Mother;

Am I afraid of Death any more?

Unto the tuft of hair on my head

Is tied the almighty mantra. Mother Kali's name.

My body I have sold in the market-place of the world

And with it have bought Sri Durga's name. . . .

Intoxicated with God, Sri Ramakrishna repeated the lines:

My body I have sold in the market-place of the world

And with it have bought Sri Durga's name.

Looking at Girish and M. he said, "'Divine fervour fills my
body and
robs me of consciousness.'
"Here 'consciousness' means consciousness of the outer world. One needs
the Knowledge of Reality and Brahman.

"Bhakti, love of God, is the only essential thing. One kind of bhakti
has
a motive behind it. Again, there is a motiveless love, pure devotion, a
love
of God that seeks no return. Keshab Sen and the members of the Brahmo
Samaj didn't know about motiveless love. In this love there is no
desire; it is
nothing but pure love of the Lotus Feet of God.

"There is another kind of love, known as urjhita bhakti, an ecstatic
love
of God that overflows, as it were. When it is awakened, the devotee
laughs
and weeps and dances and sings'. Chaitanyadeva is an example of this
love.
Rama said to Lakshmana, 'Brother, if anywhere you see the manifestation
of
urjhita bhakti, know for certain that I am there.'"

GIRISH: "Everything is possible through your grace. What was I before?
And see what I am now."

MASTER: "You had latent tendencies; so they are manifesting themselves
now. Nothing happens except at the proper time. Take the case of a
patient
Nature has almost cured him, when the physician prescribes a herb and
asks
him to drink its juice. After taking the medicine he is completely
cured.
Now, is the patient cured by the medicine, or does he get well by
himself?
Who can tell?

"Lakshmana said to Lava and Kusa: (Rama's two sons.) "You are mere
children; you don't
know Rama's power. At the touch of His feet, Ahalya,4
who had been turned into a stone, got back her human form.' Lava and
Kusa said: 'Revered
sir, we know that. We have heard the story. The stone became Ahalya
because of the power of the holy man's words. The sage Gautama said to
her: "In the Tretayuga, Rama will pass this hermitage. You will become
a
human being again at the touch of His feet."' Now, who can tell whether
the miracle happened in order that the sage's words should be fulfilled
or
on account of Rama's holiness?

"Everything happens by the will of God. If your spiritual consciousness
has been awakened at this place, know that I am only an instrument.
'Uncle
Moon is everybody's uncle.' All happens by the will of God."

GIRISH (smiling): "Did you say 'by the will of God'?
What I am saying
is the very same thing." (All laugh.)

MASTER (to Girish): "By being guileless one can
speedily realize God.
There are several kinds of people who do not attain divine knowledge.
First,
a man with a perverse mind; he is not guileless. Second, one who is
very
fastidious about outer purity. Third, a doubting person."

Sri Ramakrishna spoke highly of Nityagopal's ecstasy.

Three or four devotees stood near Sri Ramakrishna on the verandah and
listened to his words about the exalted state of the paramahamsa. The
Master said: "A paramahamsa is always conscious that God alone is real
and
all else illusory. Only the swan has the power to separate milk from a
mixture
of milk and water. The swan's tongue secretes an acid that separates
the milk from the mixture. The paramahamsa also possesses such a juice;
it
is his ecstatic love for God. That separates the Real from the mixture
of the
Real and the unreal. Through it one becomes aware of God and sees Him."

Wednesday, February 25, 1885

Sri Ramakrishna was at the house of Girish Ghosh in Bosepara
Lane,
Calcutta. It was about three o'clock when M. arrived and prostrated
himself
before him. The Master was going to see a play at the Star Theatre. He
was
talking with the devotees about the Knowledge of Brahman.

MASTER: "Man experiences three states of consciousness: waking, dream,
and deep sleep. Those who follow the path of knowledge explain away the
three states. According to them, Brahman is beyond the three states. It
is also
beyond the gross, the subtle, and the causal bodies, and beyond the
three
gunas — sattva, rajas, and tamas. All these are maya, like a reflection
in a
mirror. The reflection is by no means the real substance. Brahman alone
is
the Substance and all else is illusory.

"The knowers of Brahman say, further, that it is the identification of
the soul with the body that creates the notion of duality. In that
state of
identification the reHection appears real. When this identification
disappears,
a man realizes, 'I am He; I am Brahman.

A DEVOTEE: "Then shall we all follow the path of reasoning?"

MASTER: "Reasoning is one of the paths; it is the path of the
Vedantists.
But there is another path, the path of bhakti. If a bhakta weeps
longingly
for the Knowledge of Brahman, he receives that as well.5
These are the two paths: jnana and bhakti.

"One may attain the Knowledge of Brahman by either path. Some retain
bhakti even after realizing Brahman, in order to teach humanity. An
Incarnation of God is one of these.

"A man cannot easily get rid of the ego and the consciousness that the
body is the soul. It becomes possible only when, through the grace of
God, he
attains samadhi — nirvikalpa samadhi, jada samadhi.

"The ego of the Incarnations returns to them when they come down from
the plane of samadhi; but then it is the 'ego of Knowledge' or the 'ego
of
Devotion'. Through the 'ego of Knowledge' they teach men. Sankaracharya
kept the 'ego of Knowledge'.

"Through the 'ego of Devotion' Chaitanyadeva tasted divine love and
enjoyed the company of the devotees. He talked about God and chanted
His name.

"Since one cannot easily get rid of the ego, a bhakta does not explain
away the states of waking, dream, and deep sleep. He accepts all the
states.
Further, he accepts the three gunas — sattva, rajas, and tamas. A
bhakta sees
that God alone has become the twenty-four cosmic principles, the
universe,
and all living beings. He also sees that God reveals Himself to His
devotees
in a tangible form, which is the embodiment of Spirit.

"The bhakta takes shelter under vidyamaya. He seeks holy company, goes
on pilgrimage, and practises discrimination, devotion, and
renunciation. He
says that, since a man cannot easily get rid of his ego, he should let
the
rascal remain as the servant of God, the devotee of God.

"But a bhakta also attains the Knowledge of Oneness; he sees that
nothing
exists but God. He does not regard the world as a dream, but says that
it is
God Himself who has become everything. In a wax garden you may see
various objects, but everything is made of wax.

"But a man realizes this only when his devotion to God has matured. One
gets jaundice when too much bile accumulates. Then one sees everything
as yellow. From constantly meditating on Krishna, Radhika saw
everything
as Krishna; moreover, she even felt that she herself had become
Krishna.
If a piece of lead is kept in a lake of mercury a long time, it turns
into
mercury. The cockroach becomes motionless by constantly meditating on
the kumira worm; it loses the power to move. At last it is transformed
into a
kumira. Similarly, by constantly meditating on God the bhakta loses his
ego;
he realizes that God is he and he is God. When the cockroach becomes
the
kumira everything is achieved. Instantly one obtains liberation.

"As long as God retains the ego m a man, he should establish a definite
relationship with God, calling on Him as Master, Mother, Friend", or
the
like. I spent one year as a handmaid — the handmaid of the Divine
Mother,
the Embodiment of Brahman. I used to dress myself as a woman. I put on
a
nose-ring. One can conquer lust by assuming, the attitude of a woman.

"One must worship the Adyasakti. She must be propitiated. She alone has
assumed all female forms. Therefore I look on all women as mother. The
attitude of looking on woman as mother is very pure. The Tantra
mentions
the vamachara6
method also. But that is not a good method; it causes the
aspirant's downfall. A devotee keeping an object of enjoyment near him
has
reason to be afraid.

"Looking on woman as mother is like fasting on the ekadasi day without
touching even a drop of water; in this attitude there is not the
slightest trace
of sensual enjoyment. Another way of observing the ekadasi allows the
taking
of fruit and the like. One can also observe the day by eating luchi and
curries!
But my attitude is not to touch even a drop of water while I observe
the fast.
I worshipped the Shorasi7
as my mother; I looked on all parts of her body as
those of my mother. This attitude of regarding God as Mother is the
last
word in sadhana. 'O God, Thou art my Mother and I am Thy child' — this
is the last word in spirituality.

"The sannyasi's way of living is like observing the ekadasi fast
without
taking even a drop of water. If he clings to enjoyment, then he has
reason
to be afraid. 'Woman and gold' is enjoyment. If a monk enjoys it, he is
swallowing his own spittle, as it were. There are different kinds of
enjoyment: money, wealth, name, fame, and sense pleasures. It is not
good for a
sannyasi to sit in the company of a woman devotee, or even to talk to
her.
This injures him and others as well. Then others cannot learn from him;
he
cannot set an example to humanity. A sannyasi keeps his body in order
to
teach mankind.

"To sit with a woman or talk to her a long time has also been described
as
a kind of sexual intercourse. There are eight kinds. To listen to a
woman
and enjoy her conversation is one kind; to speak about a woman is
another
kind; to whisper to her privately is a third kind; to keep something
belonging
to a woman and enjoy it is a fourth kind; to touch her is a fifth.
Therefore a
sannyasi should not salute his guru's young wife, touching her feet.
These
are the rules for sannyasis.

"But the case is quite different with householders. After the birth of
one
or two children, the husband and wife should live as brother and
sister. The
other seven kinds of sexual intercourse do not injure them much.

"A householder has various debts: debts to the gods, to the fathers,
and to
the rishis. He also owes a debt to his wife. He should make her the
mother
of one or two children and support her if she is a chaste woman.

"Householders do not know who is a good wife and who is a bad wife,
who is a vidyasakti and who is an avidyasakti. A vidyasakti, a good
wife, has
very little lust and anger. She sleeps little. She pushes her husband's
head
away from her. She is full of affection, kindness, devotion, modesty,
and
other noble qualities. Such a wife serves all, looking on all men as
her
children. Further, she helps increase her husband's love of God. She
doesn't
spend much money lest her husband should have to work hard and thus not
get leisure to think of God.

"Mannish women have different traits. These are bad traits: squint eyes
and hollow eyes, catlike eyes, lantern jaws like a calf's, and
pigeon-breast"

GIRISH: "What is the way for people like us?"

MASTER: "Bhakti is the only essential thing. Bhakti has different
aspects:
the sattvic, the rajasic, and the tamasic. One who has sattvic bhakti
is very
modest and humble. But a man with tamasic bhakti is like a highwayman
in his attitude toward God. He says: 'O God, I am chanting Your name;
how
can I be a sinner? O God, You are my own Mother; You must reveal
Yourself to me.'"

GIRISH (smiling): "It is you, sir, who teach us
tamasic bhakti."

MASTER (smiling): "There are certain signs of
God-vision. When a man
sees God he goes into samadhi. There are five kinds of samadhi. First,
he
feels the Mahavayu8
rise like an ant crawling up. Second, he feels It rise
like a fish swimming in the water. Third, he feels It rise like a snake
wriggling along. Fourth, he feels It rise like a bird flying — flying
from one branch
to another. Fifth, he feels It rise like a monkey making a big jump;
the
Mahavayu reaches the head with one jump, as it were, and samadhi
follows.

"There are two other kinds of samadhi. First, the sthita samadhi, when
the
aspirant totally loses outer consciousness: he remains in that state a
long time,
it may be for many days. Second, the unmana samadhi: it is to withdraw
the
mind suddenly from all sense-objects and unite it with God.

(To M.) "Do you understand this?"

M: "Yes, sir."

GIRISH: "Can one realize God by sadhana?"

MASTER: "People have realized God in various ways. Some through much
austerity, worship, and devotion; they have attained perfection through
their
own efforts. Some are born perfect, as for example Narada and Sukadeva;
they are called nityasiddha, eternally perfect. There are also those
who have
attained perfection all of a sudden; it is like a man's unexpectedly
coming
into a great fortune. Again, there are instances of people's realizing
God in
a dream and by divine grace."

Saying this, Sri Ramakrishna sang, intoxicated with divine fervour:

Can everyone have the vision of Syama? Is Kali's treasure for everyone?

Oh, what a pity my foolish mind will not see what is true! . . .

Sri Ramakrishna remained in ecstasy a few moments. Girish and
the
other devotees were seated before him. A few days earlier Girish had
been
very rude to the Master at the Star Theatre; but now he was in a calm
state of mind.

MASTER (to Girish): "This mood of yours is very
good; it is peaceful. I
prayed about you to the Divine Mother, 'O Mother, make him peaceful so
that he won't abuse me.

GIRISH (to M.): "I feel as if someone were pressing
my tongue. I can't talk."

Sri Ramakrishna was still in an indrawn mood; he seemed to be gradually
forgetting the men and the objects around him. He tried to bring his
mind
down to the relative world. He looked at the devotees.

Looking at M., he said: "They all come to Dakshineswar. Let them.
Mother knows everything." To a young man of the neighbourhood he said:
"Hello! What do you think? What is the duty of man?" All sat in
silence.
To Narayan he said: "Don't you want to pass the examinations? But, my
dear
child, a man freed from bondage is Siva; entangled in bondage, he is
jiva."

Sri Ramakrishna was still in the God-intoxicated mood. There was a
glass
of water near him. He drank the water. He said to himself, "Why, I have
drunk water in this mood!"

It was not yet dusk. Sri Ramakrishna was talking to Atul, who was
seated
in front of him. Atul was Girish's brother and a lawyer of the High
Court
of Calcutta. A brahmin neighbour was also seated near him.

MASTER (to Atul): "All I want to tell you is this.
Follow both; perform
your duties in the world and also cultivate love of God."

BRAHMIN: "Can anyone but a brahmin achieve perfection?"

MASTER: "Why should you ask that? It is said that in the Kaliyuga the
sudras achieve love of God. There are the instances of Savari, Ruhidas,
the
untouchable Guhaka, and others."

NARAYAN (smiling): "Brahmins and sudras — all are
one."

BRAHMIN: "Can a man realize God in one birth?"

MASTER: "Is anything impossible for the grace of God? Suppose you bring
a light into a room that has been dark a thousand years; does it remove
the
darkness little by little? The room is lighted all at once. (To
Atul) Intense
renunciation is what is needed. One should be like an unsheathed sword.
When a man has that renunciation, he looks on his relatives as black
cobras
and his home as a deep well.

"One should pray to God with sincere longing. God cannot but listen to
prayer if it is sincere."

All sat in silence, pondering Sri Ramakrishna's words.

MASTER (to Atul): "What is worrying you? Is it that
you haven't that
grit, that intense restlessness for God?"

ATUL: "How can we keep our minds on God?"

MASTER: "Abhyasayoga, the yoga of practice. You should practise calling
on God every day. It is not possible to succeed in one day; through
daily
prayer you will come to long for God.

"How can you feel that restlessness if you are immersed in worldliness
day and night? Formerly Jadu Mallick enjoyed spiritual talk; he liked
to
engage in it himself. But nowadays he doesn't show that much interest.
He
surrounds himself with flatterers day and night and indulges in worldly
talk."

It was dusk. The lamp was lighted in the room. Sri Ramakrishna chanted
the divine names. He was singing and praying. He said, "Chant the name
of
Hari, repeal the name of Hari, sing the name of Hari." Again he said,
"Rama! Rama! Rama!" Then: "O Mother! Thou dost ever enjoy Thine
eternal sports. Tell us, O Mother, what is the way? We have taken
refuge
in Thee; we have taken shelter at Thy feet."

Finding Girish restless, Sri Ramakrishna remained silent a moment. He
asked Tejchandra to sit near him. The boy sat near the Master. He
whispered to M. that he would have to leave soon.

MASTER (to M.): "What did he say?"

M: "He said he would have to go home."

MASTER: "Why do I attract these boys to me so much? They are pure
vessels untouched by worldliness. A man cannot assimilate instruction
if his
mind is stained with worldliness. Milk can be safely kept in a new pot;
but
it turns sour if kept in a pot in which curd has been made. You may
wash
a thousand times a cup that has held a solution of garlic, but still
you cannot
remove the smell."

Sri Ramakrishna arrived at the Star Theatre, on Beadon Street, to see a
performance of Vrishaketu.9
He sat in a box, facing the south. M. and other devotees were near him.

MASTER (to M.): "Has Narendra come?"

M: "Yes, sir."

The performance began. Karna and his wife Padmavati sacrificed their
son to please God, who had come to them in the guise of a brahmin to
test
Karna's charity. During this scene one of the devotees gave a
suppressed
sigh. Sri Ramakrishna also expressed his sorrow.

After the play Sri Ramakrishna went to the recreation room of the
theatre.
Girish and Narendra were already there. The Master stood near Narendra
and said, "I have come."

Sri Ramakrishna took a seal. The orchestra was playing in the
auditorium.

MASTER (to the devotee): "I feel happy listening to
the concert. The
musicians used to play on the sanai at Dakshineswar and I would go into
ecstasy. Noticing this, a certain sadhu said, 'This is a sign of the
Knowledge
of Brahman.'"

The orchestra stopped playing and Sri Ramakrishna began the
conversation.

MASTER (to Girish): "Does this theatre belong to
you?"

GIRISH: "It is ours, sir."

MASTER: "'Ours' is good, it is not good to say 'mine'. People say 'I'
and
'mine'; they are egotistic, small-minded people."

NARENDRA: "The whole world is a theatre."

MASTER: "Yes, yes, that's right. In some places you see tlie play of
vidya
and in some, the play of avidya."

NARENDRA: "Everything is the play of vidya."

MASTER: "True, true. But a man realizes that when he has the Knowledge
of Brahman. But for a bhakta, who follows the path of divine love, both
exist — vidyamaya and avidyamaya.

"Please sing a little."

Narendra sang:

Upon the Sea of Blissful Awareness waves of ecstatic love arise:

Rapture divine! Play of God's Bliss!

Oh, how enthralling!

Wondrous waves of the sweetness of God, ever new and ever enchanting,

Rise on the surface, ever assuming

Forms ever fresh.

Then once more in the Great Communion all are merged, as the barrier
walls

Of time and space dissolve and vanish:

Dance then, O mind!

Dance in delight with hands upraised, chanting Lord Hari's holy name.

As Narendra sang the words, "Then once more in the Great
Communion
all are merged", Sri Ramakrishna said to him, "One realizes this after
attaining the Knowledge of Brahman; then all is vidya, Brahman, as you
said."

As Narendra sang the line, "Dance in delight with hands upraised,
chanting
Lord Hari's holy name", the Master said to him, "Sing that line twice."
After the song Sri Ramakrishna resumed the conversation.

GIRISH: "Devendra Babu hasn't come. He says in a mood of wounded
pride: 'We haven't any stuff inside us, no filling of thickened milk.
We
are filled only with worthless lentil-paste. Why should we go there?'"

MASTER (surprised): "Does he say that? He never said
so before."
Sri Ramakrishna took some refreshments and handed some to Narendra.

JATIN DEVA
(to the Master): "You always say: 'Narendra, eat
this! Eat
that!' Are the rest of us fools? Are we like straw washed ashore by the
flood-tide?"

Sri Ramakrishna loved Jatin dearly. Jatin visited the Master now and
then at Dakshineswar and occasionally spent the night there. He
belonged
to an aristocratic family of Sobhabazar. The Master said laughingly to
Narendra, "He is talking about you."

Sri Ramakrishna laughed and showed his affection to Jatin by touching
his chin. He said to Jatin, "Come to Dakshineswar; I'll give you plenty
to eat."

The Master went into the auditorium to see a farce. He sat in a box. He
laughed at the conversation of the maidservant. After a while he became
absent-minded and whispered a few words to M.

MASTER (to M.): "Well, is what Girish Ghosh says
true?"

Girish had lately been speaking of Sri Ramakrishna as an Incarnation of
God.

M: "Yes, sir, it must be true. Otherwise why should it appeal to our
minds?"

MASTER: "You see, a change is coming over me. The old mood has
changed. I am not able to touch any metal now."

M. listened to these words in wonder.

MASTER: "There is a very deep meaning in this new mood."
Was the Master hinting that a God-man cannot bear any association with
worldly treasure?

MASTER (to M.): "Well, do you notice any change in
me?"

M: "In what respect, sir?"

MASTER: "In my activities."

M: "Your activities are increasing as more people come to know about
you.

MASTER: "Do you see? What I said before is now coming true.

After a few moments he said, "Can you tell me why Paltu can't meditate
well?"

Sri Ramakrishna was ready to leave for Dakshineswar. He had remarked
to a devotee about Girish, "You may wash a thousand times a cup that
has
held a solution of garlic; but is it ever possible to get rid of the
smell
altogether?" Girish was offended by this remark. When the Master was
about to
leave, Girish spoke.

GIRISH: "Will this smell of garlic go?"

MASTER: "Yes, it will."

GIRISH: "So you say it will."

MASTER: "All smell disappears when a blazing fire is lighted. If you
heat
the cup smelling of garlic, you get rid of the smell; it becomes a new
cup.

"The man who says he will not succeed will never succeed. He who feels
he is liberated is indeed liberated; and he who feels he is bound
verily
remains bound. He who forcefully says, 'I am free' is certainly free;
and he
who says day and night, 'I am bound' is certainly bound."

^Gauranga
and Nityananda.

^God,
whom the poet worshipped as the Divine Mother.

^Samadhi,
which makes one appear asleep.

^The
beautiful and devoted wife of a great sage named Gautama. India, the
king of heaven, infatuated with her beauty, seduced her, impersonating
her husband.
The sage, coming to know of this, cursed her and turned her into a
stone; but he
said that the touch of Rama's feet would restore her human form. Indra,
too,
received his share of the curse, as a result of which he had a thousand
eruptions on
his body. Hence he is known as the "thousand-eyed god".

^Usually
the ideal of a bhakta is the vision of the Personal God.

^Literally,
"left-hand path". According to this attitude the aspirant seeks to
conquer lust by fulfilling its urge.

^Literally,
"maiden sixteen years old". The worship of a maiden is a discipline
Inscribed in the Tantra.

^The
great nerve current whose rising is felt in the spinal column.

^Vrishaketu
was the son of Karna, a hero of the Mahabharata, who was celebrated
alike for charity and heroism. Karna sacrificed his son to fulfil a
promise.


=== 37_master_and_narendra.htm ===

The Master and Narendra

←
Home
/ The Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna
/ Volume 2
/ →

THE MASTER AND NARENDRA

Two kinds of devotion — Vision of God — How a liberated soul lives
in the world — Detachment of a child — "I-consciousness" after
God-realization — Master warns Narendra about householders — Worldly
people have no time for spiritual practice — Akbar and the holy man —
Master talks about his young disciples — Master's eagerness for a
spiritual
companion — False piety — Genuine bhakti — Nature of Atman —
Jivanmukta — Separation of body and soul — Revelation about himself
— About Girish — Master warns Tarak.

Sunday, March 1, 1885

SRI RAMAKRISHNA was seated on the small couch in his room,
absorbed
in deep samadhi. Mahimacharan, Ram, Manomohan, Nabai Chaitanya,
M., and other devotees were sitting on a mat spread on the floor. They
were watching the Master intently.

It was the day of the Dolayatra, a Hindu religious festival. Sri
Krishna
and Radha are the central figures of this celebration, their images
being
placed on a swing which is rocked now and then. A red powder is
showered
on the images. Later, friends and relatives throw the powder at one
another.
This festival is celebrated when winter passes into spring, on a
full-moon
day rendered doubly sacred by its association with the birth of Sri
Chaitanya.

The devotees saw that the Master was returning to consciousness of the
world, though his mind still lingered in the realm of God-vision.

The Master said to Mahimacharan, "My dear sir, please tell us something
about love of God."

Mahimacharan chanted the following lines from the Narada
Pancharatra:

What need is there of penance if God is worshipped with love?

What is the use of penance if God is not worshipped with love?

What need is there of penance if God is seen within and without?

What is the use of penance if God is not seen within and without?

O Brahman! O my child! Cease from practising further penances.

Hasten to Sankara, the Ocean of Heavenly Wisdom;

Obtain from Him the love of God, the pure love praised by devotees,

Which snaps in twain the shackles that bind you to the world.

Mahima said, "Once while the great sage Narada was practising
austerity,
he suddenly heard a heavenly voice repeating those lines."

MASTER: "There are two classes of devotees: jivakotis, or ordinary men,
and Isvarakotis, or Divine Messengers. The jivakoti's devotion to God
is
called vaidhi, formal; that is, it conforms to scriptural laws. He
worships God
with a fixed number of articles, repeats God's holy name a specified
number
of times, and so on and so forth. This kind of devotion, like the path
of
knowledge, leads to the Knowledge of God and to samadhi. The jivakoti
does not return from samadhi to the relative plane.

"But the case of the Isvarakoti is different. He follows the process of
'negation' and 'affirmation'. First he negates the world, realizing
that it is not
Brahman; but then he affirms the same world, seeing it as the
manifestation
of Brahman. To-give an illustration: a man wanting to climb to the roof
first
negates the stairs as not being the roof, but on reaching the roof he
finds
that the stairs are made of the same materials as the roof: brick,
lime, and
brick-dust. Then he can either move up and down the stairs or remain on
the roof, as he pleases.

"Sukadeva was absorbed in samadhi — nirvikalpa samadhi, jada samadhi.
Since Suka was to recite the Bhagavata to King Parikshit, the Lord sent
the sage Narada to him. Narada saw him seated like an inert thing,
absolutely unconscious of the world around him. Thereupon Narada sang
four
couplets on the beauty of Hari, to the accompaniment of the vina. While
the first couplet was being sung the hair on Suka's body stood on end.
Next
he shed tears; for he saw the form of God, the Embodiment of Spirit,
within himself, in his heart. Thus Sukadeva saw the form of God even
after
jada samadhi. He was an Isvarakoti.

"Hanuman, after having the vision of God both with form and without,
remained firmly devoted to the form of Rama, the Embodiment of
Consciousness and Bliss.

"Prahlada sometimes realized, 'I am He'; sometimes he felt that he was
the servant of God. How can such a person live without love of God?
That
is why he must accept the relationship of master and servant, feeling
that
God is the Master and himself the servant. This enables him to enjoy
the
Bliss of Hari. In this attitude he feels that God is the Bliss and he
himself
is the enjoyer.

"The 'ego of Devotion', the 'ego of Knowledge', and the 'ego of a
child'
do not harm the devotee. Sankaracharya kept the 'ego of Knowledge'. The
'ego of a child' is not attached to anything. The child is beyond the
three
gunas; he is not under the control of any of them. One moment you find
him angry; the next moment it is all over. One moment you see him
building his play house; the next moment he forgets all about it. Now
you see him love his playmates; but if they are out of his sight a few
days
he forgets all about them. A child is not under the control of any of
the
gunas — sattva, rajas, or tamas.

"The bhakta feels, 'O God, Thou art the Lord and I am Thy devotee.'
This
'I' is the 'ego of bhakti'. Why does such a lover of God retain the
'ego of
Devotion'? There is a reason. The ego cannot be got rid of; so let the
rascal
remain as the servant of God, the devotee of God.

"You may reason a thousand times, but you cannot get rid of the ego.
The ego is like a pitcher, and Brahman like the ocean — an infinite
expanse
of water on all sides. The pitcher is set in this ocean. The water is
both
inside and out; the water is everywhere; yet the pitcher remains. Now,
this
pitcher is the 'ego of the devotee'. As long as the ego remains, 'you'
and 'I'
remain, and there also remains the feeling, 'O God, Thou art the Lord
and
I am Thy devotee; Thou art the Master and I am Thy servant.' You may
reason a million times, but you cannot get rid of it. But it is
different if
there is no pitcher."

Narendra entered the room and saluted the Master. They began to talk
together. Presently the Master came down from the couch and sat on the
floor, on which a mat had been spread. In the mean time the room had
become filled with people, both devotees and visitors.

MASTER (to Narendra): "Are you well? I hear
that you often visit Girish Ghosh at his house. Is it true?"

NARENDRA: "Yes, sir, I go there now and then."

Girish had been visiting Sri Ramakrishna for some months. The Master
said that none could fathom the depth of Girish's faith. And his
longing for
God was as intense as his faith was deep. At home, he was always
absorbed
in the thought of Sri Ramakrishna. Many of the Master's devotees
visited
him; they talked only about Sri Ramakrishna. But Girish was a
householder
who had had varied experiences of worldly life, and the Master knew
that
Narendra would renounce the world, that he would shun "woman and gold"
both mentally and outwardly.

MASTER: "Do you visit Girish frequently? No matter how much one
washes a cup that has contained a solution of garlic, still a trace of
the smell
will certainly linger. The youngsters who come here are pure souls —
untouched by 'woman and gold'. Men who have associated a long time with
'woman and gold' smell of the garlic, as it were. They are like a mango
pecked by crows. Such a fruit cannot be offered to the Deity in the
temple,
and you would hesitate to eat it yourself. Again, take the case of a
new pot
and another in which curd has been made. One is afraid to keep milk in
the second pot, for the milk very often turns sour.

"Householder devotees like Girish form a class by themselves. They
desire
yoga and also bhoga. Their attitude is that of Ravana, who wanted to
enjoy
the maidens of heaven and at the same time realize Rama. They are like
the asuras, the demons, who enjoy various pleasures and also realize
Narayana."

NARENDRA: "But Girish has given up his old associates."

MASTER: "Yes, yes. He is like a bull castrated in old age. In Burdwan
I once saw an ox moving about the cows. I asked a bullock-cart driver:
'What is this? An ox? How strange!' He said to me: 'True, sir. But it
was
castrated in old age, and so it hasn't altogether shaken off the old
tendencies.'

"In a certain place there sat some sannyasis. A young woman happened to
pass by. All continued as before to meditate on God, except one of
them,
who cast sidelong glances at her. Before becoming a monk he had been
the
father of three children.

"If you make a solution of garlic in a cup, won't it be hard to remove
the smell from it? Can a worthless tree like the babui produce mangoes?
Of
course such a thing may become possible through the occult powers of a
yogi; but can everyone acquire such powers?

"When have worldly people time to think of God? A man wanted to
engage a pundit who could explain the Bhagavata to
him. His friend said:
I know of an excellent pundit. But there is one difficulty: he does a
great
deal of farming. He has four ploughs and eight bullocks and is always
busy
with them; he has no leisure.' Thereupon the man said: 'I don't care
for a
pundit who has no leisure. I am not looking for a Bhagavata
scholar burdened
with ploughs and bullocks. I want a pundit who can really expound the
sacred book to me.'

"There was a king who used to listen daily to a pundit's exposition of
the
Bhagavata. Every day at the end of their study the
pundit would ask the
king, 'O King, have you understood what I have read?' To this question
the
king would daily give the same reply: 'Sir, you had better understand
it first
yourself.' Each day, when the pundit returned home, he would ponder the
meaning of the king's words. He was a pious man, devoted to prayer and
meditation. Gradually he came to his senses and realized that the only
real
thing in the world is the Lotus Feet of God, and that all else is
illusory. He
felt dispassion for the world and took up the life of a monk. As he was
leaving
the world he sent a man to the king with the message: 'Yes, O King!
Now I have understood.'

"But do I look down on worldly people? Of course not. When I see
them, I apply the Knowledge of Brahman, the Oneness of Existence.
Brahman
Itself has become everything; all are Narayana Himself. Regarding all
women as so many forms of the Divine Mother, I see no difference
between
a chaste woman and a streetwalker.

"Alas! I find no customers who want anything better than kalai pulse.
No one wants to give up 'woman and gold'. Man, deluded by the beauty of
woman and the power of money, forgets God. But to one who has seen the
beauty of God, even the position of Brahma, the Creator, seems
insignificant.

"A man said to Ravana, 'You have been going to Sita in different
disguises;
why don't you go to her in the form of Rama?' 'But', Ravana replied,
'when I meditate on Rama in my heart, the most beautiful women —
celestial
maidens like Rambha and Tilottama — appear no better than ashes of the
funeral pyre. Then even the position of Brahma appears trivial to me,
not to
speak of the beauty of another man's wife.'

"Alas! I find that all the customers here seek worthless kalai pulse.
Unless
the soul is pure, it cannot have genuine love of God and single-minded
devotion to the ideal. The mind wanders away to various objects.

(To Manomohan1)
"You may take offence at my words, but I said to
Rakhal, 'I would rather hear that you had drowned yourself in the
Ganges
than learn that you had accepted a job under another person and become
his servant.'

"One day a Nepalese girl came here. She sang devotional songs to the
accompaniment of the esraj. When someone asked her if she was married,
she said sharply: 'What? I am the handmaid of God! Whom else could I
serve?'

"How can a man living in the midst of 'woman and gold' realize God? It
is very hard for him to lead an unattached life. First, he is the slave
of his
wife, second, of money, and third, of the master whom he serves.

"When Akbar was Emperor of Delhi there lived a hermit in a hut in the
forest. Many people visited the holy man. At one time he felt a great
desire
to entertain his visitors. But how could he do so without money? So he
decided to go to the Emperor for help, for the gate of Akbar's palace
was
always open to holy men. The hermit entered the palace while the
Emperor
was at his daily devotions and took a seat in a corner of the room. He
heard
the Emperor conclude his worship with the prayer, 'O God, give me
money;
give me riches', and so on and so forth. When the hermit heard this he
was
about to leave the prayer hall; but the Emperor signed to him to wait.
When the prayer was over, Akbar said to him, 'You came to see me; how
is
it that you were about to leave without saying anything to me?' 'Your
Majesty need not trouble yourself about it', answered the hermit. 'I
must
leave now.' When the Emperor insisted, the hermit said, 'Many people
visit
my hut, and so I came here to ask you for some money.' 'Then', said
Akbar,
'why were you going away without speaking to me?' The hermit replied:
'I
found that you too were a beggar; you too prayed to God for money and
riches. Thereupon I said to myself, "Why should I beg of a beggar? If I
must beg, let me beg of God."'"

NARENDRA: "Nowadays Girish Ghosh thinks of nothing but spiritual
things."

MASTER: "That is very good. But why is he so abusive? Why does he use
such vulgar language to me? In my present state of mind I cannot bear
such
rudeness. When a thunderbolt strikes near a house, the heavy things
inside
the house are not much affected; but the window-panes rattle. Nowadays
I
cannot bear such roughness. A man living on the plane of sattva cannot
bear noise and uproar. That is why Hriday was sent away. It was the
Divine Mother who sent him away. During the later part of his stay he
went to extremes; he became very rough and abusive. (To
Narendra) Do
you agree with Girish about me?"

NARENDRA: "He said he believed you to be an Incarnation of God. I
didn't
say anything in answer to his remarks."

MASTER: "But how great his faith is! Don't you think so?"

The devotees listened intently to the Master's words. He was still
seated on
the mat spread on the floor, with M. by his side and Narendra in front
of
him. The devotees were sitting around.

After a few minutes' silence he said to Narendra tenderly, "My child,
you
will not attain God without renouncing 'woman and gold'." As he said
this, great emotion welled up in his heart. Fixing on Narendra an
earnest
and tender look, he sang:2

We are afraid to speak, and yet we are afraid to keep still;

Our minds, O Radha, half believe that we are about to lose you!

We tell you the secret that we know —

The secret whereby we ourselves, and others, with our help,

Have passed through many a time of peril;

Now it all depends on you.

Sri Ramakrishna seemed to be afraid lest Narendra should leave
him.
Narendra looked at the Master with tears in his eyes.

A visitor who was there for the first time heard and saw all this. He
said
to the Master, "Sir, if one must renounce 'woman and gold', then what
shall
a householder do?"

MASTER: "You may enjoy 'woman and gold'. What has passed between
us is no concern of yours."

Mahimacharan, a householder devotee, heard everything and sat
speechless.

MASTER (to Mahima): "Go forward. Push on. You will
discover the
forest of sandal-wood. Go farther and you will find the silver-mine. Go
farther still and you will see the gold-mine. Do not stop there. Go
forward,
and you will reach the mines of rubies and diamonds. Therefore I say,
go forward."

MAHIMA: "But, sir, something holds us back. We can't move."

MASTER (with a smile): "Why? Cut the reins. Cut them
with the sword
of God's name. 'The shackles of Kala, Time, are cut by Kali's name.'"

Every now and then the Master cast his gracious look on Narendra. He
said, "Have you now become an experienced physician?" Quoting a
Sanskrit
verse he said, "He who has killed only a hundred patients is a novice
in
medicine; but he becomes an expert after killing a thousand!"

Was the Master hinting that Narendra, even though still young, had
had many painful experiences of life?

Narendra smiled and kept silent.

It was afternoon. The devotees were seated around the Master, listening
to Nabai Chaitanya's singing. Suddenly the Master left the room, but
the
music continued. M. accompanied the Master.

Sri Ramakrishna walked across the courtyard and entered the temple of
Radhakanta. He bowed down before the images, M. following him. There
was some red powder in a tray. The Master offered a little powder to
the
images and bowed down again.

Next he proceeded to the Kali temple. Passing up the seven steps, he
stood on the open porch and looked at the image. Then he entered the
shrine, offered red powder to the Divine Mother, and saluted Her. As he
left the temple he asked M., "Why didn't you bring Baburam with you?"

Sri Ramakrishna returned to his room accompanied by M. and another
devotee carrying the tray of red powder. He offered a little of it to
all the
pictures of gods and goddesses in his room, but not to those of Jesus
Christ
and himself. Then he threw the powder on the bodies of Narendra and
the other devotees. They all took the dust of his feet.

In the cool shade of the late afternoon the devotees walked about in
the
temple garden, leaving the Master and M. in the room. The Master
whispered
to M.: "All say that they meditate well. But why is it different with
Paltu? What do you think of Narendra? He is utterly guileless. Just now
he is faced with many difficult family problems and so his spiritual
progress
is a little checked; but it will not be so for long."

Narendra was arguing on the verandah with a Vedantist. Now and then
the Master went out to look at them. As the devotees gathered in the
room
he asked Mahima to recite a hymn. Mahima chanted a verse from the
Mahanirvana Tantra:

We worship the Brahman-Consciousness in the Lotus of the Heart,

The Undifferentiated, who is adored by Hari, Hara, and Brahma. . . .

Mahima recited a few more hymns and at last one to Siva, by
Sankaracharya, that compared the world to a deep well and a wilderness.
Mahima
was a householder.

The hymn ran thus:

O Great God! O Thou Auspicious One, with the moon shining in Thy crest!

Slayer of Madana! (The god of love.) Wielder of
the trident! Unmoving One! Lord of the Himalayas!

O Consort of Durga, Lord of all creatures! Thou who scatterest the
distress of the fearful!

Rescue me, helpless as I am, from the trackless forest of this
miserable world.

O Beloved of Parvati's heart! O Thou moon-crested Deity!

Master of every being! Lord of hosts! O Thou, the Lord of Parvati!

O Vamadeva, Self-existent One! O Rudra, Wielder of the bow!

Rescue me, helpless as I am, from the trackless forest of this
miserable world.

O blue-throated God! Siva, whose ensign is the bull! O Five-faced One!

Lord of the worlds, who wearest snakes upon Thy wrists! O Thou
Auspicious One!

O Siva! O Pasupati! (Lord of beings.) O Thou, the Lord of Parvati!

Rescue me, helpless as I am, from the trackless forest of this
miserable world.

O Lord of the Universe! O Siva Sankara! O God of Gods!

Thou who dost bear the river Ganges in Thy matted locks!

Thou, the Master of Pramatha and Nandika! (Attendants of Siva.) O Hara,
Lord of the world!

Rescue me, helpless as I am, from the trackless forest of this
miserable world.

O King of Kasi, Lord of the cremation ground of Manikarnika!

O mighty Hero, Thou the Destroyer of Daksha's (Siva's father-in-law.)
sacrifice! O All-pervasive One!

O Lord of hosts! Omniscient One, who art the sole Indweller in every
heart! O Lord!

Rescue me, helpless as I am, from the trackless forest of this
miserable world.

O Great God! Compassionate One! O Benign Deity!

O Byomakesa! (A name of Siva.) Blue-throated One! O Lord of hosts!

Thy body is smeared with ashes! Thou art garlanded with human skulls!

Rescue me, helpless as I am, from the trackless forest of this
miserable world.

O Thou who dwellest on Mount Kailas! Thou whose carrier is the bull!

O Conqueror of death! O Three-eyed One! Lord of the three worlds!

Beloved of Narayana! Conqueror of lust! Thou, Sakti's Lord!

Rescue me, helpless as I am, from the trackless forest of this
miserable world.

Lord of the Universe! Refuge of the whole world! O Thou of infinite
forms!

Soul of the Universe! O Thou in whom repose the infinite virtues of the
world!

O Thou adored by all! Compassionate One! O Friend of the poor!

Rescue me, helpless as I am, from the trackless forest of this
miserable world.

MASTER (to Mahima): "Why do you call the
world a deep well or a
track-less forest? An aspirant may think so in the beginning; but how
can he be
frightened by the world if he holds fast to God? Then he finds that —

This very world is a mansion of mirth;

Here I can eat, here drink and make merry.

"Why should you be frightened? Hold fast to God. What if the
world is
like a forest of thorns? Put on shoes and walk on the thorns. Whom
should
you fear? You won't have to play again the part of the 'thief in the
game of
hide-and-seek, once you touch the 'granny'.3

"King Janaka used to fence with two swords — the one of Knowledge and
the other of action. Nothing can frighten an expert player.

(To M.) "My mind is still drawn to what he just
recited."

Sri Ramakrishna referred to the hymns chanted by Mahima.

Nabai Chaitanya and the other devotees began to sing. They were joined
by the Master, who danced, drunk with divine love. Afterwards he said:
"This is the one thing needful, the chanting of God's name. All else is
unreal. Love and devotion alone are real, and other things are of no
con-
sequence."

Later Sri Ramakrishna went out in the direction of the Panchavati. He
asked M. about Binode, a student in M.'s school, who now and then
experienced ecstasy while thinking of God. The Master loved him dearly.

As he was returning to his room with M., he asked: "Well, some speak
of me as an Incarnation of God. What do you think about it?" The Master
came back to his room and sat on the small couch. He repeated the
question
to M. The other devotees were seated at a distance and could not follow
the conversation.

MASTER: "What do you say?"

M: "I think so too. You are like Sri Chaitanya."

MASTER: "Is it a full manifestation of God, or a part? Tell me how
much."

M: "I don't know, sir. But it is true that there is in you an
Incarnation
of the Divine Power. There is no doubt that God alone dwells in you."

MASTER: "That is true. Chaitanya also wanted to realize Sakti, the
Divine Power."

Narendra was engaged in a heated discussion. Ram, who had recently
recovered from an illness, joined him.

MASTER (to M.): "I don't like such discussions. (To
Ram) Will you stop
that? You haven't been well. All right, go on softly; don't get so
excited.
(To M.) I don't like these discussions. I used to
weep and pray to the
Divine Mother saying: 'O Mother, one man says it is this, while another
says it is that. Do Thou tell me, O Mother, what is the truth.'"

Saturday, March 7, 1885

At three o'clock in the afternoon Sri Ramakrishna was in his
room at
Dakshineswar conversing happily with his devotees. Baburam, the younger
Naren, Paltu, Haripada, Mohinimohan, and others were. present. A young
brahmin who had been staying with the Master a few days was also there.

The Holy Mother, Sri Ramakrishna's wife, was living in the nahabat.
Occasionally she would come to Sri Ramakrishna's room to attend to his
needs. Mohinimohan had brought his wife and Nabin's mother with him
to the temple garden from Calcutta. The ladies were with the Holy
Mother;
they were waiting for an opportunity to visit the Master when the men
devotees would leave the room.

Sri Ramakrishna was sitting on the small couch. As he looked at the
young devotees his Face beamed with joy.

Rakhal was not then living at Dakshineswar with the Master. Since his
return from Vrindavan he had been living at home.

MASTER (smiling): "Rakhal is now enjoying his
pension'. Since his
return from Vrindavan he has been staying at home. His wife is there.
But
he said to me that he would not accept any work even if he were offered
a
salary of a thousand rupees.

Rakhal would lie down here and say to me that he didn't care even for
my company. He was then passing through such an exalted state.

Bhavanath is married; but he spends the whole night in spiritual
conversation with his wife. The couple pass their time talking of God
alone. I
said to him, 'Have a little fun with your wife now and then.' 'What?'
he;
retorted angrily. 'Shall we too indulge in frivolity?'"

Sri Ramakrishna began to talk about Narendra.

MASTER (to the devotees): "I haven't felt the same
strong longing for the
younger Naren that I felt for Narendra.

(To Haripada) "Do you go to Girish Ghosh's house?"

HARIPADA: "Yes, I go there very often. He is our neighbour."

MASTER: "Does Narendra, too, go there?"

HARIPADA: "Yes, I see him there occasionally."

MASTER: "What does he say in reply to Girish?" [Girish Ghosh spoke of
Sri Ramakrishna as an Incarnation of God.]

HARIPADA: "Narendra has been defeated in the argument."

MASTER: "No, Narendra says, 'Girish Ghosh has such strong faith; why
should I contradict him?'"

The brother of Judge Anukal Mukhopadhyaya's son-in-law was in the
room. The Master asked him, "Do you know Narendra?"

BROTHER: "Yes, sir. He is a very intelligent young man."

MASTER (to the devotees): "He must be a good man
because he speaks
highly of Narendra. Narendra was here the other day and sang with
Trailokya Sannyal. But that day his singing seemed flat to me."

Baburam was a student in the Entrance Class in the school where M.
taught.

MASTER (to Baburam): "Where are your books? Aren't
you attending
to your studies? (To M.) He wants to stick to both.
(God and the world.)

"That is very difficult. What will you gain by, knowing God partially?
Vasishthadeva, great sage that he was, was overcome at the death of his
sons. That amazed Lakshmana and he asked Rama the reason. Rama said:
'Brother, what is there to wonder at? He who has knowledge has
ignorance
also. Brother, go beyond both knowledge and ignorance.' If a thorn
enters
the sole of your foot, you get another thorn to take out the first one.
Afterwards you throw both away. Likewise, one procures the thorn of
knowledge
to remove the thorn of ignorance; then one goes beyond both knowledge
and ignorance."

BABURAM (smiling): "That's what I want."

MASTER (smiling): "But, my child, can you attain it
by holding to both?
If you want that, then come away."

BABURAM (smiling): "Take me away from the world."

MASTER (to M.): "Rakhal lived with me, but that was
different; his father
agreed to it. If these boys stay here there will be trouble.

(To Baburam) "You have no strength of mind; you
haven't much courage.
Just see how the younger Naren says, 'I will come away for good.'"

Sri Ramakrishna came down from the small couch and sat among the
youngsters on the floor. M. sat by his side.

MASTER (to M.): "I have been seeking one who has
totally renounced
'woman and gold'. When I find a young man, I think that perhaps he will
live with me; but everyone raises some objection or other.

"A ghost sought a companion. It is said that a man who dies on a
Saturday
or Tuesday becomes a ghost. Therefore, whenever the ghost saw anybody
fall from a roof or stumble and faint on the road on either of those
days, he
would run to him, hoping that the man, through an accidental death,
would
become a ghost and be his companion. But such was his ill luck that
everyone
revived. The poor thing could not get a companion.

"Just see, Rakhal always gives his wife as an excuse. He says, 'What
will
become of her?' When I touched Narendra on the chest, he became
unconscious;
then he cried out: 'Oh, what have you done to me? Don't you know
that I have a father and mother?'

"Why has God made me lead this kind of life?4
Chaitanyadeva became a sannyasi so that all would salute him. Whoever
salutes an Incarnation,
even once, obtains liberation."

Mohinimohan had brought a basket of sweetmeats for Sri Ramakrishna.

MASTER: "Who has brought these sweets?"

Baburam pointed to Mohinimohan.

Sri Ramakrishna touched the sweets, uttering the word "Om", and ate a
little. Then he distributed them among the devotees. To the surprise of
the
others, he fed the younger Naren and a few of the boys with his own
hand.

MASTER (to M.): "This has a meaning. There is a
greater manifestation
of God in men of pure heart. In former years, when I used to go to
Kamarpukur, I would feed some of the young boys with my own hand.
Chine Sankhari would say, 'Why doesn't he feed us that way?' But how
could I? They led an immoral life. Who would feed them?"

Sri Ramakrishna was in the happiest mood with his young and
pure-souled devotees. He was seated on the small couch and was doing
funny
imitations of a kirtani. The devotees laughed heartily. The kirtani is
dressed
lavishly and covered with ornaments. She sings, standing on the floor,
a
coloured kerchief in her hand. Now and then she coughs to draw people's
attention and blows her nose, raising her nose-ring. When a respectable
gentleman enters the room, she welcomes him with appropriate words,
still
continuing her song. Now and then she pulls her sari from her arms to
show off her jewels.

The devotees were convulsed with laughter at this mimicry by Sri
Ramakrishna.
Paltu rolled on the ground. Pointing to him, the Master said to M.:
"Look at that child! He is rolling with laughter." He said to Paltu
with a
smile: "Don't report this to your father, or he will lose the little
respect he
has for me. You see, he is an 'Englishman'."

MASTER (to the devotees): "There are people who
indulge in all kinds of
gossip at the time of their daily devotions. As you know, one is not
permitted
to talk then; so they make all kinds of signs, keeping their lips
closed. In
order to say, 'Bring this', 'Bring that', they make sounds like 'Huh',
'Uhuh'.
All such things they do! (Laughter.)

"Again, there are some who bargain for fish while telling their beads.
As they count the rosary, with a finger they point out the fish,
indicating,
'That one, please.' They reserve all their business for that time! (Laughter.)

"There are women who come to the Ganges for their bath and, instead
of thinking of God, gossip about no end of things. 'What jewels did you
offer at the time of your son's marriage?' — 'Has so-and-so returned
from her
father-in-law's house?' — 'So-and-so is seriously ill.' — 'So-and-so
went to see the
bride; we hope that they will offer a magnificent dowry and that there
will
be a great feast.' — 'Harish always nags at me; he can't stay away from
me
even an hour.' — 'My child, I couldn't come to see you all these days;
I was
so busy with the betrothal of so-and-so's daughter.'

"You see, they have come to bathe in the holy river, and yet they
indulge
in all sorts of worldly talk."

The Master began to look intently at the younger Naren and went into
samadhi. Did he see God Himself in the pure-souled devotee?

The devotees silently watched the figure of Sri Ramakrishna motionless
in samadhi. A few minutes before there had been so much laughter in the
room; now there was deep silence, as if no one were there. The Master
sat
with folded hands as in his photograph.

After a short while his mind began to come down to the relative plane.
He heaved a long sigh and became aware of the outer world. He looked at
the devotees and began to talk with them of their spiritual progress.

MASTER (to the younger Naren): "I have been eager to
see you. You will
succeed. Come here once in a while. Well, which do you prefer — jnana
or bhakti?"

THE YOUNGER NAREN: "Pure bhakti."

MASTER: "But how can you love someone unless you know
him? (Pointing
to M., with a smile) How can you love him unless you know
him? (To M.)
Since a pure-souled person has asked for pure bhakti, it must have some
meaning.

"One does not seek bhakti of one's own accord without inborn
tendencies.
This is the characteristic of prema-bhakti. There is another kind of
bhakti,
called jnana-bhakti, which is love of God based on reasoning.

(To the younger Naren) "Let me look at your body;
take off your shirt.
Fairly broad chest. You will succeed. Come here now and then."

Sri Ramakrishna was still in the ecstatic mood. He spoke tenderly to
the
other devotees about their future.

MASTER (to Paltu): "You will succeed, too, but it
will take a little time.

(To Baburam) "Why don't I attract you to me? It is
just to avoid trouble.

(To Mohinimohan) "As for you, you are all right.
There is a little yet to
be done. When that is achieved, nothing will remain — neither duty nor
work
nor the world itself. Is it good to get rid of everything?"

As Sri Ramakrishna spoke these words he looked at Mohini
affectionately,
as if scanning his inmost feelings. Was Mohini really wondering whether
it would be wise to renounce all for God? After a while Sri Ramakrishna
said, "God binds the Bhagavata pundit to the world
with one tie; otherwise,
who would remain to explain the sacred book? He keeps the pundit bound
for the good of men. That is why the Divine Mother has kept you in the
world."

Now Sri Ramakrishna spoke to the young brahmin.

MASTER: "Give up knowledge and reasoning; accept bhakti. Bhakti alone
is the essence. Is this the third day of your stay here?"

BRAHMIN (with folded hands): "Yes, sir."

MASTER: "Have faith. Depend on God. Then you will not have to do
anything yourself. Mother Kali will do everything for you.

"Jnana goes as far as the outer court, but bhakti can enter the inner
court.
The Pure Self is unattached. Both vidya and avidya are in It, but It is
unattached. Sometimes there is a good and sometimes a bad smell in the
air,
but the air itself is unaffected.

"Once Vyasadeva was about to cross the Jamuna. The gopis also were
there. They wanted to go to the other side of the river to sell curd,
milk, and
cream. But there was no ferry at that time. They were all worried about
how to cross the river, when Vyasa said to them, 'I am very hungry.'
The
milkmaids fed him with milk and cream. He finished almost all their
food.
Then Vyasa said to the river, 'O Jamuna, if I have not eaten anything,
then
your waters will part and we shall walk through.' It so happened. The
river
parted and a pathway was formed between the waters. Following that
path,
the gopis and Vyasa crossed the river. Vyasa had said, 'If I have not
eaten
anything'. That means, the real man is Pure Atman. Atman is unattached
and beyond Prakriti. It has neither hunger nor thirst; It knows neither
birth
nor death; It does not age, nor does It die. It is immutable as Mount
Sumeru.

"He who has attained this Knowledge of Brahman is a jivanmukta,
liberated
while living in the body. He rightly understands that the Atman and the
body are two separate things. After realizing God one does not identify
the
Atman with the body. These two are separate, like the kernel and the
shell of
the coconut when its milk dries up. The Atman moves, as it were, within
the
body. When the 'milk' of worldly-mindedness has dried up, one gets
Self-Knowledge. Then one feels that Atman and body are two separate
things.
The kernel of a green almond or betel-nut cannot be separated from the
shell; but when they are ripe the juice dries up and the kernel
separates
from the shell. After the attainment of the Knowledge of Brahman, the
'milk' of worldly-mindedness dries up.

"But it is extremely difficult to attain the Knowledge of Brahman. One
doesn't get it by merely talking about it. Some people feign it. (Smiling)
There was a man who was a great liar; but, on the other hand, he used
to
say he had the Knowledge of Brahman. When someone took him to task
for telling lies, he said: 'Why, this world is truly like a dream. If
everything
is unreal, then can truth itself be rea1? Truth is as unreal as
falsehood.'"
(All laugh.)

Sri Ramakrishna sat with the devotees on the mat on the floor. He was
smiling. He said to the devotees, "Please stroke my feet gently." They
carried
out his request. He said to M:, "There is great significance in this."
(The stroking of his feet) Placing
his hand on his heart, the Master said, "If there is anything here,
then
through this service the ignorance and illusion of the devotees will be
completely destroyed."

Suddenly Sri Ramakrishna became serious, as if about to reveal a secret.

MASTER (to M.): "There is no outsider here. The
other day, when Harish
was with me, I saw Satchidananda come out of this sheath. (Sri
Ramakrishna's body.)
It said 'I incarnate Myself in every age.' I thought that I myself was
saying these
words out of mere fancy. I kept quiet and watched. Again Satchidananda
Itself spoke, saying, 'Chaitanya, too, worshipped Sakti.'"

The devotees listened to these words in amazement. Some wondered
whether God Himself was seated before them in the form of Sri
Ramakrishna.
The Master paused a moment. Then he said, addressing M., "I
saw that it is the fullest manifestation of Satchidananda; but this
time the
Divine Power is manifested through the glory of sattva."

The devotees sat spellbound.

MASTER (to M.): "Just now I was saying to the
Mother, 'I cannot talk
much.' I also said to Her, 'May people's inner consciousness be
awakened
by only one touch!' You see, such is the power of Yogamaya that She can
cast a spell. She did so at Vrindavan. That is why Subol (One of the
companions of Sri
Krishna.) was able to unite Sri Krishna and Radhika. Yogamaya, the
Primal Power, has a power of
attraction. I applied that power myself.

(To M.) "Well, do you think that those who come here
are realizing anything?"

M: "Yes, sir, it must be so."

MASTER: "How do you know?"

M. (smiling): "Everyone says, 'Whoever goes to him
doesn't return to the world.'"

MASTER (smiling): "A bullfrog was caught by a
water-snake. The snake
could neither swallow the frog nor let it go. As a result the frog
suffered
very much; he croaked continuously. And the snake suffered too. But if
the
frog had been seized by a cobra, he would have been quiet after one or
two
croaks. (All laugh.)

(To the young devotees) "Read the Bhaktichaitanyachandrika
by Trailokya.
Ask Trailokya for a copy. He has written well about Chaitanyadeva."

A DEVOTEE: "Will he give it to us?"

MASTER (smiling): "Why not? If a farmer has a good
crop of melons he
can easily give away two or three. (All laugh.)
Won't Trailokya give you
the book free?

(To Paltu) "Come here now and then."

PALTU: "I shall come whenever I can."

MASTER: "Will you see me in Calcutta when I go there?"

PALTU: "Yes, I shall try."

MASTER: "That's the answer of a calculating mind."

PALTU: "If I don't say, 'I shall try', I may be a liar."

MASTER (to M.): "I don't mind the lies of these
boys. They are not free.

(To Haripada) "Why hasn't Mahendra Mukherji come
here lately?"

HARIPADA: "I'm not quite sure why."

M. (smiling): "He's practising jnanayoga!"

MASTER: "No, it's not that. The other day he promised to send me in his
carriage to the theatre to see a play about the life of Prahlada; but
he didn't
send the carriage. Perhaps that is why he doesn't come."

M: "One day I saw Mahima Chakravarty and had a talk with him. It
seems that Mahendra visits him."

MASTER: "But Mahima talks about bhakti also. He loves to recite the
hymn: 'What need is there of penance if God is worshipped with love?'"

M. (smiling): "He says that because you make him say
it."

Girish Chandra Ghosh was always talking to the devotees about the
Master.

HARIPADA: "Girish Ghosh sees many visions nowadays. After going home
from here he remains absorbed in spiritual moods and sees many things."

MASTER: "That may be true. Coming to the Ganges, one sees many things
— boats, ships, and what not."

HARIPADA: "Girish Ghosh says: 'From now on I shall occupy myself only
with my work. In the morning, on the stroke of the clock, I shall sit
down
with my pen and ink-pot and write for the whole day.' He makes the
resolve, no doubt, but cannot carry it out. No sooner do we visit him
than
he begins to talk about you. You asked him to send Narendra here in a
carriage. He said, 'I shall hire a carriage for Narendra.'"

At five o'clock the younger Naren was ready to go home. Sri Ramakrishna
stood by his side on the northeast verandah and gave him various
instructions.
Then the boy saluted the Master and departed. Many of the devotees
also took their leave.

Sri Ramakrishna was sitting on the small couch talking to Mohini.
Mohini's
wife was almost mad with grief on account of her son's death. Sometimes
she laughed and sometimes she wept. But she felt peaceful in Sri
Ramakrishna's presence.

MASTER: "How is your wife now?"

MOHINI: "She becomes quiet whenever she is here; but sometimes at
home she becomes very wild. The other day she was going to kill
herself."

When Sri Ramakrishna heard this he appeared worried. Mohini said to
him humbly, "Please give her a few words of advice."

MASTER: "Don't allow her to cook. That will heat her brain all the
more.
And keep her in the company of others so that they may watch her."

It was dusk. Preparations were going on in the temples for the evening
worship. The lamp was lighted in the Master's room and incense was
burnt.
Seated on the small couch, Sri Ramakrishna saluted the Divine Mother
and
chanted Her name in a tender voice. There was nobody in the room except
M., who was sitting on the floor.

Sri Ramakrishna rose from the couch. M. also stood up. The Master asked
him to shut the west and north doors of the room. M. obeyed and stood
by Sri Ramakrishna on the porch. The Master said that he wanted to go
to
the Kali temple. Leaning on M.'s arm, he came down to the terrace of
the
temple. He asked M. to call Baburam and sat down.

After visiting the Divine Mother, the Master returned to his room
across
the court, chanting, "O Mother! Mother! Rajarajesvari!"

Sri Ramakrishna entered his room and sat on the small couch. He had
been passing through an extraordinary state of mind: he could not touch
any metal. He had said a few days before, "It seems that the Divine
Mother
has been removing from my mind all ideas of possession." He had been
eating
from plantain-leaves and drinking water from an earthen tumbler. He
could not touch a metal jar; so he had asked the devotees to get a few
earthen
jars for him. If he touched metal plates or pots, his hand ached as if
stung by
a horned fish.

Prasanna had brought a few earthen pots, but they were very small. The
Master said with a smile: "These pots are too small. But he is a nice
boy.
Once I asked him to take off his clothes, and he stood naked in front
of me.
What a child he is!"

Tarak of Belgharia arrived with a friend and bowed low before Sri
Ramakrishna, who was sitting on the small couch. The room was lighted
by
an oil lamp. A few devotees were sitting on the floor.

Tarak was about twenty years old, and married. His parents did not
allow
him to come to Sri Ramakrishna. He lived mostly at his home near
Bowbazar.
The Master was very fond of him. Tarak's friend had a tamasic nature;
he
rather scoffed at the Master and religious ideas in general.

MASTER (to Tarak's friend): "Why don't you go and
visit the temples?"

FRIEND: "Oh, I've seen them before."

MASTER: "Is it wrong for Tarak to come here?"

FRIEND: "You know best."

MASTER (pointing to M.): "He is a headmaster."

FRIEND: "Oh!"

Sri Ramakrishna asked about Tarak's health and talked with him at
length. Tarak was ready to leave. Sri Ramakrishna asked him to be
careful
about many things.

MASTER: "My good man, beware. Beware of 'woman and gold'. Once
you sink in the maya of a woman, you will not be able to rise. It is
the
whirlpool of the Visalakshi. (A stream near Kamarpukur)
He who has fallen into it cannot pull himself out again. Come here now
and then."

TARAK: "My people at home don't let me."

A DEVOTEE: "Suppose someone's mother says to him, 'Don't go to
Dakshineswar.' Suppose she curses him, saying, 'If you go there you
will be
drinking my blood!'"

MASTER: "A mother who says that is no mother; she is the embodiment of
avidya. There is no sin in disobeying such a mother. She obstructs her
son's
path to God. There is no harm in disobeying your elders for the sake of
God.
For Rama's sake Bharat did not obey his mother Kaikeyi.5
The gopis did not obey their husbands when they were forbidden to visit
Krishna. Prahlada
disobeyed his father for God. Vali disregarded the words of
Sukracharya, his
teacher, in order to please God. Bibhishana went against the wishes of
Ravana, his elder brother, to please Rama. But you must obey your
elders
in all other things. Let me see your hand."

Sri Ramakrishna took Tarak's hand into his own and seemed to feel its
weight. A few moments later he said: "There is a little crookedness in
your
mind; but that will go. Pray to God a little and come here now and
then.
Yes, that twist will go. Is it you that have hired the house at
Bowbazar?"

TARAK: "Not I, sir, but my parents."

MASTER (smiling): "They or you? Is it because you
are afraid of the 'tiger'?"

Tarak had a young wife. Did the Master mean that a woman is like a
tiger to a man?

Tarak saluted Sri Ramakrishna and took his leave. The Master lay down
on the small couch. He seemed worried about Tarak. Suddenly he said to
M., "Why do I worry so much about these young boys?" M. kept still. He
was thinking over a reply. The Master asked him, "Why don't you speak?"

Mohini's wife entered the room and sat at one side. Sri Ramakrishna
spoke
to M. about Tarak's friend.

MASTER: "Why did Tarak bring that fellow with him?"

M: "Perhaps he wanted a companion for the road. It is a long way from
Calcutta; so he brought a friend with him."

The Master suddenly addressed Mohini's wife and said: "By unnatural
death one becomes an evil spirit. Beware. Make it clear to your mind.
Is
this what you have come to after hearing and seeing so much?"

Mohini was about to take his leave. He saluted Sri Ramakrishna. His
wife also saluted the Master, who stood near the north door of the
room.
Mohini's wife spoke to him in a whisper.

MASTER: "Do you want to stay here?"

MOHINI'S WIFE: "Yes, I want to spend a few days with the Holy Mother
at the nahabat. May I?"

MASTER: "That will be all right. But you talk of dying. That frightens
me. And the Ganges is so near!"

^A
householder disciple of the Master, whose sister was married to Rakhal.

^This
was a very critical period in Narendranath's life. After his father's
death he
had been faced with extreme poverty; friends and relatives had proved
indifferent
or treacherous. His rational mind could not reconcile the existence of
human misery
with the mercy of God. A few days before this meeting with the Master,
on his way
home, almost exhausted after a futile search for a job, he had sat down
on the open
porch of a house by the street, waiting for a shower of rain to pass.
There he had
received a revelation in which he had found the solution of all his
conflicting
problems. He had felt refreshed, realizing the unreality of the world,
and had determined
to become a monk at once. So he had come to the Master to take leave of
him, but
had not told him of his intention. Yet nothing could be hidden from Sri
Ramakrishna; hence the song.

^The
allusion is to the Indian game of hide-and-seek, in which the leader,
known
as the "granny", bandages the eyes of the players and hides herself.
The players
are supposed to find her. If any player can touch her, the bandage is
removed from
his eyes and he is released from the game.

^Evidently
Sri Ramakrishna was referring to his monastic life.

^Through
Kaikeyi's machinations, her stepson, Rama, was exiled to the forest so
that Bharat might become king; but Bharat refused to ascend the throne.


=== 38_devotees_in_calcutta.htm ===

With the Devotees in Calcutta

←
Home
/ The Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna
/ Volume 2
/ →

WITH THE DEVOTEES IN CALCUTTA

Balaram Bose — Master's exalted spiritual state — The younger Naren —
Mystery of Divine Incarnation — Seek God in man — God known to
the pure mind — Master's love for Narayan — The purpose of the
scriptures — Mere scholarship condemned — Narendra's many virtues —
Master's prayer — At Girish's house — Narendra and Girish argue about
God — Qualified Monism — Futility of mere reasoning — Kali and
Brahman — Master's love for Narendra — About Purna — Master at
Devendra's house — Master praises renunciation — About Girish.

March 11, 1885

ON THE MORNING of Wednesday, March 11, Sri Ramakrishna and
some of his disciples visited Balaram Bose's house. Balaram was
indeed blessed among the householder disciples of the Master. Sri
Ramakrishna often described him as a rasaddar, or supplier of stores,
appointed by the Divine Mother to take care of his physical needs.
Balaram's
house in Calcutta had been sanctified many times by the Master's
presence.
There he frequently lost himself in samadhi, dancing, singing, or
talking
about God. Those of the Master's disciples and devotees who could not
go to
Dakshineswar visited him there and received his instruction. He often
asked
Balaram to invite young disciples such as Rakhal, Bhavanath, and
Narendra
to his house, saying: "These pure souls are the veritable
manifestations of
God. To feed them is to feed God Himself. They are born with special
divine attributes. By serving them you will be serving God." And so it
happened that whenever the Master was at Balaram's house the devotees
would gather there. It was the Master's chief vineyard in Calcutta. It
was
here that the devotees came to know each other intimately.

M. taught in a school in the neighbourhood. He often brought his young
students to visit the Master at Balaram's house. On this day, having
learnt of
Sri Ramakrishna's arrival, M. went there at noon during the recess hour
of
the school. He found the Master resting in the drawing-room after his
midday meal. Several young boys were in the room. M. prostrated himself
before the Master and sat by his side.

MASTER (tenderly): "How could you come now? Have you
no school
work?"

M: "I have come directly from school. Just now I have no important work
to do."

A DEVOTEE: "No, sir; he is playing truant today." (All laugh.)

M. said to himself, "Alas! It is indeed as if some invisible power had
drawn me here."

The Master, looking a little thoughtful, asked M. to come nearer. He
said,
"Please wring out my wet towel and put my coat in the sun." Then he
continued: "My legs and feet ache. Please rub them gently."

M. felt very happy to be given the privilege of rendering these
services
to the Master.

Sri Ramakrishna said to M.: "Can you tell me why I have been feeling
like this the past few days? It is impossible for me to touch any
metal. When
I touched a metal cup I felt as if I had been stung by a horned fish.
There
was an excruciating pain all over my arm. But I must use a brass
water-jar,
and so I tried to carry it after covering it with my towel. But the
moment I
touched the jar I felt the same acute pain in my arm. It was an
unbearable
pain! At last I prayed to the Divine Mother: 'O Mother, I shall never
do
it again. Please forgive me this time.'

"The younger Naren often visits me. Do you think his people at home
will object? He is very pure and doesn't know what carnal pleasure is."

M: "He is a 'large receptacle'."

MASTER: "That is true. Further, he says he remembers spiritual things
after hearing them once only. He told me, 'I used to weep in my boyhood
because I couldn't see God.'"

The Master and M. were thus talking about the young devotee when
someone reminded M. of his school.

MASTER: "What is the time now?"

A DEVOTEE: "It is ten minutes to one."

MASTER'(to M.): "You had better go now. It is
getting late for you. You
have, left your duties. (To Latu) Where is Rakhal?"

LATU: "He has gone home."

MASTER: "What? Has he gone away without seeing me?"

After school-hours M. returned to Balaram's house and found the Master
sitting in the drawing-room, surrounded by his devotees and disciples.
Among
them were Girish, Suresh, Balaram, Latu, and Chunilal. The Master's
face
was beaming with a sweet smile, which was reflected in the happy faces
of
those in the room. M. was asked to take a seat by the Master's side.

MASTER (to Girish): "You had better argue this point
with Narendra and
see what he has to say."

GIRISH: "Narendra says that God is infinite; we cannot even so much
as say that the things or persons we perceive are parts of God. How can
Infinity have parts? It cannot."

MASTER: "However great and infinite God may be, His Essence can and
does manifest itself through man by His mere will. God's Incarnation as
a
man cannot be explained by analogy. One must feel it for oneself and
realize
it by direct perception. An analogy can give us only a little glimpse.
By
touching the horns, legs, or tail of a cow, we in fact touch the cow
herself;
but for us the essential thing about a cow is her milk, which comes
through
the udder. The Divine Incarnation is like the udder. God incarnates
Himself
as man from time to time in order to teach people devotion and divine
love."

GIRISH: "Narendra says: 'Is it ever possible to know all of God? He is
infinite.'"

MASTER (to Girish): "Who can comprehend everything
about God? It
is not given to man to know any aspect of God, great or small. And what
need is there to know everything about God? It is enough if we only
realize
Him. And we see God Himself if we but see His Incarnation. Suppose a
person goes to the Ganges and touches its water. He will then say,
'Yes, I
have seen and touched the Ganges.' To say this it is not necessary for
him
to touch the whole length of the river from Hardwar to Gangasagar. (Laughter.)

"If I touch your feet, surely that is the same as touching you. (Laughter.)
If a person goes to the ocean and touches but a little of its water, he
has
surely touched the ocean itself. Fire, as an element, exists in all
things, but
in wood it is present to a greater degree."

GIRISH (smiling): "I am looking for fire. Naturally
I want to go to a
place where I can get it."

MASTER (smiling): "Yes, fire, as an element, is
present more in wood than
in any other object. If you seek God, then seek Him in man; He
manifests
Himself more in man than in any other thing. If you see a man endowed
with ecstatic love, overflowing with prema, mad after God, intoxicated
with
His love, then know for certain that God has incarnated Himself through
that man.

(To M.) "There is no doubt that God exists in all
things; but the
manifestations of His Power are different in different beings. The
greatest
manifestation of His Power is through an Incarnation. Again, in some
Incarnations
there is a complete manifestation of God's Power. It is the Sakti, the
Power
of God, that is born as an Incarnation."

GIRISH: "Narendra says that God is beyond our words and thought."

MASTER: "That is not altogether true. He is, no doubt, unknowable by
this ordinary mind, but He can indeed be known by the pure mind. The
mind and intellect become pure the moment they are free from attachment
to 'woman and gold'. The pure mind and pure intellect are one and the
same. God is known by the pure mind. Didn't the sages and seers of
olden
times see God? They realized the All-pervading Consciousness by means
of
their inner consciousness."

GIRISH (with a smile): "I defeated Narendra in the
argument."

MASTER: "Oh, no! He said to me: 'When Girish Ghosh has so much faith
in God's Incarnation as man, what can I say to him? It is not proper to
meddle with such faith.'"

GIRISH (with a smile): "Sir, we are very free and
easy with our words.
But M. is sitting there with his lips shut tight. What in the world is
passing
through his mind? What do you say about it, sir?"

MASTER (with a laugh): "There is a common adage that
tells people
to beware of the following: a man with a loose tongue, a man whose mind
cannot be fathomed even by an expert diver, a man who sticks the sacred
tulsi-leaf in his ears as a sign of holiness, a woman wearing a long
veil to
proclaim her chastity, and the cold water of a reservoir covered with
green
scum, by bathing in which one gets typhoid fever. These are all
dangerous
things. (With a smile) But it is different with M.
He is a serious man."
(All laugh.)

CHUNILAL: "People have begun to whisper about M.'s conduct. The
younger Naren and Baburam are his students, as are Naran, Paltu, Purna,
and Tejchandra. The rumour is that he brings these boys to you and so
they
neglect their studies. The boys' guardians hold M. responsible."

MASTER: "But who would believe their words?"

They were thus talking when Naran entered the room and bowed low
before the Master. He was a student seventeen or eighteen years old and
of
fair complexion. He was dearly loved by the Master, who was very eager
to see the boy and feed him. Many a time at the temple garden at
Dakshineswar the Master wept silently for Naran. He looked on him as
the
manifestation of Narayana Himself.

GIRISH (at the sight of Naran): "There! Who told him
about this? Now
we realize that M. is at the root of all the mischief." (All
laugh.)

MASTER (smiling): "Stop! Hold your tongue. There is
already an evil
rumour about him."

The conversation next turned to Narendra.

A DEVOTEE: "Why doesn't he come to you so frequently nowadays?"

MASTER (quoting a proverb): "Man's worries over bread and butter are
simply amazing; they make even Kalidasa lose his wits."

BALARAM: "Narendra frequently visits his friend Annada Guha of the
family of Shiva Guha."

MASTER: "Yes, I have heard that too. Narendra and his friends meet at
the house of a government officer and conduct meetings of the Brahmo
Samaj there."

A DEVOTEE: "The officer's name is Tarapada."

BALARAM (smiling): "The brahmins say that Annada
Guha is a very egotistic man."

MASTER: "Never listen to what the brahmins say. You know their nature
very well. If a man doesn't give them money, they will call him bad; on
the other hand, if a man is generous to them, they will call him good. (All
laugh.) I know Annada. He is a good man."

The drawing-room was full of devotees. The Master wanted to hear some
songs. At his request Tarapada sang about Krishna:

O Kesava, bestow Thy grace

Upon Thy luckless servants here!

O Kesava, who dost delight

To roam Vrindavan's glades and groves!

O Madhava, our mind's Bewitcher!

Sweet One, who dost steal our hearts,

Sweetly playing on Thy flute!

(Chant, O Mind, the name of Hari,

Sing aloud the name of Hari,

Praise Lord Hari's name!)

O Thou Eternal Youth of Braja,

Tamer of fierce Kaliya,

Slayer of the afflicted's fear!

Beloved, with the arching eyes

And crest with arching peacock feather,

Charmer of Sri Radha's heart!

Govardhan's mighty Lifter, Thou,

All garlanded with sylvan flowers!

O Damodara, Kamsa's Scourge!

O Dark One, who dost sport in bliss

With sweet Vrindavan's gopi maids.

(Chant, O mind, the name of Hari,

Sing aloud the name of Hari,

Praise Lord Hari's name!)

MASTER (to Girish): "Ah! It is a beautiful song. Did
you write it?"

A DEVOTEE: "Yes, sir, he wrote all the songs for his play, the Chaitanyalila."

MASTER: "This one has really hit the mark."

At Sri Ramakrishna's request Tarapada sang two more songs. In the
first,
Nitai exhorts people to share Radha's love for Sri Krishna:

Come one and all! Take Radha's love!

The high tide of her love flows by;

It will not last for very long.

Oh, come then! Come ye, one and all!

In countless streams it flows from her;

As much as you desire is yours.

Made all of love, she pours out love

Unstintingly for everyone;

Her love intoxicates the heart

With heavenly bliss, and thrills the soul.

Oh, come and sing Lord Hari's name,

Drawn by her love. Oh, come ye all!

Next he sang about Gauranga:

Who art Thou, Gaur of the golden hue,

That quenchest the thirst of my soul?

Thou raisest a storm in the sea of Love,

And scarcely can I steady my boat.

Once as a cowherd boy in Vrindavan

Thou didst tend the cows;

In Thy hands Thou heldest the flute

That so bewitched the gopi maids.

Lifting Govardhan's mount in Thine arms,

Thou shieldedst Vrindavan from ill;

And at the wounded gopis' feet

Humbledst Thyself in repentant love.

The devotees pressed M. to sing; but M. was shy and asked them
in a
whisper to excuse him.

GIRISH (to the Master): "Sir, we can't find a way to
persuade M. to sing.'

MASTER (annoyed): "Yes, he can bare his teeth at
school, but shyness
overpowers him when he is asked to sing!"

M., feeling greatly distressed, remained speechless.

Suresh Mitra, a beloved householder disciple of the Master, was seated
at a distance. The Master cast an affectionate glance at him and said
to him,
pointing to Girish, "You talk of having lived a wild life, but here is
one
you could not surpass."

SURESH (with a smile) : "Yes, sir, he is my elder
brother in that respect." (All laugh.)

GIRISH (to the Master): "Well, sir, I didn't have
any education during
my boyhood, but still people say I am a learned man."

MASTER: "Mahimacharan has studied many scriptures. A big man. (To
M.) Isn't that so?"

M: "Yes, sir."

GIRISH: "What? Book-learning? I have seen enough of it. It can't fool
me
any more.

MASTER (with a smile): "Do you know my attitude?
Books, scriptures,
and things like that only point out the way to reach God. After finding
the
way, what more need is there of books and scriptures? Then comes the
time for action.

"A man received a letter from home informing him that certain presents
were to be sent to his relatives. The names of the articles were given
in the
letter. As he was about to go shopping for them, he found that the
letter
was missing. He began anxiously to search for it, several others
joining in
the search. For a long time they continued to search. When at last the
letter
was discovered, his joy knew no bounds. With great eagerness he opened
the letter and read it. It said that he was to buy five seers of
sweets, a piece
of cloth, and a few other things. Then he did not need the letter any
more,
for it had served its purpose. Putting it aside, he went out to buy the
things.
How long is such a letter necessary? As long as its contents are not
known.
When the contents are known one proceeds to carry out the directions.

"In the scriptures you will find the way to realize God. But after
getting
all the information about the path, you must begin to work. Only then
can
you attain your goal.

"What will it avail a man to have mere scholarship? A pundit may have
studied many scriptures, he may recite many sacred texts, but if he is
still
attached to the world and if inwardly he loves 'woman and gold', then
he
has not assimilated the contents of the scriptures. For such a man the
study
of scriptures is futile.

"The almanac forecasts the rainfall tor the year. You may squeeze the
book, but you won't get a drop of water — not even a single drop." (Laughter.)

GIRISH (smiling): "What did you say, sir, about
squeezing the almanac?
Won't a single drop of water come out of it?" (All laugh.)

MASTER (with a smile): "The pundits talk big, but
where is their mind
fixed? On 'woman and gold', on creature comforts and money. The vulture
soars very high in the sky, but its eyes are fixed on the charnel-pit.
It is
continually looking for charnel-pits, carcasses, and dead bodies.

(To Girish) "Narendra is a boy of a very high order.
He excels in
everything: vocal and instrumental music and studies. Again, he has
control over
his sense-organs. He is truthful and has discrimination and dispassion.
So
many virtues in one person! (To M.) What do you say?
Isn't he unusually
good?"

M: "Yes, sir, he is."

MASTER (aside to M.): "He [meaning Girish] has great
earnestness and faith."

M. looked at Girish, and marvelled at his tremendous faith. Girish had
been coming to Sri Ramakrishna only a short time and had already
recognized
his spiritual power. To M. he seemed a familiar friend and kinsman,
related
to him by the strong bond of spirituality. Girish was one of the gems
in the
necklace of the Master's devotees.

Narayan asked the Master whether he would sing. Sri Ramakrishna sang
of the Divine Mother:

Cherish my precious Mother Syama

Tenderly within, O mind;

May you and I alone behold Her,

Letting no one else intrude.

O mind, in solitude enjoy Her,

Keeping the passions all outside;

Take but the tongue, that now and again

It may cry out, "O Mother! Mother!"

Suffer no breath of base desire

To enter and approach us there,

But bid true knowledge stand on guard,

Alert and watchful evermore.

Then he sang, as if he were one of the afflicted souls of the
world:

O Mother, ever blissful as Thou art,

Do not deprive Thy worthless child of bliss!

My mind knows nothing but Thy Lotus Feet.

The King of Death scowls at me terribly;

Tell me, Mother, what shall I say to him? . . .

Again he sang about the bliss of the Divine Mother:

Behold my Mother playing with Siva, lost in an ecstasy of joy!

Drunk with a draught of celestial wine. She reels and yet She does not
fall. . . .

The devotees listened to the songs in deep silence. After a
few moments
Sri Ramakrishna said, "I have a slight cold; so I couldn't sing well."

Gradually it became dusk. The shadow of evening fell on Calcutta. For
the
moment the noise of the busy metropolis was stilled. Gongs and
conch-shells
proclaimed the evening worship in many Hindu homes. Devotees of God set
aside their worldly duties and turned their minds to prayer and
meditation.
This joining of day and night, this mystic twilight, always created an
ecstatic
mood in the Master.

The devotees seated in the room looked at Sri Ramakrishna as he began
to chant the sweet name of the Divine Mother. After the chanting he
began to pray. What was the need of prayer to a soul in constant
communion
with God? Did he not rather want to teach erring mortals how to pray?
Addressing the Divine Mother, he said, "O Mother, I throw myself on Thy
mercy; I take shelter at Thy Hallowed Feet. I do not want bodily
comforts;
I do not crave name and fame; I do not seek the eight occult powers. Be
gracious and grant that I may have pure love for Thee, a love unsmitten
by
desire, untainted by any selfish ends — a love craved by the devotee
for the
sake of love alone. And grant me the favour, O Mother, that I may not
be
deluded by Thy world-bewitching maya, that I may never be attached to
the
world, to 'woman and gold', conjured up by Thy inscrutable maya! O
Mother,
there is no one but Thee whom I may call my own. Mother, I do not know
how to worship; I am without austerity; I have neither devotion nor
knowledge.
Be gracious, Mother, and out of Thy infinite mercy grant me love for
Thy Lotus Feet."

Every word of this prayer, uttered from the depths of his soul, stirred
the
minds of the devotees. The melody of his voice and the childlike
simplicity
of his face touched their hearts very deeply.

Girish invited the Master to his house, saying that he must go there
that very night.

MASTER: "Don't you think it will be late?"

GIRISH: "No, sir. You may return any time you like. I shall have to go
to the theatre tonight to settle a quarrel there."

It was nine o'clock in the evening when the Master was ready to start
for
Girish's house. Since Balaram had prepared supper for him, Sri
Ramakrishna
said to Balaram: "Please send the food you have prepared for me to
Girish's.
I shall enjoy it there." He did not want to hurt Balaram's feelings.

As the Master was coming down from the second floor of Balaram's
house, he became filled with divine ecstasy. He looked as if he were
drunk.
Narayan and M. were by his side; a little behind came Ram, Chuni, and
the other devotees. No sooner did he reach the ground floor than he
became
totally overwhelmed. Narayan came forward to hold him by the hand lest
he should miss his footing and fall. The Master expressed annoyance at
this. A few minutes later he said to Narayan affectionately: "If you
hold
me by the hand people may think I am drunk. I shall walk by myself."

Girish's house was not far away. The Master passed the crossing at
Bosepara Lane. Suddenly he began to walk faster. The devotees were left
behind. Presently Narendra was seen coming from a distance. At other
times
the Master's joy would have been unbounded at the thought of Narendra
or
at the mere mention of his name; but now he did not even exchange a
word
with his beloved disciple.

As the Master and the devotees entered the lane where Girish lived, he
was able to utter words. He said to Narendra: "Are you quite well, my
child? I could not talk to you then." Every word the Master spoke was
full
of infinite tenderness. He had not yet reached the door of Girish's
house,
when suddenly he stopped and said, looking at Narendra: "I want to tell
you something. 'This' is one and 'that' is another." Who could know
what
was passing through his innermost soul at that moment?

Girish stood at the door to welcome the Master. As Sri Ramakrishna
entered the house, Girish fell at his feet and lay there on the floor
like a rod.
At the Master's bidding he stood up, touching the Master's feet with
his
forehead. Sri Ramakrishna was taken to the drawing-room on the second
floor. The devotees followed him and sat down, eager to get a view of
the
Master and listen to every word that fell from his lips.

As Sri Ramakrishna was about to take the seat reserved for him, he saw
a
newspaper lying near it. He signed to someone to remove the paper.
Since
a newspaper contains worldly matters — gossip and scandal —, he
regarded
it as unholy. After the paper was removed he took his seat. Nityagopal
came forward and bowed low before the Master.

MASTER: "Well! You haven't been to Dakshineswar for a long time."

NITYAGOPAL: "True, sir. I haven't been able to go there. I haven't been
well. I have had pains all over my body."

MASTER: "How are you now?"

NITYAGOPAL: "Not so well, sir."

MASTER: "Bring your mind down one or two notes."

NITYAGOPAL: "I don't like people's company. They say all kinds of
things
about me. That sometimes frightens roe, but again I feel great strength
within."

MASTER: "That's only natural. Who lives with you?"

NITYAGOPAL: "Tarak.1
He is always with me. But sometimes he too gets on my nerves."

MASTER: "Nangta told me that there lived at his monastery an ascetic
who
had acquired occult powers. He used to go about with his eyes fixed on
the
sky. But when one of his companions left him, he became disconsolate."

Again the Master went into an ecstatic mood. Strange thoughts seemed
to stir his mind and he remained speechless. After a while he said:
"Art
Thou come? I too am here." Who could pretend to understand these words?

Many of his devotees were in the room: Narendra, Girish, Ram, Haripada,
Chuni, Balaram, and M. Narendra did not believe that God could
incarnate
Himself in a human body. But Girish differed with him; he had the
burning
faith that from time to time the Almighty Lord, through His inscrutable
Power, assumes a human body and descends to earth to serve a divine
purpose.

The Master said to Girish, "I should like to hear you and Narendra
argue
in English."

The discussion began; but they talked in Bengali. Narendra said: "God
is
Infinity. How is it possible for us to comprehend Him? He dwells in
every
human being. It is not the case that He manifests Himself through one
person only."

SRI RAMAKRISHNA (tenderly): "I quite agree with
Narendra. God is
everywhere. But then you must remember that there are different
manifestations
of His Power in different beings. At some places there is a
manifestation
of His avidyasakti, at others a manifestation of His vidyasakti.
Through
different instruments God's Power is manifest in different degrees,
greater
and smaller. Therefore all men are not equal."

RAM: "What is the use of these futile arguments?"

MASTER (sharply): "No! No! There is a meaning in all
this."

GIRISH (to Narendra): "How do you know that God does
not assume a human body?"

NARENDRA: "God is 'beyond words or thought'."

MASTER: "No, that is not true. He can be known by the pure buddhi,
which is the same as the Pure Self. The seers of old directly perceived
the
Pure Self through their pure buddhi."

GIRISH (to Narendra): "Unless God Himself teaches
men through His
human Incarnation, who else will teach them spiritual mysteries? God
takes
a human body to teach men divine knowledge and divine love. Otherwise,
who will teach?"

NARENDRA: "Why, God dwells in our own heart; He will certainly teach
us from within the heart."

MASTER (tenderly): "Yes, yes. He will teach us as
our Inner Guide."

Gradually Narendra and Girish became involved in a heated discussion.
If God is Infinity, how can He have parts? What did Hamilton say? What
were the views of Herbert Spencer, of Tyndall, of Huxley? And so forth
and so on.

MASTER (to M.): "I don't enjoy these discussions.
Why should I argue
at all? I clearly see that God is everything; He Himself has become
all. I
see that whatever is, is God. He is everything; again, He is beyond
everything.
I come to a state in which my mind and intellect merge in the
Indivisible. At the sight of Narendra my mind loses itself in the
consciousness
of the Absolute. (To Girish) What do you say to
that?"

GIRISH (with a smile): "Why ask me? As if I
understood everything
except that one point!" (All laugh.)

MASTER: "Again, I cannot utter a word unless I come down at least two
steps from the plane of samadhi. Sankara's Non-dualistic explanation of
Vedanta is true, and so is the Qualified Non-dualistic interpretation
of Ramanuja."

NARENDRA: "What is Qualified Non-dualism?"

MASTER: "It is the theory of Ramanuja. According to this theory,
Brahman,
or the Absolute, is qualified by the universe and its living beings.
These three — Brahman, the world, and living beings — together
constitute
One. Take the instance of a bel-fruit. A man wanted to know the weight
of the fruit. He separated the shell, the flesh, and the seeds. But can
a man
get the weight by weighing only the flesh? He must weigh flesh, shell,
and
seeds together. At first it appears that the real thing in the fruit is
the flesh,
and not its seeds or shell. Then by reasoning you find that the shell,
seeds,
and flesh all belong to the fruit; the shell and seeds belong to the
same
thing that the flesh belongs to. Likewise, in spiritual discrimination
one
must first reason, following the method of 'Not this, not this': God is
not
the universe; God is not the living beings; Brahman alone is real and
all else
is unreal. Then one realizes, as with the bel-fruit, that the Reality
from
which we derive the notion of Brahman is the very Reality that evolves
the
idea of living beings and the universe. The Nitya and the Lila are the
two
aspects of one and the same Reality; therefore, according to Ramanuja,
Brahman is qualified by the universe and the living beings. This is the
theory of Qualified Non-dualism.

(To M.) "I do see God directly. What shall I reason
about? I clearly see
that He Himself has become everything; that He Himself has become the
universe and all living beings.

"But without awakening one's own inner consciousness one cannot realize
the All-pervading Consciousness. How long does a man reason? So long as
he has not realized God. But mere words will not do. As for myself, I
clearly
see that He Himself has become everything. The inner consciousness must
be awakened through the grace of God. Through this awakening a man goes
into samadhi. He often forgets that he has a body. He gets rid of his
attachment to 'woman and gold' and does not enjoy any talk unless it is
about God.
Worldly talk gives him pain. Through the awakening of the inner
consciousness
one realizes the All-pervading Consciousness."

The discussion came to a close. Sri Ramakrishna said to M.: "I have
observed that a man acquires one kind of knowledge about God through
reasoning and another kind through meditation; but he acquires a third
kind of Knowledge about God when God reveals Himself to him, His
devotee. If God Himself reveals to His devotee the nature of Divine
Incarnation
— how He plays in human form —, then the devotee doesn't have to
reason about the problem or need an explanation. Do you know what it is
like? Suppose a man is in a dark room. He goes on rubbing a match
against
a match-box and all of a sudden light comes. Likewise, if God gives us
this
flash of divine light, all our doubts are destroyed. Can one ever know
God
by mere reasoning?"

Sri Ramakrishna asked Narendra to sit by his side. He tenderly inquired
about his health and showed him much affection.

NARENDRA (to the Master): "Why, I have meditated on
Kali for three or
four days, but nothing has come of it."

MASTER: "All in good time, my child. Kali is none other, than Brahman
That which is called Brahman is really Kali. She is the Primal Energy.
When that Energy remains inactive, I call It Brahman, and when It
creates.
preserves, or destroys, I call It Sakti or Kali. What you call Brahman
I call Kali.

"Brahman and Kali are not different. They are like fire and its power
to
burn: if one thinks of fire one must think of its power to burn. If one
recognizes Kali one must also recognize Brahman; again, if one
recognizes
Brahman one must recognize Kali. Brahman and Its Power are identical.
It
is Brahman whom I address as Sakti or Kali."

It was late at night. Girish asked Haripada to call a cab, for he had
to go
to the theatre. As Haripada was about to leave the room the Master said
with
a smile: "Mind, a cab. Don't forget to bring one." (All laugh.)

HARIPADA (smiling): "Yes, sir. I am going out just
for that. How can I
forget it?"

GIRISH: "That I should have to go to the theatre and leave you here!"

MASTER: "No, no. You must hold to both. King Janaka paid attention to
both religious and worldly duties and 'drank his milk from a brimming
cup'." (All laugh.)

GIRISH: "I have been thinking of leaving the theatre to the youngsters."

MASTER: "No, no. It is all right. You are doing good to many."

Narendra said in a whisper, "Just a moment ago he [meaning Girish] was
calling him [meaning Sri Ramakrishna] God, an Incarnation, and now he
is
attracted to the theatre!"

Narendra was sitting beside the Master. The latter looked at him
intently
and suddenly moved closer to his beloved disciple. Narendra did not
believe
in God's assuming a human body; but what did that matter? Sri
Ramakrishna's
heart overflowed with more and more love for his disciple. He
touched Narendra's body and said, quoting from a song:

Do you2
feel that your pride is wounded?

So be it, then; we too have our pride.

Then the Master said to Narendra: "As long as a man argues
about God,
he has not realized Him. You two were arguing. I didn't like it.

"How long does one hear noise and uproar in a house where a big feast
is
being given? So long as the guests are not seated for the meal. As soon
as
food is served and people begin to eat, three quarters of the noise
disappears.
(All laugh.) When the dessert is served there is
still less noise. But when
the guests eat the last course, buttermilk, then one hears nothing but
the
sound 'soop, sup'. When the meal is over, the guests retire to sleep
and all
is quiet.

"The nearer you approach to God, the less you reason and argue. When
you attain Him, then all sounds — all reasoning and disputing — come to
an
end. Then you go into samadhi — sleep —, into communion with God in
silence."

The Master gently stroked Narendra's body and affectionately touched
his
chin, uttering sweetly the holy words, "Hari Om! Hari Om! Hari Om!" He
was fast becoming unconscious of the outer world. His hand was on
Narendra's
foot. Still in that mood he gently stroked Narendra's body. Slowly a
change came over his mind. With folded hands he said to Narendra: "Sing
a song, please; then I shall be all right. How else shall I be able to
stand on
my own legs?" Again he became speechless. He sat motionless as a
statue.
Presently he became intoxicated with divine love and said: "O Radha,
watch your step! Otherwise you may fall into the Jamuna. Ah! How mad
she
is with love of Krishna!"

The Master was in a rapturous mood. Quoting from a song, he said:

Tell me, friend, how far is the grove

Where Krishna, my Beloved, dwells?

His fragrance reaches me even here,

But I am tired and can walk no farther.

Then the Master completely forgot the outer world. He did not
notice
anyone in the room, not even his beloved Narendra seated by his side.
He
did not know where he himself was seated. He was totally merged in God.
Suddenly he stood up, shouting, "Deep drunk with the Wine of Divine
Love!" As he took his seat again, he muttered, "I see a light coming,
but I
know not whence it comes."

Now Narendra sang:

Lord, Thou hast lifted all my sorrow with the vision of Thy face,

And the magic of Thy beauty has bewitched my mind;

Beholding Thee, the seven worlds forget their never-ending woe;

What shall I say, then, of myself, a poor and lowly soul? . . .

Listening to the song, Sri Ramakrishna again went into deep
samadhi.
His eyes were closed and his body was transfixed.

Coming down from the ecstatic mood he looked around and said, "Who
will take me to the temple garden?" He appeared like a child who felt
confused in the absence of his companion.

It was late in the evening. The night was dark. The devotees stood by
the carriage that had been brought to take the Master to Dakshineswar.
They helped him in gently, for he was still in deep ecstasy. The
carriage
moved down the street and they looked after it with wistful eyes.

Soon the devotees turned homeward, a gentle south wind blowing in
their faces. Some were humming the lines of the song:

Lord, Thou hast lifted all my sorrow with the vision of Thy face,

And the magic of Thy beauty has bewitched my mind.

April 6, 1885

Sri Ramakrishna sat in the drawing-room of Balaram's house talking to
M.
It was a very hot day and long past three o'clock. He had come to
Calcutta
to see some of his young disciples and also to visit Devendra's house.

MASTER (to M.): "I gave my word that I would be here
at three o'clock;
so I have come. But it is very hot."

M: "Yes, sir, you must have suffered very much."

The devotees were fanning Sri Ramakrishna.

MASTER: "I have come here for Baburam and the younger Naren. Why
haven't you brought Purna?"

M: "He doesn't like to come to a gathering of people. He is afraid you
might praise him before others and his relatives might then hear about
it."

MASTER: "Yes, that's true. I won't do it in the future. Well, I
understand
that you are giving Purna religious instruction. That is fine."

M: "As a matter of fact, the same thing is written in one of the
text-books
of the school. It says:

With all thy soul love God above;

And as thyself thy neighbour love.

If their guardians are displeased with such teachings, it
can't be helped."

MASTER: "No doubt many things like that are written in those books;
but the authors themselves do not assimilate what they write. This
power of
assimilation comes from associating with holy men. People listen to
instruction
only when it is given by a sadhu who has truly renounced the world;
they are not much impressed by the writings or the words of a mere
scholar.
Suppose a physician has a big jar of molasses by his side, and he asks
his
patients not to eat molasses; the patients won't pay much attention to
his advice.

"Well, how do you find Purna? Does he go into ecstatic moods?"

M: "No, I haven't noticed in him any outer sign of such emotion. One
day I told him those words of yours."

MASTER: "What words?"

M: "You told us that if a man is a 'small receptacle' he cannot control
spiritual emotion; but if he is a 'large receptacle' he experiences
intense
emotion without showing it outwardly. You said that a big lake does not
become
disturbed when an elephant enters it; but when the elephant enters a
pool,
one sees tremendous confusion and the water splashes on the banks."

MASTER: "Purna will not show his emotion outwardly; he hasn't that
kind of temperament. His other signs are good. What do you say?"

M: "His eyes are very bright and prominent."

MASTER: "Mere bright eyes are not enough. The eyes of a godly person
are different. Did you ask him what he felt after meeting me?"

M: "Yes, sir, we talked about that. He has been telling me for the last
four or five days that whenever he thinks of God or repeats His name,
tears
flow from his eyes and the hair on his body stands on end — such is his
joy."

MASTER: "Indeed! That's all he needs."

The Master and M. were silent a few moments. Then M. said, "He is
waiting —"

MASTER: "Who?"

M: "Purna. Perhaps he has been standing at the door of his house. When
any of us passes that way he will come running and salute us."

MASTER: "Ah! Ah!"

Sri Ramakrishna was resting, reclining against a bolster. M. had
brought
with him a twelve-year-old boy who was a student in his school. His
name
was Kshirode.

M: "He is a nice boy. He finds great joy in spiritual talk."

MASTER (smiling): "He has eyes like a deer's."

The boy saluted Sri Ramakrishna, touching his feet. Then he gently
stroked the Master's feet.

MASTER (to M.): "Rakhal is staying at home now; he
has an abscess and
is not well. I understand that his wife expects a baby."

Paltu and Binode were seated in front of Sri Ramakrishna.

MASTER (to Paltu, smiling): "What did you say to
your father? (To M.)
He answered back when his father told him not to come here. (To
Paltu)
What did you say?"

PALTU: "I said to him: 'Yes, I go to him. Is that wrong?' (The
Master
and M. laugh.) I shall say more if necessary."

MASTER (to M., smiling): "No, no! Should he go so
far?"

M: "No, sir, he should not go too far." (Sri Ramakrishna laughs.)

MASTER (to Binode): "How are you? Why haven't you
come to Dakshineswar?"

BINODE: "I almost came, but then I was afraid of falling ill again. I
have
been ill and am not doing well."

MASTER: "Come to Dakshineswar with me. The air is very good there.
You will recover."

The younger Naren entered the room. Sri Ramakrishna was going out
to wash his hands and face. The younger Naren followed him with a
towel; he wanted to pour water for the Master. M. was with them.

MASTER: "It's very hot today."

M: "Yes, sir."

MASTER: "How do you live in that small room of yours? Doesn't it get
very hot on the upper floor?"

M: "Yes, sir, it gets very hot."

MASTER: "Besides, your wife has been suffering from brain trouble. You
should keep her in a cool room."

M: "Yes, sir. I have asked her to sleep downstairs."

Sri Ramakrishna returned to the drawing-room and took his seat.

MASTER (to M.): "Why didn't you come to Dakshineswar
last Sunday?"

M: "Sir, there was no one else at home. My wife was not well and no
one was there to look after her."

Sri Ramakrishna was on his way in a carriage to Devendra's house in
Nimu Goswami's Lane. The younger Naren, M., and one or two other
devotees were with him. The Master felt great yearning for Purna. He
began to talk of the young disciple.

MASTER (to M.): "A great soul! Or how could he make
me do japa for
his welfare? But Purna doesn't know anything about it."

M. and the other devotees were amazed at these words.

MASTER: "It would have been nice if you had brought him here with
you today. Why didn't you?"

Seeing the younger Naren laugh, the Master and the other devotees
laughed too. The Master said to M., laughing and pointing to Naren:
"Look
at him! Look! How naive he looks when he laughs, as if he knew nothing.
He never thinks of these three things: land, wife, and money. God
cannot
be realized unless the mind is totally free from 'woman and gold'."

The carriage proceeded to Devendra's house. Once Sri Ramakrishna had
said to Devendra at Dakshineswar, "I have been thinking of visiting
your
house one day." Devendra had replied: "The same idea came to my mind
today, and I have come here to ask that favour of you. You must grace
my
house this Sunday." "But", the Master had said, "you have a small
income.
Don't invite many people. The carriage hire will also run to a big
amount."
Devendra had answered, laughing: "What if my income is small? 'One can
run into debt to eat butter!'" At these words Sri Ramakrishna had
laughed
a long time.

Soon the carriage reached Devendra's house. Sri Ramakrishna said to
him: "Devendra, don't make elaborate arrangements for my meal.
Something
very simple will do. I am not very well today."

Sri Ramakrishna seated himself in the drawing-room on the ground floor
of Devendra's house. The devotees sat around him. It was evening. The
room was well lighted. The younger Naren, Ram, M., Girish, Devendra,
Akshay, Upendra, and some other devotees were present. As the Master
cast
his glance on a young devotee, his face beamed with joy. Pointing to
the
devotee, Sri Ramakrishna said to the others: "He is totally free from
attachment
to land, wife, and money, the three things that entangle one in
worldliness.
The mind that dwells on these three cannot be fixed on God. He
saw a vision, too. (To the devotee) Tell us, what
did you see?"

DEVOTEE (laughing): "I saw a heap of dung. Some were
seated on it,
and some sat at a distance."

MASTER: "It was a vision of the plight of the worldly people who are
forgetful of God. It shows that all these desires are disappearing from
his
mind. Need one worry about anything if one's mind is detached from
'woman and gold'? How strange! Only after much meditation and japa
could I get rid of these desires; and how quickly he could banish them
from his mind! Is it an easy matter to get rid of lust? I myself felt a
queer
sensation in my heart six months after I had begun my spiritual
practice.
Then I threw myself on the ground under a tree and wept bitterly. I
said
to the Divine Mother, 'Mother, if it comes to that, I shall certainly
cut my
throat with a knife!'

(To the devotees) "If the mind is free from 'woman
and gold', then what
else can obstruct a man? He enjoys then only the Bliss of Brahman."

Sashi3
had recently been visiting Sri Ramakrishna. He was studying at
the Vidyasagar College for his Bachelor's degree. The Master began to
talk about him.

MASTER (to the devotees): "That boy will think of
money for some time.
But there are some who will never do so. Some of the youngsters will
not marry."

The devotees listened silently to the Master.

MASTER: "It is hard to recognize an Incarnation of God unless the mind
is totally free from 'woman and gold'. A man asked a seller of
egg-plants the
value of a diamond. He said, 'I can give nine seers of egg-plants in
exchange,
and not one more.'" (See)

At these words all the devotees laughed. The younger Naren laughed
very loudly. Sri Ramakrishna noticed that he had quickly understood the
implication of these words.

MASTER: "What a subtle mind he has! Nangta also could understand
things that way, in a flash — the meaning of the Gita,
the Bhagavata, and
other scriptures.

"Renunciation of 'woman and gold' from boyhood! Amazing indeed! It
falls to the lot of a very few. A person without such renunciation is
like a
mango struck by a hail-stone. The fruit cannot be offered to the Deity,
and
even a man hesitates to eat it.

"There are people who during their youth committed many sins, but in
old age chant the name of God. Well, that is better than nothing.

"The mother of a certain Mallick, who belonged to a very noble family,
asked me if prostitutes would ever be saved. She herself had led that
kind
of life; that is why she asked the question. I said: 'Yes, they too
will be
saved, if only they cry to God with a yearning heart and promise not to
repeat their sins.' What will the mere chanting of Hari's name
accomplish?
One must weep sincerely."

The kirtan began to the accompaniment of drums and cymbals. The singer
was a professional. He sang about Sri Gauranga's initiation as a monk
by
Keshab Bharati:

Oh, what a vision I have beheld in Keshab Bharati's hut!

Gora, in all his matchless grace,

Shedding tears in a thousand streams! . . .

Sri Ramakrishna went into ecstasy when he heard the song. The
musician
sang again, describing the suffering of a milkmaid of Vrindavan at her
separation from Sri Krishna. She was seeking her Krishna in the madhavi
(A
spring creeper with fragrant flowers) bower:

O madhavi, give me back my Sweet One!

Give me, give me back my Sweet One!

Give Him back, for He Is mine,

And make me your slave for ever.

He is my life, as water is to the fish;

O madhavi, you have hidden Him in your bosom!

I am a simple, guileless girl,

And you have stolen my Beloved.

O madhavi, I die for my Sweet One;

I cannot hear to live without Him.

Without my Madhava (A name of Krishna.)
I shall die;

Oh, give Him, give Him back to me!

Now and then Sri Ramakrishna sang with the musicians,
improvising lines:

How far from here is Mathura,

Where dwells the Beloved of my soul?

Sri Ramakrishna went into samadhi. His body was motionless. He
remained in that state a long time.

Gradually he came down to the consciousness of the outer world. Still
in
a spiritual mood, he began to talk, sometimes addressing the devotees,
sometimes the Divine Mother.

MASTER: "Mother, please attract him to Thee. I can't worry about him
any more. (To M.) My mind is inclined a little to
your brother-in-law.

(To Girish) "You utter many abusive and vulgar
words; but that doesn't
matter. It is better for these things to come out. There are some
people who
fall ill on account of blood-poisoning; the more the poisoned blood
finds an
outlet, the better it is for them. At the time when the upadhi of a man
is
being destroyed, it makes a loud noise, as it were. Wood crackles when
it
burns; there is no more noise when the burning is over.

"You will be purer day by day. You will improve very much day by day.
People will marvel at you.

"I may not come many more times; but that doesn't matter. You will
succeed by yourself."

The Master's spiritual mood became very intense. Again he talked to the
Divine Mother.

MASTER: "Mother, what credit is there in making a man good who is
already good? O Mother, what wilt Thou accomplish by killing one who is
already dead? Only if Thou canst kill a person who is still standing
erect
wilt Thou show Thy glory."

Sri Ramakrishna remained silent a few moments. Suddenly he said in a
slightly raised voice: "I have come from Dakshineswar. I am going,
Mother!"
It was as if a child had heard the call of its mother from a distance
and
was responding to it. He again became motionless, absorbed in samadhi.
The devotees looked at him with unwinking eyes. Still in an ecstatic
mood
he said, "I shall not eat any more luchi." At this point a few
Vaishnava
priests, who had come from the neighbourhood, left the place.

Sri Ramakrishna began to talk with his devotees in a very joyous
spirit.
It was the month of April and the day was very sultry. Devendra had
made
ice-cream. He offered it to the Master and the devotees. M. said in a
low
voice, "Encore! Encore!" The devotees laughed. At the sight of the
ice-cream
Sri Ramakrishna was happy as a child.

MASTER: "The kirtan was very nice. The song described beautifully the
gopis' state of mind: 'O madhavi, give me back my Sweet One!' The
milk-maids of Vrindavan were drunk with ecstatic love for Krishna. How
wonderful! Mad for Krishna!"

A devotee, pointing to another devotee, said, "He has the attitude of
the gopis."

RAM: "No, he has both — the attitude of tender love and the attitude of
austere knowledge."

MASTER: "What is it you are talking about?"

Sri Ramakrishna inquired about Surendra.

RAM: "I sent him word, but he hasn't come."

MASTER: "He gets very tired from his heavy office-work."

A DEVOTEE: "Ram Babu has been writing about you."

MASTER (smiling): "What is he writing?"

DEVOTEE: "He is writing an article on 'The Bhakti of the Paramahamsa'."

MASTER: "Good! That will make Ram famous."

GIRISH (smiling): "He says he is your disciple."

MASTER: "I have no disciple. I am the servant of the servant of Rama."

Some people of the neighbourhood had dropped in; but they did not
please the Master. He said: "What sort of place is this? I don't find a
single
pious soul here."

Devendra took Sri Ramakrishna into the inner apartments and offered
him refreshments. Afterwards the Master returned to the drawing-room
with
a happy face and took his seat. The devotees sat around him. Upendra4
and Akshay5
sat on either side of him and stroked his feet. The Master spoke
highly of the women of Devendra's family, saying: "They are very nice.
They come from the country; so they are very pious."

The Master was absorbed in his own joy. In a happy mood he began to
sing:

Unless a man is simple, he cannot recognize God, the Simple One. . . .

Again he sang:

Stay your steps, O wandering monk!

Stand there with begging-bowl in hand,

And let me behold your radiant face. . . .

Once more:

A mendicant has come to us, ever absorbed
in divine moods;

Holy alike is he to Hindu and Mussalman. . . .

Girish saluted the Master and took his leave. Devendra and the
other
devotees took the Master to his carriage. Seeing that one of his
neighbours
was sound asleep on a bench in the courtyard, Devendra woke him up. The
neighbour rubbed his eyes and said, "Has the Paramahamsa come?" All
burst into laughter. The man had come a long time before Sri
Ramakrishna's
arrival, and because of the heat had spread a mat on the bench,
lain down, and gone sound asleep.

Sri Ramakrishna's carriage proceeded to Dakshineswar. He said to M.
happily, "I have eaten a good deal of ice-cream; bring four or five
cones
for me when you come to Dakshineswar." Continuing, he said, "Now my
mind is drawn to these few youngsters: the younger Naren, Purna, and
your brother-in-law."

M: "Do you mean Dwija?"

MASTER: "No, he is all right; I mean his elder brother."

The carriage rolled on to the Kali temple at Dakshineswar.

^A
disciple of Sri Ramakrishna later known as Swami Shivananda.

^These
words are addressed to Radha, the beloved of Krishna, by her
companions,
the gopis.

^Sashi
later became a monastic disciple of the Master and assumed the name of
Swami Ramakrishnananda.

^Later
a famous publisher in Calcutta.

^The
author of a life of Sri Ramakrishna in Bengali verse.


=== 39_masters_reminiscences.htm ===

The Master's Reminiscences

←
Home
/ The Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna
/ Volume 2
/ →

THE MASTER'S REMINISCENCES

Master's own reminiscences — Various forms of his meditation —
Master's meditation on formless Spirit — Three kinds of sadhana —
Nature
of deep concentration — Single-mindedness in meditation — Occult
powers — A false teacher — Master's visions during sadhana —
Experience of mahabhava — Power of "woman and gold" — Efficacy of
truthfulness — Narada and Sukadeva — Special traits of a Divine
Incarnation
— Master urges intense dispassion — Advice to householders —
Discussion with Trailokya — Divine bliss is the highest — Holding to
both God and the world — Worldly man's charity — Discussion about
Divine Incarnations.

April 12, 1885

SRI RAMAKRISHNA was sitting with the devotees in Balaram's
drawing-room in Calcutta. M. arrived at three o'clock. Girish, Balaram,
the
younger Naren, Paltu, Dwija, Purna, Mahendra Mukherji, and many
other devotees were there. Shortly Trailokya Sannyal, Jaygopal Sen, and
other
members of the Brahmo Samaj arrived. Many woman devotees were present
also, seated behind a screen. Among them was Mohini's wife, who had
almost gone insane on account of her son's death. There were a few
other
afflicted souls like her who used to visit the Master to obtain peace
of mind.

Sri Ramakrishna was describing to the devotees the various incidents of
his sadhana and the phases of his spiritual realization.

MASTER: "During my sadhana, when I meditated, I would actually see a
person sitting near me with a trident in his hand. He would threaten to
strike me with the weapon unless I fixed my mind on the Lotus Feet of
God, warning me that it would pierce my breast if my mind strayed from
God.

"The Divine Mother would put me in such a state that sometimes my
mind would come down from the Nitya to the Lila, and sometimes go up
from the Lila to the Nitya.

"Sometimes, when the mind descended to the Lila, I would meditate day
and night on Sita and Rama. At those times I would constantly behold
the
forms of Sita and Rama. Ramlala1
was my constant companion. Sometimes I would bathe Him and sometimes
feed Him.

"Again, I used to be absorbed in the ideal of Radha and Krishna and
would constantly see their forms. Or again, I would be absorbed in
Gauranga.
He is the harmonization of two ideals: the Purusha and the Prakriti. At
such times I would always see the form of Gauranga.

"Then a change came over me. The mind left the plane of the Lila and
ascended to the Nitya. I found no distinction between the sacred tulsi
and
the ordinary sajina plant. I no longer enjoyed seeing the forms of God;
I
said to myself, 'They come and go.' I lifted my mind above them. I
removed
all the pictures of gods and goddesses from my room and began to
meditate
on the Primal Purusha, the Indivisible Satchidananda, regarding myself
as His handmaid.

"I practised all sorts of sadhana. There are three classes of sadhana:
sattvic,
rajasic, and tamasic. In the sattvic sadhana the devotee calls on the
Lord
with great longing or simply repeats His name; he doesn't seek any
result
in return. The rajasic sadhana prescribes many rituals: purascharana,
pilgrimage, panchatapa, worship with sixteen articles, and so forth.
The
tamasic sadhana is a worship of God with the help of tamas. The
attitude
of a tamasic devotee is this: 'Hail, Kali! What? Wilt Thou not reveal
Thyself to me? If not, I will cut my throat with a knife!' In this
discipline
one does not observe conventional purity; it is like some of the
disciplines
prescribed by the Tantra.

"During my sadhana period I had all kinds of amazing visions. I
distinctly
perceived the communion of Atman. A person exactly resembling me
entered
my body and began to commune with each one of the six lotuses.2
The petals of these lotuses had been closed; but as each of them
experienced the
communion, the drooping flower bloomed and turned itself upward. Thus
blossomed forth the lotuses at the centres of Muladhara, Svadhisthana,
Anahata, Visuddha, Ajna, and Sahasrara. The drooping Bowers turned
upward. I perceived all these things directly.

"When I meditated during my sadhana, I used to think of the
unflickering
flame of a lamp set in a windless place.

"In deep meditation a man is not at all conscious of the outer world. A
hunter was aiming at a bird. A bridal procession passed along beside
him,
with the groom's relatives and friends, music, carriages, and horses.
It took
a long time for the procession to pass the hunter, but he was not at
all
conscious of it. He did not know that the bridegroom had gone by.

"A man was angling in a lake all by himself. After a long while the
float began to move. Now and then its tip touched the water. The angler
was holding the rod tight in his hands, ready to pull it up, when a
passer-by
stopped and said, 'Sir, can you tell me where Mr. Bannerji lives?'
There
was no reply from the angler, who was just on the point of pulling up
the
rod. Again and again the stranger said to him in a loud voice, 'Sir,
can you
tell me where Mr. Bannerji lives?' But the angler was unconscious of
everything
around him. His hands were trembling, his eyes fixed on the float.
The stranger was annoyed and went on. When he had gone quite a way,
the angler's float sank under water and with one pull of the rod he
landed
the fish. He wiped the sweat from his face with his towel and shouted
after the stranger. 'Hey!' he said. 'Come here! Listen!' But the man
would
not turn his face. After much shouting, however, he came back and" said
to the angler, 'Why are you shouting at me?' 'What did you ask me
about?
said the angler. The stranger said,. 'I repeated the question so many
times,
and now you are asking me to repeat it once more!' The angler replied,
'At
that time my float was about to sink; so I didn't hear a word of what
you
said.'

"A person can achieve such single-mindedness in meditation that he will
see nothing, hear nothing. He will not be conscious even of touch. A
snake
may crawl over his body, but he will not know it. Neither of them will
be
aware of the other.

"In deep meditation the sense-organs stop functioning; the mind does
not
look outward. It is like closing the gate of the outer court in a
house. There
are five objects of the senses: form, taste, smell, touch, and sound.
They
are all left outside.

"At the beginning of meditation the objects of the senses appear before
the aspirant. But when the meditation becomes deep, they no longer
bother
him. They are left outside. How many things I saw during meditation! I
vividly perceived before me a heap of rupees, a shawl, a plate of
sweets, and
two women with rings in their noses. 'What do you want?' I asked my
mind. 'Do you want to enjoy any of these things?' 'No,' replied the
mind,
'I don't want any of them. I don't want anything but the Lotus Feet of
God.' I saw the inside and the outside of the women, as one sees from
outside
the articles in a glass room. I saw what is in them: entrails, blood,
filth, worms, phlegm, and such things."

Girish Chandra Ghosh used to say now and then that he could cure
illness
by the strength of the Master's name.

MASTER (to Girish and the other devotees):
"People of small intellect seek occult powers — powers to cure disease,
win a lawsuit, walk on water,
and such things. But the genuine devotees of God don't want anything
except His Lotus Feet. One day Hriday said to me, 'Uncle, please ask
the
Mother for some powers, some occult powers.' I have the nature of a
child.
While I was practising japa in the Kali temple, I said to Kali,
'Mother,
Hriday asked me to pray to You for some occult powers.' The Divine
Mother at once showed me a vision. A middle-aged prostitute, about
forty'
years old, appeared and sat with her back to me. She had large hips and
wore a black-bordered sari. Soon she was covered with filth. The Mother
showed me that occult powers are as abominable as the filth of that
prostitute.
Thereupon I went to Hriday and scolded him, saying: 'Why did you
teach me such a prayer? It is because of you that I had such an
experience.'

"People with a little occult power gain such things as name and fame.
Many of them want to follow the profession of guru, gain people's
recognition,
and make disciples and devotees. Men say of such a guru: 'Ah! He is
having a wonderful time. How many people visit him! He has many
disciples
and followers. His house is overflowing with furniture and other
things.
People give him presents. He has such power that he can feed many
people
if he so desires.'

"The profession of a teacher is like that of a prostitute. It is the
selling
of oneself for the trifle of money, honour, and creature comforts. For
such
insignificant things it is not good to prostitute the body, mind, and
soul,
the means by which one can attain God. A man once said about a certain
woman: 'Ah! She is having a grand time now. She is so well off! She has
rented a room and furnished it with a couch, a mat, pillows, and many
other things. And how many people she controls! They are always
visiting
her.' In other words, the woman has now become a prostitute. Therefore
her
happiness is unbounded. Formerly she was a maidservant in a gentleman's
house; now she is a prostitute. She has ruined herself for a mere
trifle.

"How many other visions I saw while meditating during my sadhana!
Once I was meditating under the bel-tree when 'Sin' appeared before me
and tempted me in various ways. He came to me in the form of an English
soldier. He wanted to give me wealth, honour, sex pleasure, various
occult
powers, and such things. I began to pray to the Divine Mother. Now I am
telling you something very secret. The Mother appeared. I said to Her,
'Kill him. Mother!' I still remember that form of the Mother, Her
world-bewitching beauty. She came to me taking the form of Krishnamayi.3
But it was as if her glance moved the world."

Sri Ramakrishna became silent. Resuming his reminiscences, he said:
"How many other visions I saw! But I am not permitted to tell them.
Someone
one is shutting my mouth, as it were. I used to find no distinction
between
the sacred tulsi and the insignificant sajina leaf. The feeling of
distinction
was entirely destroyed. Once I was meditating under the banyan when I
was shown a Mussalman4
with a long beard. He came to me with rice in an
earthen plate. He fed some other Mussalmans with the rice and also gave
me a few grains to eat. The Mother showed me that there exists only
One,
and not two. It is Satchidananda alone that has taken all these various
forms; He alone has become the world and its living beings. Again, it
is
He who has become food.

(To Girish, M., and the others) "I have the nature
of a child. Hriday
said to me, 'Uncle, ask the Mother for some occult powers.' At once I
went
to the temple to ask Her about them. At that time God had put me in
such
a state that I had to listen to those who lived with me. I felt like a
child who
sees darkness all around unless someone is with him. I felt as if I
should
die unless Hriday was near me. You see I am in that state of mind just
now.
While I am speaking to you my inner spirit is being awakened."

As Sri Ramakrishna uttered these words, he was on the point of plunging
into samadhi and losing consciousness of time and space. But he was
trying
with the utmost difficulty to control himself. He said to the devotees
in an
ecstatic mood: "I still see you. But I feel as if you had been sitting
here
for ever. I don't recall when you came or where you are."

Sri Ramakrishna was silent a few minutes. Then, regaining partial
consciousness, he said, "I shall have a drink of water." He often said
things
like this after samadhi, in order to bring down his mind to the
ordinary plane
of consciousness. Girish was a new-comer and did not know this; so he
started to bring some water. Sri Ramakrishna asked him not to, saying,
"No,
my dear sir, I cannot drink now."

The Master and the devotees were silent awhile. Sri Ramakrishna resumed
the conversation.

MASTER (to M.): "Well, have I done any wrong in
telling these secret experiences?"

M. did not know what to say and kept quiet.

MASTER: "Why should there be any harm in it? I have told these things
to create faith in you all."

After a while he said to M. very humbly, "Will you kindly bring him
here?" He referred to Purna.

M. (hesitating): "Yes, sir. I shall send for him
this very moment."

MASTER (eagerly: "In Purna I have reached the
'post'."

Was Sri Ramakrishna hinting that Purna was perhaps the last devotee of
his inner circle?

Sri Ramakrishna then described to Girish, M., and the other devotees
his own experience of mahabhava.

MASTER (to the devotees): "My joy after that
experience was equal to
the pain I suffered before it. Mahabhava is a divine ecstasy; it shakes
the
body and mind to their very foundation. It is like a huge elephant
entering
a small hut. The house shakes to its foundation. Perhaps it falls to
pieces.

"The burning pain that one feels when one is separated from God is not
an ordinary feeling. It is said that the fire of this anguish in Rupa
and
Sanatana (Two great disciples of Sri Chaitanya.) scorched the leaves of
the tree under which they sat. I was
unconscious three days in that state. I couldn't move. I lay in one
place. When
I regained consciousness, the Brahmani5
took me out for a bath. But my skin couldn't bear the touch of her
hand; so my body had to be covered
with a heavy sheet. Only then could she hold me with her hand and lead
me to the bathing-place. The earth that had stuck to my body while I
was
lying on the ground had become baked.

"In that state I felt as if a ploughshare were passing through my
backbone. I cried out: 'Oh, I am dying! I am dying!' But afterwards I
was filled
with great joy."

The devotees listened breathlessly to these experiences of the Master.

MASTER (to Girish): "But it isn't necessary for you
to go so far. My
experiences are for others to refer to. You busy yourself with five
different
things, but I have one ideal only. I do not enjoy anything but God.
This is
what God has ordained for me. (Smiling) There are
different trees in the
forest, some shooting up with one trunk and others spreading out with
five
branches. (All smile.)

"Yes, my experiences are for others to refer to. But you should live in
the
world in a spirit of detachment. You will no doubt have dirt on your
body,
but you must shake it off as the mudfish shakes off the mud. You may
swim
in the black ocean of the world, but your body should not be stained."

GIRISH (smiling): "But you too had to marry." (Laughter.)

MASTER (smiling): "Marriage is necessary for the
sake of samskara.6
But how could I lead a worldly life? So uncontrollable was my divine
fervour
that every time the sacred thread was put around my neck it dropped
off.
Some believe that Sukadeva also had to marry — for the sake of
samskara.
They say he even had a daughter. (All laugh.)

"'Woman and gold' alone is the world. It makes one forget God."

GIRISH: "But how can we get rid of 'woman and gold'?"

MASTER: "Pray to God with a yearning heart. Pray to Him for
discrimination. 'God alone is real and all else illusory' — this is
discrimination. One
strains water through a fine sieve in order to separate the dirt from
it. The
clear water goes through the sieve leaving the dirt behind. Apply the
sieve
of discrimination to the world. Live in the world after knowing God.
Then
it will be the world of vidya.

"Just see the bewitching power of women! I mean the women who are
the embodiment of avidya, the power of delusion. They fool men, as it
were.
They take away their inner substance. When I see a man and woman
sitting together, I say to myself, 'Alas, they are done for!' (Looking
at M.)
Haru, such a nice boy, is possessed by a witch. People ask: 'Where is
Haru?
Where is he?' But where do you expect him to be? They all go to the
banyan and find him sitting quietly under it. He no longer has his
beauty,
power, or joy. Ah! He is possessed by the witch that lives in the
banyan.

"If a woman says to her husband, 'Go there', he at once stands up,
ready
to go. If she says, 'Sit down here', immediately he sits down.

"A job-seeker got tired of visiting the manager in an office. He
couldn't
get the job. The manager said to him, 'There is no vacancy now; but
come
and see me now and then.' This went on for a long time, and the
candidate
lost all hope. One day he told his tale of woe to a friend. The friend
said:
'How stupid you are! Why are you wearing away the soles of your feet
going to that fellow? You had better go to Golap. You will get the job
tomorrow.' 'Is that so?' said the candidate. 'I am going right away.'
Golap
was the manager's mistress. The candidate called on her and said:
'Mother,
I am in great distress. You must help me out of it. I am the son of a
poor
brahmin. Where else shall I go for help? Mother, I have been out of
work
many days. My children are about to starve to death. I can get a job if
you
but say the word.' Golap said to him, 'Child, whom should I speak to?'
She
said to herself; 'Ah, the poor brahmin! He has been suffering too
much.' The
candidate said to her, 'I am sure to get the job if you just put in a
word
about it to the manager.' Golap said, 'I shall speak to him today and
settle
the matter.' The very next morning a man called on the candidate and
said,
'You are to work in the manager's office, beginning today.' The manager
said to his English boss: 'This man is very competent. I have appointed
him.
He will do credit to the firm.'

"All are deluded by 'woman and gold'. But I do not care for it at all.
And
I swear to you that I do not know anything but God."

A DEVOTEE: "Sir, a new sect, named 'Nava Hullol', has been started.
Lalit
Chatterji is one of the members."

MASTER: "There are different views. All these views are but so many
paths to reach the same goal. But everyone believes that his view alone
is
right, that his watch alone keeps correct time."

GIRISH (to M): "Do you remember what Pope says about
it?

'Tis with our judgments as our watches, none

Go just alike, yet each believes his own."

MASTER (to M.): "What does it mean?"

M: "Everyone thinks that his own watch keeps the correct time. But
different watches do not give the same time."

MASTER: "But however wrong the watches may be, the sun never makes
a mistake. One should check one's watch with the sun."

A DEVOTEE: "Mr. X— tells lies."

MASTER: "Truthfulness in speech is the tapasya of the Kaliyuga. It is
difficult to practise other austerities in this cycle. By adhering to
truth one
attains God. Tulsidas said: 'Truthfulness, obedience to God, and the
regarding
of others' wives as one's mother, are the greatest virtues. If one does
not
realize God by practising them, then Tulsi is a liar.'

"Keshab Sen assumed his father's debts. Others would have repudiated
them. I visited Devendra's Samaj at Jorashanko and found Keshab
meditating
on the dais. He was then a young man. I said to Mathur Babu, 'Of all
who
are meditating here, this young man's "float" alone has sunk under
water.
The "fish" is biting at the hook.'

"There was a man — whom I shall not name — who for ten thousand rupees
told a lie in court. In order to win the lawsuit he made me give an
offering
to the Divine Mother. He said to me, 'Father, please give this offering
to
the Mother.' Trusting him like a child, I gave the offering."

DEVOTEE: "A nice man indeed!"

MASTER: "But he had such faith in me that he believed the Mother
would grant his prayer if I but made the offering."

Referring to Lalit Babu, Sri Ramakrishna said: "Is it an easy matter to
get
rid of pride? There are very few who are without pride. Balaram is one
of
them. (Pointing to a devotee) And here is another.
Other people in their
position would have swelled with pride. They would have parted their
hair
and showed other traits of tamas. They would have been proud of their
learning. The 'fat brahmin' [referring to Prankrishna] still has a
little of it.
(To M.) Mahima Chakravarty has read many books,
hasn't he?"

M: "Yes, sir, he has read a great deal."

MASTER (smiling): "I wish he and'Girish could meet.
Then we could
enjoy a little discussion."

GIRISH (smiling): "Doesn't he say that by means of
sadhana all people
can be like Sri Krishna?"

MASTER: "Not exactly that, but something like it."

DEVOTEE: "Sir, can all be like Sri Krishna?"

MASTER: "An Incarnation of God or one born with some of the
characteristics of an Incarnation is called an Isvarakoti. An ordinary
man is called
a jiva or jivakoti. By dint of sadhana a jivakoti can realize God; but
after
samadhi he cannot come back to the plane of relative consciousness.

The Isvarakoti is like the king's son. He has the keys to all the rooms
of
ne seven-storey palace; he can climb to all the seven floors and come
down
at will. A jivakoti is like a petty officer. He can enter some of the
rooms of
the palace; that is his limit.

"Janaka was a jnani. He attained Knowledge by means of his sadhana.
But Sukadeva was Knowledge itself."

GIRISH: "Ah!"

MASTER: "Sukadeva did not attain Knowledge through sadhana. Like
Sukadeva, Narada also had the Knowledge of Brahman. But he retained
bhakti in order to teach people. Prahlada sometimes assumed the
attitude of
'I am He', sometimes that of a servant of God, and sometimes that of
His
child. Hanuman also was like that.

"All may wish for such a lofty state, but all cannot attain it. Some
bamboos
are hollower than others; some are more solid inside."

A DEVOTEE: "You say that your spiritual experiences are for others to
refer
to. Tell us what we should do."

MASTER: "If you want to realize God, then you must cultivate intense
dispassion. You must renounce immediately what you feel to be standing
in your way. You should not put it off till the future. 'Woman and
gold' is
the obstruction. The mind must be withdrawn from it.

"One must not be slow and lazy. A man was going to bathe; he had his
towel on his shoulder. His wife said to him: 'You are worthless. You
are
getting old and still you cannot give up some of your habits. You
cannot live
a single day without me. But look at that man! What a renouncer he is!'

"HUSBAND: 'Why? What has he done?'

"WIFE: 'He has sixteen wives and he is renouncing them one by one.
You will never be able to renounce.'

"HUSBAND: 'Renouncing his wives one by one! You are crazy. He won't
be able to renounce. If a man wants to renounce, does he do it little
by little?'

"WIFE (smiling): 'Still he is better than you.'

"HUSBAND: 'You are silly; you don't understand. He cannot renounce.
But I can. See! Here I go!'"

The Master continued: "That is called intense renunciation. No sooner
did the man discriminate than he renounced. He went away with the towel
on his shoulder. He didn't turn back to settle his worldly affairs. He
didn't
even look back at his home.

"He who wants to renounce needs great strength of mind. He must have
a dare-devil attitude like a dacoit's. Before looting a house, the
dacoits shout:
'Kill! Murder! Loot!'

"Cultivate devotion and love of God and so pass your days. What else
can you do? When Krishna went away, Yasoda became insane with grief
and visited Radha. Radha was moved by her sorrow and appeared before
her as Adyasakti. She said, 'My child, ask a boon of Me.' Yasoda
replied:
'Mother, what else shall I ask of You? Bless me that I may serve
Krishna
alone with my body, mind, and speech; that I may behold His devotee?
with
these eyes; that I may go with these feet to the place where His divine
sport is manifested; that I may serve Him and His devotees with these
hands;
and that I may devote all my sense-organs to His service alone.'"

As Sri Ramakrishna uttered these words, he was about to go into
ecstasy.
Suddenly he exclaimed: "Kali, the Embodiment of Destruction! No,
Nitya-Kali,
my eternal Divine Mother!" With great difficulty he restrained himself.
He was starting to say more about Yasoda, when Mahendra Mukherji
arrived. Mahendra and his younger brother, Priya, had been visiting the
Master
for some time. Mahendra owned a flour-mill and other businesses. His
brother was an engineer. Both the brothers engaged people to manage
their
affairs and therefore had considerable leisure. Mahendra was thirty-six
or
thirty-seven and his brother two years younger. Besides their country
home
at Kedeti, they had a house at Baghbazar, Calcutta. A young devotee
named
Hari accompanied them on their visits to Sri Ramakrishna. Hari was
married
but greatly devoted to the Master. Mahendra and Hari had not visited
Dakshineswar for a long time. They saluted Sri Ramakrishna.

MASTER: "Hello! Why haven't you visited Dakshineswar for so long?"

MAHENDRA: "Sir, I have been away from Calcutta. I was at Kedeti."

MASTER: "You have no children. You don't serve anybody. And still you
have no leisure! Goodness gracious!'

The devotees remained silent. Mahendra was a little embarrassed.

MASTER (to Mahendra): "Why am I saving all this to
you? You are
sincere and generous. You have love for God."

MAHENDRA: 'You are saying these words for my good."

MASTER (smiling): 'You see, we don't take any
collection during the
performance at our place. Jadu's mother says to me, 'Other sadhus
always ask
for money, but you do not.' Worldly people feel annoyed if they have to
spend money.

"A theatrical performance was being given at a certain place. A man
felt a
great desire to take a seat and see it. He peeped in and saw that a
collection
was being taken from the audience. Quietly he slipped away. Another
performance was being given at some other place. He went there and,
inquiring,
found that no collection would he taken. There was a great rush of
people.
He elbowed his way through the crowd and reached the centre of the
hall.
There he picked out a nice scat for himself, twirled his moustaches,
and sat
through the performance. (All laugh.)

"You have no children to divert your mind. I know a deputy magistrate
who draws a salary of eight hundred rupees a month. He went to Keshab's
house to see a performance. I was there too. Rakhal and a few other
devotees
were with me and sat beside me. After a while Rakhal went out for a few
minutes. The deputy magistrate came over and made his young son take
Rakhal's seat. I said, 'He can't sit there.' At that time I was in such
a state
of mind that I had to do whatever the person next to me would ask me to
do; so I had seated Rakhal beside me. As long as the performance lasted
the
deputy did nothing hut gibber with his son. The rascal didn't look at
the
performance even once. I heard, too, that he is a slave to his wife; he
gets
up and sits down us she tells him to. And he didn't see the performance
for
that snub-nosed monkey of a boy. . . .

(To Mahendra) "Do you practise meditation?"

MAHENDRA: 'Yes, sir. A little."

MASTER: "Come to Dakshineswar now and then."

MAHENDRA (smiling): "Yes, sir. I will. You know
where my knots and
twists are. You will straighten them out."

MASTER (smiling): "First come to Dakshineswar; then
I shall press your
limbs to see where your twists are. Why don't you come?"

MAHENDRA: "Because of the pressure of my duties. Besides, I have to go
to my country home now and then."

MASTER (to Mahendra, pointing his finger at the devotees):
"Have they
no homes or dwelling-places? Have they no duties? How is it that they
come?

(To Hari) "Why haven't you come to Dakshineswar? Is
your wife living with you?"

HARI: "No, sir."

MASTER: "Then why did you forget me?"

HARI: "I haven't been well, sir."

MASTER (to the devotees): "He looks thin. He has no
small measure of
bhakti. He is overflowing with it, but it is of a rather troublesome
nature."
(Laughter.)

Sri Ramakrishna used to address a certain devotee's wife by the name of
"Habi's mother". Her brother, a college student aged about twenty, was
there. He stood up, ready to go and play cricket. His younger brother,
named Dwija, was also a devotee of the Master. Both brothers left the
room.
A few minutes later Dwija returned. The Master said, "Why didn't you
go?" A devotee answered: "He wants to hear the music. Perhaps that is
why
he has come back."

Trailokya, the Brahmo devotee, was to sing for the Master. Paltu
arrived.
The Master said: "Who is this? Ah! It is Paltu."

Purna, another young devotee, also arrived. It was with great
difficulty
that Sri Ramakrishna had managed to have him come. His relatives
strongly
objected to his visiting the Master. Purna was a student in the fifth
grade
of the school where M. taught. The boy prostrated himself before Sri
Ramakrishna. The Master seated him by his side and was talking to him
in
a low voice. M. alone was sitting near them. The other devotees were
talking
about various things. Girish, sitting on the other side of the room,
was
reading a life of Keshab.

MASTER (to Purna): "Come nearer."

GIRISH (to M.): "Who is this boy?"

M. was afraid that others might notice the boy. This would make trouble
for him at home and M. would be responsible for it.

M. (sharply): "Don't you see he is a boy?"

GIRISH (smiling): "I need no ghost to tell me that."

The Master and the boy were talking in low tones.

MASTER: "Do you practise what I asked you to?"

PURNA: "Yes, sir."

MASTER: "Do you dream? Do you dream of a flame? A lighted torch? A
married woman? A cremation ground? It is good to dream of these things."

PURNA: "I dreamt of you. You were seated and were telling me something.

MASTER: "What? Some instructions? Tell me some of it."

PURNA: "I don't remember now."

MASTER: "Never mind. But it is very good. You will make progress. You
feel attracted to me, don't you?"

A few minutes later Sri Ramakrishna said to the boy, "Won't you come
there?" He meant Dakshineswar. "I can't promise", answered the boy.

MASTER: "Why? Doesn't one of your relatives live there?"

PURNA: "Yes, sir. But it won't be very convenient for me to go."

Girish was reading a life of Keshab written by Trailokya of the Brahmo
Samaj. In it Trailokya said that at first Sri Ramakrishna had been very
much
opposed to the world but that after meeting Keshab he had changed his
mind and had come to believe that one could lead a spiritual life in
the
world as well. Several devotees had told the Master about this. They
wanted
to discuss it with Trailokya. Those passages in the book had been read
to
the Master.

Noticing the book in Girish's hand, Sri Ramakrishna said to Girish, M.,
Ram, and the other devotees: "Those people are busy with the world.
That
is why they set such a high value on worldly life. They are drowned in
'woman and gold'. One doesn't talk that way after realizing God. After
enjoying divine bliss, one looks on the world as crow-droppings. At the
very
outset I utterly renounced everything. Not only did I renounce the
company
of worldly people, but now and then the company of devotees as well.
I noticed that the devotees were dropping dead one by one, and that
made
my heart writhe with pain. But now I keep one or two of them with me."

Girish left for home, saying he would come back.

Trailokya arrived with Jaygopal Sen. They bowed before the Master and
sat down. He inquired about their health. The younger Naren entered the
room and saluted Sri Ramakrishna. The Master said to him, "Why didn't
you see me last Saturday?"

Trailokya was ready to sing.

MASTER: "Ah! You sang that day about the Blissful Mother. How sweetly
you sang! Others' songs seem insipid to me. That day I didn't enjoy
even
Narendra's singing. Why don't you sing those same songs again?"

Trailokya sang:

Victory to Gora, Sachi's son!

Hail, Abode of every virtue,

Touchstone of Love, Ocean of Bliss,

Man's bewitcher, beauteous of form,

Enchanting the eye like shining gold!

His tender arms that reach to the knee,

Graceful and long as lotus stalks,

Are lovingly stretched to all mankind;

His lotus face of matchless beauty

Overflows with the nectar of Love;

His cheeks are covered with curling hair!

Alight with heavenly love, his beauty

Charms the eye! Beaming with fervour,

Radiant with Bliss, his body trembling

With Hari's joy, Gauranga the golden

Dances like a mad elephant, shaking

In all his limbs with the frenzy of love!

Gauranga, singer of Hari's glories,

Prize of every sadhu's heart,

Rarest of men, the Ocean of Love,

Embraces the outcaste, calls him brother,

Takes him in his arms in fervent love!

He dances with both his arms upraised,

And sings Hari's name; the tears are streaming

Down his cheeks; he weeps, he cries,

He trembles, roars, and rages, saying,

"Where is Hari, the Jewel of my heart?"

The hair on his limbs is standing on end;

Like a kadamba flower is his body;

Covered with dust he rolls on the ground.

O Thou, the Abode of Hari's lila,

Fountain-head of Love's elixir,

Friend of the helpless, Glory of Banga,

Hail Chaitanya, Thou who shinest

Bright as the moon, in the bhakta's heart!

Sri Ramakrishna left the room for a minute. The women devotees
were
seated near the screen. They were eager to see Sri Ramakrishna.
Trailokya
went on with his music.

Sri Ramakrishna entered the room again and said to Trailokya, "Please
sing a little about the Blissful Mother."

Trailokya sang:

O Mother, how deep is Thy love for men!

Mindful of it, I weep for joy. . . .

Listening to the song, the younger Naren went into deep
meditation. He
remained as still as a log. Sri Ramakrishna said to M.: "Look at him.
He is
totally unaware of the outer world."

The song was over. At Sri Ramakrishna's request, Trailokya sang:

O Mother, make me mad with Thy love!

What need have I of knowledge or reason? . . .

Ram asked him to sing about Hari.

Trailokya sang:

Chant, O mind, the name of Hari,

Sing aloud the name of Hari,

Praise Lord Hari's name!

And praising Hari's name, O mind,

Cross the ocean of this world.

Hari dwells in earth, in water,

Hari dwells in fire and air;

In sun and moon He dwells.

Hari's ever living presence

Fills the. boundless universe.

M. said in a low voice to Trailokya, "Please — 'Gaur and
Nitai, ye blessed brothers'."

Sri Ramakrishna, too, asked him to sing the song. Trailokya and the
devotees sang it in chorus, the Master joining them. When it was over,
the
Master sang:

Behold, the two brothers (Gauranga and Nityananda.) have come, who weep
while chanting Hari's name,

The brothers who, in return for blows, offer to sinners Hari's love,

Embracing everyone as brother, even the outcaste shunned by men.

Behold, the two brothers have come, who once were Kanai and Balai of
Braja. . . .

Sri Ramakrishna sang again:

See how all Nadia is shaking

Under the waves of Gauranga's love! . . .

Then:

Who are they that walk along, chanting Hari's name?

O Madhai, go out and see!

They seem to be Gaur and Nitai,

With golden anklets on their lovely feet;

Shaven of head and clad in rags,

They reel like madmen as they go. . . .

The younger Naren was about to leave.

MASTER: "Show great devotion to your parents; but don't obey them if
they stand in your way to God. You must gird your loins with great
determination
and say, 'This rogue of a father!'"

NAREN: "Truly, I have no fear."

Girish arrived. Sri Ramakrishna introduced him to Trailokya. He asked
them to talk to each other. A few minutes later the Master said, "That
song
again, please."

Trailokya sang:

Victory to Gora, Sachi's son!

Hail, Abode of every virtue,

Touchstone of Love, Ocean of Bliss,

Man's bewitcher, beauteous of form,

Enchanting the eye like shining gold! . . .

Sri Ramakrishna went into samadhi. He stood up, totally unconscious of
the world.

Regaining partial consciousness, he begged Trailokya to sing "Oh, what
a
vision I have beheld".

Trailokya sang:

Oh, what a vision I have beheld in Keshab
Bharati's7
hut!

Gora, in all his matchless grace

Shedding tears in a thousand streams!

Like a mad elephant

He dances in ecstasy and sings,

Drunk with an overwhelming love.

Rolling flat upon the ground and swimming in his tears,

He weeps and shouts Lord Hari's name,

Piercing the very heavens with his cries,

Loud as a lion's roar;

Then most humbly he begs men's love,

To feel himself the servant of God.

Shorn of his locks, he has put on the yogi's ochre robe;

Even the hardest heart must melt

To see his pure and heavenly love.

Smitten with man's deep woe,

He has abandoned everything

And pours out love unstintingly.

Oh, would that Premdas were his slave and, passing from door to door,

Might sing Gauranga's endless praise!

The music was over. It was about dusk. Sri Ramakrishna was
surrounded
by the devotees.

MASTER (to Ram): "There were no instruments to
accompany the songs.
The singing creates an atmosphere when there is proper accompaniment.
(Smiling) Do you know how Balaram manages a
festival? He is like a
miserly brahmin raising a cow. The cow must eat very little but give
milk
in torrents. (All laugh.) Sing your own songs and
beat your own drums:
that's Balaram's idea!" (All laugh.)

As evening came on, lamps were lighted in the drawing-room and on the
verandah. Sri Ramakrishna bowed to the Divine Mother and began to chant
the name of God. The devotees sat around and listened to his sweet
chanting.
They wanted to discuss with Trailokya his remarks about the Master's
change of opinion on worldly life. Girish started the discussion.

GIRISH (to Trailokya): "You have written that, after
coming in contact
with Keshab, Sri Ramakrishna changed his views about worldly life; but
it isn't true."

MASTER (to Trailokya and the other devotees): "If a
man enjoys the
Bliss of God, he doesn't enjoy the world. Having tasted divine bliss,
he finds
the world insipid. If a man gets a shawl, he doesn't care for
broadcloth."

TRAILOKYA: "I referred to those who wanted to lead a worldly life. I
didn't mean renouncers."

MASTER: "What are you talking about? People talk about leading a
religious life in the world. But if they once taste the bliss of God
they will not
enjoy anything else. Their attachment to worldly duties declines. As
their
spiritual joy becomes deeper, they simply cannot perform their worldly
duties. More and more they seek that joy. Can worldly pleasures and sex
pleasures be compared to the bliss of God? If a man once tastes that
bliss,
he runs after it ever afterwards. It matters very little to him then
whether
the world remains or disappears.

"Though the chatak bird is about to die of a parched throat, and around
it there are seven oceans, rivers, and lakes overflowing with water,
still it
will not touch that water. Its throat is cracking with thirst, and
still it
will not drink that water. It looks up, mouth agape, for the rain to
fall when
the star Svati is in the ascendant. To the chatak bird all waters are
mere
dryness beside Svati water.'

"People say they will hold to both God and the world. After drinking an
ounce of wine, a man may be pleasantly intoxicated and also conscious
of
the world; but can he be both when he has drunk a great deal more?

"After the bliss of God nothing else tastes good. Then talk about
'woman
and gold' stabs the heart, as it were. (Intoning) 'I
cannot enjoy the talk of
worldly people.' When a man becomes mad for God, he doesn't enjoy money
or such things."

TRAILOKYA: "But, sir, if a man is to remain in the world, he needs
money
and he must also save. He has to give in charity and —"

MASTER: "What? Do you mean that one must first save money and then
seek God? And you talk about charity and kindness! A worldly man spends
thousands of rupees for his daughter's marriage. Yet, all the while,
his
neighbours are dying of starvation; and he finds it hard to give them
two
morsels of rice; he calculates a thousand times before giving them even
that
much. The people around him have nothing to eat; but what does he care
about that? He says to himself: 'What can I do? Let the rascals live or
die.
All I care about is that the members of my family should live well.'
And they
talk about doing good to others!"

TRAILOKYA: "But, sir, there are good people in the world as well. Take
the case of Pundarika Vidyanidhi, the devotee of Chaitanya. He lived in
the world."

MASTER: "He had drunk wine up to his neck. If he had drunk a little
more, he couldn't have led a worldly life."

Trailokya remained silent. M. said aside to Girish, "Then what he has
written is not true."

GIRISH (to Trailokya): "Then what you have written
is not true."

TRAILOKYA: "Why so? Doesn't he [meaning Sri Ramakrishna] admit that
a man can lead a spiritual life in the world?"

MASTER: "Yes, he can. But such a man should first of all attain
Knowledge
and then live in the world. First he should realize God. Then 'he can
swim
in a sea of slander and not be stained.' After realizing God, a man can
live
in the world like a mudfish. The world he lives in after attaining God
is the
world of vidya. In it he sees neither woman nor gold. He finds there
only
devotion, devotee, and God. You see, I too have a wife, and a few pots
and
pans in my room; I too feed a few vagabonds; I too worry about the
devotees — Habi's mother for instance — when they come here."

A DEVOTEE (to Trailokya): "I have read in your book
that you do not
believe in the Incarnation or God. You said so in connection with
Chaitanya."

TRAILOKYA: "Why, Chaitanya himself protested against the idea of Divine
Incarnation. Once, in Puri, Advaita and the other devotees sang a song
to
the effect that Chaitanya was God. At this Chaitanya shut the door of
his
room. Infinite are the glories of God. As he [meaning Sri Ramakrishna]
says,
the devotee is the parlour of God. Suppose a parlour is very well
furnished;
does that mean that the master of the house has exhausted all his power
and
splendour in that one parlour?"

GIRISH: "He [meaning Sri Ramakrishna] says that prema alone is the
essence of God; we need the man through whom this ecstatic love of God
flows. He says that the milk of the cow Hows through the udder; we need
the udder; we do not care for the other parts of the cow — the legs,
tail, or horns."

TRAILOKYA: "The milk of God's prema flows through an infinite number
of channels. God has infinite powers."

GIRISH: "But what other power can stand before prema?"

TRAILOKYA: "It is possible if He who has the power wants it. Everything
is in God's power."

GIRISH: "Yes, I admit that. But there is also a thing called the power
of
avidya."

TRAILOKYA: "Is avidya a thing? Does there exist a substance called
avidya?
It is only a negation, as darkness is the negation of light. There is
no doubt
that we prize prema most: what is a drop to God is an ocean to us. But
if
you say that prema is the last word about God, then you limit God
Himself."

MASTER (to Trailokya and the other devotees): "Yes,
yes, that is true.
But an ounce of wine makes me drunk. What need have I to count the
gallons of wine in the tavern? What need have we to know about the
infinite powers of God?"

GIRISH (to Trailokya): "Do you believe in the
Incarnation of God?"

TRAILOKYA : "God incarnates Himself through. His devotees alone. There
cannot be a manifestation of infinite powers. It simply isn't possible.
It is
impossible for any man to manifest infinite powers."

GIRISH: "You can serve your children as 'Brahma Gopala'.
(A name of God.) Then why isn't it possible to worship a great soul as
God?"

MASTER (to Trailokya): "Why all this bother about
infinity? If I want
to touch you, must I touch your entire body? If you want to bathe in
the
Ganges, must you touch the whole river from Hardwar down to the ocean?

"'All troubles come to an end when the ego dies.' As long as a trace of
'I-consciousness' remains, one is conscious of difference. Nobody knows
what
remains after the 'I' disappears. Nobody can express it in words. That
which
is remains. After the 'I' disappears one cannot say that a part
manifests
through this man and the rest through another. Satchidananda is the
ocean.
The pot of 'I' is immersed in it. As long as the pot exists, the water
seems
to be divided into two parts: one part inside the pot and the other
part
outside it. But when the pot is broken there is only one stretch of
water. One
cannot even say that. Who would say that?"

After the discussion Sri Ramakrishna became engaged in pleasant
conversation with Trailokya.

MASTER: "You are happy. Isn't that so?"

TRAILOKYA: "But I shall become my old self again as soon as I leave
this
place. Here I feel very much the awakening of spiritual consciousness."

MASTER: "You don't have to be afraid of walking on thorns if you are
wearing shoes. You needn't be afraid of 'woman and gold' if you know
that
God alone is real and all else illusory."

>

It was about nine o'clock in the evening. Balaram took Trailokya to
another room and gave him refreshments. Sri Ramakrishna began to tell
the
devotees about Trailokya and people of his views.

MASTER (to Girish, M., and the other devotees): "Do
you know what
these people are like? They are like a frog living in a well, who has
never
seen the outside world. He knows only his well; so he will not believe
that
there is such a thing as the world. Likewise, people talk so much about
the
world because they have not known the joy of God.

(To Girish) "Why do you argue with them so much?
They busy themselves
with both — the world and God. One cannot understand the joy of God
unless one has tasted it. Can anybody explain sex pleasure to a
five-year-old
boy? Worldly people talk about God only from hearsay. Children, hearing
their old aunts quarrelling among themselves, learn to say, 'There is
my
God', 'I swear by God.'

"But that doesn't matter. I don't blame such people. Can all comprehend
the Indivisible Satchidananda? Only twelve rishis could recognize
Ramachandra. All cannot recognize an Incarnation of God. Some take him
for an
ordinary man, some for a holy person, and only a few recognize him as
an
Incarnation.

"One offers a price for an article according to one's capital. A rich
man
said to his servant: 'Take this diamond to the market and let me know
how
different people price it. Take it, first of all, to the egg-plant
seller.' The
servant took the diamond to the egg-plant seller. He examined it,
turning it
over in the palm of his hand, and said, 'Brother, I can give nine seers
of
egg-plants for it.' 'Friend,' said the servant, 'a little more — say,
ten seers.'
The egg-plant seller replied: 'No, I have already quoted above the
market
price. You may give it to me if that price suits you. The servant
laughed.
He went back to his master and said: 'Sir, he would give me only nine
seers
of egg-plants and not one more. He said he had offered more than the
market
price.' The master smiled and said: 'Now take it to the cloth-dealer.
The
other man deals only in egg-plants. What does he know about a diamond?
The cloth-dealer has a little more capital. Let us see how much he
offers for
it.' The servant went to the cloth-dealer and said: 'Will you buy this?
How
much will you pay for it?' The merchant said: 'Yes, it is a good thing.
I
can make a nice ornament out of it. I will give you nine hundred rupees
tor it.' 'Brother, said the servant, 'offer a little more and I will
sell it to you.
Give me at least a thousand rupees.' The cloth-dealer said: 'Friend,
don't
press me for more. I have offered more than the market price. I cannot
give
a rupee more. Suit yourself.' Laughing the servant returned to his
master
and said: 'He won't give a rupee more than nine hundred. He too said he
had quoted above the market price.' The master said with a laugh: 'Now
take it to a jeweller. Let us see what he has to say.' The servant went
to a
jeweller. The jeweller glanced at the diamond and said at once, 'I will
give
you one hundred thousand rupees for it.'

"They talk of practising religion in the world. Suppose a man is shut
up
in a room. All the doors and windows are closed. Only a little light
comes.
through a hole in the ceiling. Can he see the sun with that roof over
his
head? And what will he do with only one ray of light? 'Woman and gold'
is the roof. Can he see the sun unless he removes the roof? Worldly
people
are shut up in a room, as it were.

'The Incarnations of God belong to the class of the Isvarakotis. They
roam about in the open spaces. They are never imprisoned in the world,
never entangled by it. Their ego is not the 'thick ego' of worldly
people. The
ego, the 'I-consciousness', of worldly people is like four walls and a
roof:
the man inside them cannot see anything outside. The ego of the
Incarnations and other Isvarakotis is a 'thin ego': through it they
have an
uninterrupted vision of God. Take the case of a man who stands by a
wall on both
sides of which there are meadows stretching to infinity. If there is a
hole
in the wall, through it he can see everything on the other side. If the
hole
is a big one, he can even pass through it. The ego of the Incarnations
and
other Isvarakotis is like the wall with a hole. Though they remain on
this
side of the wall, still they can see the endless meadow on the other
side.
That is to say, though they have a human body, they are always united
with
God. Again, if they will, they can pass through the big hole to the
other
side and remain in samadhi. And if the hole is big enough, they can go
through it and come back again. That is to say, though established in
samadhi, they can again descend to the worldly plane."

The devotees listened breathlessly to these words about the mystery of
Divine Incarnation.

^A
metal image of the Boy Rama given to Sri Ramakrishna during his sadhana
period by a Vaishnava saint.

^A
reference to the lotuses at the six centres, through which the
Kundalini rises.
See Glossary under Kundalini.

^The
young daughter of Balaram Bose.

^It
was perhaps a vision of Mohammed, the founder of Islam.

^A
brahmin woman who was one of Sri Ramakrishna's spiritual teachers.

^According
to Hindu religious law, marriage is one of the ten samskaras, or
purificatory rites, prescribed for the three higher castes, namely, the
brahmin,
kshatriya, and vaisya.

^The
monastic teacher of Sri Chaitanya.


=== 40_balaram_and_girish.htm ===

At the Houses of Balaram and Girish

←
Home
/ The Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna
/ Volume 2
/ →

THE MASTER AT THE HOUSES OF BALARAM AND
GIRISH

Master and M. — Discussion about Divine Incarnation — Kirtan about
Radha and Krishna — About Hazra — Master's exalted mood — Difference
between a jiva and an Incarnation — Divine knowledge destroys
egotism — The ego after God-vision — Hazra's selfishness — God's grace
— Unreality of all worldly relationships — Narendra's scepticism —
Narendra's music — Vidyamaya and avidyamaya — Knowledge of
Brahman — The all-powerful maya.

Friday, April 24, 1885

ABOUT ONE O'CLOCK in the afternoon M. arrived at Balaram's
house in Calcutta and found the Master asleep in the drawing-room, one
or
two devotees resting near him. M. began to fan the Master gently.
A few minutes later Sri Ramakrishna woke up and sat on the bed with his
clothes in a rather untidy condition. M. saluted him and took the dust
of
his feet.

MASTER (tenderly to M.): "Are you well? I'm feeling
rather uneasy. I
have a sore (The beginning of his cancer of the throat.) in my throat.
I suffer very much during the early hours of the
morning. Can you tell me how I may be cured? (In a worried tone)
They
served pickled mango with the meal. I ate a little of it.

"How is your wife? I noticed the other day that she was looking rather
sickly. Give her soothing drinks to keep her nerves cool."

M: "Green coconut milk, sir?"

MASTER: "Yes. A drink made of sugar candy is also good."

M: "Since last Sunday I have been living at our house with my parents.

MASTER: "You have done well. It will be convenient for you to live at
home. Since your parents live there, you won't have to worry so much
about the family."

While Sri Ramakrishna was talking, his mouth became dry. He said to
M., like a child: "I feel a dryness in my mouth. Do you all feel that
way?

M. (to Jogin): "Is your mouth also drying up?"

JOGIN: "No. Perhaps it is due to the heat."

Jogindra of Ariadaha was an intimate disciple of Sri Ramakrishna, and
later, after the passing away of the Master, renounced the world.

Sri Ramakrishna's clothes were still untidy. Some of the devotees
smiled.

MASTER: "I look like a mother nursing her babies. (All laugh.)
Well, my
tongue is drying up. Shall I eat a pear or a jamrul?" (A kind of juicy
fruit.)

BABURAM: "Let me get a jamrul for you."

MASTER: "You don't have to go out in this sun."

M. was still fanning the Master.

MASTER: "You may stop now. You have been fanning a long time."

M: "I am not tired, sir."

MASTER (tenderly): "No?"

M. taught in a school in the neighbourhood. He had a little recess at
one
o'clock, during which he visited Sri Ramakrishna. It was time for him
to
go back to the school. He saluted the Master.

MASTER (to M.): "Must you go now?"

A DEVOTEE: "School is not over yet. He came here during recess."

MASTER (smiling): "He is like a mother with seven or
eight children.
Day and night she is busy with her worldly duties. But now and then she
makes time to serve her husband."

M.'s school closed at four o'clock. He came back to Balaram's house and
found the Master sitting in the drawing-room. The devotees were
arriving
one by one. The younger Naren arid Ram came. Narendra, too, was there.
M. saluted the Master and took a seat. The ladies sent a plate of halua
for
Sri Ramakrishna. Because of the sore in his throat he could not eat any
hard food.

MASTER (to Narendra): "Ah! This is nice stuff! Eat
some! It is good!
Eat some!" (All laugh.)

Dusk was coming on. Sri Ramakrishna was about to go to the house of
Girish, who had arranged a festival to celebrate the Master's coming.
The
Master came down from the second floor of Balaram's house with M. and a
few other devotees. Near the gate he saw a beggar chanting the name of
Rama, and he stood still. He fell into a meditative mood and remained
standing a few minutes. He said to M., "He sings well." A devotee gave
the
beggar four pice.

Sri Ramakrishna entered Bosepara Lane. Laughing, he said to M.: "What
are these people saying? 'There comes Paramahamsa's battalion!' What
these fools say!" (All laugh.)

Sri Ramakrishna entered Girish's house. The latter had invited a large
number of devotees to join the festival. Many of them were present.
They
all stood up to receive the Master, who, smiling, took his seat. The
devotees
sat around him. Among them were Girish, Mahimacharan, Ram, and
Bhavanath, and also Baburam, Narendra, Jogin, the younger Naren, Chuni,
Balaram, M., and the other devotees who had accompanied the Master from
Balaram's house.

MASTER (to Mahimacharan): "I said. to Girish about
you, 'There is one —
very deep. You are only knee-deep.' Now you must help me check up on
what I said. I want to see you two argue. But don't compromise." (All
laugh.)

Girish and Mahimacharan started their discussion. Soon Ram said: "Let
them stop. Let us have some kirtan."

MASTER (to Ram): "No, no! This has a great deal of
meaning. They are
'Englishmen'. I want to hear what they say."

Mahimacharan contended that all could become Krishna by means of
sadhana. Girish said that Sri Krishna was an Incarnation of God.
However
much a man practised sadhana, he could never be an Incarnation.

MAHIMA: "Do you know what I mean? Let me give an illustration. The
bel-tree can become a mango-tree if only the obstructions are removed.
It
can be done by the practice of yoga."

GIRISH: "You may say whatever you like, but it cannot be done either by
the practice of yoga or by anything else. Only a Krishna can become
Krishna.
If anybody has all the attributes of another person, Radha for
instance, then
he is none other than that person — Radha herself. If I see in a person
all
the attributes of Krishna, then I shall conclude that I am seeing
Krishna
Himself."

Mahimacharan could not argue well. At last he had to accept Girish's
views.

MAHIMA (to Girish): "Yes, sir, both views are right.
God has willed the
path of knowledge. He has also willed the path of bhakti. (Pointing
to Sri
Ramakrishna) As he says, by different paths people ultimately
reach one
and the same goal."

MASTER (aside to Mahima): "You see, what I said was
right, wasn't it?"

MAHIMA: "Yes, sir. As you say, both paths are right."

MASTER (pointing to Girish): "Haven't you noticed
how deep his faith
is? He forgot to eat his refreshments. Like a dog, he would have torn
your
throat if you hadn't accepted his view. But we have enjoyed the
discussion.
You two have known each other and I myself have learnt many things."

The musician arrived with his party and sat in the middle of the room.
He was waiting for a sign from Sri Ramakrishna to begin the kirtan. The
Master gave his permission.

RAM (to the Master): "Please tell them what to sing."

MASTER: "What shall I suggest? (After a little reflection)
Well, let them
sing the prelude to the union of Radha and Krishna."

The musician sang:

My Gora, my treasure, the jewel among men,

Weeps as he chants Sri Radha's name

And rolls on the ground; with fervent love

He chants her name again and again.

The tears stream from his love-filled eyes;

Once more he rolls upon the ground,

As chanting her name he faints away.

The hair on his body stands on end;

His tongue can lisp but a single word.

Says Basu: (The author of the song.) Why is Gora so restless?

The kirtan continued.

Radha had met Krishna on the bank of the Jamuna under the kadamba
tree. Her companions describe her physical and mental condition:

A hundred times each hour, in and out of the room she goes;

Restless, breathing hard, she looks toward the kadamba grove.

Is she afraid of the elders? Has she been possessed by a ghost?

Filled with restlessness, she cannot keep her dress arranged;

Her jewels have fallen off; she trembles every now and then.

Alas, she is so young! A princess born, and a wife besides!

What is it that she craves? We do not understand her mind;

But we can guess her hand is reaching out to catch the moon.

Humbly says Chandidas: (The author of the song.) Radha has fallen in
Krishna's trap.

The Kirtan went on.

Radha's friends say to her.

Tell us, O Radha of comely face! Tell us what it is that ails you.

Why has your mind wandered away? Why do you claw the earth in frenzy?

Tell us why your golden skin has taken the ashy hue of cinders.

From your body the scarlet cloth has dropped unheeded to the ground;

Ah! Your eyes are red with tears; your lovely lotus face has withered.

Tell us what it is that ails you, lest our hearts should break with
grief.

Radha says to her friends:

I long for the sight of Krishna's face.

The musician sang again.

Hearing Krishna's flute, Radha has gone mad. She says to her friends:

Who is the Sorcerer that dwells in the kadamba grove?

His flute-notes suddenly enter my ears and strike a chord in my heart;

Piercing my very soul, they slay my dharma and drive me mad.

With restless mind and streaming eyes, alas! I can scarcely breathe:

How He plays His magic flute, whose music thrills my soul!

Because He is out of my sight, my heart expires; I cannot stay home.

My soul yearns for Him; racked with pain, it longs to see Him once more.

Says Uddhava Das: But you will die, O Radha, when you behold Him!

The music continued.

Radha's heart yearns for the vision of Krishna. She says to her friends:

First I heard His magic flute from the kadamba grove,

And the next day the minstrel told me of Him and thrilled my soul;

Another day, O friend of my heart, you chanted His blessed name.

(Ah, the blessed name of Krishna, full of honeyed sweetness!)

The wise men, too, described to me His virtues without number.

I am a weak and simple girl, and stern, alas! are my elders;

My love for my Beloved grows; how can I live any longer?

After reflecting long, I find that I must die at last:

Can you not tell me a way, O friend, by which I may meet my Krishna?

As Sri Ramakrishna heard the line, "Ah, the blessed name of
Krishna,
full of honeyed sweetness!", he could not remain seated any longer. He
stood
up in a state of unconsciousness and went into deep samadhi. The
younger
Naren stood at his right. Regaining partial consciousness, the Master
repeated the name of Krishna in his melodious voice. Tears flowed down
his
cheeks. He sat down again. The musician continued his singing.

Visakha, a friend of Radha, runs out and brings a portrait of Krishna.
She
holds it before Radha's eyes. Radha says: "I see the picture of Him
whom I
beheld on the Jamuna's bank. Ever since then I have been in this plight.

I see the picture of Him whom I beheld on the Jamuna's bank;

The name Visakha spoke is the name of Him who is painted here.

He who played on the flute is the Beloved of my soul;

His virtues the minstrel sang to me; He has bewitched my heart.

It is none other than He!" So saying, Radha falls in a swoon.

Restored to her senses by her friends, at once she says to them,

"Show me Him, O friends, whom I saw reflected in my soul."

And they promise her that they will.

Now Sri Ramakrishna with Narendra and the other devotees began
to
sing the kirtan in a loud voice. They sang:

Behold, the two brothers have come, who weep while chanting Hari's
name. . . .

They continued:

See how all Nadia is shaking

Under the waves of Gauranga's love. . . .

Again Sri Ramakrishna went into samadhi. After regaining
consciousness
of the outer world, he returned to his seat. Turning to M., he said, "I
don't
remember which way I was facing before." Then he began to talk to the
devotees.

NARENDRA (to the Master): "Hazra has now become a
good man."

MASTER: "You don't know. There are people who repeat Rama's name
with their tongues but hide stones under their arms to throw at others."

NARENDRA: "I don't agree with you, sir. I asked him about the things
people complain of. He denied them."

MASTER: "He is steadfast in his devotions. He practises japa a little.
But
he also behaves in a queer way. He doesn't pay the coachman his fare."

NARENDRA: "That isn't true, sir. He said he had paid it."

MASTER: "Where did he get the money?"

NARENDRA: "From Ramlal or someone else."

MASTER: "Did you ask him all these things in detail? Once I prayed to
the Divine Mother, O Mother, if Hazra is a hypocrite then please remove
him from here.' Later on I told him of my prayer. After a few days he
came
to me and said, 'You see, I am still here.' (The Master and
the others laugh.)
But soon afterwards he left.

"Hazra's mother begged me through Ramlal to ask Hazra to come home.
She was almost blind with weeping. I tried in various ways to persuade
him
to visit her. I said: 'Your mother is old. Go and see her once.' I
couldn't
make him go. Afterwards the poor mother died weeping for him."

NARENDRA: "This time he will go home."

MASTER: "Yes, yes! He will go home! He is a rogue. He is a rascal. You
don't understand him. You are a fool. Gopal said that Hazra stayed at
Sinthi
a few days. People used to supply him with butter, rice, and other
food. He
had the impudence to tell them he couldn't swallow such coarse rice and
bad butter. Ishan of Bhatpara accompanied him there. He ordered Ishan
to carry water for him. That made the other brahmins very angry."

NARENDRA: "I asked him about that too. He said that Ishan Babu had
himself come forward with the water. Besides, many brahmins of Bhatpara
showed him respect."

MASTER (smiling): "That was the result of his japa
and austerity. You
see, physical traits to a great extent influence character. Short
stature and a
body with dents here and there are not good traits. People with such
traits
take a long time to acquire spiritual knowledge."

BHAVANATH: "Let us stop talking about these things."

MASTER: "Don't misunderstand me. (To Narendra) You
say you
understand people; that is why I am telling you all this. Do you know
how I look
on people like Hazra? I know that just as God takes the form of holy
men,
so He also takes the form of cheats and rogues. (To
Mahimacharan) What
do you say? All are God."

MAHIMA: "Yes, sir. All are God."

GIRISH (to the Master): "Sir, what is ekangi prema?"

MASTER: "It means one-sided love. For instance, the water does not seek
the duck, but the duck loves water. There are other kinds of love:
sadharani,
samanjasa, and samartha. In the first, which is ordinary love, the
lover seeks
his own happiness; he doesn't care whether the other person is happy or
not. That was Chandravali's attitude toward Krishna. In the second,
which
is a compromise, both seek each other's happiness. This is a noble kind
of
love. But the third is the highest of all. Such a lover says to his
beloved,
'Be happy yourself, whatever may happen to me.' Radha had this highest
love. She was happy in Krishna's happiness. The gopis, too, had
attained
this exalted state.

"Do you know who the gopis were? Ramachandra was wandering in the
forest where sixty thousand rishis dwelt. They were very eager to see
Him.
He cast a tender glance at them. According to a certain Purana, they
were
born later on as the gopis of Vrindavan."

A DEVOTEE: "Sir, who may be called an antaranga?"

MASTER: "Let me give an illustration. A natmandir has pillars inside
and
outside. An antaranga is like the inside pillars. Those who always live
near
the guru are the antarangas.

(To Mahimacharan) "The jnani wants neither a form of
God nor His
Incarnation. While wandering in the forest, Ramachandra saw a number of
rishis. They welcomed Him to their asrama with great love and said to
Him:
'O Rama, today our life is blessed because we have seen You. But we
know
You as the son of Dasaratha. Bharadvaja and other sages call You a
Divine
Incarnation; but that is not our view. We meditate on the Indivisible
Satchidananda.' Rama was pleased with them and smiled.

"Ah, what a state of mind I passed through! My mind would lose itself
in the Indivisible Absolute. How many days I spent that way! I
renounced
bhakti and bhakta, devotion and devotee. I became inert. I could not
feel
the form of my own head. I was about to die. I thought of keeping
Ramlal's
aunt (Referring to his own wife.) near me.

"I ordered the removal of all pictures and portraits from my room. When
I regained outer consciousness, when the mind climbed down to the
ordinary
level, I felt as if I were being suffocated like a drowning person. At
last I
said to myself, 'If I can't bear people, then how shall I live?' Then
my mind
was again directed to bhakti and bhakta. 'What has happened to me?' I
kept
asking people. Bholanath (A clerk at the Dakshineswar temple garden.)
said to me, 'This state of mind has been described
in the Mahabharata.' How can a man live, on coming down from the plane
of samadhi? Surely he requires devotion to God and the company of
devotees.
Otherwise, how will he keep his mind occupied?"

MAHIMACHARAN (to the Master): "Sir, can a man return
from the plane
of samadhi to the plane of the ordinary world?"

MASTER (in a low voice, to Mahima): "I shall tell
you privately. You
are the only one fit to hear it.

"Koar Singh also asked me that question. You see, there is a vast
difference
between the jiva and Isvara. Through worship and austerity, a jiva can
at
the utmost attain samadhi; but he cannot come down from that state. On
the other hand, an Incarnation of God can come down from samadhi. A
jiva is like an officer of the king; he can go as far as the outer
court of the
seven-storey palace. But the king's son has access to all the seven
floors; he
can also go outside. Everybody says that no one can return from the
plane
of samadhi. In that case, how do you account for sages like Sankara and
Ramanuja? They retained the 'ego of Knowledge'."

MAHIMA: "That is true, indeed. Otherwise, how could they write books?"

MASTER: "Again, there are the instances of sages like Prahlada, Narada,
and Hanuman. They too retained bhakti after attaining samadhi."

MAHIMA: "That is true, sir."

MASTER: "Some people indulge in philosophical speculation and think
much of themselves. Perhaps they have studied a little Vedanta. But a
man
cannot be egotistic if he has true knowledge. In other words, in
samadhi
man becomes one with God and gets rid of his egotism. True knowledge is
impossible without samadhi. In samadhi man becomes one with God. Then
he can have no egotism.

"Do you know what it is like? Just at noon the sun is directly
overhead.
If you look around then, you do not see your shadow. Likewise, you will
not find the 'shadow' of ego after attaining Knowledge, samadhi.

"But if you see in anyone a trace of 'I-consciousness' after the
attainment
of true Knowledge, then know that it is either the 'ego of Knowledge'
or the
'ego of Devotion' or the 'servant ego'. It is not the 'ego of
ignorance'.

"Again, jnana and bhakti are twin paths. Whichever you follow, it is
God
that you will, ultimately reach. The jnani looks on God in one way and
the
bhakta looks on Him in another way. The God of the jnani is full of
brilliance, and the God of the bhakta full of sweetness."

Bhavanath was seated near the Master, listening to these words.

BHAVANATH (to the Master): "Sir, I have a question
to ask. I don't quite
understand the Chandi. It is written there that the
Divine Mother kills all
beings. What does that mean?"

MASTER: "This is all Her lila. Her sportive pleasure. That question
used
to bother me too. Later I found out that all is maya. Both creation and
destruction are God's maya."

Girish conducted Sri Ramakrishna and the devotees to the roof, where
the meal was served. There was a bright moon in the sky. The devotees
took
their seats. The Master occupied a seat in front of them. All were in a
joyous mood.

Sri Ramakrishna was beside himself with joy at the sight of Narendra.
The beloved disciple sat in the front row. Every now and then the
Master
asked how he was getting along. He had hardly finished half his meal
when
he came to Narendra with some water-melon sherbet and curd from his own
plate. Tenderly he said to the disciple, "Please eat this." Then he
went
back to his own place.

Saturday, May 9, 1885

It was about three o'clock in the afternoon. Sri Ramakrishna sat in
Balaram's drawing-room in a happy mood. Many devotees were present.
Narendra, M., Bhavanath, Purna, Paltu, the younger Naren, Girish, Ram,
Binode, Dwija, and others sat around him.

Balaram was not there. He had gone to Monghyr for a change of air. His
eldest daughter had invited Sri Ramakrishna and the devotees and
celebrated
the occasion with a feast. The Master was resting after the meal.

Again and again the Master asked M.: "Am I liberal-minded? Tell me."

BHAVANATH (smiling): "Why do you ask him? He will
only keep quiet."

A beggar entered the room. He wanted to sing. The devotees listened to
a song or two. Narendra liked his singing and asked him to sing more.

MASTER: "Stop! Stop! We don't want any more songs. Where is the
money? (To Narendra) You may order the music, but
who will pay?"

A DEVOTEE (smiling): "Sir, the beggar may think you
are an amir, a
wealthy aristocrat, the way you are leaning against that big pillow." (All
laugh.)

MASTER (smiling): "He may also think I am ill."

The conversation drifted to Hazra and his egotism. For some reason he
had had to go away from Dakshineswar.

NARENDRA: "Hazra now admits he was egotistic."

MASTER: "Don't believe him. He says so in order to come back to
Dakshineswar. (To the devotees) Narendra always
insists that Hazra is a grand
person."

NARENDRA: "Even now I say so."

MASTER: "Why? You have heard so much about him, and still you think so?"

NARENDRA: "He has slight defects but many virtues."

MASTER: "I admit that he has devotion to his ideal. He said to me, 'You
don't care for me now, but later you will be seeking my company.' A
goswami
came from Srerampore. He was a descendant of Advaita Goswami. He
intended to spend a night or two at the temple garden. I asked him very
cordially
to stay. Do you know what Hazra said to me? He said, 'Send him to the
temple
officer.' What was in his mind was that the goswami might ask for milk
or
food, and that he might have to give him some from his own share. I
said
to Hazra: 'Now, you rogue! Even I prostrate myself before him because
he
is a goswami. And you, after leading a worldly life and indulging a
great
deal in "woman and gold", have so much pride because of a little japa!
Aren't you ashamed of yourself?'

"One realizes God through sattva. Rajas and tamas take one away from
Him. The scriptures describe sattva as white, rajas as red, and tamas
as black.
Once I asked Hazra: Tell me what you think of the people that come
here.
How much sattva does each one possess?' He said, 'Narendra has one
hundred
per cent and I have one hundred and ten per cent.' 'What about me?'
I asked. And he said: 'You still have a trace of pink. You have only
seventy-five per cent, I should say.' (All laugh.)

"Hazra used to practise japa at Dakshineswar. While telling his beads,
he would also try to do a little brokerage business. He has a debt of a
few
thousand rupees which he must clear up. About the brahmin cooks of the
temple he remarked, 'Do you think I talk with people of that sort?'

"The truth is that you cannot attain God if you have even a trace of
desire. Subtle is the way of dharma. If you are trying to thread a
needle,
you will not succeed if the thread has even a slight fibre sticking out.

"There are people who perform japa for thirty years and still do not
attain
any result. Why? A gangrenous sore requires very drastic treatment.
Ordinary
medicine won't cure it.

"No matter how much sadhana you practise, you will not realize the goal
as long as you have desire. But this also is true, that one can realize
the
goal in a moment through the grace of God, through His kindness. Take
the case of a room that has been dark a thousand years. If somebody
suddenly brings a lamp into it, the room is lighted in an instant.

"Suppose a poor man's son has fallen into the good graces of a rich
person.
He marries his daughter. Immediately he gets an equipage, clothes,
furniture,
a house, and other things."

A DEVOTEE: "Sir, how does one receive God's grace?"

MASTER: "God has the nature of a child. A child is sitting with gems in
the skirt of his cloth. Many a person passes by him along the road.
Many of
them pray to him for gems. But he hides the gems with his hands and
says,
turning away his face, 'No, I will not give any away.' But another man
comes along. He doesn't ask for the gems; and yet the child runs after
him
and offers him the gems, begging him to accept them.

"One cannot realize God without renunciation. Who will accept my
words? I have been seeking a companion, a sympathetic soul who will
understand
my feelings. When I see a great devotee, I say to myself, 'Perhaps he
will accept my ideal.' But later on I find that he behaves in a
different way.

"A ghost sought a companion. One becomes a ghost if one dies from an
accident on a Saturday or a Tuesday. So whenever the ghost found
someone
who seemed to be dying from an accident on either of these days, he
would
run to him. He would say to himself that at last he had found his
companion.
But no sooner would he run to the man than he would see the man getting
up. The man, perhaps, had fallen from a roof and after a few moments
regained consciousness.

"Once Mathur Babu was in an ecstatic mood. He behaved like a drunkard
and could not look after his work. At this all said: 'Who will look
after his
estate it he behaves like that? Certainly the young priest (Sri
Ramakrishna, who was at that time a priest in the Kali temple.) has
cast a spell
upon him.'

"During one of Narendra's early visits I touched his chest and he
became
unconscious. Regaining consciousness, he wept and said: 'Oh, why did
you
do that to me? I have a father! I have a mother!' This 'I' and 'mine'
spring
from ignorance.

"A guru said to his disciple: 'The world is illusory. Come away with
me.'
'But, revered sir,' said the disciple, 'my people at home — my father,
my
mother, my wife — love me so much. How can I give them up?' The guru
said: 'No doubt you now have this feeling of "I" and "mine" and say
that
they love you; but this is all an illusion of your mind. I shall teach
you a
trick, and you will know whether they love you truly or not.' Saying
this,
the teacher gave the disciple a pill and said to him: 'Swallow this at
home.
You will appear to be a corpse, but you will not lose consciousness.
You
will see everything and hear everything. Then I shall come to your
house
and gradually you will regain your normal state.'

"The disciple followed the teacher's instructions and lay on his bed
like a
dead person. The house was filled with loud wailing. His mother, his
wife,
and the others lay on the ground weeping bitterly. Just then a brahmin
entered the house and said to them, 'What is the matter with you?'
'This
boy is dead', they replied. The brahmin felt his pulse and said: 'How
is that?
No, he is not dead. I have a medicine for him that will cure him
completely.'
The joy of the relatives was unbounded; it seemed to them that heaven
itself had come down into their house. 'But', said the brahmin, 'I must
tell
you something else. Another person must take some of this medicine
first,
and then the boy must swallow the rest. But the other person will die.
I see
he has so many dear relatives here; one of them will certainly agree to
take
the medicine. I see his wife and mother crying bitterly. Surely they
will not
hesitate to take it.'

"At once the weeping stopped and all sat quiet. The mother said: 'Well,
this is a big family. Suppose I die; then who will look after the
family?' She
fell into a reflective mood. The wife, who had been crying a minute
before
and bemoaning her ill luck, said: 'Well, he has gone the way of
mortals. I
have these two or three young children. Who will look after them if I
die?'

"The disciple saw everything and heard everything. He stood up at once
and said to the teacher: 'Let us go, revered sir. I will follow you.' (All
laugh.)

"Another disciple said to his teacher: 'Revered sir, my wife takes
great
care of me. It is for her sake that I cannot give up the world.' The
disciple
practised hathayoga. The teacher taught him, too, a trick to test his
wife's
love. One day there was a great wailing in his house. The neighbours
came
running and saw the hathayogi seated in a posture, his limbs paralysed
and
distorted. They thought he was dead. His wife fell on the ground,
weeping
piteously: 'Oh, what has befallen me? How have you provided for our
future? Oh, friends, I never dreamt I should meet such a fate!'

"In the mean time the relatives and friends had brought a cot to take
the
corpse out. But suddenly a difficulty arose as they started to move it.
Since
the body was twisted and stiff, it could not be taken out through the
door.
A neighbour quickly brought an axe and began to chop away the
door-frame.
The wife was crying bitterly, when she heard the sound of the axe.
She ran to the door. 'What are you doing, friends?' she asked, still
weeping.
The neighbour said, 'We can't take the body out; so we are chopping
away
the door-frame.'

"'Please', said the wife, 'don't do any such thing. I am a widow now; I
have no one to look after me. I have to bring up these young children.
If
you destroy this door, I shall not be able to replace it. Friends,
death is
inevitable for all, and my husband cannot be called back to life. You
had better
cut his limbs.' The hathayogi at once stood up. The effect of the
medicine had
worn off. He said to his wife: 'You evil one! You want to cut off my
hands
and feet, do you?' So saying, he renounced home and followed his
teacher.
(All laugh.)

"Many women make a show of grief. Knowing beforehand that they will
have to weep, they first take off their nose-rings and other ornaments,
put
them securely in a box, and lock it. Then they fall on the ground and
weep,
'O friends, what has befallen us?'"

NARENDRA: "How can I believe, without proof, that God incarnates Him
self as a man?"

GIRISH: "Faith alone is sufficient. What is the proof that these
objects
exist here? Faith alone is the proof."

A DEVOTEE: "Have philosophers been able to prove that the external
world
exists outside us? But they say we have an irresistible belief in it."

GIRISH (to Narendra): "You wouldn't believe, even if
God appeared before
you. God Himself might say that He was God born as a man, but perhaps
you would say that He was a liar and a cheat."

The conversation turned to the immortality of the gods.

NARENDRA: "What is the proof of their immortality?"

GIRISH: "You wouldn't believe it even if the gods appeared before you."

NARENDRA: "That the immortals existed in the past requires proof."

M. whispered something to Paltu.

PALTU (smiling, to Narendra): "What need is there
for the immortals to
be without beginning? To be immortal one need only be without end."

MASTER (smiling): "Narendra is the son of a lawyer,
but Paltu of a deputy
magistrate." (All laugh.)

All kept silent awhile.

JOGIN (smiling): "He [meaning the Master] doesn't
accept Narendra's
words any more."

MASTER (smiling): "One day I remarked that the
chatak bird doesn't
drink any water except that which falls from the sky. Narendra said,
'The
chatak drinks ordinary water as well.' Then I said to the Divine
Mother,
'Mother, then are my words untrue?' I was greatly worried about it.
Another
day, later on, Narendra was here. Several birds were flying about in
the
room. He exclaimed, 'There! There!' 'What is there?' I asked. He said,
'There is your chatak!' I found they were only bats. Since that day I
don't
accept what he says. (All laugh.)

"At Jadu Mallick's garden house Narendra said to me, 'The forms of God
that you see are the fiction of your mind.' I was amazed and said to
him,
'But they speak too!' Narendra answered, 'Yes, one may think so.' I
went to
the temple and wept before the Mother. 'O Mother,' I said, 'what is
this?
Then is this all false? How could Narendra say that?' Instantly I had a
revelation. I saw Consciousness — Indivisible Consciousness — and a
divine
being formed of that Consciousness. The divine form said to me, 'If
your
words are untrue, how is it that they tally with the facts?' Thereupon
I said
to Narendra: 'You rogue! You created unbelief in my mind. Don't come
here any more.'"

The discussion continued. Narendra was arguing. He was then slightly
over twenty-two years of age.

NARENDRA (to Girish, M., and the others): "How am I
to believe in the
words of scripture? The Mahanirvana Tantra says, in
one place, that unless
a man attains the Knowledge of Brahman he goes to hell; and the same
book
says, in another place, that there is no salvation without the worship
of
Parvati, the Divine Mother. Manu writes about himself in the Manusamhita;
Moses describes his own death in the Pentateuch.

"The Samkhya philosophy says that God does not exist, because there is
no proof of His existence. Again, the same philosophy says that one
must
accept the Vedas and that they are eternal.

"But I don't say that these are not true. I simply don't understand
them.
Please explain them to me. People have explained the scriptures
according
to their fancy. Which explanation shall we accept? White light coming
through a red medium appears red, through a green medium, green."

A DEVOTEE: "The Gita contains the words of God."

MASTER: "Yes, the Gita is the essence of all
scriptures. A sannyasi may or
may not keep with him another book, but he always carries a pocket Gita."

A DEVOTEE: "The Gita contains the words of Krishna."

NARENDRA: "Yes, Krishna or any fellow for that matter!"

Sri Ramakrishna was amazed at these words of Narendra.

MASTER: "This is a fine discussion. There are two interpretations of
the
scriptures: the literal and the real. One should accept the real
meaning
alone — what agrees with the words of God. There is a vast difference
between
the words written in a letter and the direct words of its writer. The
scriptures
are like the words of the letter; the words of God are direct words. I
do not
accept anything unless it agrees with the direct words of the Divine
Mother."

The conversation again turned to Divine Incarnation.

NARENDRA: "It is enough to have faith in God. I don't care about what
He is doing or what He hangs from. Infinite is the universe; infinite
are the Incarnations."

As Sri Ramakrishna heard the words, "Infinite is the universe; infinite
are
the Incarnations", he said with folded hands, "Ah!"

M. whispered something to Bhavanath.

BHAVANATH: "M. says: 'As long as I have not seen the elephant, how can
I know whether it can pass through the eye of a needle? I do not know
God; how can I understand through reason whether or not He can
incarnate
Himself as man?"

MASTER: "Everything is possible for God. It is He who casts the spell.
The
magician swallows the knife and takes it out again; he swallows stones
and bricks."

A DEVOTEE: "The Brahmos say that a man should perform his worldly
duties. He must not renounce them."

GIRISH: "Yes, I saw something like that in their paper, the Sulabha
Samachar. But a man cannot even finish all the works that are
necessary for
him in order to know God, and still he speaks of worldly duties."

Sri Ramakrishna smiled a little, looked at M., and made a sign with his
eye, as if to say, "What he says is right."

M. understood that this question of performing duties was an extremely
difficult one.

Purna arrived.

MASTER: "Who told you about our being here?"

PURNA: "Sarada."

MASTER (to the woman devotees): "Give him some
refreshments."

Narendra was preparing to sing. The Master and the devotees were eager
to hear his music. Narendra sang:

Siva, Thy ready thunderbolt rules over
meadows, hills, and sky!

O God of Gods! O Slayer of Time! Thou the Great Void, the King of
Dharma!

Siva, Thou Blessed One, redeem me; take away my grievous sin.

He sang again:

Sweet is Thy name, O Refuge of the humble!

It falls like sweetest nectar on our ears

And comforts us, Beloved of our souls! . . .

Again:

Why, O mind, do you never call on Him

Who takes away all fear of danger?

Tricked by delusion you forget yourself,

Enamoured of the world's bleak wilderness.

Alas, what mockery is here!

Comrades and wealth you cannot always keep;

Take care lest you forget Him quite.

Give up the false, O mind! Adore the Real;

And all the grief will vanish from your life.

Keep my good counsel in your heart.

With sounding voice proclaim Lord Hari's name

And cast away your false desires,

If you would cross the ocean of this life;

Surrender to Him body, mind, and soul,

And worship Him with trusting love.

PALTU: "Won't you sing that one?"

NARENDRA: "Which one?"

PALTU: "'When I behold Thy peerless face.'"

Narendra sang:

When I behold Thy peerless face, beaming with love, O Lord,

What fear have I of earthly woe or of the frown of sorrow?

As the first ray of the dawning sun dispels the dark,

So too, Lord, when Thy blessed light bursts forth within the heart,

It scatters all our grief and pain with sweetest balm.

When on Thy love and grace I ponder, in my heart's deepest depths,

Tears of joy stream down my cheeks beyond restraining.

Hail, Gracious Lord! Hail, Gracious One! I shall proclaim Thy love.

May my life-breath depart from me as I perform Thy works!

At M.'s request Narendra sang again, M. and many of the
devotees
listening with folded hands:

Be drunk, O mind, be drunk with the Wine of Heavenly Bliss!

Roll on the ground and weep, chanting Hari's sweet name! . . .

Narendra sang again:

Meditate, O my mind, on the Lord Hari,

The Stainless One, Pure Spirit through and through.

How peerless is the light that in Him shines!

How soul-bewitching is His wondrous form!

How dear is He to all His devotees! . . .

He sang another song:

This universe, wondrous and infinite,

O Lord, is Thy handiwork;

And the whole world is a treasure-house

Full of Thy beauty and grace.

The stars glisten innumerable,

Like gems on a necklace of gold;

How can the myriad suns and moons

Ever be numbered above?

The earth is glowing with grain and gold,<

Thine ever brimming store;

Uncounted stars, O God, sing forth:

Blessed, blessed art Thou!

Then he sang:

Upon the tray of the sky blaze bright

The lamps of sun and moon;

Like diamonds shine the glittering stars

To deck Thy wondrous form. . . .

He continued:

Fasten your mind, O man, on the Primal Purusha,

Who is the Cause of all causes,

The Stainless One, the Beginningless Truth.

As Prana He pervades the infinite universe;

The man of faith beholds Him,

Living, resplendent, the Root of all. . . .

At Narayan's request Narendra sang:

Come! Come, Mother! Doll of my soul! My heart's Delight!

In my heart's lotus come and sit, that I may see Thy face.

Alas! sweet Mother, even from birth I have suffered much;

But I have borne it all. Thou knowest, gazing at Thee.

Open the lotus of my heart, dear Mother! Reveal Thyself there.

Then Narendra sang a song of his own choice:

In dense darkness, O Mother, Thy formless beauty sparkles;

Therefore the yogis meditate in a dark mountain cave. . . .

As Sri Ramakrishna heard this soul-enthralling song, he went
into samadhi.

Narendra again sang:

Be drunk, O mind, be drunk with the Wine of Heavenly Bliss! . . .

The Master was in samadhi. He was sitting on a pillow,
dangling his
feet, facing the north and leaning against the wall. The devotees were
seated
around him.

In an ecstatic mood Sri Ramakrishna talked to the Divine Mother. He
said: "I shall take my meal now. Art Thou come? Hast Thou found Thy
lodging and left Thy baggage there and then come out?" He continued:
"I don't enjoy anybody's company now. Why should I listen to the music,
Mother? That diverts part of mv mind to the outside world."

The Master was gradually regaining consciousness of the outer world.
Looking at the devotees he said: "Years ago I used to be amazed to see
people
keeping kai fish alive in a pot of water. I would say: 'How cruel these
people are! They will finally kill the fish.' But later, as changes
came over
my mind, I realized that bodies are like pillow-cases. It doesn't
matter
whether they remain or drop off."

BHAVANATH: "Then may one injure a man without incurring sin? Kill him?"

MASTER: "Yes, it is permissible if one has achieved that state of mind,
But not everyone has it. It is the state of Brahmajnana.

"By coming down a step or two from samadhi I enjoy bhakti and bhakta.
"There exist in God both vidya and avidya. Vidyamaya leads one to God,
and avidyamaya away from Him. Knowledge, devotion, compassion; and
renunciation belong to the realm of vidya. With the help of these a man
comes near God. One step more and he attains God, Knowledge of Brahman.
In that state he clearly feels and sees that it is God who has become
everything. He has nothing to give up and nothing to accept. It is
impossible tor
him to be angry with anyone.

"One day I was riding in a carriage. I saw two prostitutes standing on
a
verandah. They appeared to me to be embodiments of the Divine Mother
Herself. I saluted, them.

"When I first attained this exalted state I could not worship Mother
Kali
or give Her the food offering. Haladhari and Hriday told me that on
account
of this the temple officer had slandered me. But I only laughed; I
wasn't in
the least angry. Attain Brahmajnana and then roam about enjoying God's
lila. A holy man came to a town and went about seeing the sights. He
met
another sadhu, an acquaintance. The latter said: 'I see you are gadding
about. Where is your baggage. I hope no thief has stolen it.' The first
sadhu
said: 'Not at all. First I found a lodging, put my things in the room
in
proper order, and locked the door. Now I am enjoying the fun of the
city.'"
(All laugh.)

BHAVANATH: "These are very lofty words."

M. (to himself): "Tasting God's lila after
Brahmajnana! Climbing down
to the ordinary plane of consciousness after the attainment of samadhi!"

MASTER (to M. and the others): "Is it an easy thing
to obtain the
Knowledge of Brahman? It is not possible unless the mind is
annihilated. The guru
said to the disciple, 'Give me your mind and I shall give you
Knowledge.'
In this state one enjoys only spiritual talk and the company of
devotees.

(To Ram) "You are a physician. You know that
medicine works only when
it mixes with the patient's blood and becomes one with it. Likewise, in
the
state of Brahmajnana one sees God both within and without. One sees
that
it is God Himself who has become the body, mind, life, and soul."

M. (to himself): "Assimilation!"

MASTER: "A man attains Brahmajnana as soon as his mind is annihilated.
With the annihilation of the mind dies the ego, which says 'I', 'I'.
One also
attains the Knowledge of Brahman by following the path of devotion. One
also attains It by following the path of knowledge, that is to say,
discrimination.
The jnanis discriminate, saying, 'Neti, neti', that is, 'All this is
illusory,
like a dream.' They analyse the world through the process of 'Not this,
not
this'; it is maya. When the world vanishes, only the jivas, that is to
say, so
many egos, remain.

"Each ego may be likened to a pot. Suppose there are ten pots filled
with
water, and the sun is reflected in them. How many suns do you see?"

A DEVOTEE: "Ten reflections. Besides, there certainly exists the real
sun."

MASTER: "Suppose you break one pot. How many suns do you see now?"

DEVOTEE: "Nine reflected suns. But there certainly exists the real Sun."

MASTER : "All right. Suppose you break nine pots. How many suns do you
see now?"

DEVOTEE: "One reflected sun. But there certainly exists the real sun."

MASTER (to Girish): "What remains when the last pot
is broken?"

GIRISH: "That real sun, sir."

MASTER: "No. What remains cannot be described. What is
remains.
How will you know there is a real sun unless there is a reflected sun?
'I-
consciousness' is destroyed in samadhi. A man climbing down from
samadhi
to the lower plane cannot describe what he has seen there."

It was late in the evening. Lamps were burning in the drawing-room. Sri
Ramakrishna was in a spiritual mood. The devotees sat around him.

MASTER (in the ecstatic mood): "There is no one else
here; so I am telling
you this. He who from the depth of his soul seeks to know God will
certainly
realize Him. He must. He alone who is restless for God and seeks
nothing
but Him will certainly realize Him.

"Those who belong to this place (The inner circle of the Master's
devotees.)
have already come. Those who will
come from now on are outsiders. Such people will come now and then. The
Divine Mother will tell them: 'Do this. Call on God in this way.'

"Why doesn't man's mind dwell on God? You see, more powerful than
God is His Mahamaya, His Power of Illusion. More powerful than the
judge is his orderly. (All laugh.)

"Rama said to Narada: 'I am very much pleased with your prayer. Ask a
boon of Me.' Narada replied, 'O Rama, may I have pure devotion to Your
Lotus Feet, and may I not be deluded by Your world-bewitching maya!'
Rama said, 'Be it so: ask for something else.' Narada replied, 'No,
Rama, I
do not want any other boon.'

"Everyone is under the spell of this world-bewitching maya. When God
assumes a human body, He too comes under the spell. Rama wandered
about weeping for Sita. 'Brahman weeps entangled in the snare of the
five
elements.' But you must remember this: God, by His mere will, can
liberate
Himself from this snare."

BHAVANATH: "The guard of a railway train shuts himself of his own will
in a carriage; but he can get out whenever he wants to."

MASTER: "The Isvarakotis — Divine Incarnations, for instance
— can liberate themselves whenever they want to; but the jivakotis
cannot. Jivas are
imprisoned by 'woman and gold'. When the doors and windows of a room
are fastened with screws, how can a man get out?"

BHAVANATH (smiling): "Ordinary men are like the
third-class passengers
on a railway train. When the doors of their compartments are locked,
they
have no way to get out."

GIRISH: "If a man is so strongly tied hand and foot, then what is his
way?"

MASTER: "He has nothing to fear if God Himself, as the guru, cuts the
chain of maya."


=== 41_at_rams.htm ===

At Ram's House

←
Home
/ The Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna
/ Volume 2
/ →

AT RAM'S HOUSE

Nitya and Lila — The seed of bhakti cannot be destroyed — Reality
includes both Absolute and universe — Futility of mere scholarship —
Advice to the worldly — The real teacher — Go beyond knowledge
and ignorance — Nature of the worldly — Master's adherence to truth —
Divine Incarnation — Master reprimands Captain — Significance of
Radhika — Master's boyhood reminiscences — Magician and his magic
— Harmless ego — "Wicked ego" must be killed — Signs of God-realization
— Man's peace in God — Sincere yearning enables one to realize
God — Advice to householders.

Saturday, May 25, 1885

SRI RAMAKRISHNA was sitting in the drawing-room on the ground
floor of
Ram's house. He was surrounded by devotees and was conversing with
them. Mahima sat in front of him, M. to his left. Paltu, Bhavanath,
Nityagopal, Haramohan, and a few others sat around him. It was about
five o'clock in the afternoon. The Master inquired after several
devotees.

MASTER (to M.): "Hasn't the younger Naren arrived
yet?"

Presently the younger Naren entered the room.

MASTER: "What about him?"

M: "Who, sir?"

MASTER: "Kishori. Isn't Girish Ghosh coming? What about Narendra?"

A few minutes later Narendra arrived and saluted Sri Ramakrishna.

MASTER (to the devotees): "It would be fine if Kedar
were here. He
agrees with Girish. (To Mahima, smiling) He says the
same thing."1

Ram had arranged the kirtan. With folded hands the musician said to
Sri Ramakrishna, "Sir, I can begin if you give the order."

The Master drank some water and chewed spices from a small bag. He
asked M. to close the bag.

The musician started the kirtan. As Sri Ramakrishna heard the sound
of the drum he went into an ecstatic mood. While listening to the
prelude
of the kirtan he plunged into deep samadhi. He placed his legs on the
lap
of Nityagopal, who was sitting near him. The devotee, too, was in an
ecstatic mood. He was weeping. The other devotees looked on intently.

Regaining partial consciousness, Sri Ramakrishna said: "From the Nitya
to the Lila and from the Lila to the Nitya. (To Nityagopal)
What is your ideal?"

NITYAGOPAL: "Both are good."

Sri Ramakrishna closed his eyes and said: "Is it only this? Does God
exist
only when the eyes are closed; and cease to exist when the eyes are
opened?
The Lila belongs to Him to whom the Nitya belongs, and the Nitya
belongs
to Him to whom the Lila belongs. (To Mahima) My dear
sir, let me tell you —"

MAHIMA: "Revered sir, both are according to the will of God."

MASTER: "Some people climb the seven floors of a building and cannot
get down; but some climb up and then, at will, visit the lower floors.

"Uddhava said to the gopis: 'He whom you address as your Krishna dwells
in all beings. It is He alone who has become the universe and its
living beings.'

"Therefore I say, does a man meditate on God only when his eyes are
closed? Doesn't he see anything of God when his eyes are open?"

MAHIMA: "I have a question to ask, sir. A lover of God needs Nirvana2
some time or other, doesn't he?"

MASTER: "It can't be said that bhaktas need Nirvana. According to some
schools there is an eternal Krishna and there are also His eternal
devotees.
Krishna is Spirit embodied, and His Abode also is Spirit embodied.
Krishna
is eternal and the devotees also are eternal. Krishna and the devotees
are
like the moon and the stars — always near each other. You yourself
repeat:
'What need is there of penance if God is seen within and without?'
Further,
I have told you that the devotee who is born with an element of Vishnu
cannot altogether get rid of bhakti. Once I fell into the clutches of a
jnani,3
who made me listen to Vedanta for eleven months. But he couldn't
altogether
destroy the seed of bhakti in me. No matter where my mind wandered,
it would come back to the Divine Mother. Whenever I sang of Her,
Nangta would weep and say, 'Ah! What is this?' You see, he was such a
great
jnani and still he wept. (To the younger Naren and the others)
Remember
the popular saying that if a man drinks the juice of the alekh creeper,
a plant
grows inside his stomach. Once the seed of bhakti is sown, the effect
is
inevitable: it will gradually grow into a tree with flowers and fruits.

"You may reason and argue a thousand times, but if you have the seed
of bhakti within you, you will surely come back to Hari."

The devotees listened silently to the Master. Sri Ramakrishna asked
Mahima, laughing, "What is the thing you enjoy most?"

MAHIMA (smiling): "Nothing, sir. I like mangoes."

MASTER (smiling): "All by yourself? Or do you want
to share them with others?"

MAHIMA (smiling): "I am not so anxious to give
others a share. I may
as well eat them all by myself."

MASTER: "But do you know my attitude? I accept both, the Nitya and
the Lila. Doesn't God exist if one looks around with eyes open? After
realizing
Him, one knows that He is both the Absolute and the universe. It is He
who is the Indivisible Satchidananda. Again, it is He who has become
the
universe and its living beings.

"One needs sadhana. Mere study of the scriptures will not do. I noticed
that though Vidyasagar had no doubt read a great deal, he had not
realized
what was inside him; he was satisfied with helping boys get their
education,
but had not tasted the Bliss of God. What will mere study accomplish?
How
little one assimilates! The almanac may forecast twenty measures of
rain;
but you don't get a drop by squeezing its pages."

MAHIMA: "We have so many duties in the world. Where is the time for
sadhana?"

MASTER: Why should you say such a thing? It is you who describe the
world as illusory, like a dream.

"Rama and Lakshmana wanted to go to Ceylon. But the ocean was before
them. Lakshmana was angry. Taking his bow and arrow, he said: 'I shall
kill Varuna. This ocean prevents our going to Ceylon.' Rama explained
the
matter to him, saying: 'Lakshmana, all that you are seeing is unreal,
like a
dream. The ocean is unreal. Your anger is also unreal. It is equally
unreal
to think of destroying one unreal thing by means of another.'"

Mahimacharan kept quiet. He had many duties in the world. He had
lately started a school to help others.

MASTER (to Mahima): "Sambhu once said to me: 'I have
some money. It
is my desire to spend it for good works — for schools and dispensaries,
roads,
and so forth.' I said to him: 'It will be good if you can do these
works in a
selfless spirit. But it is extremely difficult to perform unselfish
action. Desire
for fruit comes from nobody knows where. Let me ask you something.
Suppose
God appears before you; will you pray to Him, then, for such things
as schools and dispensaries and hospitals?'"

A DEVOTEE: "Sir, what is the way for worldly people?"

MASTER: "The company of holy men. Worldly people should listen to
spiritual talk. They are in a state of madness, intoxicated with 'woman
and
gold'. A drunkard should be given rice-water as an antidote. Drinking
it
slowly, he gradually recovers his normal consciousness.

"A worldly person should also receive instructions from a sadguru, a
real
teacher. Such a teacher has certain signs. You should hear about
Benares
only from a man who has been to Benares and seen it. Mere book-learning
will not do. One should not receive instruction from a pundit who has
not
realized the world to be unreal. Only if a pundit has discrimination
and
renunciation is he entitled to instruct.

"Samadhyayi remarked that God was dry. Think of his speaking like that
of Him who is the embodiment of sweetness! It sounds like the remark,
'My
uncle's cow-shed is full of horses.' (All laugh.)

"Yes, a worldly person is in a state of intoxication. He always says to
himself: 'It is I who am doing everything. All these — the house and
family
— are mine.' Baring his teeth, he says: 'What will happen to my wife
and
children without me? How will they get along? Who will look after my
wife and children?' Rakhal said one day, 'What will happen to my wife?'"

HARAMOHAN: "Did Rakhal say that?"

MASTER: "What else could he do? He who has knowledge has ignorance
also. 'How amazing!' Lakshmana said to Rama. 'Even a sage like
Vasishtha is
stricken with grief because of the death of his sons!' 'Brother,'
replied Rama,
'he who has knowledge has ignorance also. Therefore go beyond both
knowledge and ignorance.'

"Suppose a thorn has pierced a man's foot. He picks another thorn to
pull
out the first one. After extracting the first thorn with the help of
the second,
he throws both away. One should use the thorn of knowledge to pull out
the thorn of ignorance. Then one throws away both the thorns, knowledge
and ignorance, and attains vijnana. What is vijnana? It is to know God
distinctly by realizing His existence through an intuitive experience
and to
speak to Him intimately. That is why Sri Krishna said to Arjuna, 'Go
beyond the three gunas.'

"In order to attain vijnana one has to accept the help of vidyamaya.
Vidyamaya includes discrimination — that is to say, God is real and the
world
illusory — and dispassion, and also chanting God's name and glories,
meditation, the company of holy persons, prayer, and so forth.
Vidyamaya may be
likened to the last few steps before the roof. Next is the roof, the
realization of God.

"Worldly people are in a state of chronic intoxication — mad with
'woman
and gold'; they are insensible to spiritual ideas. That is why I love
the
youngsters not yet stained by 'woman and gold'. They are 'good
receptacles'
and may become useful in God's work. But as for worldly people, you
lose
almost everything while trying to eliminate the worthless stuff in
them.
They are like bony fish — almost all bones and very little meat.

"Worldly people are like mangoes struck by hail. If you want to offer
them
to God you have to purify them by sprinkling them with Ganges water.
Even then they are seldom used in the temple worship. If you are to use
them
at all, you have to apply Brahmajnana, that is to say, you have to
persuade
yourself that it is God alone who has become everything."

A Theosophist gentleman arrived with Aswini Kumar Dutta and the son
of Behari Bhaduri. The Mukherji brothers entered the room and saluted
Sri Ramakrishna. Arrangements were being made for devotional music in
the courtyard. At the first beat of the drum the Master left the room
and
went there. The devotees followed him.

Bhavanath introduced Aswini to the Master. The Master introduced him
to M. Aswini and M. were talking together when Narendra arrived. Sri
Ramakrishna said to Aswini, "This is Narendra."

Saturday, June 13, 1885

About three o'clock in the afternoon Sri Ramakrishna was resting in his
room after the midday meal. A pundit was sitting on a mat on the floor.
Near the north door of the room stood a brahmin woman who had recently
lost her only daughter and was stricken with grief. Kishori, too, was
in the
room. M. arrived and saluted the Master. He was accompanied by Dwija
and
a few other devotees.

Sri Ramakrishna was not well. He had been suffering from an inflamed
throat. These were the hot days of summer. M. was not keeping well
either,
and of late he had not been able to visit Sri Ramakrishna frequently.

MASTER (to M.): "How are you? It is nice to see you.
The bel-fruit you
sent me was very good."

M: "I am slightly better now, sir."

MASTER: "It is very hot. Take a little ice now and then. I have been
feeling the heat very much myself; so I ate a great deal of ice-cream.
That is
why I have this sore throat. The saliva smells very bad.

"I have said to the Divine Mother: 'Mother, make me well. I shall not
eat ice-cream any more.' Next I said to Her that I wouldn't eat ice
either.
Since I have given my word to the Mother, I shall certainly not eat
these
things. But sometimes I become forgetful. Once I said that I wouldn't
eat
fish on Sundays; but one Sunday I forgot and ate fish. But I cannot
consciously go back on my word. The other day I asked a devotee to
bring my
water-jug to the pine-grove. As he had to go elsewhere, another man
brought
the jug. But I couldn't use that water. I was helpless. I waited there
until
the first man brought water for me.

"When I renounced everything with an offering of flowers at the Lotus
Feet of the Mother, I said: 'Here, Mother, take Thy holiness, take Thy
unholiness. Here, Mother, take Thy dharma, take Thy adharma. Here,
Mother, take Thy sin, take Thy virtue. Here, Mother, take Thy good,
take
Thy evil. And give me only pure bhakti.' But I could not say, 'Here,
Mother,
take Thy truth, take Thy falsehood.'"

A devotee had brought some ice. Again and again the Master asked M.,
"Shall I eat it?"

M. said humbly, "Please don't eat it without consulting the Mother."
Sri Ramakrishna could not take-the ice.

MASTER: "It is the bhakta, and not the jnani, who discriminates between
holiness and unholiness. Vijay's mother-in-law said to me: 'How little
I have
achieved of my spiritual ideal! I cannot take food from everybody.' I
said to
her: 'Is eating everybody's food a sign of jnana? A dog eats anything
and
everything. Does that make it a jnani?'

(To M.) "Why do I eat a variety of dishes? In order
not to become
monotonous. Otherwise I should have to renounce the devotees.

"I said to Keshab: 'If I instruct you from a still higher standpoint,
then
you won't be able to preserve your organization. In the state of jnana
organizations and things, like that become unreal, like a dream.'

"One time I gave up fish. At first I suffered from it; afterwards it
didn't
bother me much. If someone burns up a bird's nest, the bird flies
about; it
takes shelter in the sky. If a man truly realizes that the body and the
world
are unreal, then his soul attains samadhi.

"Formerly I had the state of mind of a jnani: I couldn't enjoy the
company
of men. I would hear that a jnani or a bhakta lived at a certain place;
then,
a few days later, I would learn that he was dead. Everything seemed to
me
impermanent; so I couldn't enjoy people's company. Later the Mother
brought my mind down to a lower plane; She so changed my mind that I
could enjoy love of God and His devotees."

Next the Master began to talk about Divine Incarnation.

MASTER (to M.): "Do you know why God incarnates
Himself as a man?
It is because through a human body one can hear His words. He sports
through it. He tastes divine bliss through a human body. But through
His
other devotees God manifests only a small part of Himself. A devotee is
like
something you get a little juice from after much sucking — like a
flower you
get a drop of honey from after much sucking. (To M.)
Do you understand this?"

M: "Yes, sir. Very well."

Sri Ramakrishna began to talk to Dwija, who was about sixteen years
old. His father had married a second time. Dwija often accompanied M.
to
Dakshineswar, and Sri Ramakrishna was fond of him. The boy said that
his
father opposed his coming to Dakshineswar.

MASTER: "And your brothers too? Do they speak slightingly of me?"

Dwija did not answer.

M. (to the Master): "Those who speak slightingly of
you will be cured
of it after getting a few more blows from the world."

MASTER (referring to Dwija's brothers): "They live
with their
step-mother. So they are getting blows."

All were silent a moment.

MASTER (to M.): "Introduce Dwija to Purna some time."

M: "Yes, I shall. (To Dwija) Go to Panihati."

MASTER: "I am asking everyone to send people to Panihati. (To M.)
Won't you go?"

Sri Ramakrishna intended to visit the religious festival at Panihati;
so he
was asking the devotees to go too.

M: "Yes, sir, I want to go."

MASTER: "We shall engage a big boat; then it won't toss about. Will
Girish Ghosh be there?"

Sri Ramakrishna looked steadily at Dwija.

MASTER: "Well, there are so many youngsters in the city; why does this
boy come here? (To M.) Tell me what you think.
Certainly he has inherited
some good tendencies from his previous birth."

M: "Undoubtedly, sir."

MASTER: "There is such a thing as inborn tendencies. When a man has
performed many good actions in his previous births, in the final birth
he
becomes guileless. In the final birth he acts somewhat like a madcap.

"To tell you the truth, everything happens by God's will. When He says
'Yea', everything comes to pass, and when He says 'Nay', everything
comes
to a standstill.

"Why is it that one man should not bless another? Because nothing can
happen by man's will: things come to pass or disappear by God's will.

"The other day I went to Captain's house. I saw some young boys going
along the road. They belong to a different class. I saw one of them,
about
nineteen or twenty years old, with his hair parted on the side. He was
whistling as he walked along.

"I see some immersed in the thickest tamas. They play the flute and are
proud of it.

(To Dwija) "Why should a man of Knowledge be afraid
of criticism?
His understanding is as immovable as the anvil in a blacksmith s shop.
Blows
from the hammer fall continually on the anvil but cannot affect it in
the least.

"I saw X —'s father going along the street."

M; "He is a very artless man."

MASTER: "But he has red eyes."

Sri Ramakrishna told the devotees about his visit to Captain's house.
Captain had criticized the young men who visited the Master. Perhaps
Hazra
had poisoned his mind.

MASTER: "I was talking to Captain. I said: 'Nothing exists except
Purusha
and Prakriti. Narada said to Rama, "O Rama, all the men You see are
parts
of Yourself, and all the women are parts of Sita."'

"Captain was highly pleased. He said: 'You alone have the right
perception.
All men are really Rama, being parts of Rama; all women are really
Sita, being parts of Sita.'

"Immediately after saying this he began to criticize the young
devotees.
He said: 'They study English books and don't discriminate about their
food.
It is not good that they should visit you frequently. It may do you
harm.
Hazra is a real man, a grand fellow. Don't allow those young people to
visit
you so much.' At first I said, 'What can I do if they come?' Then I
gave
him some mortal blows. His daughter laughed. I said to him: 'God is
far,
far away from the worldly-minded. But God is very near the man — nay,
within a distance, of three cubits — whose mind is free from
worldliness.'
Speaking of Rakhal, Captain said, 'He eats with all sorts of people.'
Perhaps he had heard it from Hazra. Thereupon I said to him: 'A man may
practise intense austerity and japa, but he won't achieve anything if
his
mind dwells on the world. But blessed is the man who keeps his mind on
God even though he eats pork. He will certainly realize God in due
time.
Hazra, with all his austerity and japa, doesn't allow an opportunity to
slip
by for earning money as a broker.'

"'Yes, yes!' said Captain. 'You are right.' I said to him further, 'A
few
minutes ago you said that all men were parts of Rama and all women
parts
of Sita, and now you are talking like this!'

"Captain said: 'Yes, that's true. But you don't love everybody.'

"I said: 'According to the scriptures, water is God. We see water
everywhere. But some water we drink, some we bathe in, and some we use
for
washing dirty things. Here sit your wife and daughter. I see them as
embodiments of the Blessed Mother.'

"Thereupon Captain said, 'Yes, yes! That's true.' He wanted to
apologize
by touching my feet."

After speaking thus, Sri Ramakrishna laughed. Then he began to tell of
Captain's many virtues.

MASTER: "Captain has many virtues. Every day he attends, to his
devotions. He himself performs the worship of the Family Deity. How
many
mantras he recites while bathing the image! He is a great ritualist. He
performs his daily devotions, such as worship, japa, arati, recital of
the
scriptures, and chanting of hymns.

"I scolded Captain and said: 'Too much reading has spoiled you. Don't
read any more.'

"About my own spiritual state Captain said, 'Your soul, like a bird, is
ready
to fly.' There are two entities: jivatma, the embodied soul, and
Paramatma,
the Supreme Soul. The embodied soul is the bird. The Supreme Soul is
like
the akasa; it is the Chidakasa, the akasa of Consciousness. Captain
said:
'Your embodied soul flies into the akasa of Consciousness. Thus you go
into samadhi.'

(Smiling) "He criticized the Bengalis. He said: The
Bengalis are fools.
They have a gem (Sri Ramakrishna.) near them, but they cannot recognize
it.'

"Captain's father was a great devotee. He was a subeder in the English
army. Even on the battle-field he would perform his worship at the
proper
time. With one hand he would worship Siva and with the other he
would wield his gun and sword.

(To M.) "But Captain is engaged in worldly duties
day and night.
Whenever I go to his house I see him surrounded by his wife and
children.
Besides, his men bring him their account books now and then. But at
times his
mind dwells on God also. It is like the case of a typhoid patient who
is
always in a delirium. Now and then he gets a flash of consciousness and
cries out: 'I want a drink of water! I want a drink of water!' But
while you
are giving him the water, he becomes unconscious again and is not aware
of
anything. I said to Captain, 'You are a ritualist.' He said: 'Yes, I
feel very
happy while performing worship and things like that. Worldly people
have
no other way.'

"I said to him: 'But must one perform formal worship for ever? How long
does a bee buzz about? As long as it hasn't lighted on a flower. While
sipping honey it doesn't buzz.' 'But', he said, 'can we, like you, give
up worship
and other rituals?' Yet he doesn't always say the same thing. Sometimes
he
says that all this is inert, sometimes that all this is conscious. I
say: 'What do
you mean by inert? Everything is Chaitanya, Consciousness.'"

Sri Ramakrishna asked M. about Purna.

MASTER: "If I see Purna once more, then my longing for him will
diminish. How intelligent he is! His mind is much drawn to me. He says,
'I too
feel a strange sensation in my heart for you.' (To M.)
They have taken him
away from your school. Will that harm you?"

M: "If Vidyasagar (The founder of the school.) tells me that Purna's
relatives have taken him away from the school on my account, I have an
explanation to give him."

MASTER: "What will you say?"

M: "I shall say that one thinks of God in holy company. That is by no
means bad. Further, I shall tell him that the text-books prescribed by
the
school authorities say that one should love God with all one's soul." (The
Master laughs.)

MASTER: "At Captain's house I sent for the younger Naren. I said to
him:
Where is your house? I want to see it.' 'Please do come', he said. But
he
became nervous as we were going there, lest his father should know
about
it" (All laugh.)

(To a visitor) "You haven't been here for a long
time — about seven or
eight months."

VISITOR: "About a year, sir."

MASTER: "Another gentleman used to come with you."

VISITOR: "Yes, sir. Nilmani Babu."

MASTER: "Why doesn't he come any more? Ask him to come some time. I
want to see him. Who is this boy with you?"

VISITOR: "He comes from Assam."

MASTER: "Where is Assam? In which direction?"

Dwija spoke to the Master about Ashu. Ashu's father was arranging for
his marriage, but Ashu had no wish to marry.

MASTER: "See, he doesn't want to marry. They are forcing him."

Sri Ramakrishna said to a devotee that he should show respect to his
elder
brother. He said: "The elder brother is like one's father. Respect him."

A pundit was sitting with the devotees. He came from upper India.

MASTER (smiling, to M.): "The pundit is a great
student of the Bhagavata."
M. and the devotees looked at the pundit.

MASTER (to the pundit): "Well, sir, what is
Yogamaya?"

The pundit gave some sort of explanation.

MASTER: "Why isn't Radhika called Yogamaya?"

The pundit also answered this question after a fashion.

MASTER: "Radhika is full of unmixed sattva, the embodiment of prema.
Yogamaya contains all the three gunas — sattva, rajas, and tamas; but
Radhika has nothing but pure sattva.

(To M.) "Narendra now respects Radhika very much. He
says that if
anyone wants to know how to love Satchidananda, he can learn it from
her.

"Satchidananda wanted to taste divine bliss for Itself. That is why It
created Radhika. She was created from the person of Satchidananda
Krishna.
Satchidananda Krishna is the 'container', and He Himself, in the form
of
Radhika, is the 'contained'. He manifested Himself in that way in order
to taste His own bliss, that is to say, in order to experience divine
bliss by
loving Satchidananda.

"Therefore it is written in the Vaishnava books that after her birth
Radhika did not open her eyes. The idea is that she did not wish to see
any
human being. Yasoda came with Krishna in her arms to see Radhika. Only
then did she open her eyes, to behold Krishna. In a playful mood
Krishna
touched her eyes. (To the Assamese boy) Haven't you
seen this? Small
children touch others' eyes with their hands."

The pundit was about to take leave of Sri Ramakrishna.

PUNDIT : "I must go home."

MASTER (tenderly): "Have you earned anything?"

PUNDIT: "The market is very dull. I've earned nothing."

A few minutes later he saluted the Master and departed.

MASTER (to M.): "You see how great the difference is
between worldly
people and the youngsters? This pundit has been worrying about money
day and night. He has come to Calcutta to earn money; otherwise his
people
at home will have nothing to eat. So he has to knock at different
doors.
When will he concentrate his mind on God? But the youngsters are
untouched by 'woman and gold'; hence they can direct their mind to God
whenever they desire.

"The youngsters do not enjoy worldly people's company. Rakhal used to
say, 'I feel nervous at the sight of the worldly-minded.' When I was
first
beginning to have spiritual experiences, I used to shut the doors of my
room
when I saw worldly people coming.

"As a boy, at Kamarpukur, I loved Ram Mallick dearly. But afterwards,
when he came here, I couldn't even touch him. Ram Mallick and I were
great friends during our boyhood. We were together day and night; we
slept together. At that time I was sixteen or seventeen years old.
People
used to say, 'If one of them were a woman they would marry each other.'
Both of us used to play at his house. I remember those days very well.
His
relatives used to come riding in palanquins. Now he has a shop at
Chanak.
I sent for him many a time; he came here the other day and spent two
days.
Ram said he had no children; he brought up his nephew, but the boy
died.
He told me this with a sigh; his eyes were filled with tears; he was
grief-stricken for his nephew. He said further that since they had no
children of
their own, all his wife's affection had been turned to the nephew. She
was
completely overwhelmed with grief. Ram said to her: 'You are crazy.
What
will you gain by grieving? Do you want to go to Benares?' You see, he
called
his wife crazy. Grief for the boy totally 'diluted' him. I found he had
no
stuff in him. I couldn't touch him."

The brahmin lady still stood near the north door. She was a widow. Her
only daughter had been married to a very aristocratic man, a landlord
in
Calcutta with the title of Raja. Whenever the daughter visited her she
was
escorted by liveried footmen. Then the mother's heart swelled with
pride.
Just a few days ago the daughter had died, and now she was beside
herself
with sorrow.

The brahmin lady listened to the account of Ram Mallick's grief for his
nephew. For the last few days she had been running to the Master from
her home at Baghbazar like an insane person. She was eager to know
whether
Sri Ramakrishna could suggest any remedy for her unquenchable grief.
Sri
Ramakrishna resumed the conversation.

MASTER: "A man came here the other day. He sat a few minutes and
then said, 'Let me go and see the "moon-face" of my child.' I couldn't
control
myself and said: 'So you prefer your son's "moon-face" to God's
"moon-face"!
Get out, you fool!'

(To M.) "The truth is that God alone is real and all
else unreal. Men,
universe, house, children — all these are like the magic of the
magician. The
magician strikes his wand and says: 'Come delusion! Come confusion!'
Then
he says to the audience, 'Open the lid of the pot; see the birds fly
into the
sky,' But the magician alone is real and his magic unreal. The unreal
exists
tor a second and then vanishes.

"Siva was seated in Kailas. His companion Nandi was near Him. Suddenly
a terrific noise arose. 'Revered Sir,' asked Nandi, 'what does that
mean?' Siva said: 'Ravana is born. That is its meaning.' A few moments
later another terrific noise was heard. 'Now what is this noise?' Nandi
asked. Siva said with a smile, 'Now Ravana is dead.' Birth and death
are
like magic: you see the magic for a second and then it disappears. God
alone
is real and all else unreal. Water alone is real; its bubbles appear
and
disappear. They disappear into the very water from which they rise.

"God is like an ocean, and living beings are its bubbles. They are born
there and they die there. Children are like the few small bubbles
around a
big one.

"God alone is real. Make an effort to cultivate love for Him and find
out
the means to realize Him. What will you gain by grieving?"

All sat in silence. The brahmin lady said, "May I go home now?" The
Master said to her tenderly: "Do you want to go now? It is very hot.
Why
now? You can go later in a carriage with the devotees."

Because the day was so hot, a devotee gave the Master a new fan made
of sandal-wood. He was very much pleased and said: "Good! Good! Om Tat
Sat! Kali!" First he fanned the pictures of the gods and goddesses, and
then
he fanned himself. He said to M.: "See! Feel the breeze!" M. was highly
pleased.

Captain arrived with his children.

Sri Ramakrishna said to Kishori, "Please show the temples to the
children."
He began to talk to Captain. M., Dwija, and the other devotees were
sitting
on the floor. Sri Ramakrishna was sitting on the small couch, facing
the
north. He asked Captain to sit in front of him on the same couch.

MASTER: "I was telling the devotees about you — your
devotion, worship, and arati."

CAPTAIN (bashfully): "What do I know of worship and
arati? How
insignificant I am!"

MASTER: "Only the ego that is attached to 'woman and gold' is harmful.
But the ego that feels it is the servant of God does no harm to
anybody.
Neither does the ego of a child, which is not under the control of any
guna.
One moment children quarrel, and the next moment they are on friendly
terms. One moment they build their toy houses with great care, and
immediately afterwards they knock them down. There is no harm in the
'I-consciousness' that makes one feel oneself to be a child of God or
His servant.
This ego is really no ego at all. It is like sugar candy, which is not
like other
sweets. Other sweets make one ill; but sugar candy relieves acidity. Or
take
the case of Om. It is unlike other sounds.

"With this kind of ego one is able to love Satchidananda. It is
impossible
to get rid of the ego. Therefore it should be made to feel that it is
the devotee
of God, His servant. Otherwise, how can one live? How intense was the
love of the gopis for Sri Krishna! (To Captain)
Please tell us something
about the gopis. You read the Bhagavata so much."

CAPTAIN: "When Sri Krishna lived at Vrindavan, without any of His
royal splendour, even then the gopis loved Him more than their own
souls.
Therefore Sri Krishna said, 'How shall I be able to pay off my debt to
the
gopis, who surrendered to me their all — their bodies, minds, and
souls?'"

Captain's words awakened intense love for Krishna in the Master's mind.

He exclaimed, "Govinda! Govinda! Govinda!" and was about to go into an
ecstatic mood. Captain was amazed and said: "How blessed he is! How
blessed he is!"

Captain and the devotees watched this love-ecstasy of Sri Ramakrishna.
They sat quietly gazing at him, awaiting his return to the
consciousness of
the world.

MASTER: "Tell us more."

CAPTAIN: "Sri Krishna is unattainable by the yogis, by yogis like you;
but He can be attained by lovers like the gopis. How many years did the
yogis practise yoga for His vision! Yet they did not succeed. But the
gopis
realized Him with such ease!"

MASTER (smiling): "Yes, He ate from the. hands of
the gopis, wept for
them, played with them, and made many demands on them."

A DEVOTEE: "Bankim has written a life of Krishna."

MASTER: "He accepts Krishna but not Radhika."

CAPTAIN: "I see he doesn't accept Krishna's lila with the gopis."

MASTER: "I also hear that Bankim says that one needs passions such as
lust."

A DEVOTEE: "He has written in his magazine that the purpose of religion
is to give expression to our various faculties: physical, mental, and
spiritual."

CAPTAIN: "I see. He believes that lust and so forth are necessary. But
he
doesn't believe that Sri Krishna could enjoy His sportive pleasure in
the
world, that God could incarnate Himself in a human form and sport in
Vrindavan with Radha and the gopis."

MASTER (smiling): "But these things are not written
in the newspaper.
How could he believe them?

"A man said to his friend, 'Yesterday, as I was passing through a
certain
part of the city, I saw a house fall with a crash.' 'Wait', said the
friend.
'Let me look it up in the newspaper.' But this incident wasn't
mentioned in
the paper. Thereupon the man said, 'But the paper doesn't mention it.'
His
friend replied, 'I saw it with my own eyes.' 'Be that as it may,' said
the man,
'I can't believe it as long as it isn't in the paper.'

"How can Bankim believe that God sports about as a man? He doesn't
get it from his English education. It is very hard to explain how God
fully
incarnates Himself as man. Isn't that so? The manifestation of Infinity
in
this human body only three and a half cubits tall!"

CAPTAIN: "Krishna is God Himself. In describing Him we have to use
such terms as 'whole' and 'part'."

MASTER: "Whole and part are like fire and its sparks. An Incarnation of
God is for the sake of the bhaktas and not of the jnanis. It is said in
the
Adhyatma Ramayana that Rama alone is both the
Pervading Spirit and
everything pervaded. 'You are the Supreme Lord distinguished as the
vachaka, the signifying symbol, and the vachya, the object signified.'"

CAPTAIN: "The 'signifying symbol' means the pervader, and the 'object
signified' means the thing pervaded."

MASTER: "The pervader in this case is a finite form. It is God
incarnating
Himself as a human being."

Sri Ramakrishna was talking thus to Captain and the devotees when
Jaygopal Sen and Trailokya of the Brahmo Samaj arrived. They saluted
the
Master and sat down. Sri Ramakrishna looked at Trailokya with a smile
and
continued the conversation.

MASTER: "It is on account of the ego that one is not able to see God.
In
front of the door of God's mansion lies the stump of ego. One cannot
enter
the mansion without jumping over the stump.

"There was once a man who had acquired the power to tame ghosts. One
day, at his summons, a ghost appeared. The ghost said: 'Now tell me
what
you want me to do. The moment you cannot give me any work I shall break
your neck.' The man had many things to accomplish, and he had the ghost
do them all, one by one. At last he could find nothing more for the
ghost
to do. 'Now', said the ghost, 'I am going to break your neck.' 'Wait a
minute',
said the man. 'I shall return presently.' He ran to his teacher and
said:
'Revered sir, I am in great danger. This is my trouble.' And he told
his
teacher his trouble and asked, 'What shall I do now?' The teacher said:
'Do
this. Tell the ghost to straighten this kinky hair.' The ghost devoted
itself
day and night to straightening the hair. But how could it make a kinky
hair
straight? The hair remained kinky.

"Likewise, the ego seems to vanish this moment, but it reappears the
next. Unless one renounces the ego, one does not receive the grace of
God.

"Suppose there is a feast in a house and the master of the house puts a
man in charge of the stores. As long as the man remains in the
store-room,
the master doesn't go there; but when of his own will he renounces the
store-room and goes away, then the master locks it and takes charge of
it himself.

"A guardian is appointed only for a minor. A boy cannot safeguard his
property; therefore the king assumes responsibility for him. God does
not
take over our responsibilities unless we renounce our ego.

"Once Lakshmi and Narayana were seated in Vaikuntha, when Narayana
suddenly stood up. Lakshmi had been stroking His feet. She said, 'Lord,
where are You going?' Narayana answered: 'One of My devotees is in
great
danger. I must save him.' With these words He went out. But He came
back immediately. Lakshmi said, 'Lord, why have You returned so soon?'
Narayana smiled and said: 'The devotee was going along the road
overwhelmed with love for Me. Some washermen were drying clothes on the
grass, and the devotee walked over the clothes. At this the washermen
chased
him and were going to beat him with their sticks. So I ran out to
protect
him.' 'But why have You come back?' asked Lakshmi. Narayana laughed
and said: 'I saw the devotee himself picking up a brick to throw at
them.
(All laugh.) So I came back.'

"I said to Keshab, 'You must renounce your ego.' Keshab replied, 'If I
do, how can I keep my organization together?'

"I said to him: 'How slow you are to understand! I am not asking you to
renounce the "ripe ego", the ego that makes a man feel he is a servant
of
God or His devotee. Give up the "unripe ego", the ego that creates
attachment
to "woman and gold". The ego that makes a man feel he is God's
servant. His child, is the "ripe ego". It doesn't harm one.'"

TRAILOKYA: "It is very difficult to get rid of the ego. People only
think
they are free from it."

MASTER: "Gauri would not refer to himself as 'I' lest he should feel
egotistic. He would say 'this' instead. I followed his example and
would refer to
myself as 'this' instead of 'I'. Instead of saying, 'I have eaten,' I
would say,
'This has eaten.' Mathur noticed it and said one day: 'What is this,
revered
father? Why should you talk that way? Let them talk that way. They have
their egotism. You are free from it; you don't have to talk like them.'

"I said to Keshab, 'Since the ego cannot be given up, let it remain as
the
servant, the servant of God.' Prahlada had two moods. Sometimes he
would
feel that he was God. In that mood he would say, Thou art verily I, and
I am verily Thou.' But when he was conscious of his ego, he felt that
God
was the Master and he was His servant. After a man is firmly
established in
the ideal of 'I am He', he can live as God's servant. He may then think
of
himself as the servant of God.

(To Captain) "When a man attains the Knowledge of
Brahman he shows
certain characteristics. The Bhagavata describes
four of them: the state of a
child, of an inert thing, of a madman, and of a ghoul. Sometimes the
knower
of Brahman acts like a five-year-old child. Sometimes he acts like a
madman.
Sometimes he remains like an inert thing. In this state he cannot work;
he
renounces all action. You may say that jnanis like Janaka were active.
The
truth is that people in olden times gave responsibility to their
subordinate
officers and thus freed themselves from worry. Further, at that time
men
possessed intense faith."

Sri Ramakrishna began to speak about the renunciation of action. But he
also said that those who felt they must do their duties should do them
in a detached spirit.

MASTER: "After attaining Knowledge one cannot do much work."

TRAILOKYA: "Why so, sir? Pavhari Baba was a great yogi and yet he
reconciled people's quarrels, even lawsuits."

MASTER: "Yes, yes. That's true. Dr. Durgacharan was a great drunkard.
He used to drink twenty-four hours a day. But he was precise in his
actions;
he did not make any mistake in treating his patients. There is no harm
in
doing work after the attainment of bhakti. But it is very hard. One
needs intense tapasya.

"It is God who does everything. We are His instruments. Some Sikhs
said to me in front of the Kali temple, 'God is compassionate.' I said,
'To
whom is He compassionate?' 'Why, revered sir, to all of us', said the
Sikhs. I
said: 'We are His children. Does compassion to one's own children mean
much? A father must look after his children; or do you expect the
people
of the neighbourhood to bring them up?' Well, won't those who say that
God is compassionate ever understand that we are God's children and not
someone else's?"

CAPTAIN: "You are right. They don't regard God as their own."

MASTER: "Should we not, then, address God as compassionate? Of course
we should, as long as we practise sadhana. After realizing God, one
rightly
feels that God is our Father or Mother. As long as we have not realized
God, we feel that we are far away from Him, children of someone else.

"During the stage of sadhana one should describe God by all His
attributes.
One day Hazra said to Narendra: 'God is Infinity. Infinite is His
splendour. Do you think He will accept your offerings of sweets and
bananas
or listen to your music? This is a mistaken notion of yours.' Narendra
at
once sank ten fathoms. So I said to Hazra, 'You villain! Where will
these
youngsters be if you talk to them like that?' How can a man live if he
gives
up devotion? No doubt God has infinite splendour; yet He is under the
control of His devotees. A rich man's gate-keeper comes to the parlour
where his master is seated with his friends. He stands on one side of
the
room. In his hand he has something covered with a cloth. He is very
hesitant.
The master asks him, 'Well, gate-keeper, what have you in your
hand?' Very hesitantly the servant takes out a custard-apple from under
the
cover, places it in front of his master, and says, 'Sir, it is my
desire that you
should eat this.' The Master is impressed by his servant's devotion.
With
great love he takes the fruit in his hand and says: 'Ah! This is a very
nice
custard-apple. Where did you pick it? You must have taken a great deal
of
trouble to get it.'

"God is under the control of His devotees. King Duryodhana was very
attentive to Krishna and said to Him, 'Please have your meal here.' But
the
Lord went to Vidura's hut. He is very fond of His devotees. He ate
Vidura's
simple rice and greens as if they were celestial food.

"Sometimes a perfect jnani behaves like a ghoul. He does not
discriminate
about food and drink, holiness and unholiness. A perfect knower of God
and a perfect idiot have the same outer signs. A perfect jnani perhaps
does
not utter the mantras while bathing in the Ganges. While worshipping
God,
perhaps he offers all the flowers together at His feet. He doesn't
utter the
mantras, nor does he observe the rituals.

"A man cannot renounce action as long as he desires worldly enjoyment.
As long as one cherishes a desire for enjoyment, one performs action.

"A bird sat absent-mindedly on the mast of a ship anchored in the
Ganges.
Slowly the ship sailed out into the ocean. When the bird came to its
senses,
it could find no shore in any direction. It flew toward the north
hoping to
reach land; it went very far and grew very tired but could find no
shore.
What could it do? It returned to the ship and sat on the mast. After a
long
while the bird flew away again, this time toward the east. It couldn't
find
land in that direction either; everywhere it saw nothing but limitless
ocean.
Very tired, it again returned to the ship and sat on the mast. After
resting a
long while, the bird went toward the south, and then toward the west.
When
it found no sign of land in any direction, it came back and settled
down on
the mast. It did not leave the mast again, but sat there without making
any
further effort. It no longer felt restless or worried. Because it was
free from
worry, it made no further effort."

CAPTAIN: "Ah, what an illustration!"

MASTER: "Worldly people wander about to the four quarters of the earth
for the sake of happiness. They don't find it anywhere; they only
become
tired and weary. When through their attachment to 'woman and gold' they
only suffer misery, they feel an urge toward dispassion and
renunciation.
Most people cannot renounce 'woman and gold' without first enjoying it.
There are two sorts of people: those who stay in one place and those
who
go about to many places. There are some sadhakas who visit many sacred
places. They cannot settle down in one spot; they must drink the water
of
many holy places. Thus roaming about, they satisfy their unfulfilled
desires.
And at last they build a hut in one place and settle down there. Then,
free
from worry and effort, they meditate on God.

"But what is there to enjoy in the world? 'Woman and gold'? That is
only
a momentary pleasure. One moment it exists and the next moment it
disappears.

"The world is like an overcast sky that steadily pours down rain: the
face
of the sun is seldom seen. There is mostly suffering in the world. On
account
of the cloud of 'woman and gold' one cannot see the sun. Some people
ask
me: 'Sir, why has God created such a world? Is there no way out for
us?' I
say to them: 'Why shouldn't there be a way out? Take shelter with God
and pray to Him with a yearning heart for a favourable wind, that you
may
have things in your favour. If you call on Him with yearning. He will
surely
listen to you.'

"A man had a son who was on the point of death. In a frenzy he asked
remedies of different people. One of them said: 'Here is a remedy:
First it
must rain when the star Svati is in the ascendant; then some of the
rain must
fall into a skull; then a frog must come there to drink the water, and
a snake
must chase it; and when the snake is about to bite the frog, the frog
must
hop away and the poison must fall into the skull. You should give the
patient a little of the poison and rain-water from the skull.' The
father set
out eagerly to find the medicine when the star Svati was in the sky. It
started raining. Fervently he said to God, 'O Lord, please get a skull
for
me.' Searching here and there, he at last found a skull with rain-water
in it.
Again he prayed to God, saying, 'O Lord, I beseech Thee, please help me
find the frog and the snake.' Since he had great longing, he got the
frog and
the snake also. In the twinkling of an eye he saw a snake chasing a
frog,
and as it was about to bite the frog, its poison fell into the skull.

"If one takes shelter with God and prays to Him with great longing, God
will surely listen; He will certainly make everything favourable."

CAPTAIN: "What an apt illustration!"

MASTER: "Yes, God makes everything favourable. Perhaps the aspirant
doesn't marry. Thus he is able to devote his whole attention to God. Or
perhaps his brothers earn the family's livelihood. Or perhaps a son
takes
on the responsibilities of the family. Then the aspirant will not have
to
bother about the world; he can give one hundred per cent of his mind to
God.

But one cannot succeed unless one renounces 'woman and gold'. Only by
renunciation is ignorance destroyed. The sun's rays, falling on a lens,
burn
many objects. But if a room is dark inside, you cannot get that result.
You
must come out of the room to use the lens.

But some people live in the world even after attaining jnana. They see
both what is inside and what is outside the room. The light of God
illumines
the world. Therefore with that light they can discriminate between good
and bad, permanent and impermanent. The ignorant, who lead a worldly
life
without knowing God, are like people living in a house with mud walls.
With the help of a dim light they can see the inside of the house but
nothing more. But those who live in the world after having attained
Knowledge
and realized God, are like people living in a glass house. They see the
inside of the room and also all that is outside. The light from the sun
of
Knowledge enters strongly into the room. They perceive everything
inside
the room very clearly. They know what is good and what is bad, what is
permanent and what is impermanent.

"God alone is the Doer, and we are all His instruments. Therefore it is
impossible even for a jnani to be egotistic. The writer of a hymn to
Siva
felt proud of his achievement; but his pride was dashed to pieces when
Siva's
bull bared his teeth. He saw that each tooth was a word of the hymn. Do
you understand the meaning of this? These words had existed from the
beginningless past. The writer had only discovered them.

"It is not good to be a guru by profession. One cannot be a teacher
without
a command from God. He who says he is a guru4
is a man of mean intelligence. Haven't you seen a balance? The lighter
side goes higher. He
who is spiritually higher than others does not consider himself a guru.5
Everyone wants to be a teacher, but a disciple is hard to find."

Trailokya was seated on the floor, to the north of the small couch. He
was going to sing. Sri Ramakrishna said to him, "Ah, how sweetly you
sing!"

Trailokya sang to the accompaniment of a tanpura:

I have joined my heart to Thee: all that
exists art Thou;

Thee only have I found, for Thou art all that exists.

O Lord, Beloved of my heart! Thou art the Home of all;

Where indeed is the heart in which Thou dost not dwell?

Thou hast entered every heart: all that exists art Thou.

Whether sage or tool, whether Hindu or Mussalman,

Thou makest them as Thou wilt: all that exists art Thou.

Thy presence is everywhere, whether in heaven or in Kaaba;

Before Thee all must bow, for Thou art all that exists.

From earth below to the highest heaven, from heaven to deepest earth,

I see Thee wherever I look: all that exists art Thou.

Pondering, I have understood; I have seen it beyond a doubt;

I find not a single thing that may be compared to Thee.

To Jafar6
it has been revealed that Thou art all that exists.

He sang again:

Thou art my All in All, O Lord! — the Life of my life, the Essence of
essence;

In the three worlds I have none else but Thee to call my own.

Thou art my peace, my joy, my hope; Thou my support, my wealth, my
glory;

Thou art my wisdom and my strength.

Thou art my home, my place of rest; my dearest friend, my next of kin;

My present and my future, Thou; my heaven and my salvation.

Thou art my scriptures, my commandments; Thou art my ever gracious Guru;

Thou the Spring of my boundless bliss.

Thou art the Way, and Thou the Goal; Thou the Adorable One, O Lord!

Thou art the Mother tender-hearted; Thou the chastising Father;

Thou the Creator and Protector; Thou the Helmsman who dost steer

My craft across the sea of life.

While Sri Ramakrishna listened to the songs he was overwhelmed
with
emotion. Again and again he said: "Ah, Thou art all! Ah me! Ah me!"

The music was over. It was six o'clock in the evening. Sri Ramakrishna
went to the pine-grove, M. accompanying him. Sri Ramakrishna was
laughing
and talking. Suddenly he said to M.: "Why haven't you eaten any
refreshments? Why haven't the others eaten either?" He was eager for
the
devotees to take some refreshments.

Sri Ramakrishna was to go to Calcutta in the evening. While returning
from the pine-grove he said to M., "I don't know who will take me to
Calcutta in his carriage."

It was evening. A lamp was lighted in Sri Ramakrishna's room and
incense was burnt. Lamps also were lighted in the different temples and
buildings. The orchestra was playing in the nahabat. Soon the evening
service would begin in the temples.

Sri Ramakrishna sat on the small couch. After chanting the names of the
different deities, he meditated on the Divine Mother. The evening
service
was over. Sri Ramakrishna paced the room, now and then talking to the
devotees. He also consulted M. about his going to Calcutta.

Presently Narendra arrived. He was accompanied by Sarat and one or
two other young devotees. They all saluted the Master.'

At the sight of Narendra Sri Ramakrishna's love overflowed. He tenderly
touched Narendra's chin as one touches a baby's to show one's love. He
said in a loving voice, "Ah, you have come!"

The Master was standing in his room, facing the Ganges. Narendra and
his young friends were talking to him, facing the east. The Master
turned
toward M. and said: "Narendra has come. How can I go to Calcutta now?
I sent for Narendra. How can I go now? What do you think?"

M: "As you wish, sir. Let us put it off today."

MASTER: "All right. We shall go tomorrow, either by boat or by
carriage.
(To the other devotees) It is late. Go home now."

One by one the devotees saluted him and departed.

^Kedar
spoke of Sri Ramakrishna as an Incarnation of God.

^Nirvana,
or total annihilation of the ego, is the ideal of the jnanis, the
non-dualists.

^The
Master was speaking of Totapuri, whom he always referred to as
"Nangta",
the "naked one".

^The
word means both "spiritual teacher" and "heaviness".

^The
meaning is that if a man thinks of himself as "guru" he is "heavy" and
goes
down, like the heavier pan of a balance.

^The
author of the song.


=== 42_car_festival.htm ===

Car Festival at Balaram's House

←
Home
/ The Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna
/ Volume 2
/ →

CAR FESTIVAL AT BALARAM'S HOUSE

Master on Purna — Purna's divine traits — Story of Ranjit Raya •
Gopal Ma — God dwelling in the Master — Worries associated with
human birth — Nitya and Lila — Essence of Vedanta — Absolute and
Relative are correlatives — Brahman and Sakti — Synthesis of the
formless Reality and God with form — Intimate Knowledge of God —
Master's spiritual experiences — Spiritual fervour of Gopal Ma — Man
and
woman devotees — Free will — The Car Festival — Master's love for
young disciples — Master's praise of Narendra — Knowledge of God is
the same as love of Him — Divine love leads to union with God — Two
kinds of samadhi — Master praises his young disciples — Respect for
one's own mother — Master's spiritual experiences.

Monday, July 13, 1885

SRI RAMAKRISHNA was sitting in Balaram's drawing-room with the
devotees. It was nine o'clock in the morning. Balaram was going to
celebrate the Car Festival the following day. The Deity Jagannath1
was worshipped daily at his house. He had a small car which would be
drawn along the verandah to celebrate the festival. The Master had been
specially invited for the occasion.

Sri Ramakrishna and M. were talking together. Narayan, Tejchandra,
Balaram, and other devotees were in the room. The Master was talking
about Purna, a lad of fifteen. He was very eager to see the boy.

MASTER (to M.): "Well, by which road will he come to
see me? Please
have Purna and Dwija meet each other.

"When two people are of the same age and have the same inner nature,
I bring them together. There is a meaning in this. In this way both
make
progress. Have you noticed Purna's longing for God?"

M: "Yes, sir. One day I was riding on a tram. He saw me from the roof
of his house and ran down to the street. With great fervour he saluted
me
from the street."

MASTER (with tears in his eyes): "Ah! Ah! It is
because you have helped
him make the contact through which he will find out the supreme ideal
of
his life. One doesn't act like that unless one longs for God.

"Narendra, the younger Naren, and Purna — these three have a manly
nature. It is not so with Bhavanath. He has a womanly nature.

"Purna is in such an exalted state that either he will very soon give
up
his body — the body is useless after the realization of God — or his
inner
nature will within a few days burst forth.

"He has a divine nature — the traits of a god. It makes a person less
fearful
of men. If you put a garland of flowers round his neck or smear his
body
with sandal-paste or burn incense before him, he will go into samadhi;
for
then he will know beyond the shadow of a doubt that Narayana Himself
dwells in his body, that it is Narayana who has assumed the body. I
have
come to know about it.

"A few days after my first experience of the God-intoxicated state at
Dakshineswar, a lady of a brahmin family arrived there. She had many
good traits. No sooner was a garland put round her neck and incense
burnt
before her than she went into samadhi. A few moments later she
experienced
great bliss; tears streamed from her eyes. I saluted her and said,
'Mother,
shall I succeed?' 'Yes', she replied.

"I want to see Purna once more. But how will it be possible for me? It
seems he is a part. (A part of the Divine Incarnation.)
How amazing! Not a mere particle, but a part. Very
intelligent, too. I understand that he is very clever in his studies.
Therefore
I have hit it right.

"By dint of austerity, a man may obtain God as his son. By the roadside
on
the way to Kamarpukur is Ranjit Raya's lake. Bhagavati, the Divine
Mother,
was born as his daughter. Even now people hold an annual festival there
in the month of Chaitra, in honour of this divine daughter. I feel very
much like going there.

"Ranjit Raya was the landlord of that part of the country. Through the
power of his tapasya he obtained the Divine Mother as his daughter. He
was very fond of her, and she too was much attached to him; she hardly
left
his presence. One day Ranjit Raya was engaged in the duties of his
estate.
He was very busy. The girl, with her childlike nature, was constantly
interrupting him, saying: 'Father, what is this? What is that?' Ranjit
Raya tried,
with sweet words, to persuade her not to disturb him, and said: 'My
child,
please leave me alone. I have much work to do.' But the girl would not
go
away. At last, absent-mindedly, the father said, 'Get out of here!' On
this
pretext she left home. A pedlar of conch-shell articles was going along
the
road. From him she took a pair of bracelets for her wrists. When he
asked
tor the price, she said that he could get the money from a certain box
in
her home. Then she disappeared. Nobody saw her again. In the mean time
the pedlar came to the house and asked for the price of his bracelets.
When
she was not to be found at home, her relatives began to run about
looking
for her. Ranjit Raya sent people in all directions to search for her.
The
money owed to the pedlar was found in the box, as she had indicated.
Ranjit
Raya was weeping bitterly, when people came running to him and said
that they had noticed something in the lake. They all ran there and saw
an arm, with conch-shell bracelets on the wrist, being waved above the
water. A moment afterwards it disappeared. Even now people worship her
as the Divine Mother at the time of the annual festival. (To M.)
All this is true."

M: "Yes, sir."

MASTER: "Narendra now believes these things.

"Purna was born with an element of Vishnu. I worshipped him mentally
with bel-leaves; but the offering was not accepted. Then I worshipped
him
with tulsi-leaves and sandal-paste.2
That proved to be all right. God reveals
Himself in many ways: sometimes as man, sometimes in other divine forms
made or Spirit. One must believe in divine forms. What do you say?"

M: "It is true, sir."

MASTER: "The brahmani of Kamarhati3
sees many visions. She lives all by herself in a lonely room in a
garden on the bank of the Ganges. She
spends her time in japa. Gopala (The Baby Krishna.)
sleeps with her. (The Master gives a start.)
It is not imagination, but fact. She saw that Gopala's palms were red.
He walks with her. She suckles Him at her breast. They talk to each
other.
When Narendra heard the story he wept. Formerly I too used to see many
visions, but now in my ecstatic state I don't see so many. I am
gradually
getting over my feminine nature; I feel nowadays more like a man.
Therefore
I control my emotion; I don't manifest it outwardly so much.

"The younger Naren has the nature of a man. Therefore in meditation
his mind completely merges in the Ideal. He does not show emotion.
Nityagopal has a feminine nature. Therefore while he is in a spiritual
mood his
body becomes distorted and twisted; it becomes flushed.

(To M.) "Well, people renounce grain by grain, but
what a mood these
youngsters are in!

"Binode said: 'I have to sleep with my wife. That makes me feel very
bad.'
It is bad for an aspirant to sleep with his wife, whether he has
intercourse
with her or not. There is the friction of the body and also the
physical warmth.

"What a state Dwija is passing through! In my presence he only sways
his body and fixes his glance on me. Is that a trifling thing? If a man
gathers
his whole mind and fixes it on me, then, indeed, he achieves everything.

"But what am I? It is all He. I am the machine and He is its Operator.
It is God alone who exists in this [meaning his body]. That is why so
many
people are feeling more and more attracted to it. A mere touch is
enough to
awaken (heir spirituality. This attraction, this pull, is the
attraction of God
and of none else.

"Tarak of Belgharia was going home from Dakshineswar. I clearly noticed
that a flame-like thing came out of this [meaning his body] and
followed
him. A few days later Tarak came back to Dakshineswar. In a state of
samadhi He who dwells in this body placed His foot on Tarak's chest.

"Well, are there more youngsters like these?"

M: "Mohit is very nice. He came to you once or twice. He is studying
enough books to pass two university examinations. He has great longing
for God."

MASTER: "That may be. But he doesn't belong to a high plane. His
physical traits are not so good; he has a puggish face. But these other
youngsters belong to a high plane.

"Many troubles and worries follow in the wake of a birth in a physical
body. Further, if a person is cursed, he may have to be born seven
times.
One must be very careful. One has to assume a human body it one
cherishes
the slightest desire."

A DEVOTEE: "What are the desires of those who are Incarnations of God?"

MASTER (smiling): "I find that I have not got rid of
all my desires. Once
I saw a holy man with a shawl, and I too wanted to put on one like it.
Even
now I have that desire. I don't know whether I shall have to be born
again for it."

BALARAM (smiling): "Then will you be born again just
for a shawl?"
(All laugh.)

MASTER (smiling): "One has to keep a good desire so
that one may give
up the body meditating on it. There are four-holy places for the sadhus
to
visit. They visit three and leave out one. Many of them leave out Puri,
the
place of Jagannath, so that they can give up their bodies meditating on
Jagannath."

A man dressed in an ochre robe entered the room and greeted the Master.
Privately he was in the habit of criticizing Sri Ramakrishna; so at the
sight
of him Balaram laughed. Sri Ramakrishna could read a man's mind. He
said
to Balaram: "Never mind. Let him say I am a cheat."

Sri Ramakrishna was talking to Tejchandra.

MASTER: "I send for you so often. Why don't you come? If you practise
meditation and prayer it will make me happy. I look on you as my own;
that is why I send for you."

TEJCHANDRA: "Sir, I have to go to the office. I am very busy with my
duties."

M. (smiling): "There was a marriage ceremony at his
home and he got
leave from his office for ten days,"

MASTER: "Well, well! You say you have no leisure. You told me just now
that you were going to renounce the world."

NARAYAN: "M. said to us one day that this world is a wilderness."

MASTER (to M.): "Please tell them that story of the
disciple who became
unconscious after taking the medicine. His teacher arrived at the house
and
said he would revive if someone else swallowed a pill that he would
prescribe. The disciple would get back his life, but the man who
swallowed the pill would die.

"Please tell the other one, too, of the hathayogi who thought that his
wife and children were his very own, and who feigned death with his
limbs
stretched out. It will do them good to hear those stories."

It was noon. Sri Ramakrishna partook of the food that had been offered
to the Family Deity, Jagannath. The Master often used to say that the
food
at Balaram's house was very pure. Afterwards he rested awhile.

Late in the afternoon Sri Ramakrishna sat with the devotees in the
drawing-room of Balaram's house. Chandra Babu, of the Kartabhaja sect,
and a witty brahmin were there. The brahmin was something of a buffoon;
his words made everybody laugh.

About six o'clock Girish's brother Atul and Tejchandra's brother
arrived.
Sri Ramakrishna was in samadhi. A few minutes later he said, still in
the
ecstatic mood: "Can one become unconscious by meditating on
Consciousness?
Can one lose one's mind by thinking of God? God is of the very nature
of Knowledge; He is of the very nature of Eternity, Purity, and
Consciousness."

Sri Ramakrishna said to the witty brahmin: "Why do you waste your
time with these frivolous jokes about insignificant worldly things?
Direct your
mind to God. If a man can calculate about salt, he can also calculate
about
sugar candy."

BRAHMIN (smiling): "Please attract me."

MASTER: "What can I do? Everything depends on your effort. Your mind
is your own. Give up this trifling buffoonery and go forward toward
God.
You can go farther and farther along that way. The brahmachari asked
the
wood-cutter to go forward. At first the wood-cutter found a sandal-wood
forest; next, a silver-mine; next, a gold-mine; and then gems and
diamonds."

BRAHMIN: "There is no end to this path."

MASTER: "Where you find peace, there is the end."

About a new visitor Sri Ramakrishna said: "I didn't find any substance
in him. He seemed worthless."

It was dusk. Lamps were lighted in the room. Sri Ramakrishna was
meditating on the Divine Mother and chanting Her name in his melodious
voice.
The devotees sat around him. Since Balaram was going to celebrate the
Car
Festival at his house the following day, Sri Ramakrishna intended to
spend
the night there.

After taking some refreshments in the inner apartments, Sri Ramakrishna
returned to the parlour. It was about ten o'clock. The Master said to
M.,
"Please bring my towel from the other room."

A bed was made for Sri Ramakrishna in the adjoining sir all room. About
half past ten Sri Ramakrishna lay down to sleep. It was summertime. He
said to M., "You had better bring a fan." He asked the disciple to fan
him.
At midnight Sri Ramakrishna woke up. He said to M., "Don't fan me any
more; I feel chilly."

Tuesday, July 14, 1885

It was the day of the Car Festival. Sri Ramakrishna left his
bed very early
in the morning. He was alone in the room, dancing and chanting the name
of God. M. entered and saluted the Master. Other devotees arrived one
by
one. They saluted the Master and took seats near him. Sri Ramakrishna
was
longing intensely for Purna. He was talking to M. about him.

MASTER: "Did vu give Purna any instruction?"

M: "I asked him to read the life of Chaitanya. He is familiar with the
incidents of his life. I told him further that you ask people to stick
to the truth."

MASTER: "How did he take it when you said about me, 'He is an
Incarnation of God'?'

M: "I said to him, 'Come with me if you want to see a person like
Chaitanya.'"

MASTER: "Anything else?"

M: "Also that remark of yours that when an elephant enters a small pool
there is a great splashing of water all around; likewise, in the case
of a
'small receptacle', emotion overflows.

"About his giving up of fish, I said to him: 'Why have you done that?
Your family will make a great fuss about it.'"

MASTER: "That's good. One should keep one's feelings and emotions to
oneself."

It was about half past six in the morning. M. was going to bathe in the
Ganges, when suddenly tremors of an earthquake were felt. At once he
returned to Sri Ramakrishna's room. The Master stood in the
drawing-room. The devotees stood around him. They were talking about
the
earthquake. The shaking had been rather violent, and many of the
devotees were frightened.

M: "You should all have gone downstairs."

MASTER: "Such is the fate of the house under whose roof one lives; and
still people are so egotistic. (To M.) Do you
remember the great storm of the month of Aswin?"

M: "Yes, sir. I was very young at that time — nine or ten years old. I
was alone in a room while the storm was raging, and I prayed to God."

M. was surprised and said to himself: "Why did the Master suddenly ask
me about the great storm of Aswin? Does he know that I was alone at
that
time earnestly praying to God with tears in my eves? Does he know all
this?
Has he been protecting me as my guru since my very birth?"

MASTER: "It was quite late in the day at Dakshineswar when the storm
broke, but somehow they managed to cook the meals. The trees were
uprooted You see, this is the fate of the house one lives in.

"But when one attains Perfect Knowledge, then one finds that dying and
killing are one and the same thing; that is to say, both are unreal.
When
one is dead, one has not really died; and when one has killed another,
the
man is not really dead. Both the Lila and the Nitya belong to the same
Reality. In one form It is the Absolute, and in another, the Lila. Even
though the Lila is destroyed, the Nitya always exists. Water is water,
whether
it is still or in waves; it is the same water when the waves quiet
down."

Sri Ramakrishna sat in the drawing-room with the devotees. Mahendra
Mukherji, Hari, the younger Naren, and many other devotees were there.
Hari lived alone and studied Vedanta. He was about twenty-three years
old,
and unmarried. Sri Ramakrishna was very fond of him. He wanted Hari to
visit him frequently. But since Hari loved solitude he did not often
come to the Master.

MASTER (to Hari): "Well, I haven't seen you for a
long time.

"You see, in one form He is the Absolute and in another He is the
Relative.
What does Vedanta teach? Brahman alone is real and the world
illusory. Isn't that so? But as long as God keeps the 'ego of a
devotee' in a
man, the Relative is also real. When He completely effaces the ego,
then
what is remains. That cannot be described by the tongue. But as long as
God keeps the ego, one must accept all. you removing the outer sheaths
of the
plantain-tree, you reach the inner pith. As long as the tree contains
sheaths,
it also contains pith. So too, as long as it contains pith, it also
contains
sheaths. The pith goes with the sheaths and the sheaths go with the
pith. In
the same way, when you speak of the Nitya, it is understood that the
Lila
also exists; and when you speak of the Lila, it is understood that the
Nitya also exists.

"It is He alone who has become the universe, living beings, and the
twenty-four cosmic principles. When He is actionless, I call Him
Brahman;
when He creates, preserves, and destroys, I call Him Sakti. Brahman and
Sakti are not different from each other. Water is water, whether it is
still or moving.

"It is not possible to rid oneself of 'I-consciousness'. And as long as
one
is aware of this 'I-consciousness', one cannot speak of the universe
and its
living beings as unreal. You cannot get the correct weight of the
bel-fruit if
you leave out its shell and pits.

"The brick, lime, and brick-dust of which the stairs are made are the
same brick, lime, and brick-dust of which the roof is made. The
universe
and its living beings exist on account of the Reality of Him who is
known as Brahman.

"The devotees — I mean the vijnanis — accept both God with form and the
Formless, both the Personal God and the Impersonal. In a shoreless
ocean
— an infinite expanse of water — visible blocks of ice are formed here
and
there by intense cold. Similarly, under the cooling influence, so to
say, of the
deep love of Its worshipper, the Infinite reduces Itself to the finite
and
appears before the .worshipper as God with form. Again, as, on the
rising of
the sun, the ice melts away, so, on the awakening of Knowledge, God
with
form melts away into the same Infinite and Formless.

"As long as a man analyses with the mind, he cannot reach the Absolute.
As long as you reason with your mind, you have no way of getting rid of
the universe and the objects of the senses — form, taste, smell, touch,
and
sound. When reasoning stops, you attain the Knowledge of Brahman. Atman
cannot be realized through this mind; Atman is realized through Atman
alone. Pure Mind, Pure Buddhi, Pure Atman — all these are one and the
same.

"Just think how many things you need to perceive an object. You need
eyes; you need light; you need mind. You cannot perceive the object if
you
leave out any one of these three. As long as the mind functions, how
can
you say that the universe and the 'I' do not exist?

"When the mind is annihilated, when it stops deliberating pro and con,
then one goes into samadhi, one attains the Knowledge of Brahman. You
know the seven notes of the scale: sa, re, ga, ma, pa, dha, ni. One
cannot
keep one's voice on 'ni' very long."

Looking at the younger Naren, Sri Ramakrishna said: "What will you
gain by merely being intuitively aware of God's existence? A mere
vision of
God is by no means everything. You have to bring Him into your room.
You have to talk to Him.

"Some have heard of milk, some have seen milk, and some have drunk
milk. Some have seen the king, but only one or two can bring the king
home and entertain him."

M. went to the Ganges to take his bath. It was ten o'clock. Sri
Ramakrishna
was still talking with the devotees. After finishing his bath, M.
returned to Balaram's house. He saluted the Master and sat down near
him.

Sri Ramakrishna was filled with intense spiritual fervour. Words of
wisdom flowed from him. Now and then he narrated his profound mystical
experiences to the devotees.

MASTER: "I went to Benares with Mathur Babu. Our boat was passing
the Manikarnika Ghat on the Ganges, when suddenly I had a vision of
Siva. I stood near the edge of the boat and went into samadhi. The
boatman,
fearing that I might fall into the water, cried to Hriday: 'Catch hold
of him!
Catch hold of him!' I saw Siva standing on that ghat, embodying in
Himself
all the seriousness of the world. At first I saw Him standing at a
distance;
then I saw Him approaching me. At last He merged in me.

"Another time, in an ecstatic mood, I saw that a sannyasi was leading
me
by the hand. We entered a temple and I had a vision of Annapurna made
of gold.

"God alone has become all this; but He manifests Himself more in
certain things than in others.

(To M.) "Perhaps you do not believe in the salagram.
'Englishmen' do
not believe in it. It doesn't matter whether you believe in it or not.
A
salagram should contain the mark of a disc and other signs; only then
can
it be worshipped as an emblem of God."

M: "Yes, sir. It is like the fuller manifestation of God in a man with
good physical traits."

MASTER: "At first Narendra used to say that these were figments of my
imagination; but now he accepts everything."

Sri Ramakrishna was describing the vision of God, when he went into
samadhi. The devotees looked at him with fixed gaze. After a long time
he regained consciousness of the world and talked to the devotees.

MASTER (to M.): "What do you think I saw? I saw the
whole universe
as a salagram, and in it I saw your two eyes."

In silent wonder M. and the devotees listened to these words about his
inner experience. At this moment Sarada, another young disciple of the
Master, entered the room and saluted him.

MASTER (to Sarada): "Why don't you come to
Dakshineswar? Why
don't you see me when I come to Calcutta?"

SARADA: "Nobody tells me about it."

MASTER: "Next time I shall let you know. (To M., smiling)
Make a list
of these youngsters." (M. and the devotees laugh.)

SARADA: "My relatives at home want me to marry. (Pointing to M.)
How
many times he has scolded me about marriage!"

MASTER: "Why should you marry just now? (To M.)
Sarada is now in
a very good state of mind. Formerly he had a hesitant look; now his
face
beams with joy."

Sri Ramakrishna said to a devotee, "Will you kindly fetch Purna?"

Narendra arrived. Sri Ramakrishna asked a devotee to give him some
refreshments. He was greatly pleased at the sight of Narendra. When he
fed Narendra, he felt that he was feeding Narayana Himself. He stroked
Narendra's body affectionately.

Gopal Ma entered the room. She was a great devotee of Gopala and was
blessed with many lofty spiritual visions. Sri Ramakrishna had asked
Balaram
to send a man to bring her from Kamarhati. As soon as she entered the
room
she said, "I am shedding tears of joy." With these words she bowed
before
the Master, touching the ground with her forehead.

MASTER: "What is this? You address me as 'Gopala' and still you salute
me! Now go into the inner apartments and cook some curry for me. Put
some spicy seasoning in it so that I may get the smell from here." (All
laugh.)

GOPAL MA:
"What will they [meaning the members of the household] think of me?"

Before she left the room she said to Narendra in a very fervent voice,
"My child, have I reached the goal, or have I farther to go?"

It was the day of the Car Festival; so there was some delay in the
worship
of the Family Deity. When the worship was finished Sri Ramakrishna was
asked to have his meal. He went to the inner apartments. The woman
devotees were anxious to see him.

Sri Ramakrishna had many woman devotees, but he did not talk much
about them to his man devotees. He would warn the men against visiting
woman devotees. He would say: "Don't overdo it. Otherwise you will
slip."
To some of his man devotees he would say, "Don't go near a woman even
if she rolls on the ground with devotion." The Master wanted the men to
live apart from woman devotees; only thus would the two groups make
progress. He did not like the woman devotees to caress the men as
"Gopala";
for too much of this motherly affection was not good; it degenerated in
time
into a harmful relationship.

After his midday meal Sri Ramakrishna sat in the drawing-room with the
devotees. It was one o'clock. A devotee brought Purna from his home.
With
great joy the Master exclaimed to M.: "Here he is! Purna has come."
Narendra,
the younger Naren, Narayan, Haripada, and other devotees were talking
with the Master.

THE YOUNGER NAREN: "Sir, have we any free will?"

MASTER: "Just try to find out who this 'I' is. While you are searching
for
'I', 'He' comes out. 'I am the machine and He is the Operator.' You
have
heard of a mechanical toy that goes into a store with a letter in its
hand.
You are like that toy. God alone is the Doer. Do your duties in the
world
as if you were the doer, but knowing all the time that God alone is the
Doer and you are the instrument.

"As long as the upadhi exists there is ignorance. 'I am a scholar', 'I
am a
jnani', 'I am wealthy', 'I am honourable, 'I am the master, father, and
teacher' — all these ideas are begotten of ignorance. 'I am the machine
and
You are the Operator' — that is Knowledge. In the state oF Knowledge
all
upadhis are destroyed. When the log is burnt in entirely, there is no
more
sound; no heat either. Everything cools down. Peace! Peace! Peace! (To
Narendra) Sing a little."

NARENDRA: "I must go home. I have many things to do."

MASTER: "Yes, yes, my child! Why should you listen to us? The words
of those who have gold in their ears are valuable; no one listens to
him who
hasn't even a rag round his waist.' (All laugh.) You
frequent the garden
house of the.Guhas. I always hear about it. Whenever I ask, 'Where is
Narendra today?' I am told, 'Oh, he has gone to the Guhas.' I should
not
have said all these things, but you have wrung them out of me."

Narendra kept quiet a few moments. Then he said: "There are no
instruments to accompany me. Shall I just sing?"

MASTER: "My child, this is all we have. Please sing if it suits you.
You
must know how Balaram arranges things.

"Balaram says to me, 'Please come to Calcutta by boat; take a carriage
only if you must.' (All laugh). You see, he has
given us a feast today; so
this afternoon he will make us all dance! (All laugh.)
One day he hired a
carriage for me from here to Dakshineswar. He said that the carriage
hire
was twelve annas. I said to him, 'Will the coachman take me to
Dakshineswar
for twelve annas?' 'Oh, that will be plenty', he replied. One side of
the
carriage broke down before we reached Dakshineswar. (All laugh.)
Besides,
the horse stopped every now and then; it simply would not go. Once in a
while the coachman whipped the horse, and then it ran a short distance.
(All laugh.) The program for the evening is that Ram
will play on the
drum and we shall all dance. Ram has no sense of rhythm. (All
laugh.)
Anyhow, that is Balaram's attitude — sing yourselves, dance yourselves,
and
make yourselves happy!" (All laugh.)

Other devotees were arriving. Mahendra Mukherji saluted the Master
from a distance. The Master returned the salute. Then he salaamed to
Mahendra like a Mussalman. The Master said to a young devotee who sat
next to him: "Why don't you tell him I have salaamed to him? He will
appreciate it." (All laugh.)

Many of the householder devotees were accompanied by their wives and
other woman relatives. They wanted to salute the Master and watch his
dancing before the car. Ram, Girish, and other devotees gradually
assembled. Many young devotees were present.

Narendra sang:

Oh, when will dawn the blessed day

When Love will waken in my heart?

When will my tears flow uncontrolled

As I repeat Lord Hari's name,

And all my longing be fulfilled?

When will my mind and soul be pure?

Oh, when shall I at last repair

Unto Vrindavan's sacred groves?

When will my worldly bonds fall off

And my imperfect sight be healed

By Wisdom's cool collyrium?

When shall I learn true alchemy

And, touching the Philosopher's Stone,

Transmute my body's worthless iron

Into the Spirit's purest gold?

When shall I see this very world

As God, and roll on Love's highway?

When shall I give up piety

And duty and the thought of caste?

When shall I leave behind all fear,

All shame, convention, worry, pride?

Oh, I shall smear my body then

With dust from the feet of devotees;

Across my shoulders I shall sling

Renunciation's pack, and drink

From my two hands a cooling draught

Of Jamuna's life-renewing stream.

Oh, then I shall be mad with love;

I shall both laugh and weep for joy!

Then I shall swim upon the Sea

Of blessed Satchidananda;

Drunk with His love, I shall make all

As drunk as I! Oh, I shall sport

At Hari's feet for evermore!

He sang again:

In dense darkness, O Mother, Thy formless beauty sparkles;

Therefore the yogis meditate in a dark mountain cave. . . .

Balaram had arranged for kirtan with Vaishnavcharan, the
musician.
Vaishnavcharan sang:

O tongue, always repeat the name of Mother Durga;

Who but your Mother Durga will save you in distress? ...

When Sri Ramakrishna had heard a line or two of the song he
went into
samadhi. He stood up in that ecstatic mood. The younger Naren supported
him. The Master's face was lighted with a smile. Gradually his body
became
motionless; his mind appeared to have gone to another realm. All the
devotees
in the room looked at him in amazement. The woman devotees watched the
scene from behind the screen. After a long time he came down from
samadhi, chanting the holy name of God.

As the Master sat down, Vaishnavcharan sang again:

O vina, sing Lord Hari's name!

Without the blessing of His feet

You cannot know the final Truth.

The name of Hari slays all grief:

Sing Hari's name! Sing Krishna's name! . . .

Then he sang:

O vina, forgetting to worship Hari,

I pass the days of my life in vain. . . .

It was afternoon. In the mean time the small car of Jagannath,
decorated
with flowers, flags, and bunting, had been brought to the inner
verandah.
The images of Jagannath Subhadra, and Balarama, were adorned with
sandal-paste, flower garlands, robes, and jewelry. Sri Ramakrishna left
the
room where the professional musicians were singing and came to the
verandah, accompanied by the devotees. He stood in front of the car and
pulled it by the rope. He began to sing and dance with the devotees in
front
of the car.

The Master sang:

Behold, the two brothers (Gauranga and Nityananda.) have come, who weep

while chanting Hari's name. . . .

He sang again:

See how all Nadia is shaking

Under the waves of Gauranga's love! . . .

The music and dancing went on in the verandah as the car was
pulled
to and fro. A large crowd entered the house on hearing the loud music
and
the beating of the drums. Sri Ramakrishna was completely intoxicated
with
divine love. The devotees felt its contagion and danced with the Master
in an
ecstasy of love.

Afterwards Sri Ramakrishna returned to the drawing-room. M. and other
devotees stroked his feet.

Filled with divine fervour, Narendra sang to the accompaniment of the
tanpura:

Come! Come, Mother! Doll of my soul! My heart's Delight!

In my heart's lotus come and sit, that I may see Thy face. . . .

Then he sang:

Mother, Thou art our sole Redeemer,

Thou the Support of the three gunas,

Higher than the most high.

Thou art compassionate, I know,

Who takest away our bitter grief.

Sandhya art Thou, and Gayatri;

Thou dost sustain this universe.

Mother, the Help art Thou

Of those, that have no help but Thee,

O Eternal Beloved of Siva!

Thou art in earth, in water Thou;

Thou liest at the root of all.

In me, in every creature,

Thou hast Thy home; though clothed with form,

Yet art Thou formless Reality.

He sang another song:

I have made Thee, O Lord, the Pole-star of my life;

No more shall I lose my way on the world's trackless sea.

Wherever I wander here. Thy brilliance shines undimmed;

With Thy serene and gracious light

Thou drivest all the tears out of my troubled soul.

In my heart's inmost shrine Thy face for ever beams;

If, for a moment even, I cannot find it there,

My soul is overwhelmed with woe;

And when my witless mind strays from the thought of Thee,

The vision of Thy face strikes me with deepest shame.

A devotee said to Narendra, "Will you sing that one — 'O
Mother, Thou
my Inner Guide, ever awake within my heart'?"

MASTER: "Oh, no! Why that song now? The proper thing now is to sing
of divine bliss — a song like 'O Mother Syama, full of the waves of
drunkenness divine'."

Narendra sang:

O Mother Syama, full of the waves of drunkenness divine!

Who knows how Thou dost sport in the world?

Thy fun and frolic and Thy glances put to shame the god of love.

O Wielder of the sword! O Thou of terrifying face!

The earth itself is shaken under Thy leaps and strides!

O Thou Abode of the three gunas! O Redeemer! Fearsome One!

Thou who art the Consort of Siva!

Many the forms Thou dost assume, fulfilling Thy bhaktas' prayers.

Thou dancest in the Lotus of the Heart,

O Mother, Eternal Consort of Brahman!

Full of divine ecstasy, Narendra sang again and again the
lines:

Thou dancest in the Lotus of the Heart,

O Mother, Eternal Consort of Brahman!

Sri Ramakrishna was dancing, drunk with divine love, and he
sang again
and again, "O Mother, Eternal Consort of Brahman!"

After dancing a long time Sri Ramakrishna resumed his seat. He was very
much pleased to see Narendra in a spiritual mood, singing with tears in
his eyes.

It was about nine o'clock in the evening. The devotees still sat around
the Master. Vaishnavcharan sang about Gauranga:

The beautiful Gauranga, the youthful dancer, fair as molten gold. ...

Next he sang about Sri Krishna. Krishna had left His pastoral
life in
Vrindavan and become the king of Mathura. A gopi met Him there and said:

O Hari, how shall we know You now?

In Mathura's royal splendour You have forgotten us.

Now, in Your kingly robes. You ride an elephant;

Have You utterly forgotten how in Vrindavan You tended cows?

O Hari, have You forgotten how You would steal the butter

From Braja's innocent gopi maids?

About eleven o'clock the devotees saluted the Master and were departing
one by one.

MASTER: "You may all go. (Pointing to Narendra and the younger
Naren)
It will be enough if these two stay. (To Girish)
Will you eat your supper
at home? You may stay a few minutes if you want to. You want a smoke!
But Balaram's servant is just like his master. Ask him for a smoke; he
won't
give it! (All laugh.) But don't go away without
having your smoke."

Girish had brought with him a bespectacled friend. The latter observed
all these things and left the place. Sri Ramakrishna said to Girish: "I
say
this to you and to everyone: Please do not force anybody to come here.
Nothing happens except at the right time."

Before leaving, a devotee saluted the Master. He had a young boy with
him. Sri Ramakrishna said to him affectionately, "It is getting late,
and you
have this boy with you." Narendra, the younger Naren, and a few other
devotees stayed awhile and then took their leave.

Wednesday, July 15, 1885

It was four o'clock in the morning. Sri Ramakrishna was in bed in the
small room next to the drawing-room. M. was sitting on a bench on the
outer verandah to the south of the room. A few minutes later Sri
Ramakrishna came out to the verandah. M. saluted him.

MASTER: "I have already been up once. Well, shall we go to Dakshineswar
this morning?"

M: "The Ganges is less choppy in the morning."

Day was gradually breaking. The devotees had not yet arrived. Sri
Ramakrishna had washed his mouth and was chanting the names of God in
his
sweet voice. He stood near the north door of the room. M. was by his
side. A
few minutes later Gopal Ma arrived and stood near him. One or two woman
devotees were looking at the Master from behind the doors of the inner
apartments. They were like the gopis of Vrindavan looking at Sri
Krishna,
or the woman devotees of Nadia looking at Gauranga from behind the
screen.

After chanting the name of Rama, Sri Ramakrishna chanted the name of
Krishna: "Krishna! Krishna! Krishna of the gopis! Gopi! Gopi! Krishna,
the
Life of the cowherd boys of Vrindavan! Krishna, the son of Nanda!
Govinda! Govinda!"

Next he chanted the name of Gauranga. Then he repeated, "Alekh
Niranjana", which is a name of God. Saying, "Niranjana", he wept. The
devotees wept too. With tears in his eyes the Master said: "O Niranjan!
O my child! Come! Eat this! Take this! When shall I make my life
blessed
by feeding you? You have assumed this human form for my sake."

He prayed to Jagannath in a very touching voice: "O Jagannath, Lord
of the Universe! O Friend of the world! O Friend of the poor! I am not
O Lord, outside Thy universe. Be gracious to me!"

While he sang in praise of Jagannath he was beside himself with divine
love.

Now he chanted the name of Narayana. He danced and sang: "O
Narayana! O Narayana! Narayana! Narayana!"

He danced and sang again:

Ah, friend! I have not found Him yet,
whose love has driven me mad. . . .

Afterwards the Master sat in the small room with the devotees.
He was
completely stripped of his clothes, like a five-year-old child. M.,
Balaram,
and a few other devotees were in the room.

MASTER: "One can see God's form. One sees God when all upadhis
disappear and reasoning stops. Then a man becomes speechless and goes
into
samadhi. Coming to the theatre, people indulge in all kinds of gossip.
But
the moment the curtain goes up, all conversation stops; the spectators
become fully absorbed in what they see on the stage.

"I want to tell you something very secret. Why do I love boys like
Purna
and Narendra so much? Once, in a spiritual mood, I felt intense love
for
Jagannath, love such as a woman feels for her sweetheart. In that mood
I
was about to embrace Him, when I broke my arm. It was then revealed to
me: "You have assumed this human body. Therefore establish with human
beings the relationship of friend, father, mother, or son.'

"I now feel for Purna and the other young boys as I once felt for
Ramlala.4
I used to bathe Ramlala, feed Him, put Him to bed, and take
Him wherever I went. I used to weep for Ramlala. Now I have the same
feeling for these young boys. Look at Niranjan. He is not attached to
anything. He spends money from his own pocket to take poor patients to
the
hospital. At the proposal of marriage he says, 'Goodness! That is the
whirlpool of the Visalakshi!' (A stream near Kamarpukur.) I see him
seated on a light.

"Purna belongs to the realm of the Personal God. He was born with an
element of Vishnu. Ah, what yearning he has!

(To M.) "Didn't you notice that he looked at you as
if you were his
spiritual brother, his very own? He said he would visit me again, at
Captain's house.

"Narendra belongs to a very high plane — the realm of the Absolute. He
has a manly nature. So many devotees come here, but there is not one
like him.

"Every now and then I take stock of the devotees. I find that some are
like lotuses with ten petals, some like lotuses with sixteen petals,
some like
lotuses with a hundred petals. But among lotuses Narendra is a
thousand-petalled one.

"Other devotees may be like pots or pitchers; but Narendra is a huge
water-barrel.

"Others may be like pools or tanks; but Narendra is a huge reservoir
like the Haldarpukur.

"Among fish, Narendra is a huge red-eyed carp; others are like minnows
or smelts or sardines. Tarak of Belgharia may be called a bass.

"Narendra is a 'very big receptacle', one that can hold many things. He
is
like a bamboo with a big hollow space inside.

"Narendra is not under the control of anything. He is not under the
control of attachment or sense pleasures. He is like a male pigeon. If
you
hold a male pigeon by its beak, it breaks away from you; but the female
pigeon keeps still. Narendra has the nature of a man; so he sits on the
right
side in a carriage. Bhavanath has a woman's nature; so I make him sit
on
the other side. I feel great strength when Narendra is with me in a
gathering."

About eight o'clock in the morning Mahendra Mukherji arrived and
saluted the Master. Haripada, Tulsiram, and other devotees arrived one
by
one and saluted him. Baburam was laid up with fever and could not come.

MASTER (to M. and the others): "Hasn't the younger
Naren come?
Perhaps he thought I had left. (To Mukherji) How
amazing! Even during his
boyhood, on returning from school, he cried for God. Is it a small
thing to
cry for God? He is very intelligent, too. He is like a bamboo with a
big
hollow space inside. All of his mind is fixed on me. Girish Ghosh said
to
me: The younger Naren went to Navagopal's house when a kirtan was
going on. On entering the house he inquired about you and exclaimed,
"Where is he?" He was totally unconscious of his surroundings and
practically walked over the people.' He has no fear of his relatives'
threats.
Sometimes he spends three nights at a stretch at Dakshineswar."

MUKHERJI: "Hari5
became simply speechless at what you said yesterday.
He said to me: 'Such wisdom can be found only in the philosophical
systems
of Samkhya, Yoga, and Vedanta. He is no ordinary person.'"

MASTER: "But I have never studied Samkhya or Vedanta.

"Perfect jnana and perfect bhakti are one and the same thing. A man
reasons, saying, 'Not this, not this'; he rejects the unreal. When his
reasoning comes to an end, he attains the Knowledge of Brahman. Then he
accepts
what he rejected before. A man carefully climbs to the roof, rejecting
the
steps one by one. After reaching the roof he realizes that the steps
are made
of the same materials as the roof, namely, brick, lime, and brick-dust.

"He who is aware of the high is also aware of the low. After the
attainment of Knowledge one looks alike on high and low.

"While Prahlada dwelt on the plane of the Supreme Reality, he
maintained the attitude of 'I am He'; but when he climbed down to the
physical
plane, he would look on himself as the servant of God.

"Hanuman also sometimes said, 'I am He', sometimes, 'I am the servant
of God', sometimes, 'I am a part of God.'

"Why should a man cherish love of God in his heart? How else will he
live? How else will he spend his days?

"To be sure, the ego does not disappear altogether. As long as the pot
of
'I' (Body-consciousness.) persists, one cannot realize 'I am He.' In
samadhi the
ego totally disappears; then what is remains. Ramprasad says: 'O
Mother, when I shall attain
Knowledge, then You alone will know whether I am good or You are good.'

"As long as 'I-consciousness' exists, one should have the attitude of a
bhakta;
one should rot say, 'I am God.' A man aware of his body should feel
that
he is not Krishna Himself, but His devotee. But if God draws the
devotee
to Himself, then it is different. It is like the master saying to his
beloved
servant: 'Come, take your seat near me. You are the same as I.'

"The waves are part of the Ganges, but the Ganges is not part of the
waves.

"Siva experiences two states of mind. When He is completely absorbed
in His own Self, He feels, 'I am He.' In that union neither body nor
mind
functions. But when He is conscious of His separate ego, He dances,
exclaiming, 'Rama! Rama!'

"That which is unmoving also moves. Just now you are still, but a few
moments later the same you will be engaged in action.

"Jnana and bhakti are one and the same thing. The difference is like
this:
one man says 'water', and another, 'a block of ice'.

"Generally speaking there are two kinds of samadhi. First, sthira or
jada
samadhi: one attains it by following the path of knowledge — as a
result of
the destruction of the ego through reasoning. Second, bhava samadhi:
one
attains this by following the path of bhakti. In this second samadhi a
trace
of ego remains, like a line, in order to enable the devotee to enjoy
God, to
taste His lila. But one cannot understand all this if one is attached
to 'woman and gold'.

"I said to Kedar, 'You will never succeed if your mind dwells on "woman
and gold".' I wanted to pass my hand over his chest, but I could not.
He
has knots and twists inside. It was like a room smelling of filth,
which I
could not enter. His attachment to the world is very deep; it is like a
natural
emblem of Siva, whose root spreads as far as Benares. One will never
succeed if one is attached to the world — to 'woman and gold'.

"The youngsters are yet untouched by 'woman and gold'. That is why I
love them so dearly. Hazra says to me, 'You love a boy if he comes from
a
wealthy family or if he is handsome.' If that is so, then why do I love
Harish, Latu, and Narendra? Narendra hasn't a penny to buy salt to
season his rice.

"The youngsters' minds are not yet coloured by worldliness. That is why
they are so pure in heart. Besides, many of them are eternally perfect;
they
have been drawn to God from their very birth. It is like a garden in
which,
while cleaning it, you suddenly discover water-pipes. The water gushes
forth without any effort on your part."

BALARAM: "Sir, how was it possible for Purna to know all of a sudden
that the world is illusory?"

MASTER: "He has inherited that knowledge from his previous births. In
his past lives he practised many disciplines. It is the body alone that
is small or grows big, and not the Atman.

"Do you know what these youngsters are like?'They are like certain
plants
that grow fruit first and then flowers. These devotees first of all
have the
vision of God; next they hear about His glories and attributes; and at
last
they are united with Him. Look at Niranjan. He always keeps his
accounts
clear. He will be able to go whenever he hears the call. But one should
look
after one's mother as long as she is alive. I used to worship my mother
with
flowers and sandal-paste. It is the Mother of the Universe who is
embodied
as our earthly mother.

"As long as you look after your own body, you must look after your
mother too. Therefore I said to Hazra: 'When you have a cold, you
procure
black pepper, sugar candy, and salt. As long as you feel you must look
after
your body, you must look after your mother too.'

"But it is quite different when you completely forget your body. Then
God Himself assumes your responsibilities. A minor cannot look after
himself; therefore a guardian is appointed for him. Chaitanyadeva, like
a minor,
could not look after himself."

M. went to the Ganges to bathe.

Sri Ramakrishna was talking with the devotees in the small room in
Balaram's house. Mahendra, Balaram, Tulasi, Haripada, Girish, and other
devotees were sitting on the floor. M. returned from the Ganges. After
saluting the Master he took a seat near him. Sri Ramakrishna was
recounting
to the devotees some of his spiritual experiences.

MASTER: "One day in the Kali temple Haladhari and Nangta were
reading the Adhyatma Ramayana. Suddenly I had a
vision of a river with woods
on both sides. The trees and plants were green. Rama and Lakshmana were
walking along wearing their shorts. One day, in front of the kuthi, I
saw
Arjuna's chariot. Sri Krishna was seated in it as the charioteer. I
still remember
it. Another day, while listening to kirtan at Kamarpukur, I saw
Gauranga in front of me.

"At that time a naked person, emerging from my body, used to go about
with me. I used to joke with him. He looked like a boy and was a
paramahamsa.
I can't describe to you all the divine forms I saw at that time. I was
suffering then from indigestion, which would become worse when I saw
visions; so I would try to shun these divine forms and would spit on
the
ground when I saw them. But they would follow me and obsess me like
ghosts. I was always overwhelmed with divine ecstasy and couldn't tell
the
passing of day and night. On the day after such a vision I would have a
severe attack of diarrhoea, and all these ecstasies would pass out
through my bowels."

GIRISH (smiling): "I am examining your horoscope."

MASTER (smiling): "I was born on the second day of
the bright fortnight
of the moon. My horoscope shows the positions of the sun, the moon, and
Mercury at the time of my birth. There are not many more details."

GIRISH: "You were born under Kumbha. Rama and Krishna were born
under Karkat and Brisha, and Chaitanya under Simha."6

MASTER: "I had two desires: first, that I should be the king of the
devotees, and second, that I should not be a dry sadhu."

GIRISH (smiling): "Why did you have to practise
spiritual discipline?"

MASTER (smiling): "Even the Divine Mother had to
practise austere
sadhana to obtain Siva as Her husband. She practised the panchatapa.
She
would also immerse Her body in water in wintertime, and look fixedly at
the sun. Krishna Himself had to practise much sadhana. I had many
mystic
experiences, but I cannot reveal their contents. Under the bel-tree I
had
many flaming visions. There I practised the various sadhanas prescribed
in
the Tantra. I needed many articles — human skulls, and so forth and so
on.
The Brahmani used to collect these things for me. I practised a number
of mystic postures.

"I had another strange experience: if I felt egotistic on a particular
day,
I would be sick the following day."

M. sat motionless as a picture on canvas, hearing about these unique
visions of the Master. The other devotees also were spellbound. There
was a
dead silence in the room.

TULASI (pointing to M.): "He never laughs."

MASTER: "But he laughs inside. The surface of the river Phalgu is
covered with sand; but if you dig into the sand, water comes up.

(To M.) "Don't you scrape your tongue? Scrape it
every day."

BALARAM: "Well, Purna has heard much about you from M."

MASTER: "Perhaps the account of my early spiritual experiences."

BALARAM: "If Purna is perfect by nature, then what is M.'s function?"

MASTER: "A mere instrument."

It was nine o'clock. Sri Ramakrishna was about to leave for
Dakshineswar.
Arrangements were being made for his departure. A boat bad been hired
at
Baghbazar. The devotees saluted the Master.

Sri Ramakrishna went to the boat with one or two devotees. Gopal Ma
accompanied them. She intended to spend the morning at Dakshineswar and
go to Kamarhati in the afternoon. The camp cot generally used by Rakhal
at Dakshineswar had been sent to Calcutta for repair. It was put in the
boat,
and the boat left for Dakshineswar.

According to the Hindu almanac the day was not auspicious. So Sri
Ramakrishna decided to return to Balaram's house the next Saturday and
start again for Dakshineswar on an auspicious day.

^The
name of Krishna as He is worshipped in Puri; literally, "Lord of the
Universe".

^The
leaves of the bel-tree are offered to Siva, whereas tulsi-leaves and
sandal-paste are offered to Vishnu.

^Referring
to one of the Master's woman devotees known as Gopal Ma.

^A
name of the Boy Rama. A metal image of the Boy Rama given to Sri
Ramakrishna during his sadhana
period by a Vaishnava saint.

^Later
Hari embraced the monastic life and became known as Swami Turiyananda.

^Kumbha,
Karkat, Brisha, and Simha are signs of the Hindu zodiac corresponding
to Aquarius, Scorpio, Taurus, and Leo.


=== 43_visit_to_nanda_bose.htm ===

Visit to Nanda Bose's House

←
Home
/ The Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna
/ Volume 2
/ →

VISIT TO NANDA BOSE'S HOUSE

Pictures at Nanda's house — Master praises his host — Master's prayer
— Nature of worldly enjoyment — Is God partial? — Liberation for
all — Nature of "I" — God, the Wish-fulfilling Tree — About the
afterlife
— Narada and Hanuman — Different degrees of divine manifestation
— Visit to the brahmani's house — Brahmani's indescribable joy —
Master's visit to Ganu's mother — He praises the music — Martha and
Mary — Master about himself — Master and Jesus — About Dwija.

Tuesday, July 28, 1885

IT WAS ABOUT THREE O'CLOCK in the afternoon. Sri Ramakrishna
was sitting
in Balaram's drawing-room with the devotees. Among others, Binode,
Rakhal, the younger Naren, and M. were present. The Master had
come to Balaram's house in the morning and had taken his midday meal
there. At Balaram's house the Deity was worshipped as Jagannath, and
the
members of the family partook of the food offered to the Deity. Sri
Ramakrishna used to say that the food at Balaram's house was very pure.

Narayan and certain other devotees had remarked to the Master that
Nanda Bose, an aristocrat of Baghbazar, had many pictures of gods and
goddesses in his house. Hence Sri Ramakrishna intended to pay a visit
to
Nanda's house in the afternoon. A brahmin woman devoted to the Master
lived near by. She often came to see him at Dakshineswar. She was
extremely sorrowful over the death of her only daughter, and the Master
had
agreed to go to her house. She had invited him with great earnestness.
From
her house the Master was to go to the house of Ganu's mother, another
devotee.

The younger Naren had said to Sri Ramakrishna that he would not be
able to visit him often on account of his having to prepare for his
examinations.

MASTER (to the younger Naren): "I didn't send for
you today."

THE YOUNGER NAREN
(smiling): "What can be done about it now?"

MASTER: "Well, my child, I don't want to interfere with your studies.
You may visit me when you have leisure."

The Master said these words as if he were piqued.

He was ready to go to Nanda Bose's house. A palanquin was brought tor
him, and he got into it repeating the name of God. He had put on a pair
of black varnished slippers and a red-bordered cloth. As Sri
Ramakrishna
sat down in the palanquin, M. put the slippers by his side. He
accompanied
the palanquin on foot. Paresh joined them.

They entered the gate of Nanda's house, crossed the spacious square,
and stopped in front of the building. The members of the family greeted
the Master. He asked M. to hand him the slippers and then got out of
the
palanquin and entered the large hall. It was a very spacious room.
Pictures
of gods and goddesses were hanging on all sides.

Nanda Bose and his brother Pasupati saluted Sri Ramakrishna. The
devotees of the Master also arrived. Girish's brother Atul came, and
Prasanna's
father, who was a frequent visitor at Nanda's house, was there.
Prasanna
was a devotee of the Master.

The Master looked at the pictures. M. and a few other devotees stood
around him. Pasupati was explaining the pictures to them.

The first picture was of Vishnu with four arms. At the very sight of it
Sri Ramakrishna was overwhelmed with ecstasy; he sat down on the floor
and remained a few minutes in that spiritual mood.

In the second picture Rama was blessing Hanuman, with His hand on
the devotee's head. Hanuman's gaze was fixed on Rama's Lotus Feet. The
Master looked at the picture a long time and exclaimed with great
fervour,
"Ah me! Ah me!"

The third picture was of Krishna standing with flute to His lips under
the kadamba tree.

The fourth was of Vamana, the Dwarf, who was an Incarnation of
Vishnu. The Master looked intently at this picture.

Next the Master looked at a picture of Nrisimha,1
and then at one of Krishna with a herd of cows. Krishna was tending the
cows with His
cowherd friends on the bank of the Jamuna at Vrindavan. M. said, "A
lovely picture!"

Sri Ramakrishna then saw pictures of Dhumavati, Shorasi, Bhuvanesvari,
Tara, and Kali. He said: "All these portray the terrible aspects of the
Divine
Mother. If one keeps these pictures, one should worship them. But you
must be lucky, to be able to hang them like that on the wall."

At the sight of Annapurna's picture, Sri Ramakrishna exclaimed with
great fervour, "Grand! Grand!"

The next picture was one of Radhika as monarch. She was seated on a
throne in the nikunja grove, surrounded by her woman attendants. Sri
Krishna guarded the entrance of the grove as her officer.

Next was Sri Krishna's picture. Then came a picture of Sarasvati, the
goddess of learning and music. It was in a glass case. She was in an
ecstatic
mood, playing melodies on the vina.

After seeing the pictures, Sri Ramakrishna went to the master of the
house and said: "I am very happy today. It is grand! You are a real
Hindu.
You have these pictures instead of English ones. I am surprised!"

Nanda Bose was seated. He said to the Master: "Please take a seat. Why
are you standing?"

Sri Ramakrishna sat down. He said: "These are very large pictures.
You are a real Hindu."

NANDA: "I have European pictures also."

MASTER (smiling): "They are not like these. I am
sure you don't pay
much attention to them."

A picture of Keshab's Navavidhan hung on the wall. Suresh Mitra, a
beloved householder disciple of the Master, had had it painted. In this
picture
Sri Ramakrishna was pointing out to Keshab that people of different
religions proceed to the same goal by different paths.

MASTER: "That was painted for Surendra."

PRASANNA'S FATHER (smiling): "You too are in that
picture."

MASTER (smiling): "Yes, it contains everything. This
is the ideal of
modern times."

As he spoke Sri Ramakrishna manifested great spiritual fervour. He was
in an ecstatic mood, talking to the Divine Mother. A few minutes later
he
said, like a drunkard, "I am not unconscious." Looking at the house, he
said: "It is a huge mansion. But what does it consist of? Bricks,
timber, and clay."

A little later he said, "I am very happy to see these pictures of gods
and
goddesses." He added: "It is not good to keep pictures of the terrible
aspects
of the Divine Mother. If one does, one should worship them."

PASUPATI (smiling): "Well, things will go on as long
as She keeps them
going."

MASTER: "That is true. But one should think of God. It is not good to
forget Him."

NANDA: "But how little we think of God!"

MASTER: "One thinks of God through His grace."

NANDA: "But how can we obtain God's grace? Has He really the power to
bestow grace?"

MASTER (smiling): "I see. You think as the
intellectuals do: one reaps
the results of one's actions. Give up these ideas. The effect of karma
wears
away if one takes refuge in God. I prayed to the Divine Mother with
flowers in my hand: 'Here, Mother, take Thy sin; here, take Thy virtue.
I don't want either of these; give me only real bhakti. Here, Mother,
take
Thy good; here, take Thy bad. I don't want any of Thy good or bad; give
me only real bhakti. Here, Mother, take Thy dharma; here, take Thy
adharma. I don't want any of Thy dharma or adharma; give me only real
bhakti. Here, Mother, take Thy knowledge; here, take Thy ignorance. I
don't
want any of Thy knowledge or ignorance; give me only real bhakti. Here,
Mother, take Thy purity; here, take Thy impurity. Give me only real
bhakti.'"

NANDA: "Can God violate law?'

MASTER: "What do you mean? He is the Lord of all. He can do
everything. He. who has made the law can also change it.

"But you may very well talk that way. Perhaps you want to enjoy the
world, and that is why you talk that way. There is a view that a man's
inner spirit is not awakened unless he is through with enjoyment. But
what is there to enjoy? The pleasures of 'woman and gold'? This moment
they exist and the next moment they disappear. It is all momentary. And
what is there in 'woman and gold'? It is like the hog plum — all stone
and skin. If one eats it, one suffers from colic. Or like a sweetmeat.
Once
you swallow it, it is gone."

Nanda remained silent a few minutes. Then he said: "Oh, yes. People
no doubt talk that way. But is God partial? If things happen through
God's
grace, then I must say God is partial."

MASTER: "But God Himself has become everything — the universe and
its living beings. You will realize it when you have Perfect Knowledge.
God
Himself has become the twenty-four cosmic principles: the mind,
intellect"
body, and so forth. Is there anyone but Himself to whom He can show
partiality?"

NANDA: "Why has He assumed all these different forms? Why are some
wise and some ignorant?"

MASTER: "It is His sweet will."

ATUL: "Kedar Babu puts it nicely. Once a man asked him, 'Why has
God created the world?' He replied, 'I was not present at the
conference
where God made the plans of His creation.'"

MASTER: "Oh! It is His sweet will."

So saying, the Master sang:

O Mother, all is done after Thine own sweet will;

Thou art in truth self-willed, Redeemer of mankind!

Thou workest Thine own work; men only call it theirs.

Thou it is that holdest the elephant in the mire;

Thou, that helpest the lame man scale the loftiest hill.

On some Thou dost bestow the bliss of Brahmanhood;

Yet others Thou dost hurl into this world below.

Thou art the Moving Force, and I the mere machine;

The house am I, and Thou the Spirit dwelling there;

I am the chariot, and Thou the Charioteer:

I move alone as Thou, O Mother, movest me.

He continued: "The Divine Mother is full of bliss. Creation,
preservation,
and destruction are the waves of Her sportive pleasure. Innumerable
are the living beings. Only one or two among them obtain liberation.
And
that makes Her happy.

Out of a hundred thousand kites, at best but one or two break free;

And Thou dost laugh and clap Thy hands, O Mother, watching them!

Some are being entangled in the world and some are being
liberated from it.

How many are the boats, O mind,

That float on the ocean of this world!

How many are those that sink!"

NANDA: "It may be Her sweet will; but it is death to us."

MASTER: "But who are you? It is the Divine Mother who has become all
this. It is only as long as you do not know Her that you say, 'I', 'I'.

"All will surely realize God. All will be liberated. It may be that
some
get their meal in the morning, some at noon, and some in the evening;
but
none will go without food. All, without any exception, will certainly
know
their real Self."

PASUPATI: "True, sir. It seems that it is God alone who has become
everything."

MASTER: "Try to find out what this 'I' is. Is this 'I' the bones or
flesh or
blood or intestines? Seeking the 'I', you discover 'Thou'. In other
words,
nothing exists inside you but the power of God. There is no 'I', but
only
'He'. (To Pasupati) You have so much wealth, but you
have no egotism. It
is not possible to rid oneself altogether of the ego; so, as long as it
is there,
let the rascal remain as the servant of God. (All laugh.)
The ego that
makes a man feel he is a devotee of God or a son of God or a servant of
God
is good. But the ego that makes a man attached to 'woman and gold' is
the
'unripe ego'. That ego is to be renounced."

The head of the household and the others were very much pleased to hear
this interpretation of the ego.

MASTER (to Pasupati): "There are two signs of
knowledge: first, absence
of pride, and second, a peaceful nature. You have both. Therefore you
must have received the grace of God.

"Too much wealth makes one forget God. That is the very nature of
wealth. Jadu Mallick has become very rich. Nowadays he doesn't talk of
God. Formerly he used to enjoy spiritual talk a great deal.

"'Woman and gold' is a kind of wine. If a man drinks too much wine, he
does not show his father and uncle the respect that is due to them.
Very
often he abuses them. A drunkard cannot distinguish between his
superior
and his inferior."

NANDA: "That is true, sir."

PASUPATI: "Sir, what do you think of Theosophy and Spiritualism? Are
these true? What do you think of the solar plane, the lunar plane, the
stellar plane?"

MASTER: "My dear sir, I don't know about these things. Why bother
about them so much? You have come to the orchard to eat mangoes. Enjoy
them. What is the use of your calculating how many mango-trees there
are,
how many millions of branches, how many billions of leaves? I have come
to the orchard to eat mangoes. Let me enjoy them.

"Once a man's inner spirit is awakened, once he succeeds in knowing
God, he doesn't feel the desire even to know about all this rubbish.
How
incoherently a delirious patient talks: 'I shall eat five seers of
rice! I shall
drink a whole tank of water!' 'Will you?' says the physician. 'All
right! You
will have them.' Saying this, the physician goes on with his smoke. But
he
pays attention to what the patient says when the patient is no longer
delirious."

PASUPATI: "Will our delirium last for ever?"

MASTER: "Why should you think so? Fix your mind on God, and spiritual
consciousness will be awakened in you."

PASUPATI (smiling): "Our union with God is only
momentary. It doesn't
last any longer than a pipeful of tobacco." (All laugh.)

MASTER: "What if that is so? Union with God even for one moment
surely gives a man liberation.

'Ahalya said to Rama, 'O Rama, it doesn't matter if I am born as a pig
or any other being; only bless me that my mind may dwell on Thy Lotus!
Feet and be filled with real devotion to Thee.'

"Narada said to Rama: 'O Rama, I want from Thee no other favour. Please
give me real love for Thee; and please bless me, that I may not come
under
the spell of Thy world-bewitching maya.'

"When a man sincerely prays to God, he is able to fix his mind on God
and develop real love for His Lotus Feet.

"Give up all such notions as: 'Shall we be cured of our delirium?',
'What
will happen to us?', 'We are sinners!' (To Nanda)
One must have this
kind of faith: 'What? Once I have uttered the name of Rama, can I be a
sinner any more?'"

NANDA: "Is there no after-life? What about punishment for our sins?"

MASTER: "Why not enjoy your mangoes? What need have you to calculate
about the after-life and what happens then, and things like that? Eat
your
mangoes. You need mangoes. You need devotion to God —"

NANDA: "But where is the mango-tree? Where do I get mangoes?"

MASTER: "Tree? God is the eternal and infinite Brahman. He does
exist;
there is no doubt about it. He is eternal. But you must remember this,
that
He is the Kalpataru.

Come, let us go for a walk, O mind, to
Kali, the Wish-fulfilling Tree,

And there beneath It gather the four fruits of life.

"You must go to the Kalpataru and pray. Only then will you
obtain the
fruits. Only then will the fruits fall from the tree. Only then will
you be able
to gather them. There are four fruits: dharma, artha, kama, and moksha.
The jnanis seek the fruit of liberation; and the bhaktas, love of God,
love
without any motive behind it. They seek neither dharma nor artha nor
kama.

"You ask about the after-life. According to the Gita
you will become in
the next life what you think of in the hour of death. King Bharata was
very
much grieved over his pet deer; he died repeating the word 'deer';
therefore
he was reborn as a deer. That is why day and night a man should
practise
worship, japa, meditation, and other spiritual exercises. Only then, by
virtue
of practice, will he be able to think of God in the hour of death. If
one
dies thus, thinking of God, one will acquire God's nature.

"Keshab Sen, too, asked me about the after-life. I said to him also,
'What
need have you of all these calculations?' Then I said: 'As long as a
man
does not realize God, he will return to the world. The potter puts his
clay
jars and lids out in the sun to bake. If cattle trample them underfoot,
he
throws away the baked ones. But he collects the soft ones, mixes them
with
more clay, puts them on the wheel, and makes new vessels from them.'"

The master of the house had not yet shown any sign of serving Sri
Ramakrishna
with refreshments. Sri Ramakrishna himself said to Nanda: "You
see, you should offer me something to eat. That is why the other day I
said
to Jadu's mother: 'Look here. Give me something to eat.' Otherwise it
brings
harm to the householder."

Nanda Bose ordered some sweets. Sri Ramakrishna began to eat them.
Nanda and the others were watching the Master and his actions. After
eating the sweets, Sri Ramakrishna wanted to wash his hands. The plate
on
which the sweets were served had been placed on the sheet covering the
carpet; so the Master could not wash his hands in the plate. A servant
brought a brass bowl for him to use. But Sri Ramakrishna would not use
it,
since only rajasic people used such things. He asked the servant to
take it
away. The master of the house said to him, "Please wash your hands."
Absent-mindedly Sri Ramakrishna said: "What? Shall I wash my hands?"

The Master walked to the south verandah. He asked M. to pour water
into his hands. M. poured water from a jug. The Master dried his hands
with his cloth and returned to the room. Then he was offered betel-leaf
on
a tray. But the other guests had already taken some from the same tray;
the
Master did not accept any.
NANDA (to the Master): "May I say something?"

MASTER (smiling): "What?"

NANDA: "Why didn't you eat any betel-leaf? Everything else you did was
proper; this alone seems to be otherwise."

MASTER: "Before I eat anything I offer it to God.2
It is a notion of mine."

NANDA: "But the betel-leaf would have gone to God all the same."

MASTER: "There is the path of jnana, and there is also the path of
bhakti.
According to the jnani everything can be eaten by applying the
Knowledge of Brahman;3
but the follower of bhakti keeps a little distinction." (Between holy
and unholy.)

NANDA: "But I still maintain that you did not act rightly."

MASTER (smiling): "It is just a notion of mine. What
you say is also right.
That too is supported by the scriptures."

Sri Ramakrishna was warning Nanda of flatterers.

MASTER: "Beware of flatterers. They are after their own selfish
purpose.
(To Prasanna's father) Do you live in this house?"

PRASANNA'S FATHER: "No, sir, I am a neighbour. Won't you have a smoke?"

MASTER (very humbly): "No, please enjoy yourself. I
don't feel like
smoking now."

Nanda's house was like a palace. Sri Ramakrishna said to him: "Jadu
hasn't such a big house. I told him so the other day."

NANDA: "He has built a new house at Jorashanko."

Sri Ramakrishna was encouraging Nanda.

MASTER (to Nanda): "Though you are a householder,
still you have kept
your mind on God. Is that a small thing? The man who has renounced the
world will pray to Him as a matter of course. Is there any credit in
that?
But blessed indeed is he who, while leading a householder's life, prays
to
God. He is like a man who finds an object after removing a stone
weighing twenty maunds.

"One should pray to God, establishing with Him an appropriate
relationship.
Hanuman's love for God was mixed with knowledge; but Narada's
love for God was pure and unadulterated.

"Rama asked Hanuman, 'Hanuman, what attitude do you cherish toward
Me when you worship Me?' Hanuman answered: 'Sometimes I see that You
are the whole and I am a part; sometimes I see that You are the Master
and
I am Your servant. But Rama, when I have the Knowledge of Reality, then
I find that You are I and I am You.'

"Rama said to Narada, 'Ask a favour of Me.' Narada said, 'O Rama, grant
me the boon that I may have genuine love for Thy Lotus Feet and that I
may not come under the spell of Thy world-bewitching maya!'"

Sri Ramakrishna was about to take his leave.

MASTER (to Nanda): "According to the Gita
a man who is honoured and
respected by many people possesses a special power of God. You have
divine power."

NANDA: "All men have the same power."

MASTER (sharply): "You all say the same thing. Can
all men ever
possess power to the same degree? God no doubt dwells in all beings as
the
all-pervading Spirit, but the manifestations of His Power are different
in different beings.

"Vidyasagar, too, said the same thing. He said, 'Has God given some
more power and some less?' Thereupon I said to him: 'If there are not
different manifestations of His Power, then why have we come to see
you?
Have you grown two horns on your head?'"

Sri Ramakrishna rose. The devotees followed him. Pasupati accompanied
them to the door.

The Master arrived at the house of the brahmin lady who was
grief-stricken on account of her daughter's death. It was an old brick
house.
Entering the house, the Master passed the cow-shed on his left. He and
the
devotees went to the roof, where they took seats. People were standing
there
in rows. Others were seated. They were all eager to get a glimpse of
Sri Ramakrishna.

The brahmani had a sister; both of them were widows. Their brothers
also lived in the house with their families. The brahmani had been busy
all day making arrangements to receive Sri Ramakrishna. While the
Master
was at Nanda Bose's house she had been extremely restless, going out of
the house every few minutes to see if he was coming. He had promised to
come to her place from Nanda's. Because of his delay she had thought
perhaps he would not come at all.

Sri Ramakrishna was seated on a carpet. M., Narayan, Jogin, Devendra,
and others were seated on a mat. A few minutes later the younger Naren
and some other devotees arrived. The brahmani's sister came to the
Master
and saluted him. She said, "Sister has just gone to Nanda Bose's house
to
inquire the reason for your delay in coming here. She will return
presently.

A sound was heard downstairs and she exclaimed, "There she comes!" She
went down. But it was not the brahmani.

Sri Ramakrishna sat there smiling, surrounded by devotees.

M. (to Devendra): "What a grand sight! All these
people — young and
old, men and women — standing in lines, eager to have a glimpse of him
and hear his words."

DEVENDRA (to the Master): "M. says that this place
is better than Nanda's.
The devotion of these people is amazing."

Sri Ramakrishna laughed.

The brahmani's sister exclaimed, "Here comes sister!"

The brahmani came and saluted the Master. She was beside herself with
joy. She did not know what to say. In a half-choked voice she said:
"This joy
is too much for me. Perhaps I shall die of it. Tell me, friends, how
shall I
be able to live? I did not feel such a thrill even when Chandi, my
daughter,
used to visit the house accompanied by liveried footmen, with armed
guards
lining both sides of the street. Oh! Now I have no trace of my grief at
her
death. I was afraid he (Meaning Sri Ramakrishna.) would not come. Then
I thought that, if that
happened, I should throw into the Ganges all the things I had arranged
for his
reception and entertainment. I should not speak to him any more. If he
visited a place, I should go there, look at him from a distance, and
then come away.

"Let me go and tell everybody how happy I am. Let me go and tell
Yogin of my good luck."

Still overwhelmed with joy she said: "A labourer won a hundred thousand
rupees in a lottery. The moment he heard the news he died of joy.
Yes, he really and truly died. I am afraid the same thing is going to
happen
to me. Please bless me, friends, or else I shall certainly die."

M. was amazed to see the brahmani's sincere joy and her ecstatic mood.
He was about to take the dust of her feet. "What are you doing?" she
exclaimed and saluted M.

The brahmani was extremely happy at the sight of the devotees. She
said:
"I am so happy to see you all here. I have brought the younger Naren;
without him, who would there be to make us laugh?"

She was talking like this when her sister came up and said: "Come down,
sister! How can I manage things if you stay here? Can I do it all by
myself?"

But the brahmani was overwhelmed with joy. She could not take her eyes
from the Master and the devotees.

After a while she very respectfully took Sri Ramakrishna to another
room
and offered him sweets and other refreshments. The devotees were
entertained on the roof.

It was about eight o'clock in the evening. Sri Ramakrishna was ready to
leave. When he came to the door, the brahmani asked her sister-in-law
to
salute the Master. Next, one of her brothers took the dust of the
Master's
feet. Referring to him, she said: "He is one of my brothers. He is a
fool."
No, no!" said the Master. "They are all good."

A man showed the way with a light. At places it was dark. Sri
Ramakrishna stood in front of the cow-shed. The devotees gathered
around him.
M. saluted the Master, who was about to go to the house of Ganu's
mother.

Sri Ramakrishna was seated in the drawing-room of Ganu's mother's
house.
It was on the street floor. The room was used by a concert party.
Several
young men played on their instruments now and then for the pleasure of
the Master.

It was eight-thirty In the evening. Moonlight flooded the streets, the
houses, and the sky. It was the first day after the full moon.

The brahmani, who had also come, was visiting the drawing-room and the
inner apartments alternately. Every few minutes she would come to the
door
of the drawing-room and look at the Master. Some youngsters from the
neighbourhood also looked at him through the windows. The people of the
locality, young and old, came thronging to see the saint.

The younger Naren saw the boys in the street climbing the windows. He
said to them: "Why are you here? Get away! Go home!" The Master said
tenderly, "Let them stay." Every now and then he chanted: "Hari Om!
Hari Om!"

The floor of the drawing-room was covered with a carpet. The young
musicians sat on it and sang:

O Kesava, bestow Thy grace

Upon Thy luckless servants here!

O Kesava, who dost delight

To roam Vrindavan's glades and groves! . . .

MASTER: "Ah, how sweet the music is! How melodious the violin
is! How
good the accompaniments are! (Pointing to a boy) He
and the flutist seem
to be a nice pair."

The orchestra went on playing. After it was over, Sri Ramakrishna said
joyfully, '"It is very fine indeed." Pointing to a young man, he said,
"He
seems to know how to play every instrument." He said to M., "They are
all good people."

After the concert the young musician said to the devotees, "We should
like to hear some of you sing." The brahmani stood near the door. She
said;
"None of them knows how to sing. Perhaps Mohin Babu can sing. But he
will not sing before the Master."

A YOUNG MAN: "Why? I can sing even before my father."

THE YOUNGER NAREN (laughing):
"But he has not yet advanced that far."

All laughed. A few minutes later the brahmani said to Sri Ramakrishna,
"Please come inside."

MASTER: "Why?"

BRAHMANI: "The refreshments are served there. Please come."

MASTER: "Why not bring them here?"

BRAHMANI: "Ganu's mother requests you to bless the room with the dust
of your feet. Then the room will be turned into Benares, and anyone
dying
in it will have no trouble hereafter."

Sri Ramakrishna went inside accompanied by the brahmani and the young
men of the family. The devotees were strolling outside in the
moonlight.
M. and Binode were pacing the street south of the house and recalling
the
various incidents in the life of their beloved Master.

Sri Ramakrishna had returned to Balaram's house. He was resting in the
small room to the west of the drawing-room. It was quite late, almost a
quarter to eleven.

Sri Ramakrishna said to Jogin, "Please rub my feet gently." M. was
sitting
near by. While Jogin was rubbing his feet the Master said suddenly: "I
feel hungry. I shall eat some farina pudding."

The brahmani had accompanied the Master and the devotees to Balaram's
house. Her brother knew how to play the drums. Sri Ramakrishna said,
"It
will serve our purpose to send for her brother when Narendra or some
other
singer wants to sing."

Sri Ramakrishna ate a little pudding, Jogin and the other devotees left
the room. M. was stroking the Master's feet. They talked together.

MASTER (referring to the brahmani and her relatives):
"Ah! How happy
they were!"

M: "How amazing! A similar thing happened with two women at the
time of Jesus. They too were sisters, and devoted to Christ. Martha and
Mary."

MASTER (eagerly): "Tell me the story."

M: "Jesus Christ, like you, went to their house with His devotees. At
the
sight of Him one of the sisters was filled with ecstatic happiness. It
reminds
me of a song about Gauranga:

My two eyes sank in the sea of Gora's heavenly beauty

And did not come back to me again;

Down went my mind, as well, forgetting how to swim.

"The other sister, all by herself, was arranging the food to
entertain Jesus.
She complained to the Master, saying: 'Lord, please judge for Yourself
—
how wrong my sister is! She is sitting in Your room and I am doing all
these
things by myself.' Jesus said: 'Your sister indeed is blessed. She has
developed the only thing needful in human life: love of God.'"

MASTER: "Well, after seeing all this, what do you feel?"

M: "I feel that Christ, Chaitanyadeva, and yourself — all three are one
and the same. It is the same Person that has become all these three."

MASTER: "Yes, yes! One! One! It is indeed one. Don't you see that it is
He alone who dwells here in this way."

As he said this, Sri Ramakrishna pointed with his finger to his own
body.

M: "You explained clearly, the other day, how God incarnates Himself on
earth."

MASTER: "Tell me what I said."

M: "You told us to imagine a field extending to the horizon and beyond.
It extends without any obstruction; but we cannot see it on account of
a
wall in front of us. In that wall there is a round hole. Through the
hole
we see a part of that infinite field."

MASTER: "Tell me what that hole is."

M: "You are that hole. Through you can be seen everything — that
Infinite Meadow without any end."

Sri Ramakrishna was very much pleased. Patting M.'s back, he said: "I
see you have understood that. That's fine!"

M: "It is indeed difficult to understand that. One cannot quite grasp
how
God, Perfect Brahman that He is, can dwell in that small body."

The Master quoted from a song:

Oh, no one at all has found out who He is;

Like a madman from door to door He roams,

Like a poor beggar He roams from door to door.

M: "You also told us about Jesus."

MASTER: "What did I say?"

M: "You went into samadhi at the sight of Jesus Christ's picture in
Jadu
Mallick's garden house. You saw Jesus come down from the picture and
merge in your body."

Sri Ramakrishna was silent a few moments. Then he said to M.: "Perhaps
there is a meaning in what has happened to my throat [referring to the
sore
in his throat]. This has happened lest I should make myself light
before all;
lest I should go to all sorts of places and sing and dance."

Sri Ramakrishna began to talk about Dwija.

MASTER: "He didn't come today. Why?"

M: "I asked him to come. He said he would. I don't know why he didn't."

MASTER: "He has great yearning. Well, he must be someone belonging
to this. (Meaning the circle of the Master's devotees.) Isn't that so?"

M: "Yes, sir, it must be so. Otherwise, how could he have such
yearning?"

Sri Ramakrishna lay down inside the mosquito curtain. M. fanned him.
The Master turned on his side. He told M. how God incarnates Himself in
a human body. He told him, further, about his, M.'s, spiritual ideal.

MASTER: "At the beginning I too passed through such states that I did
not
see divine forms. Even now I don't see them often."

M: "Among all the forms God chooses for His lila, I like best His play
as a human being."

MASTER: "That is enough. And you are seeing me."

^God
incarnated as half lion and half man to protect Prahlada and destroy
the
demon Hiranyakasipu, his father.

^According
to Hindu religious custom a thing can be offered to God only if no
part of it has been eaten by anyone else beforehand.

^The
jnani sees everything as Brahman; therefore he does not distinguish
between
holy and unholy.


=== 44_master_on_himself.htm ===

The Master on Himself and His Experiences

←
Home
/ The Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna
/ Volume 2
/ →

THE MASTER ON HIMSELF AND HIS EXPERIENCES

Beginning of Master's illness — Advice to the worldly-minded
—Instructing Dwija's father — Man's several debts — Mahima's estimate
of
the devotees — Different kinds of samadhi — Awakening of Kundalini —
Master's intimate vision of God — Master's vision of maya — Master
saw devotees before their arrival — About Narendra — Master about
himself — Totapuri — Mathur Babu — Brahman and Sakti — Brahman
is the innermost Reality — Futility of mere scholarship — Divine
Incarnations act like men — Jesus and Lazarus — Similarities between
Christ
and Sri Ramaknshna — Purna's letter — About rebirth — Girish and
Master — The guru and the Chosen Ideal — Two classes of devotees —
Kitten and young monkey — Worldly man's obstacles — Futility of
argument — Master's renunciation — Master could not ask God to cure
him.

August 9, 1885

SRI RAMAKRISHNA was sitting in his room at Dakshineswar.
Rakhal, M.,
Dwija and his father, and other devotees were present. It was about
four o'clock in the afternoon.

After returning from Vrindavan Rakhal had spent a few days at home.
Now he was staying with the Master. Latu, Harish, and Ramlal were also
staying at the temple garden.

Sri Ramakrishna was not well. It was the beginning of the illness
subsequently diagnosed as the fatal cancer. But this did not disturb
the serenity of
his mind. Day and night he had only one thought, and that was the
spiritual
welfare of his disciples. He was guiding them toward the attainment of
God. He encouraged them constantly to cultivate knowledge and devotion
and warned them of the snares of "woman and gold". He was completely
indifferent to his own illness and devoted himself whole-heartedly to
the
fulfilment of his earthly mission.

Dwija was about sixteen years old. After the death of his mother, his
father had married a second time. Dwija often accompanied M. to
Dakshineswar; but his father did not approve of it.

Dwija's father had for a long time been speaking of visiting Sri
Ramakrishna.
Today he had come to Dakshineswar. He was the manager of a
business firm in Calcutta and had passed his examination in law.

MASTER (to Dwija's father): "Please don't mind your
children's coming
here.

"I ask people to live in the world after the awakening of their
spiritual
consciousness. After extracting gold through hard labour, a man may
keep
it under earth or in a box or under water. The gold is not affected.

"I ask people to live in the world in a spirit of detachment. If you
break
the jack-fruit after rubbing oil on your hands, its sticky juice will
not smear them.

'If the 'unripe' mind dwells in the world, the mind gets soiled. One
should first attain knowledge and then live in the world.

"If you put milk in water the milk is spoiled. But this will not happen
if
butter, churned from the milk, is put in water."

DWIJA'S FATHER: "That is true, sir."

MASTER (smiling): "I know why you scold your
children. You only
threaten them. The brahmachari said to the snake: 'You are a fool
indeed!
I forbade you to bite but not to hiss. Your enemies would not have
beaten
you, if only you had hissed at them.' Your scolding of the children is
really
a hissing. (Dwija's father smiles.)

"A good son is an indication of his father's spiritual nature. If good
water
comes out when a reservoir is dug, it only indicates the virtue of the
owner.

"A son is called Atmaja, 'the self reborn'. There is no difference
between
you and your son. In one way you yourself are reborn as vour son. In
one
sense you are a worldly person, working in a business office and
enjoying
worldly life; in another sense you are a devotee of God, in the form of
your
son. I heard that you were a very worldly person; but now I find it
isn't so.
(Smiling) You know all this. I understand that you
are very circumspect.
Perhaps that is why you are nodding your assent to what I am saying,
(Dwija's father smiles.)

"If your children visit this place, they will be able to know what you
really are. How precious one's father is! If a person deceives his
father and
mother in order to seek religion, he gets only worthless trash.

"A man is born with several debts: debts to his father, the devas, and
the
rishis. Besides, there is his debt to his mother. He also has a debt to
his wife.
She must be supported. If the wife is chaste, the husband must provide
for
her after his death.

"I could not live at Vrindavan on account of my mother. When I
remembered that my mother was living in the temple garden here at
Dakshineswar,
I could not feel peaceful at Vrindavan.

"I ask people to live in the world and at the same time fix their minds
on
God. I don't ask them to give up the world. I say, 'Fulfil your worldly
duties and also think of God.'"

DWIJA'S FATHER: "I tell my children that they should attend to their
studies. I don't forbid them to come to you, but I don't want them to
waste
time in frivolities with the youngsters."

MASTER (referring to Dwija): "This boy must have
been bom with some
good tendencies. Why are the two other brothers different from him? Why
is he alone spiritually minded? Will you be able to compel him not to
visit
this place? Sooner or later everyone unfolds his inborn tendencies."

DWIJA'S FATHER: "Yes, that is true."

Sri Ramakrishna came down from the couch and sat on the floor beside
Dwija's father. While talking with him he touched him now and then.

It was nearly evening. Sri Ramakrishna asked M. and the others to show
Dwija's father the temples. He said to them, "I should have accompanied
him myself if I were well." He asked someone to give sweets to the
young
men and said to Dwija's father: "Let the children have a little
refreshment,
It is customary." Dwija's father visited the temples and the images and
took
a stroll in the garden.

Sri Ramakrishna engaged happily in conversation with Bhupen, Dwija,
M., and others on the southeast porch of his room. He playfully slapped
Bhupen and M. on the back. He said to Dwija with a laugh, "How I talked
to your father!"

Dwija's father returned to Sri Ramakrishna's room after dusk. He
intended
to leave shortly. He was feeling hot. Sri Ramakrishna fanned him
himself.
In a few minutes the father took leave of the Master. Sri Ramakrishna
stood
up to bid him farewell.

It was eight o'clock. Sri Ramakrishna was talking to Mahimacharan.
Rakhal, M., and one or two companions of Mahimacharan were in the
room. Mahimacharan was going to spend the night at the temple garden.

MASTER (to Mahima): "Well, how do you find Kedar?
Has he only seen
milk, or has he drunk it too?"

MAHIMA: "Yes, he is enjoying bliss."

MASTER: "Nityagopal?"

MAHIMA: "Very good. He is in a lofty state of mind."

MASTER: "Yes. Well, what about Girish Ghosh?"

MAHIMA: "He too has developed nicely. But he belongs to another class."

MASTER: "And Narendra?"

MAHIMA: "He is now in the state I was in fifteen years ago."

MASTER: "The younger Naren? How guileless he is!"

MAHIMA: "Yes, quite guileless."

MASTER: "You are right. (Reflecting a little) Let me
see who else. It will
be sufficient for the youngsters who come here if they know only two
things.
If they know these, they will not have to practise much discipline and
austerity. First, who I am, and second, who they are. Many of the
youngsters
belong to the inner circle.

"Those belonging to the inner circle will not attain liberation. I
shall have
to assume a human body again, in a northwesterly direction.

"I feel peace of mind when I see the youngsters. How can I feel joy at
the
sight of those who have begotten children and are engaged in lawsuits
and
are involved in 'woman and gold'? How could I live without seeing
pure-souled persons?"

Mahimacharan recited some texts from the scriptures. He also described
various mystic rites of the Tantra.

MASTER: "Well, some say that my soul, going into samadhi, flies about
like a bird in the Mahakasa, the Infinite Space.

"Once a sadhu of Hrishikesh came here. He said to me: There are five
kinds of samadhi. I find you have experienced them all. In these
samadhis
one feels the sensation of the Spiritual Current to be like the
movement of
an ant, a fish, a monkey, a bird, or a serpent.'

"Sometimes the Spiritual Current rises through the spine, crawling like
an ant.

"Sometimes, in samadhi, the soul swims joyfully in the ocean of divine
ecstasy, like a fish.

"Sometimes, when I lie down on my side, I feel the Spiritual Current
pushing me like a monkey and playing with me joyfully. I remain still.
That Current, like a monkey, suddenly with one jump reaches the
Sahasrara.
That is why you see me jump up with a start.

"Sometimes, again, the Spiritual Current rises like a bird hopping from
one branch to another. The place where it rests feels like fire. It may
hop
from Muladhara to Svadhisthana, from Svadhisthana to the heart, and
thus
gradually to the head.

"Sometimes the Spiritual Current moves up like a snake. Going in a
zigzag way, at last it reaches the head and I go into samadhi.

"A man's spiritual consciousness is not awakened unless his Kundalini
is aroused.

"The Kundalini dwells in the Muladhara. When it is aroused, it passes
along the Sushumna nerve, goes through the centres of Svadhisthana,
Manipura, and so on, and at last reaches the head. This is called the
movement of
the Mahavayu, the Spiritual Current. It culminates in samadhi.

"One's spiritual consciousness is not awakened by the mere reading of
books. One should also pray to God. The Kundalini is aroused if the
aspirant
feels restless for God. To talk of Knowledge from mere study and
hearsay!
What will that accomplish?

"Just before my attaining this state of mind, it had been revealed to
me
how the Kundalini is aroused, how the lotuses of the different centres
blossom
forth, and how all this culminates in samadhi. This is a very secret
experience. I saw a boy twenty-two or twenty-three years old, exactly
resembling
me, enter the Sushumna nerve and commune with the lotuses, touching
them with his tongue. He began with the centre at the anus and passed
through the centres at the sexual organ, navel, and so on. The
different
lotuses of those centres — four-petalled, six-petalled, ten-petalled,
and so forth
— had been drooping. At his touch they stood erect.

"When he reached the heart — I distinctly remember it — and communed
with the lotus there, touching it with his tongue, the twelve-petalled
lotus,
which was hanging head down, stood erect and opened its petals. Then he
came to the sixteen-petalled lotus in the throat and the two-petalled
lotus in
the forehead. And last of all, the thousand-petalled lotus in the head
blossomed. Since then I have been in this state."

Sri Ramakrishna came down to the floor and sat near Mahimacharan.
M. and a few other devotees were near him. Rakhal also was in the room.

MASTER (to Mahima): "For a long time I have wanted
to tell you my
spiritual experiences, but I could not. I feel like telling you today.

"You say that by mere sadhana one can attain a state of mind like mine.
But it is not so. There is something special here [referring to
himself]."

Rakhal, M., and the others became eager to hear what the Master was
going to say.

MASTER: "God talked to me. It was not merely His vision. Yes, He talked
to me. Under the banyan-tree I saw Him coming from the Ganges. Then
we laughed so much! By way of playing with me He cracked my fingers.
Then He talked. Yes, He talked to me.

"For three days I wept continously. And He revealed to me what is in
the Vedas, the Puranas, the Tantras, and the other scriptures.

"One day He showed me the maya of Mahamaya. A small light inside a
room began to grow, and at last it enveloped the whole universe.

"Further, He revealed to me a huge reservoir of water covered with
green
scum. The wind moved a little of the scum and immediately the water
became visible; but in the twinkling of an eye, scum from all sides
came
dancing in and again covered the water. He revealed to me that the
water
was like Satchidananda, and the scum like maya. On account of maya,
Satchidananda is not seen. Though now and then one may get a glimpse of
It, again maya covers It.

"God reveals the nature of the devotees to me before they arrive. I saw
Chaitanya's party singing and dancing near the Panchavati, between the
banyan-tree and the bakul-tree. I noticed Balaram there. If it weren't
for
him, who would there be to supply me with sugar candy and such things?
(Pointing to M.) And I saw him too.

"I had seen Keshab before I actually met him — I had seen him and his
party in my samadhi. In front of me sat a roomful of men. Keshab looked
like a peacock sitting with its tail spread out. The tail meant his
followers.
I saw a red gem on Keshab's head. That indicated his rajas. He said to
his
disciples, 'Please listen to what he [meaning the Master] is saying.' I
said to
the Divine Mother: 'Mother, these people hold the views of
"Englishmen".
Why should I talk to them?' Then the Mother explained to me that it
would be like this in the Kaliyuga.

"Keshab and his followers got from here [meaning himself] the names of
Hari and the Divine Mother. That is why the Divine Mother took Vijay
away from Keshab's party. But Vijay did not join the Adi Samaj. (A sect
of the Brahmo Samaj.)

(Pointing to himself) "There must be something
special here. Long ago
a young man named Gopal Sen used to visit me. He who dwells in me
placed His foot on Gopal's chest. Gopal said in an ecstatic mood: 'You
will
have to wait here a long time. I cannot live any more with worldly
people.'
He took leave of me. Afterwards I heard that he was dead. Perhaps he
was
born as Nityagopal.

"I have had many amazing visions. I had a vision of the Indivisible
Satchidananda. Inside It I saw two groups with a fence between them. On
one side were Kedar, Chuni, and other devotees who believe in the
Personal
God. On the other side was a luminous space like a heap of red
brick-dust.
Inside it was seated Narendra immersed in samadhi. Seeing him absorbed
in meditation, I called aloud, 'Oh, Narendra!' He opened his eyes a
little.
I came to realize that he had been born, in another form, in Simla
(The section of Calcutta in which Narendra was born.)
in a kayastha family. At once I said to the Divine Mother, 'Mother,
entangle
him in maya; otherwise he will give up his body in samadhi.' Kedar, a
believer in the Personal God, peeped in and ran away with a shudder.

"Therefore I feel that it is the Divine Mother Herself who dwells in
this
body and plays with the devotees. When I first had my exalted state of
mind,
my body would radiate light. My chest was always flushed. Then I said
to
the Divine Mother: 'Mother, do not reveal Thyself outwardly. Please go
inside.' That is why my complexion is so dull now. If my body were
still
luminous, people would have tormented me; a crowd would always have
thronged here. Now there is no outer manifestation. That keeps weeds
away.
Only genuine devotees will remain with me now. Do you know why I have
this illness? It has the same significance. Those whose devotion to me
has a
selfish motive behind it will run away at the sight of my illness.

"I cherished a desire. I said to the Mother, 'O Mother, I shall be the
king
of the devotees.'

"Again, this thought arose in my mind: 'He who sincerely prays to God
will certainly come here. He must.' You see, that is what is happening
now.
Only people of that kind come.

"My parents knew who dwells inside this body. Father had a dream at
Gaya. In that dream Raghuvir said to him, 'I shall be born as your son.'

"God alone dwells inside this body. Such renunciation of 'woman and
gold'! Could I have accomplished that myself? I have never enjoyed a
woman, even in a dream.

"Nangta instructed me in Vedanta. In three days I went into samadhi. At
the sight of my samadhi under the madhavi vine, he was quite taken
aback
and exclaimed, 'Ah! What is this?' Then he came to know who resides in
this body. He said to me, 'Please let me go.' At these words of
Totapuri, I
went into an ecstatic mood and said, You cannot go till I realize the
Truth
of Vedanta.'

"Day and night I lived with him. We talked only Vedanta. The Brahmani
used to say to me: 'Don't listen to Vedanta. It will injure your
devotion to God.'

"I said to the Divine Mother: 'Mother, please get me a rich man. If You
don't, how shall I be able to protect this body? How shall I be able to
keep
the sadhus and devotees, near me?' That is why Mathur Babu provided for
my needs for fourteen years.

"He who dwells in me tells me beforehand what particular class of
devotees will come to me. When I have a vision of Gauranga, I know that
devotees of Gauranga are coming. When I have a vision of Kali, the
Saktas come.

"At the time of the evening service I used to cry out from the roof of
the
kuthi, weeping: 'Oh, where are you all? Come to me!' You see, they are
all
gathering here, one by one.

"God Himself dwells in this body. It is He who, of His own accord, is
working with these devotees.

"What a wonderful state of mind some of the devotees have! The younger
Naren gets kumbhaka without any effort, and samadhi too. Sometimes he
stays in an ecstatic mood for two and a half hours; sometimes even
more.
How wonderful!

"I have practised all kinds of sadhana: jnanayoga, karmayoga, and
bhaktiyoga. I have even gone through the exercises of hathayoga to
increase
longevity. There is another Person dwelling in this body. Otherwise,
after
attaining samadhi, how could I live with the devotees and enjoy the
love of
God? Koar Singh used to say to me: 'I have never before seen a person
who
has returned from the plane of samadhi. You are none other than Nanak.'

"I live in the midst of worldly people; on all sides I see 'woman and
gold'.
Nevertheless, this is the state of my mind: unceasing samadhi and
bhava.
That is the reason Pratap1
said, at the sight of my ecstatic mood: 'Good heavens! It is as if he
were possessed by a ghost!'"

Rakhal, M., and the others were speechless as they drank in this
account
of Sri Ramakrishna's unique experiences.

But did Mahimacharan understand the import of these words? Even
after hearing them, he said to the Master, "These things have happened
to
you on account of your meritorious actions in your past births." Mahima
still thought that Sri Ramakrishna was a sadhu or a devotee of God. The
Master nodded assent to Mahima's words and said: "Yes, the result of
past
actions. God is like an aristocrat who has many mansions. Here
[referring to
himself] is one of His drawing-rooms. The bhakta is God's drawing-room."

It was nine o'clock in the evening. Sri Ramakrishna was sitting on the
small couch. It was Mahimacharan's desire to form a brahmachakra
(A mystic circle prescribed in Tantra.)
in the presence of the Master. Mahima formed a circle, on the floor,
with Rakhal,
M., Kishori, and one or two other devotees. He asked them all to
meditate.
Rakhal went into an ecstatic state. The Master came down from the couch
and placed his hand on Rakhal's chest, repeating the name of the Divine
Mother. Rakhal regained consciousness of the outer world.

It was one o'clock in the morning, the fourteenth day of the dark
fortnight of the moon. There was intense darkness everywhere. One or
two
devotees were pacing the concrete embankment of the Ganges. Sri
Ramakrishna was up. He came out and said to the devotees, "Nangta told
me
that at this time, about midnight, one hears the Anahata sound."

In the early hours of the morning Mahimacharan and M. lay down on
the floor of the Master's room. Rakhal slept on a camp cot. Now and
then
Sri Ramakrishna paced up and down the room with his clothes off, like a
five-year-old child.

Monday, August 10

It was dawn. The Master was chanting the name of the Divine
Mother.
He went to the porch west of his room and looked at the Ganges; then he
stopped in front of the pictures of different gods and goddesses in the
room
and bowed to them. The devotees left their beds, saluted Sri
Ramakrishna, and went out.

The Master was talking to a devotee in the Panchavati. The latter had
dreamt of Chaitanyadeva.

MASTER (in an ecstatic mood): "Ah me! Ah me!"

DEVOTEE: "But, sir, it was only a dream."

MASTER: "Is a dream a small thing?"

The Master's voice was choked. His eyes were filled with tears.

Sri Ramakrishna was told of a devotee who had divine visions even while
he was awake. The Master said: "I am not surprised. Narendra, too, sees
forms of God nowadays."

Mahimacharan went to one of the Siva temples to the west of the
courtyard and chanted hymns from the Vedas. He was alone.

It was eight o'clock in the morning. M. bathed in the Ganges and came
to Sri Ramakrishna. The brahmani who was grief-stricken on account of
her daughter's death also entered the room.

The Master asked the brahmani to give M. some prasad to eat.

BRAHMANI: "Please eat something yourself first; then he will eat."

MASTER (to M.): "Take some prasad of Jagannath first
and then eat."

After eating the prasad, M. went to the Siva temples and saluted the
Deity. Then he returned to the Master's room and saluted him. He was
ready to go to Calcutta.

MASTER (tenderly): "Go home safely. You have to
attend to your duties."

Tuesday, August 11

Sri Ramakrishna was in his room at the temple garden. He had been
observing silence since eight o'clock in the morning. Did he know the
fatal
nature of his illness? At his silence the Holy Mother wept. Rakhal and
Latu also wept. The brahmani widow from Baghbazar arrived. She too was
weeping at this strange mood of the Master. Now and then the devotees
asked him whether he would remain silent for good. The Master answered
them in the negative, by a sign.

At three o'clock in the afternoon Narayan arrived. Sri Ramakrishna said
to him, "The Divine Mother will bless you." Narayan told the other
devotees
that the Master had spoken to him. A heavy weight was lifted from their
breasts. They all came into the Master's room and sat on the floor.

MASTER (to the devotees): "The Mother showed me that
all this is verily
maya. She alone is, real, and all else is the splendour of Her maya.

"Another thing was revealed to me. I found out how far the different
devotees have progressed."

DEVOTEES: "Please tell us about it."

MASTER: "I came to know about all these devotees: Nityagopal, Rakhal,
Narayan, Puma, Mahima Chakravarty, and the others."

Sunday, August 16, 1885

The news of Sri Ramakrishna's illness had been reported to
the" devotees
in Calcutta. They thought it was just a sore in his throat. Many
devotees
arrived at Dakshineswar to visit him. Among them were Girish, Ram,
Nityagopal, Mahima, Kishori, and Pundit Shashadhar.

Sri Ramakrishna was in his usual happy mood. He was talking to the
devotees.

MASTER: "I cannot tell the Mother about my illness. I feel ashamed to
talk of it."

GIRISH: "God will cure you."

RAM: "Yes, you will be all right."

MASTER (smiling): "Yes, give me your blessing." (All
laugh.)

Girish was a recent visitor to Dakshineswar. The Master said to him:
"You have so many duties to perform. You have to face so many troubles.
Come here only three times more.

(To Shashadhar) "Please tell us something about the
Adyasakti."

SHASHADHAR: "What do I know, sir?"

MASTER (smiling): "A certain man had great respect
for another man.
The second man asked him to bring him a little fire for his tobacco. He
answered humbly, 'Sir, am I fit to carry your fire?' He didn't bring
the
fire." (All laugh.)

SHASHADHAR: "The Primal Power alone is both the instrumental and the
material cause of the universe. It is She who has created the universe
and
its living beings; further, She Herself has become all these. To give
an
example: the spider, as the instrumental cause, makes the web and, as
the
material cause, brings the web out of its own body."

MASTER: "It is also stated that He who is Purusha is also Prakriti; He
who is Brahman is also Sakti. He is called Purusha or Brahman when He
is
inactive, that is to say, when He ceases to create, preserve, or
destroy; and
He is called Sakti or Prakriti when He engages in those activities. But
He
who is Brahman is none other than Sakti; He who is Purusha has verily
become Prakriti. Water is water whether it moves or is still. A snake
is a
snake whether it wriggles along or stays still and coiled up.

"What Brahman is cannot be described. Speech stops there. In the kirtan
the singers at first sing: 'My Nitai dances like a mata hati.' (Mad
elephant.) As they become
more and more ecstatic, they can hardly utter the whole sentence. They
sing only: 'Hati! Hati!' As their mood deepens they sing only: 'Ha!
Ha!' At
last they cannot sing even that; they become completely unconscious."

As the Master spoke these words, he himself became transfixed in
samadhi.
He was standing.

Regaining consciousness of the world, he said, "That which is beyond
both kshara and akshara cannot be described."

The devotees sat in silence.

MASTER : "You cannot go into samadhi as long as your worldly
experiences
are not finished, or as long as you have duties to perform.

(To Shashadhar) "God is now making you perform such
duties as delivering
lectures. You must do these things now. You will have peace when
your duties are finished. After completing her household duties, the
mistress
of the family goes for her bath. She will not come back then even if
you
shout after her."

Thursday, August 27, 1885

Sri Ramakrishna was sitting in his room at Dakshineswar. It
was five
o'clock in the afternoon. There were two or three devotees with him.
While
with the devotees he never gave a thought to his physical illness,
often
spending the whole day with them talking and singing.

Doctor Madhu was treating Sri Ramakrishna. He frequently visited the
Master at Dakshineswar, coming by country boat from Calcutta. The
devotees were very much worried about the Master; it was their secret
desire
that the physician should see him daily. M. said to the Master, "Doctor
Madhu is an experienced physician. It will be nice if he sees you every
day."

Pundit Shyamapada of Antpur arrived. It was dusk. The pundit went to
the bank of the Ganges to perform his evening worship; he had some
amazing visions during the worship. He returned to the Master's room
and
sat on the floor. Sri Ramakrishna had just finished meditation and the
chanting of the holy names. He was sitting on the small couch and M. on
the foot-rug. Rakhal, Latu, and the others were in and out of the room.

MASTER (to M., pointing to the pundit): "He is very
nice. (To the
pundit) Where the mind attains peace by practising the
discipline of
'Neti, neti', there Brahman is.

"The king dwells in the inmost room of the palace, which has seven
gates.
The visitor comes to the first gate. There he sees a lordly person with
a
large retinue, surrounded on all sides by pomp and grandeur. The
visitor
asks his companion, 'Is he the king?' 'No', says his friend with a
smile.

"At the second and the other gates he repeats the same question to his
friend. He finds that the nearer he comes to the inmost part of the
palace,
the greater is the glory, pomp, and grandeur. When he passes the
seventh
gate he does not ask his companion whether it is the king; he stands
speech-
less at the king's immeasurable glory. He realizes that he is face to
face
with the king. He hasn't the slightest doubt about it."
PUNDIT: "One sees God beyond the realm of maya."

MASTER: "But after realizing God one finds that He alone has become
maya, the universe, and all living beings. This world is no doubt a
'frame-work of illusion', unreal as a dream. One feels that way when
one
discriminates following the process of 'Not this, not this'. But after
the vision
of God this very world becomes 'a mansion of mirth'.

"What will you gain by the mere study of scriptures? The pundits merely
indulge in reasoning."

PUNDIT: "I hate the idea of being called a pundit."

MASTER: "That is due to the grace of God. The pundits merely indulge
in reasoning. Some have heard of milk and some have drunk milk. After
you
have the vision of God you will find that everything is Narayana. It is
Narayana Himself who has become everything."

The pundit recited a hymn to Narayana. Sri Ramakrishna was overwhelmed
with joy.

PUNDIT (quoting from the Gita): "'With the heart
concentrated by
yoga, with the eye of evenness for all things, he beholds the Self in
all
beings and all beings in the Self.'"

MASTER: "Have you read the Adhyatma Ramayana?

PUNDIT: "Yes, sir, a little."

MASTER: "The book is filled with ideas of knowledge and devotion. The
life of Savari and the hymn by Ahalya are filled with bhakti.

"But you must remember one thing: God is very far away from the mind
tainted with worldliness."

PUNDIT: "Yes, sir. God is far, far away from worldly intelligence. And
God is very near, where that does not exist. I visited a certain
zemindar, one
Mukherji of Uttarpara. He is now an elderly man; but he listens only to
stories and novels."

MASTER: "It is further said in the Adhyatma Ramayana
that God alone
has become the universe and its living beings."

The pundit was delighted. He recited a hymn to that effect from the
tenth chapter of the Bhagavata:

O Krishna! Krishna! Mighty Yogi! Thou art the Primal Supreme Purusha:

This universe, manifest and unmanifest, is Thy form, as the sages
declare.

Thou alone art the soul, the sense-organs, the Lord dwelling in the
bodies of all;

Thou art the subtle Great Prakriti, made of sattva, rajas, and tamas;

Thou alone art the Purusha, the Lord dwelling in the bodies of all.

As Sri Ramakrishna listened to the hymn he went into samadhi.
He
remained standing. The pundit was seated. The Master placed his foot on
the pundit's lap and chest, and smiled.

The pundit clung to his feet and said, "O Guru! Please give me
God-Consciousness."

After the pundit had left the room Sri Ramakrishna said to M.: "Don't
you see that what I have said is coming to pass? Those who have
sincerely
practised meditation and japa must come here."

It was ten o'clock. Sri Ramakrishna ate a little farina pudding and lay
down. He asked M. to stroke his feet. A few minutes later he asked the
disciple to massage his body and chest gently. He enjoyed a short nap.
Then
he said to M.: "Now go to sleep. Let me see if I can sleep better when
I am
alone." He said to Ramlal, "He [meaning M.] and Rakhal may sleep in the
room."

Friday, August 28

It was dawn. Sri Ramakrishna was awake and meditating on the
Divine
Mother. On account of his illness the devotees were deprived of his
sweet
chanting of the Mother's name.

Sri Ramakrishna was seated on the small couch. He asked M., "Well,
why have I this illness?"

M: "People will not have the courage to approach you unless you
resemble
them in all respects. But they are amazed to find that in spite of such
illness you don't know anything but God."

MASTER (smiling): "Balaram also said, 'If even you
can be ill, then why
should we wonder about our illnesses?' Lakshmana was amazed to see that
Rama could not lift His bow on account of His grief for Sita. 'Even
Brahman
weeps, entangled in the snare of the five elements.'"

M: "Jesus Christ, too, wept like an ordinary man at the suffering of
His
devotees."

MASTER: "How was that?"

M: "There were two sisters, Mary and Martha. Lazarus was their brother.
All three were devoted to Jesus. Lazarus died. Jesus was on His way to
their
house. One of the sisters, Mary, ran out to meet Him. She fell at His
feet
and said weeping, 'Lord, if You had been here, my brother would not
have
died!' Jesus wept to see her cry.

"Then Jesus went to the tomb of Lazarus and called him by name.
Immediately Lazarus came back to life and walked out of the tomb."

MASTER: "But I cannot do those things."

M: "That is because you don't want to. These are miracles; therefore
you
aren't interested in them. These things draw people's attention to
their
bodies. Then they do not think of genuine devotion. That is why you
don't
perform miracles. But there are many similarities between you and Jesus
Christ."

MASTER (smiling): "What else?"

M: "You don't ask your devotees to fast or practise other austerities.
You
don't prescribe hard and fast rules about food. Christ's disciples did
not
observe the sabbath; so the Pharisees took them to task. Thereupon
Jesus
said: 'They have done well to eat. As long as they are with the
bridegroom,
they must make merry.'"

MASTER: "What does that mean?"

M: "Christ meant that as long as the disciples live with the
Incarnation
of God, they should only make merry. Why should they be sorrowful? But
when He returns to His own abode in heaven, then will come the days of
their sorrow and suffering."

MASTER (smiling): "Do you find
anything else in me that is similar to Christ?"

M: "Yes, sir. You say: 'The youngsters are not yet touched by "woman
and gold"; they will be able to assimilate instruction. It is like
keeping milk
in a new pot: the milk may turn sour if it is kept in a pot in which
curd
has been made.' Christ also spoke like that."

MASTER: "What did He say?"

M: "'If new wine is kept in an old bottle, the bottle may crack. If an
old
cloth is patched with new cloth, the old cloth tears away.'

"Further, you tell us that you and the Mother are one. Likewise, Christ
said, 'I and My Father are one.'"

MASTER (smiling): "Anything else?"

M: "You say to us, 'God will surely listen to you if you call on Him
earnestly.' So also Christ said, 'Knock and it shall be opened unto
you.'"

MASTER: "Well, if God has incarnated Himself again, is it a fractional
or
a partial or a complete manifestation of God? Some say it is a complete
manifestation."

M: "Sir, I don't quite understand the meaning of complete or partial of
fractional Incarnation. But I have understood, as you explained it, the
idea
of a round hole in a wall."

MASTER: "Tell me about it."

M: "There is a round hole in the wall. Through it one is able to see
part of the meadow on the other side of the wall. Likewise, through you
one sees part of the Infinite God."

MASTER: "True. You can see five or six miles of the meadow at a
stretch."

M. finished his bath in the Ganges and went to the Master's room. It
was eight o'clock in the morning. He asked Latu to give him the rice
prassad
of Jagannath. The Master stood near him and said: "Take this prasad
regularly. Those who are devotees of God do not eat anything before
taking the prasad."

M: "Yesterday I got some prasad of Jagannath from Balaram Babu's house.
I take one or two grains daily."

M. saluted the Master and took his leave, Sri Ramakrishna said to him
tenderly: "Come early in the morning tomorrow. The hot sun of the rainy
season is bad for the health."

Monday, August 31, 1885

Sri Ramakrishna was resting in his room. It was about eight
o'clock in the
evening. Though ill and suffering, he constantly devoted himself to the
welfare of the devotees. Sometimes he felt restless, like a child; but
the next
moment he forgot all about his illness and became filled with ecstatic
love of
God. His love for the devotees was like that of a mother for her
children.

Two days earlier, on Saturday night, he had received a letter from
Purna.
Puma had written: "I am feeling extremely happy. Now and then I cannot
sleep at night for joy." After hearing the letter the Master had
remarked: "I
feel thrilled to hear this. Even later on he will be able to keep this
bliss. Let
me see the letter." He had pressed the letter in the palm of his hand
and
said: "Generally I cannot touch letters. But this is a good letter."
That same
night, while the Master was in bed, he had suddenly become covered with
perspiration. He had sat up in bed, saying, "It seems to me that I
shall not
recover from this illness." It had worried the devotees very much to
hear
this. The Holy Mother had come to the temple garden to wait on Sri
Ramakrishna and was living in a room in the nahabat. The devotees, with
the
exception of one or two, were not aware of her presence. A woman
devotee
staying with the Holy Mother had begun to pay frequent visits to Sri
Ramakrishna in his room. After a few days Sri Ramakrishna had said to
her:
"You have been here some time. What will people think about it? You had
better go home for a week or so."

Sri Ramakrishna lav in bed, on his side, with his back to the room.
After
dusk Gangadhar and M. arrived from Calcutta. Gangadhar sat at the feet
of the Master, who was talking to M.

MASTER: "Two boys came here the other day. One of them was Subodh.
He is Sankar Ghosh's great-grandson. The other, Kshirode, is his
neighbour.
They are nice boys. I told them I was ill and asked them to go to you
for
instruction. Please look after them a little."

M: "Yes, sir. They are our neighbours."

MASTER: "The other day, again, I woke up covered with perspiration. I
don't understand this illness."

M: "We have decided to ask Bhagavan Rudra to see you once. He is an
M.D. and an expert physician."

MASTER: "How much will he charge?"

M: "His regular fee is twenty or twenty-five rupees."

MASTER: "Then don't bother about him."

M: "But we shall pay him four or five rupees at the most."

MASTER: "Listen. Suppose you say this to him, 'Sir, please be kind
enough
to come and see him.' Hasn't he heard anything about this place?"
(Referring to himself.)

M: "Perhaps he has. He has almost agreed not to charge any fee. But we
shall pay him a little. If we do that, he will come again."

MASTER: "Ask Dr. Nitai to come. He is a good physician. But what will
the doctors do, I wonder? They press my throat and make my illness
worse."

It was nine o'clock in the evening. Sri Ramakrishna ate a little farina
pudding and had no difficulty in swallowing it. He said to M.
cheerfully:
"I was able to eat a little. I feel very happy."

Tuesday, September 1

Sri Ramakrishna was about to take his bath. A devotee was rubbing his
body with oil on the verandah south of his room. M. came there after
finishing his bath in the Ganges and saluted the Master.

After bathing, Sri Ramakrishna wrapped himself in a towel and with
folded hands saluted the deities in the temples from afar. He could not
go
to the temples because of his illness.

It was the sacred Janmasthami day, the birthday of Krishna. Ram and
other devotees had brought new clothes for Sri Ramakrishna. He put them
on and looked charming. Again he saluted the deities.

Gopal Ma brought her Gopala2
some food that she had prepared at her
home at Kamarhati. She said to the Master sorrowfully, "But you won't
eat any of it."

MASTER: "You see, I am ill."

GOPAL MA: "That is my bad luck. Please take a little in your hand."

MASTER: "Please give me your blessing."

A devotee brought some sugar candy. Gopal Ma said, "Let me take it to
the Holy Mother in the nahabat." The Master said: "No, keep it here. I
give sweets to the devotees. Who wants to send a messenger a hundred
times to the nahabat for sugar candy? Let it be kept here."

It was eleven o'clock in the morning. The devotees were gradually
arriving
from Calcutta. Balaram, Narendra, the younger Naren, Navagopal, and
a Vaishnava from Katoa arrived. Rakhal and Latu were staying with Sri
Ramakrishna. A Punjabi sadhu had been staying in the Panchavati for
some days.

The younger Naren had a tumour on his forehead. Sri Ramakrishna was
strolling in the Panchavati with the devotees. He said to the younger
Naren: "Why don't you have your tumour operated on? It is not in the
throat but only on the forehead. That is a simple thing. People have
their
orchitis operated on."

The Punjabi sadhu was going along the foot-path in the garden. The
Master said: "I don't attract him. He has the attitude of a jnani. I
find him
to be dry as wood."

Sri Ramakrishna and the devotees returned to the Master's room. The
conversation turned to Shyamapada Bhattacharya.

BALARAM: "Shyamapada said, 'When he, the Master, placed his foot on
Narendra's chest, Narendra went into bhava; but I didn't have that
experience.'"

MASTER: "Shall I tell you the truth about it? It is very difficult to
gather
the dispersed mind when it is attached to 'woman and gold'. The pundit
told me he was called upon to act as arbiter to settle people's
quarrels.
Besides, he has to worry about his children. But the minds of Narendra
and
other youngsters are not scattered like that; they are not yet touched
by
'woman and gold'.

"But Shyamapada is a grand person."

The Vaishnava from Katoa began to ask Sri Ramakrishna questions. He
was squint-eyed.

VAISHNAVA: "Sir, is a man born again?"

MASTER: "It is said in the Gita that a man is
reborn with those tendencies
that are in his mind at the time of his death. King Bharata thought of
his
deer at the time of death and was reborn as a deer."

VAISHNAVA: "I could believe in rebirth only if an eye-witness told me
about it."

MASTER: "I don't know about that, my dear sir. I cannot cure my own
illness, and you ask me to tell you what happens after death!

"What you are talking about only shows your petty mind. Try to
cultivate love of God. You are born as a human being only to attain
divine love.
You have come to the orchard to eat mangoes: what need is there of
knowing
how many thousands of branches and millions of leaves there are in the
orchard? To bother about what happens after death! How silly!"

Girish Ghosh arrived in a carriage with one or two friends. He was
drunk.
Ha was weeping as he entered the room. He wept as he placed his head on
Sri Ramakrishna's feet.

Sri Ramakrishna affectionately patted him on the back. He said to a
devotee, "Prepare a smoke for him."

Girish raised his head and said with folded hands: "You alone are the
Perfect Brahman! If that is not so then everything is false.

"It is such a pity that I could not be of any service to you." He
uttered
these words with a tenderness that made several devotees weep.

Girish continued: "O Lord! please grant me the boon that I may serve
you
ror a year. Who cares for salvation? One finds it everywhere. I spit on
it.
Please tell me that you will accept my service for one year."

MASTER: "People around here are not good. Some may criticize you."

GIRISH: "I don't care. Please tell —"

MASTER : "All right. You may serve me when I go to your house —"

GIRISH: "No, it is not that. I want to serve you here."

Girish was insistent. The Master said, "Well, that depends on God's
will."

Referring to the Master's throat trouble, Girish said: "Please say,
'Let it
be cured.' All right, I shall thrash it out. Kali! Kali!"

MASTER: "You will hurt me."

GIRISH: "O throat, be cured! (He blows at the throat like an
exorciser)
Are you not all right? If you aren't cured by this time, you certainly
will be
if I have any devotion to your feet. Say that you are cured."

MASTER (sharply): "Leave me alone. I can't say those
things. I can't ask
the Divine Mother to cure my illness.

"All right. I shall be, cured if it is the will of God."

GIRISH: "You are trying to fool me. All depends on your will."

MASTER: "Shame! Never say that again. I look on myself as a devotee of
Krishna, not as Krishna Himself. You may think as you like. You may
look
on your guru as God. Nevertheless, it is wrong to talk as you are
talking.
You must not talk that way again."

GIRISH: "Please say you will be cured."

MASTER: "Very well, if that pleases you."

Girish was still under the influence of drink. Now and then he said to
Sri Ramakrishna, "Well, sir, how is it that you were not born this time
with
your celestial beauty?"

A few moments later he said, "I see, this time it will be the salvation
of
Bengal."

A devotee said to himself: "Why Bengal alone? It will be the salvation
of the whole world."

Girish said, addressing the devotees: "Does any of you understand why
he
is here? It is for the liberation of men. Their suffering has moved him
to
assume a human body."

The coachman was calling Girish. He got up and was going toward the
man. The Master said to M.: "Watch him. Where is he going? I hope he
won't beat the coachman!" M. accompanied Girish.

Presently Girish returned. He prayed to Sri Ramakrishna and said, "O
God, give me purity that I may not have even a trace of sinful thought."

MASTER: "You are already pure. You have such faith and devotion! You
are in a state of joy, aren't you?"

GIRISH: "No, sir. I feel bad. I have worries. That is why I have drunk
so much liquor."

A few minutes afterwards Girish said: "Lord, I am amazed to find that
I,
even I, have been given the privilege of serving the Perfect Brahman.
What
austerities have I practised to deserve this privilege?"

Sri Ramakrishna took his midday meal. On account of his illness he ate
very little.

The Master's natural tendency of mind was to soar into the plane of
God-
Consciousness. He would force his mind to be conscious of the body.
But,
like a child, he was incapable of looking after his body. Like a child
he said
to the devotees: "I have eaten a little. I shall rest now. You may go
out for
a little while." Sri Ramakrishna rested a few minutes. The devotees
returned
to the room.

GIRISH: "The guru and the Ishta. I like very much the form of the guru.
I am not afraid of him. Why should it be so? I am afraid of ecstasy. At
the
sight of ecstasy I run away."

MASTER: "He who is the Ishta appears in the form of the guru. The
aspirant practises meditation on a corpse.3
When he obtains the vision of his Chosen Ideal, it is really the guru
who appears to him and says. This is
that', that is to say, he points out to the disciple his Ishta.
Uttering these
words, the guru disappears into the form or the Ishta. The disciple no
longer sees the guru. In the state of perfect jnana, who is the guru
and who
is the sishya? That creates a very difficult situation; there the
teacher and
the disciple do not see each other.'"

A DEVOTEE: "Guru's head and disciple's feet."

GIRISH (joyously): "Yes! Yes! It is true."

NAVAGOPAL: "But listen to its meaning. The disciple's head belongs to
the
guru; and the guru's feet belong to the disciple. Do you understand?"

GIRISH: "No, that is not the meaning. Haven't you seen the child
climbing on the head of the father? That is why the disciple's feet are
mentioned."

NAVAGOPAL: "But then the disciple must feel like a young baby."

MASTER: "There are two classes of devotees. One class has the nature of
the kitten. The kitten depends completely on its mother. It accepts
whatever
its mother does for it. The kitten only cries, 'Mew, mew!' It doesn't
know
what to do or where to go. Sometimes the mother puts the kitten near
the
hearth, sometimes on the bed. Devotees of this class give God the power
of attorney and thus become free of all worry. The Sikhs said to me
that
God was kind. I said to them: 'How is that? He is our Father and our
Mother. Shouldn't parents bring up their children after begetting them?
Do you mean to say that the neighbours will look after them?' Devotees
of
this class have an unwavering conviction that God is our Mother and our
Father.

"There is another class of devotees. They have the nature of the young
monkey. The young monkey clings to its mother with might and main. The
devotees who behave like the young monkey have a slight idea of being
the
doer. They feel: 'We must go to the sacred places; we must practise
japa
and austerity; we must perform worship with sixteen articles as
prescribed
by the sastras. Only then shall we be able to realize God.' Such is
their attitude.

"The aspirants of both classes are devotees of God. The farther you
advance, the more you will realize that God alone has become
everything. He
alone does everything. He alone is the Guru and He alone is the Ishta.
He
alone gives us knowledge and devotion.

"The farther you advance, the more you will see that there are other
things even beyond the sandal-wood forest — mines of silver and gold
and
precious gems. Therefore go forward.

"But how can I ask people to go forward? If worldly people go too far,
then the bottom will drop out of their world. One day Keshab was
conducting
a religious service. He said, 'O God, may we all sink and disappear in
the
river of bhakti!' When the worship was over I said to him: 'Look here.
How
can you disappear altogether in the river of bhakti? If you do, what
will'
happen to those seated behind the screen? (The Master referred to the
ladies.)
But do one thing: sink now and then, and come back again to dry land.'"
(All laugh.)

The Vaishnava from Katoa was arguing.

MASTER (to the Vaishnava): "Stop that sizzling
noise! When butter
containing water is heated over a fire, it makes that sound.

If a man but once tastes the joy of God, his desire to argue takes
wing.
The bee, realizing the joy of sipping honey, doesn't buzz about any
more.
What will vou achieve by quoting from books? The pundits recite verses
and do nothing else.

"What will you gain by merely repeating 'siddhi'? You will not be
intoxicated even by gargling with a solution of siddhi. It must go into
your
stomach; not until then will you be intoxicated. One cannot comprehend
what I am saying unless one prays to God in solitude, all by oneself,
with a longing heart."

Dr. Rakhal arrived to examine Sri Ramakrishna. The Master said to him
eagerly, "Come in and sit down."

The conversation with the Vaishnava continued.

MASTER: "Man should possess dignity and alertness. Only he whose
spiritual consciousness is awakened possesses this dignity and
alertness and can be
called a man. Futile is the human birth without the awakening of
spiritual consciousness.

"There are many men at Kamarpukur with big bellies and imposing
moustaches. Yet the villagers go with palanquins and bring righteous
and
truthful persons from twenty miles away to arbitrate their quarrels.
They do
not bring mere pundits.

"Truthfulness is the tapasya of the Kaliyuga. 'Truthfulness, submission
to
God, and looking on the wives of other men as one's own mother' — these
are the means to realize God."

Like a child Sri Ramakrishna said to the physician, "Sir, please cure
my throat."

DOCTOR: "Do you ask me to cure you?"

MASTER: "The physician is Narayana Himself. I honour everybody. You
may say that if I look on all as Naravana then I should keep quiet. But
I also
accept the words of the 'mahut Narayana'.

"The Pure Mind and the Pure Atman are one and the same thing.
Whatever comes up in the Pure Mind is the voice of God. God alone is
the 'mahut Narayana'.

"Why should I not listen to God? He alone is the Master. As long as He
keeps 'I-consciousness' in me, I shall obey His orders."

The doctor was going to examine Sri Ramakrishna's throat. The Master
said, "Dr. Mahendra Sarkar pressed my tongue the way they press a
cow's."

Like a child Sri Ramakrishna said to the physician, pulling at his
shirt-sleeves again and again, "Sir! My dear sir! Please cure my
throat." Looking
at the laryngoscope, he said with a smile: "I know it. You will see the
reflection in it."

Narendra sang. But on account of the Master's illness there was not
much music.

September 2

After finishing his midday meal Sri Ramakrishna sat on the
small couch
and talked to Dr. Bhagavan Rudra and M. Rakhal, Latu, and other
devotees
were in the room. The physician heard all about the Master's illness.
Sri
Ramakrishna came down to the floor and sat near the doctor.

MASTER: "You see, medicine does not agree with me. My system is
different.

"Well, what do you think of this? When I touch a coin my hand gets
twisted; my breathing stops. Further, if I tie a knot4
in the corner of my cloth, I cannot breathe. My breathing stops until
the knot is untied."

The Master asked a devotee to bring a rupee. When Sri Ramakrishna
held it in his hand, the hand began to writhe with pain. The Master's
breathing also stopped. After the coin had been taken away, he breathed
deeply three times and his hand relaxed. The doctor became speechless
with
wonder to see this strange phenomenon.

The doctor said to M., "Action on the nerves."

MASTER (to the doctor): "I get into another state of
mind. It is impossible
for me to lay up anything. One day I visited Sambhu Mallick's garden
house.
At that time I had been suffering badly from stomach trouble. Sambhu
said
to me: 'Take a grain of opium now and then. It will help you.' He tied
a
little opium in a corner of my cloth. As I was returning to the Kali
temple,
I began to wander about near the gate as if unable to find the way.
Then I
threw the opium away and at once regained my normal state. I returned
to the temple garden.

"One day at Kamarpukur I picked some mangoes. I was carrying them
home. But I could not walk; I had to stay standing in one place. Then I
left
the mangoes in a hollow. Only after that could I return home. Well, how
do
you explain that?"

DOCTOR: "There is a force behind it. Will-force."

M: "He [meaning the Master] says that it is God-force. You say that it
is will-force."

MASTER (to the doctor): "Again, I get into such a
state of mind that if
someone says I am better, I at once feel much better. The other day the
brahmani said. 'You are fifty per cent better. At once I began to
dance."

Sri Ramakrishna was much pleased with the physician. He said to him:
"You have a very fine nature. There are two characteristics of
knowledge:
a peaceful nature and absence of pride."

M: "The doctor has lost his wife."

MASTER (to the doctor): "I say that God can be
realized if one feels
drawn to Him by the intensity of these three attractions: the child's
attraction
for the mother, the husband's attraction for the chaste wife, and the
attraction of worldly possessions for the worldly man.

"Please cure me of my illness."

The doctor was going to examine the Master's throat. Sri Ramakrishna
was seated in a chair on the semicircular porch. Referring to Dr.
Sarkar,
the Master said: "He is a villain. He pressed my tongue as if I were a
cow."

DOCTOR: "He didn't hurt you purposely."

MASTER: "No, he pressed the tongue to make a thorough examination."

Sunday, September 20, 1885

Sri Ramakrishna was sitting in his room, surrounded by
devotees.
Navagopal, Haralal, Rakhal, Latu, and others were present. A goswami
who was a
musician was also there.

M. arrived with Dr. Rakhal of Bowbazar. The physician began to
examine the Master. He was a stout person and had rather thick fingers.

MASTER (smiling, to the physician): "Your fingers
are like a wrestler's.
Mahendra Sarkar also examined me. He pressed my tongue so hard that it
hurt me. He pressed my tongue the way they press a cow's."

DOCTOR: "I shall not hurt you, sir."

The physician made out his prescription. Sri Ramakrishna was talking.

MASTER (to the devotees): "Well, people ask why, if
I am such a holy
person, I should be ill."

TARAK: "Bhagavan Das Babaji, too, was ill and bed-ridden a long time."

MASTER: "But look at Dr. Madhu. At the age of sixty he carries food to
the house of his mistress; and he has no illness."

GOSWAMI: "Sir, your illness is for the sake of others. You take upon
yourself the sins of those who come to you. You fall ill because you
accept their sins."

A DEVOTEE: "You will soon be cured if only you say to the Divine
Mother,
'Mother, please make me well.'"

MASTER: "I cannot ask God to cure my disease. The attitude of the
servant-master relationship is nowadays less strong in me. Once in a
while
I say, 'O Mother, please mend the sheath (The Master referred to his
body.)
of the sword a little.' But such
prayers are also becoming less frequent. Nowadays I do not find my 'I';
I see
that it is God alone who resides in this sheath."

The goswami had been invited to sing kirtan. A devotee asked, "Will
there be any kirtan?" Sri Ramakrishna was ill, and all were afraid that
the
kirtan might throw his mind into ecstasy and thus aggravate the illness.

Sri Ramakrishna said: "Let there be a little singing. All are afraid of
my
going into ecstasy. Spiritual emotion hurts the throat."

The goswami began the kirtan. Sri Ramakrishna could not control
himself.
He stood up and began to dance with the devotees. The physician watched
the whole scene.

A hired carriage was waiting for Dr. Rakhal. He and M. were ready to
leave for Calcutta. They saluted the Master. Sri Ramakrishna said to M.
affectionately, "Have you had your meal?"

Thursday, September 24, 1885

It was the night of the full moon. Sri Ramakrishna was sitting on the
small couch. He was very ill. M. and some other devotees were sitting
on
the floor.

MASTER (to M.): "Every now and then I think that the
body is a mere
pillow-case. The only real substance is the Indivisible Satchidananda.

"When I go into divine ecstasy this illness of the throat remains away
from me. I am now somewhat in that mood and so I feel like laughing."

Some ladies of Dwija's family arrived. They saluted the Master and sat
on
one side. Pointing to one of the ladies, Sri Ramakrishna asked: "Who is
this
lady? Is it she who brought up Dwija? Why has Dwija bought an ektara?"

M: "It has two strings, sir."

MASTER: "Dwija's father is opposed to his views. Won't other people
criticize him? It is wise for him to pray to God secretly."

A picture of Gauranga and Nitai hung on the wall of the Master's room.
It was a picture of the two brothers singing devotional songs with
their
companions at Navadvip.

RAMLAL (to the Master): "Then may I give him
[meaning M.] the picture?"

MASTER: "Yes."

Sri Ramakrishna was then under Dr. Pratap's treatment. He awoke at
midnight and felt extremely restless. Harish, his attendant, was in the
room.
Rakhal also was there. Ramlal was asleep on the verandah. The Master
remarked later on: "I was feeling extremely restless. I felt like
embracing
Harish. They rubbed a little medicinal oil on my head. Then I began to
dance."

^Pratap
Chandra Mazumdar, a distinguished member of the Brahmo Samaj.

^The
Baby Krishna. Gopal Ma regarded Sri Ramakrishna as Gopala and addressed
him by that name.

^One
of the forms of meditation prescribed in the Tantra.

^The
common people in India tie their money or other small articles in a
corner
of their cloths.


=== 45_at_syampukur.htm ===

Sri Ramakrishna at Syampukur

←
Home
/ The Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna
/ Volume 2
/ →

SRI RAMAKRISHNA AT SYAMPUKUR

Master consoles Surendra — Praising the Gita —
Secret of karmayoga —
M. and Dr. Sarkar — Master praises doctor's son — On Divine
Incarnation — Absolute and Relative — Dr. Sarkar on incarnation —
Futility
of discussion — Go beyond knowledge and ignorance — The story of the
"mahut Narayana" — Master reasons with Dr. Sarkar — Illusion
persists — Master praises the true householder — Advice to householders
—
Necessity of solitude — Example of Janaka — The householder jnani —
The monk jnani — Teaching others after realizing God — Knowledge
and love of God — Personal God and Impersonal Truth — Illustration
of the chameleon — Illustration of ice and water — 'I-consciousness'—
Parable of the cow — Harmless and injurious ego — "Ripe ego" and
"unripe ego" — Childlike nature of perfect souls — "Ego of old age" —
Characteristics of tamas — Turn your passions to God — Paths of
knowledge and devotion — Difficulty of path of knowledge — Discussion
about Divine Incarnation — Childlike faith — Three classes of teachers
— Advice to householders — Faith and self-surrender.

October 18, 1885

THE DOCTORS HAD DEFINITELY diagnosed Sri Ramakrishna's illness
as
cancer. No proper arrangement for his treatment and nursing could be
made
at Dakshineswar. He needed the constant attention of a physician,
which could not be given at the temple garden. Furthermore, the
devotees
who lived in Calcutta found it very inconvenient to attend on him daily
at
Dakshineswar. Therefore the older devotees had rented a small
two-storey
house in Baghbazar, Calcutta, and had brought the Master there. Sri
Ramakrishna, however, had not liked the place and had gone to Balaram's
house.
In a few days a new house had been engaged in Syampukur, in the
northern
section of Calcutta, and the Master had been taken there. He had been
placed
under the treatment of Dr. Mahendra Lal Sarkar. The new building had
two large rooms and two smaller ones on the second floor. One of the
larger
rooms was used as the parlour, and in the other the Master lived. Of
the
two smaller rooms, one was used as a sleeping-room by the devotees, and
the
other by the Holy Mother when she came there. Near the exit to the roof
was a small, covered, square space, where the Holy Mother stayed during
tlie day and prepared the Master's food.

It was Vijaya day, the fourth day of the worship of Durga, when the
image is immersed in water. On that day the Divine Mother returns to
Her
heavenly abode at Mount Kailas, leaving gloom in the hearts of Her
devotees.

It was eight o'clock in the morning. The air was chilly. Though ill,
Sri
Ramakrishna was sitting on his bed. He was like a five-year-old child
who
knows nothing but its mother. Navagopal, M., and a few other devotees
were
present. Surendra arrived and sat down. The Divine Mother had been
worshipped at his house for the past three days. Sri Ramakrishna had
not been
able to go there on account of his illness, but he had sent some of his
disciples. Surendra was in a very unhappy mood because on this day the
image
of the Mother was to be immersed in the water.

SURENDRA: "I had to run away from home."

MASTER (to M.): "What if the image is thrown into
the water? May
Mother dwell in the heart!"

Surendra was disconsolate. He was crying to the Divine Mother and
talking
to Her. At this yearning of his beloved disciple Sri Ramakrishna could
not control his tears. He looked at M. and said-in a choked voice:
"What
bhakti! Ah, what great love he feels for God!"

MASTER (to Surendra): "Yesterday evening at seven or
seven-thirty I saw
your worship hall in a vision. I saw the divine image full of
effulgence. This
place and your hall were joined by a stream of light flowing between
them."

SURENDRA: "At that time I was crying to the Mother in the worship hall.
My elder brothers had gone upstairs. I thought the Mother said, 'I will
come again.'"

It was about eleven o'clock in the morning. Sri Ramakrishna finished
his
meal. M. poured water into his hand for him to rinse his mouth.

MASTER (to M.): "Rakhal has indigestion. It is best
to take only sattvic
food. Haven't you read about it in the Gita? Don't
you read the Gita?"

M: "Yes, sir. The Gita speaks of temperance in
eating. Sattvic food,
rajasic food, tamasic food; sattvic kindness, sattvic ego, and so on —
all these
are described in the Gita."

MASTER: "Have you a copy of the book?"

M: "Yes, sir."

MASTER: "It contains the essence of all the scriptures."

M: "The Gita describes various ways of realizing
God. You too say that
God can be reached by various paths: knowledge, devotion, work, and
meditation."

MASTER: "Do you know the meaning of karmayoga? It is to surrender to
God the fruit of all action."

M: "Yes, sir, I have read that in the Gita. It also
says that there are three
ways of performing action."

MASTER: "What are they?"

M: "First, one may perform karma to attain jnana; second, to teach
others;
third, under the impulse of one's nature."

After rinsing his mouth the Master chewed betel-leaf.

Sri Ramakrishna was talking with M. about Dr. Sarkar. M. had been at
the doctor's house the previous day to report the Master's condition.

MASTER: "What did you talk about?"

M: "There are many books in the doctor's room. I took out one to read,
and now and then read a passage aloud to Dr. Sarkar. It was a book by
Sir
Humphry Davy. He wrote about the necessity of Divine Incarnation."

MASTER: "Indeed! What did you say to the doctor?"

M: "There was one passage that stated that Divine Truth must be made
human truth to be appreciated by us; therefore Divine Incarnation is
necessary."

MASTER: "Splendid! That's very good."

M: "The author gave the illustration of the sun: one cannot look at the
sun, but one can look at its reflected rays."

MASTER: "Very fine. Anything else?"

M: "Another passage stated that real knowledge is faith."

MASTER: "That too is very good. If one has faith one has everything."

M: "The author dreamt of the Roman gods and goddesses."

MASTER: "Do such books really exist? Surely the author was inspired by
God. Did you talk of anything else?"

M: "People like Dr. Sarkar speak of doing good to the world. So I told
him what you had said about it."

MASTER (smiling): "What did I say?"

M: "About Sambhu Mallick. He had said to you: 'It is my desire to
devote
my money to the building of schools, hospitals, dispensaries, and the
like.
That will do good to many.' Thereupon you had said to him, 'Suppose God
appears before you; will you then ask Him to build schools, hospitals,
and
dispensaries?' I told the doctor another thing."

MASTER: "Those who are born to do work belong to a different class.
What else did you say?"

M: "I said to the doctor: 'If your aim is to visit the image of Mother
Kali,
what will you gain by spending all your time in giving alms to the poor
by
the roadside? First you had better somehow visit the image. Afterwards
you
may give alms to your heart's content."

MASTER: "Did you talk about anything else?"

M: "Yes. I told him that many of those who come to you have conquered
lust. Thereupon the doctor replied, 'I too have conquered lust.' I
said: 'You
are a great man. It is no wonder that you have conquered lust. But the
amazing thing is that under his influence even insignificant creatures
have
conquered it.' Afterwards I told him what you had said to Girish."

MASTER (smiling): "What did I say?"

M: "You said to Girish, 'The doctor has not been able to surpass you.'
You
said that with reference to his calling you a Divine Incarnation."

MASTER: "Discuss the doctrine of Divine Incarnation with Dr. Sarkar. He
who liberates others is an Incarnation of God. The scriptures speak of
ten,
of twenty-four, and also of innumerable Incarnations."

M: "Dr. Sarkar is keenly interested in Girish Ghosh. He always asks me
whether Girish has given up drinking. He keeps a sharp eye on him."

MASTER: "Did you tell Girish about that?"

M: "Yes, sir, I did. And I also told him about giving up drinking."

MASTER: "What did he say?"

M: "He said: 'Since you all say so, I take your words as the words of
the
Master himself. But I won't promise anything.'"

MASTER (joyously). "Kalipada told me that he had
altogether given up drinking."

It was afternoon. Dr. Sarkar arrived accompanied by his son Amrita and
Hem. Narendra and other devotees were present.

Sri Ramakrishna was talking aside to Amrita. He asked him, "Do you
meditate?" He further said to him: "Do you know what one feels in
meditation? The mind becomes like a continuous flow of oil — it thinks
of one
object only, and that is God. It does not think of anything else."

Sri Ramakrishna was talking to the devotees.

MASTER (to the doctor): "Your son does not believe
in the Incarnation of
God. That's all right. It doesn't matter if he doe's not believe in it.

"Your son is a nice boy. Why shouldn't he be? Does a mango-tree of the
fine 'Bombay' variety ever bear sour mangoes? How firm his faith in God
is! That man is a true man whose mind dwells on God. He alone is a man
whose spiritual consciousness has been awakened and who is firmly
convinced that God alone is real and all else illusory. He does not
believe in
Divine Incarnation; but what does that matter? It is enough if he
believes
that God exists, and that all this universe and its living beings are
the
manifestations of His Power — like a rich man and his garden.

"Some say that there are ten Divine Incarnations, some twenty-four,
while
others say that there are innumerable Incarnations. If you see anywhere
a
special manifestation of God's Power, you may know that God has
incarnated Himself there. That is my opinion.

"There is another view, according to which God has become all that you
see. It is like a bel-fruit, which consists of three parts: seeds,
shell, and flesh.
That which is the Absolute has also its relative aspect, and that which
is the
Relative has also its absolute aspect. You cannot set aside the
Absolute and
understand just the Relative. And it is only because there is the
Relative
that you can transcend it step by step and reach the Absolute.

"So long as 'I-consciousness' exists, a man cannot go beyond the
Relative.
Through meditation he can negate the phenomena, following the process
of 'Neti, neti', and reach the Absolute; but nothing can really be
denied, as
in the instance of the bel-fruit."

DOCTOR: "Quite true."

MASTER: "Kacha had been immersed in nirvikalpa samadhi. When his
mind was coming down to the relative plane, someone asked him, 'What do
you see now?' Kacha replied: 'I see that the universe is soaked, as it
were, in
God. Everything is filled with God. It is God alone who has become all
that
I see. I do not know what to accept and what to reject.'

"In my opinion one should realize both the Nitya and the Lila and then
live in the world as the servant of God. Hanuman saw both the Personal
God and the formless Reality. He then lived as a devotee of God, as His
servant."

M. (to himself): "So we must accept both — the
Absolute and the
Relative. Since the introduction of the Vedanta philosophy in Germany,
some of
the European philosophers, too, have been thinking along that line. But
the Master says that one cannot realize both the Nitya and the Lila
without
complete renunciation, that is to say, without totally giving up 'woman
and
gold'. Such a person must be a true renouncer; he must be totally
detached
from the world. Here lies the real difference between him and such
European philosophers as Hegel."

In Dr. Sarkar's opinion. God created men and ordained that every soul
should make infinite progress. He would not believe that one man was
greater than another. That was why he did not believe in the doctrine
of
Divine Incarnation.

DOCTOR: "I believe in infinite progress. If that is not so, then what
is the
use of leading a mere five or six years' existence in the world? I
would rather
hang myself with a rope round my neck.

"Incarnation! What is that? To cower before a man who excretes filth!
It
is absurd. But if you speak of a man as the reflection of God's Light —
yes,
that I admit."'

GIRISH (smiling): "But you have not seen God's
Light."

Dr. Sarkar was hesitating before giving a reply. A friend who sat near
him whispered something into his ear.

DOCTOR (to Girish): "You too have not seen anything
but a reflection."

GIRISH: "I see It! I see the Light! I shall prove that Sri Krishna is
an
Incarnation of God or I shall cut out my tongue!"

MASTER: "All this is useless talk. It is like the ravings of a
delirious patient.
A delirious patient says, 'I shall drink a whole tank of water; I shall
eat a
whole pot of rice.' The physician says: 'Yes, yes. You will have all
these.
We shall give you whatever you want when you are convalescent.'

"When butter is heated it sizzles and crackles. But all sound comes to
a
stop when it is thoroughly boiled. As a man's mind is, so is his
conception
of God. I have seen in rich men's houses portraits of the Queen (Queen
Victoria.) and other
aristocrats. But the devotees keep in their houses pictures of gods and
goddesses.

"Lakshmana said, 'O Rama, even a sage like Vasishthadeva was overcome
with grief on account of the death of his sons!' 'Brother,' replied
Rama,
'whoever has knowledge has ignorance also. Whoever is conscious of
light
is also conscious of darkness. Therefore go beyond knowledge and
ignorance.'
One attains that state through an intimate knowledge of God. This
knowledge is called vijnana.

"When a thorn enters the sole of your foot you have to get another
thorn.
You then remove the first thorn with the help of the second. Afterwards
you throw away both. Likewise, after removing the thorn of ignorance
with
the help of the thorn of knowledge, you should throw away the thorns of
both knowledge and ignorance.

"There are signs of Perfect Knowledge. One is that reasoning comes to
an
end. As I have just said, the butter sizzles and crackles as long as it
is not
thoroughly boiled."

DOCTOR: "But can one retain Perfect Knowledge permanently? You say
that all is God. Then why have you taken up this profession of a
paramahamsa? And why do these people attend on you? Why don't you keep
silent?'

MASTER (smiling): "Water is water whether it is
still or moves or breaks
into waves.

"I must tell you something else. Why should I not listen to the 'mahut
Narayana'? The guru had taught his disciple that everything was
Narayana.
A mad elephant was coming toward the disciple, but he did not move away
since he believed the guru's words. He thought that the elephant was
Narayana. The mahut shouted to him: 'Get away! Get away!' But the
disciple
did not move. The elephant picked him up and threw him to the ground.
The disciple was not quite dead; when his face was sprinkled with water
he regained consciousness. Being asked why he had not moved away, he
said 'Why should I? The guru said, "Everything is Narayana."' 'But, my
child,' said the guru, 'why didn't you listen to the words of the mahut
Narayana?'

"It is God who dwells within as the Pure Mind and Pure Intelligence. I
am the machine and He is its Operator. I am the house and He is the
Indweller. It is God who is the mahut Narayana."

DOCTOR: "Let me ask you something. Why do you ask me to cure your
illness?"

MASTER: "I talk that way as long as I am conscious of the 'jar' of the
'ego'. Think of a vast ocean filled with water on all sides. A jar is
immersed
in it. There is water both inside and outside the jar; but the water
does not
become one unless the jar is broken. It is God who has kept this 'jar'
of the 'ego' in me."

DOCTOR: "What is the meaning of 'ego' and all that you are talking
about? You must explain it to me. Do you mean to say that God is
playing tricks on us?"

GIRISH: "Sir, how do you know that He is not playing tricks?"

MASTER (smiling): "It is God who has kept this 'ego'
in us. All this is His
play, His lila. A king has four sons. They are all princes; but when
they
play, one becomes a minister, another a police officer, and so on.
Though a
prince, he plays as a police officer.

(To the doctor) "Listen. If you realize Atman you
will see the truth of all
I have said. All doubts disappear after the vision of God."

DOCTOR: "But is it ever possible to get rid of all doubts?"

MASTER: "Learn from me as much as I have told you. But if you want to
know more, you must pray to God in solitude. Ask Him why He has so
ordained.

"The son of the house can give a beggar only a small measure of rice.
But
if the beggar asks for his train fare, then the master of the house
must be called."

The doctor remained silent.

MASTER: "Well, you love reasoning. All right. Let us reason a little.
Listen. According to the jnani there is no Incarnation of God. Krishna
said
to Arjuna: 'You speak of Me as an Incarnation of God. Let Me show you
something. Come with Me.' Arjuna had followed Sri Krishna a short
distance, when Sri Krishna asked him, 'What do you see there?' Arjuna
replied, 'A big tree with black berries hanging in bunches.' Krishna
said,
'Those are not black berries. Go nearer and look at them.' Arjuna went
nearer and saw that they were Krishnas hanging in bunches. 'Do you see
now', said Krishna, 'how many Krishnas like Me have grown there?'

"Kavirdas said of Krishna, 'He danced like a monkey to the clapping of
the gopis!'

"As you go nearer to God you see less and less of His upadhis, His
attributes. A devotee at first may see the Deity as the ten-armed
Divine
Mother; when he goes nearer he sees Her possessed of six arms; still
nearer,
he sees the Deity as the two-armed Gopala. The nearer he comes to the
Deity, the fewer attributes he sees. At last, when he comes into the
presence
of the Deity, he sees only Light without any attributes.

"Listen a little to the Vedantic reasoning. A magician came to a king
to
show his magic. When the magician moved away a little, the king saw a
rider on horseback approaching him. He was brilliantly arrayed and had
various weapons in his hands. The king and the audience began to reason
out what was real in the phenomenon before them. Evidently the horse
was
not real, nor the robes, nor the armour. At last they found out beyond
the
shadow of a doubt that the rider alone was there. The significance of
this
is that Brahman alone is real and the world unreal. Nothing whatsoever
remains if you analyse."

DOCTOR: "I don't object to this."

MASTER: "But it is not easy to get rid of illusion. It lingers even
after
the attainment of Knowledge. A man dreamt of a tiger. Then he woke up
and his dream vanished. But his heart continued to palpitate.

"Some thieves came to a field. A straw figure resembling a man had been
put there to frighten intruders. The thieves were scared by the figure
and
could not persuade themselves to enter the field. One of them, however,
approached and found that it was only a figure made of straw. He came
back to his companions and said, 'There is nothing to be afraid of.'
But still
they refused to go; they said that their hearts were beating fast. Then
the
daring thief laid the figure on the ground and said, 'It is nothing, it
is
nothing.' This is the process of 'Neti, neti'."

DOCTOR: "These are fine words."

MASTER (smiling): "What kind of words?"

DOCTOR: "Fine."

MASTER: "Then give me a 'Thank you'." [The Master said the words
"thank you" in English.]

DOCTOR: "Don't you know what is in my mind? I go to so much trouble
to come and visit you!"

MASTER (smiling): "No, it is not that. Say something
for the good of the
ignorant. After the death of Ravana, his brother Bibhishana refused to
be
king of Ceylon. He said: 'O Rama, I have obtained You. What shall I do
with kingship?' Rama said: 'Bibhishana, be king for the sake of the
ignorant,
for those who might ask what riches you have gained by serving Me so
much. Be king to give them a lesson.'"

DOCTOR: "Are there such ignorant people here?"

MASTER (smiling): "Oh, yes! Here you will find
oysters and snails as well
as conchs." (All laugh.)

Doctor Sarkar, who was a homeopath, gave Sri Ramakrishna two globules
of medicine. He said, "I am giving you these two globules: one is
Purusha
and the other is Prakriti." (All laugh.)

MASTER (smiling): "Oh yes, Purusha and Prakriti are
always together.
Haven't you observed pigeons? The male and female cannot live
separately.
Wherever Purusha is, there is Prakriti, and wherever Prakriti is, there
is Purusha."

It was Vijaya day. Sri Ramakrishna asked Dr. Sarkar to have some
refreshments. The devotees served him with sweets.

DOCTOR (while eating): "Now I say 'Thank you' for
the sweets; but it is
not for your teachings. Why should I give that 'Thank you' in words?"

MASTER (smiling): "The essential thing is to fix the
mind on God and to
practise meditation a little. What more shall I say? (Pointing
to the younger
Naren) Look at him. His mind totally merges in God. Those
things I was telling you —"

DOCTOR: "Tell the others also."

MASTER: "No, a man should be given food according to his power of
digestion. Can all understand what I told you? I cannot talk to
everyone as
I talked to you. Suppose a mother has bought a fish for the family. All
her
children have not the same power of digestion. For some she makes pilau
and for others she makes stew. These latter have weak stomachs." (All
laugh.)

Dr. Sarkar took his leave. It was Vijaya day, when people show their
love and respect to their friends and elders with appropriate
greetings. The
devotees all prostrated themselves before Sri Ramakrishna and took the
dust
of his feet. Then they embraced one another. Their joy knew no bounds.
The Master was seriously ill, but he made them all forget about his
illness.
The embracing and exchange of greetings continued a long time. The
devotees also took light refreshments. The younger Naren, M., and a few
other devotees sat near Sri Ramakrishna. The Master talked to them
joyfully. He spoke of Dr. Sarkar.

MASTER: "I shall not have to tell him very much. When the trunk of a
tree is cut almost to the other side, the cutter steps aside. A little
later the tree falls down of itself."

THE YOUNGER NAREN
(smiling): "Here everything is principle!"

MASTER (to M.): "The doctor has already changed a
great deal, hasn't he?"

M: "Yes, sir. When he comes here he loses his wits. He never talks
about
medicine. When we remind him of it, he says: 'Oh, yes, yes! I shall
have to
give the medicine.'"

Some of the devotees were singing in the parlour. They returned to the
Master's room. Sri Ramakrishna said: "I heard your music; but why did
you
make mistakes in the rhythm? I once heard of a man who was an adept in
discord. You sang like him." (All laugh.)

A young man, a relative of the younger Naren, arrived. He was
bespectacled and foolishly dressed. Sri Ramakrishna spoke to the
younger Naren.

MASTER: "You see, a young man was going along the road. He had put
on a pleated shirt. And how he strutted! Now and again he would display
the shirt by removing his scarf, and then look around to see if anyone
was
admiring him. But when he walked you could see that he was knock-kneed.
(All laugh.) The peacock displays its feathers; but
its feet are very dirty.
(All laugh.) The camel is very ugly. Everything
about it is ugly."

YOUNG MAN: "But it acts well."

MASTER: "Yes. But it browses on briars. It will continue to eat thorns
though its mouth bleeds. The worldly man loses his children and still
clamours for more."

October 22, 1885

It was Thursday evening, a few days after the Durga Puja. Sri
Ramakrishna sat on his bed in his room on the second floor, with Dr.
Sarkar,
Ishan, and other devotees. Although Dr. Sarkar was a very busy
physician,
he would spend a long time — sometimes six or seven hours — in Sri
Ramakrishna's company. He had great love for the Master and looked on
the
devotees as his own kith and kin. A lamp was burning in the room.
Moon-light illumined the outside world.

Addressing Ishan, a householder devotee, the Master said: "Blessed
indeed
is the householder who performs his duties in the world, at the same
time
cherishing love for the Lotus Feet of God. He is indeed a hero. He is
like a
man who carries a heavy load of two maunds on his head and at the same
time watches a bridal procession. One cannot lead such a life without
great
spiritual power. Again, such a man is like the mudfish, which lives in
the
mud but is not stained by it. Further, such a householder may be
compared
to a waterfowl. It is constantly diving under water; yet, by fluttering
its
wings only once, it shakes off all trace of wet.

"But a man must practise some spiritual discipline in order to be able
to
lead a detached life in the world. It is necessary for him to spend
some time
in solitude — be it a year, six months, three months, or even one
month. In
that solitude he should fix his mind on God and pray with a longing
heart
for love of God. He should also say to himself: 'There is nobody in
this
world who is my own. Those whom I call my own are here only for two
days. God alone is my own. He alone is my all in all. Alas, how shall I
realize Him?'

"One can live in the world after acquiring love of God. It is like
breaking
the jack-fruit after rubbing your hands with oil; the sticky juice of
the fruit
will not smear them. The world is like water and the mind like milk. If
you
put milk in water it will mix with the water. But first keep the milk
in a
quiet place and let it turn into curd. Then from the curd extract
butter.
That butter you may keep in water; it will not mix with the water, but
will float on it.

"Some members of the Brahmo Samaj said to me: 'Sir, our attitude toward
the world is that of King Janaka. Like him, we want to enjoy the world
in a
detached spirit.' I said to them: To live in the world in a detached
spirit is
very difficult. By merely saying so you cannot be a King Janaka. How
much
austerity Janaka practised! How long he remained in one posture, with
head
down and feet up! You don't have to practise these extreme disciplines.
But
you need sadhana; you should live in solitude. You may lead the life of
a
householder after having attained divine knowledge and love in
solitude.
Milk turns into curd only when it is not disturbed. The curd does not
set
if the milk is often moved from place to place or is too much
disturbed.'

"On account of his detachment from the world Janaka was also known as
the 'Videha', that is, one free from consciousness of the body. Though
living
in the world, he moved about as a jivanmukta, a free soul living in a
body.
But for most people freedom from body-consciousness is something very
far
off. Intense spiritual discipline is necessary.

"Janaka was a great hero. He fenced with two swords, the one of
knowledge and the other of work.

"You may ask, 'Is there any difference between the realizations of two
jnanis, one a householder and the other a monk?' The reply is that the
two
belong to one class. Both of them are jnanis, they have the same
experience.
But a householder jnani has reason to fear. He cannot altogether get
rid of
his fear as long as he is to live in the midst of 'woman and gold'. If
you
constantly live in a room full of soot, you are sure to soil your body,
be it
ever so little, no matter how clever you may be.

"After extracting the butter, it you keep it in a new pot, then there
is no
chance of its getting spoiled. But if you keep the butter in a pot
where curd
has been kept, well, then it is doubtful whether it will keep its
flavour. (Laughter.)

"When they parch rice, a few grains jump out of the frying-pan to the
ground. These are white, like mallika flowers, without the slightest
stain
on them. But the grains that remain in the pan are also good, though
not as
immaculate as the fresh mallika flower. They are a little stained. In
the
same way, if a monk who has renounced the world attains divine wisdom,
he appears as spotless as the white flower; but one who stays in the
frying-pan of the world after attaining Knowledge may get a little
blemish. (All laugh.)

"Once a bhairavi came to King Janaka's court. At the sight of the
woman,
the king bent his head and cast his eyes to the ground. At this the
bhairavi
said, 'O Janaka, even now you are afraid of a woman!' Through Perfect
Knowledge a man becomes like a child five years old; he does not know
the
distinction between a man and a woman.

"Although a jnani living in the world may have a little blemish, yet
this
does not injure him. The moon undoubtedly has dark spots, but these do
not
obstruct its light.

"After realizing God, some souls perform work in order to teach men.
Janaka, Narada, and others like them, belong to this group. But one
must
possess power in order to be able to teach others. The sages of old
were
busy attaining knowledge for themselves. But teachers like Narada went
about doing good to others. They were real heroes.

"A worthless stick floating on the water sinks under the weight of a
bird;
but a heavy and substantial log floating on the water can support a
cow, a
man, or even an elephant. A steamboat not only crosses the water itself
but
carries many human beings with it. Teachers like Narada may be compared
to the heavy log of wood or the steamboat.

"One man, after eating a tasty morsel, removes every trace of it by
wiping
his face carefully with a towel, lest anyone should know. (All
laugh.)
Another, again, having got a mango, not only enjoys it himself but
shares
it with others.

"Even after having attained Perfect Knowledge, teachers like Narada
retained love of God in their minds for the welfare of others."

DOCTOR: "Jnana makes a man speechless. He closes his eyes and sheds
tears. Then he needs bhakti."

MASTER: "Bhakti may be likened to a woman who has access to the inner
court of a house. Jnana can go only as far as the outer rooms."

DOCTOR: "All women are not allowed to enter the inner court, for
instance,
prostitutes. Hence the need of jnana."

MASTER: "A man may not know the right path, but if he has bhakti and
the desire to know God, then he attains Him through the force of sheer
bhakti. Once a sincere devotee set out on a pilgrimage to the temple of
Jagannath in Puri. He did not know the way; he went west instead of
south.
He no doubt strayed from the right path, but he always eagerly asked
people
the way, and they gave him the right directions, saying, This is not
the
path; follow that one.' At last the devotee was able to get to Puri and
worship
the Deity. So you see, even if you are ignorant, someone will tell you
the
way if you are earnest."

DOCTOR: "But the devotee in his ignorance did lose his way."

MASTER: "Yes, such a thing happens, no doubt. But a man reaches the
goal in the end."

A DEVOTEE: "Has God a form or is He formless?"

MASTER: "God has form and, again. He is formless. Once upon a time a
sannyasi entered the temple of Jagannath. As he looked at the holy
image
he debated within himself whether God had a form or was formless. He
passed his staff from left to right to feel whether it touched the
image. The
staff touched nothing. He understood that there was no image before
him;
he concluded that God was formless. Next he passed the staff from right
to
left. It touched the image. The sannyasi understood that God had form
Thus he realized that God has form and, again, is formless.

"But it is extremely difficult to understand this. Naturally the doubt
arises in the mind: if God is formless, how then can He have form?
Further,
if He has a form, why does He have so many forms?"

DOCTOR: "God has created all these forms in the world; therefore He
Himself has a form. Again, He has created the mind; therefore He is
formless. It is possible for God to be everything."

MASTER: 'These things do not become clear until one has realized God.
He assumes different forms and reveals Himself in different ways for
the
sake of His devotees. A man kept a solution of dye in a tub. Many
people
came to him to have their clothes dyed. He would ask a customer, 'What
colour should you like to have your cloth dyed?' If the customer wanted
red,
then the man would dip the cloth in the tub and say, 'Here is your
cloth
dyed red.' If another customer wanted his cloth dyed yellow, the man
would dip his cloth in the same tub and say, 'Here is your cloth dyed
yellow.'
If a customer wanted his cloth dyed blue, the man would dip it in the
same
tub and say, 'Here is your cloth dyed blue.' Thus he would dye the
clothes
of his customers different colours, dipping them all in the same
solution.
One of the customers watched all this with amazement. The man asked
him, 'Well? What colour do you want for your cloth?' The customer said,
'Brother, dye my cloth the colour of the dye in your tub.' (Laughter.)

"Once a man went into a wood and saw a beautiful creature on a tree.
Later he told a friend about it and said, 'Brother, on a certain tree
in the
wood I saw a red-coloured creature.' The friend answered: 'I have seen
it
too. Why do you call it red? It is green.' A third man said: 'Oh, no,
no! Why
do you call it green? It is yellow.' Then other persons began to
describe the
animal variously as violet, blue, or black. Soon they were quarrelling
about
the colour. At last they went to the tree and found a man sitting under
it.
In answer to their questions he said: 'I live under this tree and know
the
creature very well. What each of you has said about it is true.
Sometimes
it is red, sometimes green, sometimes yellow, sometimes blue, and so
forth
and so on. Again, sometimes I see that it has no colour whatsoever.'

"Only he who constantly thinks of God can know His real nature. He
alone knows that God reveals Himself in different forms and different
ways,
that He has attributes and, again, has none. Only the man who lives
under
the tree knows that the chameleon can assume various colours and that
sometimes it remains colourless. Others, not knowing the whole truth,
quarrel among themselves and suffer.

"Yes, God has form and, again. He has none. Do you know how it is?
Brahman, Existence-Knowledge-Bliss Absolute, is like a shoreless ocean.
In
the ocean visible blocks of ice are formed here and there by intense
cold.
Similarly, under the cooling influence, so to speak, of the bhakti of
Its
worshippers, the Infinite transforms Itself into the finite and appears
before
the worshipper as God with form. That is to say, God reveals Himself to
His
bhaktas as an embodied Person. Again, as, on the rising of the sun, the
ice
in the ocean melts away, so, on the awakening of jnana, the embodied
God
melts back into the infinite and formless Brahman."

DOCTOR: "Yes. When the sun is up, the ice melts; and what is more, the
heat of the sun turns the water into invisible vapour."

MASTER: "Yes, that is true. As a result of the discrimination that
Brahman
alone is real and the world illusory, the aspirant goes into samadhi.
Then,
for him, the forms or attributes of God disappear altogether. Then he
does
not feel God to be a Person. Then he cannot describe in words what God
is.
And who will describe it? He who is to describe does not exist at all;
he no
longer finds his 'I'. To such a person Brahman is attributeless. In
that state
God is experienced only as Consciousness, by man's inmost
consciousness.
He cannot be comprehended by the mind and intelligence.

"Therefore people compare bhakti, love of God, to the cooling light of
the moon, and jnana, knowledge, to the burning rays of the sun. I have
heard that there are oceans in the extreme north and extreme south
where
the air is so cold that it freezes the water into huge blocks of ice
here and
there. Ships cannot move there; they are stopped by the ice."

DOCTOR: "Then in the path of bhakti the aspirant meets with obstacles."

MASTER : "Yes, that is true. But it does not cause the devotee any
harm.
After all, it is the water of the Ocean of Brahman,
Existence-Knowledge-Bliss Absolute, that is frozen into ice. It will
not injure you if you continue
to reason, saying, for instance, that Brahman alone is real and the
world
illusory. This reasoning will awaken in you jnana, which, like the sun,
will
melt the ice of divine forms hack into the infinite Ocean of Brahman,
Existence-Knowledge-Bliss Absolute.

"In the samadhi that comes at the end of reasoning and discrimination,
no such thing as 'I' exists. But it is extremely difficult to attain
it;
'I-consciousness' lingers so persistently. That is why a man is born
again and again
in this world.

"The cow suffers so much because she says, 'Hamba! Hamba!', that is,
'I!
I!' She is yoked to the plough all day long, rain or shine. Or she is
slaughtered
by the butcher. But even that doesn't put an end to her misery. The
cobbler
tans her hide to make shoes from it. At last the carder makes a string
for his
bow from her entrails and uses the string in carding; then it says,
'Tuhu!
Tuhu!', that is, 'Thou! Thou!' Only then does the cow's suffering come
to an end.

"Likewise, only when a man says: 'Not I! Not I! I am nobody. O Lord,
Thou art the Doer and I am Thy servant; Thou art the Master', is he
freed
from all sufferings; only then is he liberated."

DOCTOR: "But one must fall into the hands of the carder." (All
laugh.)

MASTER: "If this ego cannot be got rid of, then let the rascal remain
as
the servant of God. (All laugh.)

"A man may keep this ego even after attaining samadhi. Such a man feels
either that he is a servant of God or that he is a lover of God.
Sankaracharya
retained the 'ego of Knowledge'1
to teach men spiritual life. The 'servant ego',
the 'Knowledge ego', or the 'devotee ego' may be called the 'ripe ego'.
It is
different from the 'unripe ego', which makes one feel: 'I am the doer.
I am
the son of a wealthy man. I am learned. I am rich. How dare anyone
slight
me?' A man with an 'unripe ego' cherishes such ideas. Suppose a thief
has
entered such a man's house and stolen some of his belongings. If the
thief
is caught, all the articles will be snatched away from him. Then he
will be
beaten. At last he will be handed over to the police. The owner of the
stolen goods will say: 'What! This rogue doesn't know whose house he
has entered!'

"After realizing God, a man becomes like a child five years old. The
ego of
such a man may be called the 'ego of a child', the 'ripe ego'. The
child is
not under the control of any of the gunas. He is beyond the three
gunas. He
is not under the control of any of the gunas — sattva, rajas, or tamas.
Just
watch a child and you will find that he is not under the influence of
tamas.
One moment he quarrels with his chum or even fights with him, and the
next moment he hugs him, shows him much affection, and plays with him
again. He is not even under the control of rajas. Now he builds his
play
house and makes all kinds of plans to make it beautiful, and the next
moment he leaves everything behind and runs to his mother. Again, you
see him wearing a beautiful piece of cloth worth five rupees. After a
few
moments the cloth lies on the ground; he forgets all about it. Or he
may
carry it under his arm. If you say to the child: 'That's a beautiful
piece of
cloth. Whose is it?', he answers: 'Why, it is mine. My daddy gave it to
me.'
You may say, 'My darling, won't you give it to me?' and he will reply:
'Oh
no, it is mine. My daddy gave it to me. I won't give it to you.' Some
minutes
later you may coax him with a toy or a music-box worth a penny, and he
will give you the cloth. Again, a child five years old is not attached
even to
sattva. You may find him today very fond of his playmates in the
neighbourhood;
he doesn't feel happy for a moment without seeing them; but tomorrow,
when he goes to another place with his parents, he finds new playmates;
all his love is now directed to his new friends, and he almost forgets
about his old ones. Further, a child has no pride of caste or family.
If his
mother says to him about a certain person, 'This man is your elder
brother',
he believes this to be one hundred per cent true. One of the two may
have
been born in a brahmin family and the other may belong to a low caste,
say that of the blacksmiths, but they will take their meal from the
same
plate. A child is beyond all ideas of purity and impurity. He is not
bound
by social conventions. He doesn't hesitate to come out naked before
others.

"Then there is an 'ego of old age'. (Dr. Sarkar laughs.)
An old man has
many shackles: caste, pride, shame, hatred, and fear. Furthermore, he
is
bound by the ideas of worldly cleverness, calculating intelligence, and
deceit.
If he is angry with anybody, he cannot shake it off easily; perhaps he
keeps
the feeling as long as he lives. Again, there is the 'ego of
scholarship' and
tile 'ego of wealth'. The 'ego of old age' is an 'unripe ego'.

(To the doctor) "There are a few men who cannot
attain knowledge of
God: men proud of their scholarship, proud of their education, or proud
of their wealth. If you speak to such people about a holy man and ask
them
to visit him, they make all kinds of excuses and will not go. But in
their
heart of hearts they think: 'Why, we are big people ourselves. Must we
go
and visit someone else?'

'A characteristic of tamas is pride. Pride and delusion come from tamas.

"It is said in the Purana that Ravana had an excess of rajas,
Kumbhakarna
of tamas, and Bibhishana of sattva. That is why Bibhishana was able to
receive the grace of Rama. Another characteristic of tamas is anger.
Through
anger one loses one's wits and cannot distinguish between right and
wrong.
In a fit of anger Hanuman set fire to Lanka, without thinking for a
moment
that the fire might also burn down the hut where Sita lived.

"Still another feature of tamas is lust. Girindra Ghosh of
Pathuriaghata
once remarked. 'Since you cannot get rid of your passions — your lust,
your
anger, and so on — give them a new direction. Instead of desiring
worldly
pleasures, desire God. Have intercourse with Brahman. If you cannot get
rid of
anger, then change its direction. Assume the tamasic attitude of
bhakti, and
say: 'What? I have repeated the hallowed name of Durga, and shall I not
be
liberated? How can I be a sinner any more? How can I be bound any
more?'
If you cannot get rid of temptation, direct it toward God. Be
infatuated with
God's beauty. If you cannot get rid of pride, then be proud to say that
you
are the servant of God, you are the child of God. Thus turn the six
passions toward God."

DOCTOR: "It is very hard to control the sense-organs. They are like
restive
horses, whose eyes must be covered with blinkers. In the case of some
horses
it is necessary to prevent them from seeing at all."

MASTER: "A man need not fear anything if but once he receives the grace
of God, if but once he obtains the vision of God, if but once he
attains
Self-Knowledge. Then the six passions cannot do him any harm.

"Eternally perfect souls like Narada and Prahlada did not have to take
the trouble to put blinkers on their eyes. The child who holds his
father's
hand, while walking along the narrow balk in the paddy-field, may
loosen
his hold in a moment of carelessness and slip into the ditch. But it is
quite
different if the father holds the child's hand. Then the child never
falls into the ditch."

DOCTOR: "But it is not proper for a father to hold his child by the
hand."

MASTER: "It is not quite like that. Great sages have childlike natures.
Before God they are always like children. They have no pride. Their
strength
is the strength of God, the strength of their Father. They have nothing
to
call their own. They are firmly convinced of that."

DOCTOR: "Can you make a horse move forward without first covering his
eyes with blinkers? Can one realize God without first controlling the
passions?"

MASTER: "What you say is according to the path of discrimination. It is
known as jnanayoga. Through that path, too, one attains God. The jnanis
say that an aspirant must first of all purify his heart. First he needs
spiritual
exercises; then he will attain Knowledge.

"But God can also be realized through the path of devotion. Once the
devotee develops love for the Lotus Feet of God and enjoys the singing
of
His name and attributes, he does not have to make a special effort to
restrain
his senses. For such a devotee the sense-organs come under control of
themselves.

"Suppose a man has just lost his son and is mourning his death. Can he
be in a mood to quarrel with others that very day, or enjoy a feast in
the
house of a friend? Can he, that very day, show his pride before others
or
enjoy sense pleasures?

"If the moth discovers light, can it remain in darkness any longer?"

DOCTOR (with a smile): "Of course it cannot. It
would rather fly into the
flame and perish."

MASTER: "Oh no, that's not so. A lover of God does not burn himself to
death, like a moth. The light to which he rushes is like the light of a
gem.
That light is brilliant, no doubt, but it is also cooling and soothing.
That
light does not scorch his body; it gives him joy and peace.

"One realizes God by following the path of discrimination and
knowledge.
But this is an extremely difficult path. It is easy enough to say such
things
as, 'I am not the body, mind, or intellect; I am beyond grief, disease,
and
sorrow; I am the embodiment of Existence Knowledge-Bliss Absolute; I am
beyond pain and pleasure; I am not under the control of the
sense-organs',
but it is very hard to assimilate these ideas and practise them.
Suppose I see
my hand cut by a thorn and blood gushing out; then it is not right for
me
to say: 'Why, my hand is not cut by the thorn! I am all right.' In
order to
be able to say that, I must first of all burn the thorn itself in the
fire of Knowledge.

"Many people think they cannot have knowledge or understanding of
God without reading books. But hearing is better than reading, and
seeing
is better than hearing. Hearing about Benares is different from reading
about
it; but seeing Benares is different from either hearing or reading.

"Those actually engaged in a game of chess do not always judge the
moves on the board correctly. The onlookers often judge the moves
better
than the players. Worldly people often think themselves very
intelligent,
but they are attached to the things of the world. They are the actual
players
and cannot understand their own moves correctly. But holy men, who have
renounced everything, are unattached to the world; they are really more
intelligent than worldly people. Since they do not take any part in
worldly
life, their position is that of onlookers, and so they see things more
clearly."

DOCTOR (to the devotees): "If he [meaning Sri
Ramakrishna] had studied
books he could not have acquired so much knowledge. Faraday communed
with nature; that is why he was able to discover many scientific
truths. He
could not have known so much from the mere study of books. Mathematical
formulas only throw the brain into confusion and bar the path of
original inquiry."

MASTER: "There was a time when I lay on the ground in the Panchavati
and prayed to the Divine Mother, 'O Mother, reveal to me what the
karmis (The ritualists.)
have realized through their ritualistic worship, what the yogis have
realized
through yoga, and what the jnanis have realized through
discrimination.'
How much I communed with the Divine Mother! How can I describe it all?

"Ah, what a state I passed through! Sleep left me completely."

The Master sang:

My sleep is broken; how can I slumber any
more?

For now I am wide awake in the sleeplessness of yoga.
O Divine Mother, made one with Thee in yoga-sleep2
at last,

My slumber I have lulled asleep for evermore.

A man has come to me from a country where there is no night;

Rituals and devotions have all grown profitless tor me.

He continued: "I have not read books. But people show me
respect because
I chant the name of the Divine Mother. Sambhu Mallick said about me,
'Here is a great hero without a sword or shield!'" (Laughter.)

The conversation turned to the performance of a drama by Girish Ghosh
called The Life of Buddha. The doctor had seen the
play and been much pleased with it.

DOCTOR (to Girish): "You are a very bad man. Must I
go to the theatre
every day?"

MASTER (to M.): "What does he say? I don't quite
understand."

M: "The doctor liked the play very much."

MASTER (to Ishan): "Why don't you say something? (Pointing
to the
doctor) He does not believe that God can incarnate Himself in
a human form."

ISHAN: "What shall I say, sir? I don't like to argue any more."

MASTER (sharply): "Why? Won't you say the right
thing?"

ISHAN (to the doctor): "Our faith is shallow on
account of our pride. It
is said in the Ramayana that a crow named Bhushandi did not at first
accept
Rama as an Incarnation of God. Once it incurred Rama's displeasure. It
travelled through the different worlds — the lunar, solar, and so forth
— and
through Mount Kailas, to escape Rama's wrath. But it found that it
could
not escape. Then it surrendered itself to Him and took refuge at His
feet.
Rama took the crow in His hand and swallowed it. Thereupon the crow
found that it was seated in its own nest in a tree. After its pride had
thus
been crushed, the bird came to realize that though Rama looked like any
other man, yet He contained in His stomach the entire universe — sky,
moon, sun, stars, oceans, rivers, men, animals, and trees."

MASTER (to the doctor): "It is very difficult to
understand that God can
be a finite human being and at the same time the all-pervading Soul of
the
universe. The Absolute and the Relative are His two aspects. How can we
say
emphatically with our small intelligence that God cannot assume a human
form? Can we ever understand all these ideas with our little intellect?
Can
a one-seer pot hold four seers of milk?

"Therefore one should trust in the words of holy men and great souls,
those who have realized God. They constantly think of God, as a lawyer
of his
lawsuits. Do you believe the story of the crow Bhushandi?"

DOCTOR: "I accept as much as I want to. All difficulties come to an end
if only God reveals His true nature to the seeker. Then there can be no
confusion. How can I accept Rama as an Incarnation of God? Take the
example
of His killing Vali, the monkey chieftain. He hid Himself behind a
tree,
like a thief, and murdered Vali. This is how a man acts, and not God."

GIRISH: "But, sir, such an action is possible only for God."

DOCTOR: "Then take the example of His sending Sita into exile."

GIRISH: "This too, sir, is possible only for God, not for man."

ISHAN (to the doctor): "Why don't you believe in the
Incarnation of
God? Just now you said that God has form since He has created all these
forms, and that God is formless since He has created the mind, which is
without form. A moment ago you said that everything is possible for God.

MASTER (laughing): "It is not mentioned in his
'science' that God can
take human form; so how can he believe it? (All laugh.)

"Listen to a story. A man said to his friend, 'I have just seen a house
fall
down with a terrific crash.' Now, the friend to whom he told this had
received
an English education. He said: 'Just a minute. Let me look it up in the
newspaper.' He read the paper but could not find the news of a house
falling
down with a crash. Thereupon he said to his friend: 'Well, I don't
believe
you. It isn't in the paper; so it is all false.'" (All laugh.)

GIRISH (to the doctor): "You must admit that Krishna
is God. I will not
let you look on Him as a mere man. You must admit that He is either God
or a demon."

MASTER: "Unless a man is guileless, he cannot so easily have faith in
God. God is far, far away from the mind steeped in worldliness. Worldly
intelligence creates many doubts and many forms of pride — pride of
learning,
wealth, and the rest. (Pointing to the doctor) But
he is guileless.

"How guileless Keshab Sen was! One day he visited the Kali temple at
Dakshineswar. At about four in the afternoon he went around to the
guest-house, where the poor are fed, and asked when the beggars would
be fed.
He didn't know that it was too late in the day for the feeding of the
poor.
As a man's faith increases, so does his knowledge of God. The cow that
discriminates too much about food gives milk in dribblets. But the cow
that
gulps down everything — herbs, leaves, grass, husks, straw — gives milk
in
torrents. (All laugh.)

"God cannot be realized without childlike faith. The mother says to her
child, pointing to a boy, "He is your elder brother.' And the child at
once
believes that the boy is one hundred per cent his brother. Again, the
mother
says that a bogy man lives in a certain room, and the child believes
one
hundred per cent that the bogy man lives in the room. God bestows His
grace on the devotee who has this faith of a child. God cannot be
realized
by the mind steeped in worldliness."

DOCTOR (to the devotees): "It is not right, however,
to make the cow yield
milk by feeding her all sorts of things. One of my cows was fed that
way. I
drank its milk and the result was that I became seriously ill. At first
I was at
a loss to know the cause. After much inquiry I found out that the cow
had
been given the wrong things to eat. I was in a great fix. I had to go
to
Lucknow for a change to get rid of the illness. I spent twelve thousand
rupees. (Roars of laughter.)

"It is very difficult always to find out the precise relationship
between
cause and effect. A child of seven months, in a wealthy family, had an
attack
of whooping-cough. I was called in for consultation. Even after much
effort
I could not find out the cause of the illness. At last I learnt that
the child
had been given the milk of an ass that had been drenched in the rain." (All
laugh.)

MASTER (to the devotees): "How strange'. It is like
saying that a man
has an acid stomach because he passed, in his coach, under a tamarind
tree." (All laugh.)

DOCTOR (with a smile): Let me tell you another. The
captain of a ship
had a bad headache. After consultation, the doctors on board had a
blister
applied to the side of the boat." (All laugh.)

MASTER (to the doctor): "For the seekers of God the
constant company of
holy men is necessary. The disease of worldly people has become
chronic,
as it were. They should carry out the instruction of holy men. What
will
they gain by merely listening to their advice? They must not only take
the
prescribed medicine, but also follow a strict diet. Diet is important."

DOCTOR: "Yes, it is the diet. more than anything else, that causes the
cure."

MASTER: "There arc three classes of physicians: superior, mediocre, and
inferior. The interior physician feels the patient's pulse, merely asks
him
to take medicine, and then goes away. He doesn't bother to find out
whether
the patient has followed his directions. The mediocre physician gently
tries
to persuade the patient to take the medicine. He says: 'Look here. How
can
you get well without medicine? Take the medicine, my dear. I am
preparing
it with my own hands.' But the superior physician follows a different
method. If he finds the patient stubbornly refusing to swallow the
medicine,
he presses the patient's chest with his knee and forces the medicine
down his throat."

DOCTOR: "There is a form of treatment that does not require the
physician
to press the patient's chest with his knee. For instance, homeopathy."

MASTER: "There is no fear if a good physician presses the patient's
chest
with his knee.

Like the physicians, there are three classes of religious teachers. The
inferior teacher is content with merely giving spiritual instruction;
he doesn't
bother about the student after that. The mediocre teacher explains the
teaching again and again for the good of the student, that he may
assimilate
it; he persuades the student through love and kindness to follow it.
But the
superior teacher uses force, if necessary, on the stubborn student.

(To the doctor) "The renunciation of 'woman and
gold' is meant for the
sannyasi. He must not look even at the picture of a woman. Do you know
what a woman is to a man? She is like spiced pickle. The very thought
of
pickle brings water to the tongue; it doesn't have to be brought near
the tongue.

"But this renunciation is not meant for householders like you. It is
meant
only for sannyasis. You may live among women, as far as possible in a
spirit
of detachment. Now and then you must retire into solitude and think of
God.
Women must not be allowed there. You can lead an unattached life to a
great
extent if you have faith in God and love for Him. After the birth of
one or
two children a married couple should live as brother and sister. They
should
then constantly pray to God that their minds may not run after sense
pleasures
any more and that they may not have any more children."

GIRISH (to the doctor, with a smile): "You have
already spent three or
four hours here. What about your patients?"

DOCTOR: "Well, my practice and patients! I shall lose everything on
account of your paramahamsa!" (All laugh.)

MASTER: "There is a river called the 'Karmanasa'.
(Literally, "destroyer of duties.") It is very dangerous to
dive into that river. If a man plunges into its waters he cannot
perform any
more action. It puts an end to his duties." (All laugh.)

DOCTOR (to Girish, M., and the other devotees): "My
friends, consider
me as one of you. I am not saying this as a physician. But if you think
of me as your own, then I am yours."

MASTER (to the doctor): "There is such a thing as
love for love's sake.
It is very good if one can grow such love. Prahlada loved God for the
sake
of love. A devotee like Prahlada says: 'O God, I do not want wealth,
fame,
creature comforts, or any such thing. Please grant me the boon that I
may
have genuine love for Thy Lotus Feet.'"

DOCTOR: "You are right, sir. I have seen people bowing down before the
image of Kali. They seek worldly objects from the Goddess, such as a
job,
the healing of disease, and so forth.

(To the Master) "The illness you are suffering from
does not permit the
patient to talk with people. But my case is an exception. You may talk
with
me when I am here." (All laugh.)

MASTER: "Please cure my illness. I cannot chant the name and glories of
God."

DOCTOR: "Meditation is enough."

MASTER: "What do you mean? Why should I lead a monotonous life? I
enjoy my fish in a variety of dishes: curried fish, fried fish, pickled
fish, and
so forth! Sometimes I worship God with rituals, sometimes I repeat His
name,
sometimes I meditate on Him, sometimes I sing His name and glories,
sometimes I dance in His name."

DOCTOR: "Neither am I monotonous."

MASTER: "Your son Amrita does not believe in the Incarnation of God.
What is the harm in that? One realizes God even if one believes Him to
be
formless. One also realizes God if one believes that God has form. Two
things are necessary for the realization of God: faith and
self-surrender. Man
is ignorant by nature. Errors are natural to him. Can a one-seer pot
hold
four seers of milk? Whatever path you may follow, you must pray to God
with a restless heart. He is the Ruler of the soul within. He will
surely
listen to your prayer if it is sincere. Whether you follow the ideal of
the
Personal God or that of the Impersonal Truth, you will realize God
alone,
provided you are restless for Him. A cake with icing tastes sweet
whether
you eat it straight or sidewise.

"Your son Amrita is a nice boy."

DOCTOR: "He is your disciple."

MASTER (with a smile): "There is not a fellow under
the sun who is my
disciple. On the contrary, I am everybody's disciple. All are the
children of
God. All are His servants. I too am a child of God. I too am His
servant.
'Uncle Moon' is every child's uncle!"

^The
ego illumined and purified by the Knowledge of God. Following the
method
of discrimination, the jnani, in samadhi, merges his ego in Brahman.
Thereafter
he may come down to the relative plane with an appearance of
individuality, but
even then he is always conscious of his identity with Brahman. This
apparent ego
is called the "ego of Knowledge". A bhakta, following the path of love,
realizes
his eternal relationship with God. He too keeps an appearance of
individuality on
the relative plane. This ego has none of the characteristics of the
worldly ego and
is called the "ego of Devotion". The two egos here described refer to
the
same state of realization.

^Samadhi,
which makes one appear asleep.


=== 46_master_and_dr_sarkar.htm ===

The Master and Dr. Sarkar

←
Home
/ The Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna
/ Volume 2
/ →

THE MASTER AND DR. SARKAR

Master's visions — The doctor and M. — Influence of holy company —
Master's mystic experiences — About miracles — Soul is different from
body — Guilelessness of the young devotees — Hard rules for sannyasis
— "Woman and gold" — Preaching without God's command — Confusion
of mere scholars — Dr. Sarkar explains samadhi — Narendra's
music — Mahima's three paths — On japa — Dr. Sarkar on Mahima —
Vijay Goswami — Master in ecstasy — Use of scriptures — God's
Incarnation as man — The duty of a physician — Cultivating holy
company — Narendra sings — Doctor suppresses his emotion.

Friday, October 23, 1885

IT WAS THE DAY of the full moon following the Durga Puja, the
worship
of the Divine Mother. At ten o'clock in the morning Sri Ramakrishna
was talking to M., who was helping him with his socks.

MASTER (smiling): "Why can't I cut my woolen scarf
into two pieces
and wrap them around my legs like socks? They will be nice and warm."

M. smiled. The previous evening Sri Ramakrishna had had a long
conversation with Dr. Sarkar. Referring to it, the Master said
laughingly, "I
told him the story of the calf, and about egotism being the cause of
all
suffering."

The younger Naren reminded Sri Ramakrishna that he, the Master, had
told the doctor about people's suffering from the threefold misery of
the
world and still bragging of their well-being. The disciple said, "That
was a
very nice thing you said yesterday about the thorn, and also about
burning
it in the fire of Knowledge."

MASTER: "I had direct visions of those things. One day I was passing
back
of the kuthi when my whole body burst into flames, as it were, like the
fire
in a homa. Padmalochan once said to me, 'I shall convene an assembly of
pundits and proclaim your spiritual experiences before all.' But he
died
shortly after."

At eleven o'clock M. went to Dr. Sarkar's house to report Sri
Ramakrishna's
condition. The doctor showed great eagerness to hear about him.

DOCTOR (laughing): "How well I told him yesterday
that in order to be
able to say 'Tuhu! Tuhu!', 'Thou! Thou!', one must fail into the hands
of an expert carder!"

M: "It is true, sir. One cannot get rid of egotism without the help of
a
capable teacher. How well he spoke last night of bhakti! Bhakti, like a
woman, can go into the inner court."

DOCTOR: "Yes, that is very nice. But still one cannot give up jnana."

M: "But he does not say that. He accepts both knowledge and love, the
Impersonal Truth and the Persona! God. He says that through the cooling
influence of bhakti a part of the Reality takes the solid form of the
Personal
God; and with the rise of the sun of jnana the ice of form melts again
into
the formless water of the Absolute. In other words, you realize God
with
form through bhaktiyoga, and the formless Absolute through jnanayoga.

"You must have noticed that he sees God so near him that he always
converses with Him. When suffering from illness, he says to God, like a
small
child, 'Oh, Mother, it is hurting me!'

"How wonderful his power of observation is! He saw a fossil in the
museum.
At once he gave it as an example of the effect of companionship with
holy
persons. Just as an object is turned into stone by remaining near
stone, so
does a man become holy by living with a holy man."

DOCTOR: "Yesterday Ishan Babu talked of the Incarnation of God. What
is that? To call man God!"

M: "Everyone has his own faith. What is the use of interfering with it?"

DOCTOR: "Yes, what is the use?"

M: "How the Master made us laugh when he told us about a certain
man who refused to believe that a house had collapsed, because it was
not
published in the newspaper!"

Doctor Sarkar remained silent. Sri Ramakrishna had said to him, "Your
'science' does not speak of God's Incarnation; therefore you say that
God
cannot incarnate Himself as man."

It was midday. Doctor Sarkar took M. with him in his carriage. He was
going to visit Sri Ramakrishna after seeing his other patients.

A few days before, at Girish's invitation, Doctor Sarkar had seen his
play
about Buddha's life. He said to M.: "It would have been better to speak
of
Buddha as the Incarnation of Compassion. Why did he speak of him as
an Incarnation of Vishnu?"

The doctor set M. down at the corner of Cornwallis Square.

It was three o'clock in the afternoon. One or two devotees were seated
near Sri Ramakrishna. He became impatient, like a child. Repeatedly he
asked the devotees, "When is the doctor coming?" "What time is it now?"
Doctor Sarkar was expected in the evening.

Suddenly Sri Ramakrishna was overwhelmed with a strange mood. He
placed his pillow on his lap. Filled with maternal love, he began to
caress it
and hold it to his breast as if it were his child. He was in an
ecstatic mood.
His face was lighted with a childlike smile. He put on his cloth in a
strange
manner. The devotees looked at him in amazement.

A little later Sri Ramakrishna was in his normal mood. It was time for
his meal. He ate a little boiled farina.

He was talking to M. about his mystic experiences.

MASTER (to M., aside): "Do you know what I saw just
now in my ecstatic
state? There was a meadow covering an area of seven or eight miles,
through
which lay the road to Sihore. I was alone in that meadow. I saw a
sixteen-year-old paramahamsa boy exactly like the one I had seen in the
Panchavati.

"A mist of bliss lay all around. Out of it emerged a boy thirteen or
fourteen
years old. I saw his face. He looked like Purna. Both of us were naked.
Then we began to run around joyfully in the meadow. Purna felt thirsty.
He drank some water from a tumbler and offered me what was left. I said
to
him, 'Brother, I cannot take your leavings.' Thereupon he laughed,
washed
the glass, and brought me fresh water."

Sri Ramakrishna was again in samadhi. He regained consciousness and
began to talk to M.

MASTER: "My mind is undergoing a change. I cannot take prasad any
more. The Real and the Appearance are becoming one to me. Do you know
what I saw just now? A divine form — a vision of the Divine Mother. She
had a child in Her womb. She gave birth to it and the next instant
began
to swallow it; and as much of it as went into Her mouth became void. It
was revealed to me that everything is void. The Divine- Mother said to
me,
as it were: 'Come confusion! Come delusion! Come!'"

This reminded M. of Sri Ramakrishna's saying that the magician alone
is real and all else unreal.

MASTER: "Well, how is it that the other time I tried to attract Purna
but
failed? This weakens my faith a little."

M: "But to attract a person is to work a miracle."

MASTER: "Yes, a downright miracle."

M: "You remember, one day we were returning to Dakshineswar in a
carriage from Adhar's house, when a bottle broke. One of us said to
you:
'Does this mean that any harm will befall us? What do you think?' You
said:
'What do I care? Why should I bother about it? That would be
miracle-working.'"

MASTER: "Yes, people lay ailing children down on the ground where
men chant the name of God, in order that they may be cured; or people
cure
disease through occult powers. All this is miracle-working. Only those
whose
spiritual experience is extremely shallow call on God for the healing
of disease."

It was evening. Sri Ramakrishna was seated on his bed, thinking of the
Divine Mother and repeating Her hallowed name. The devotees sat near
him in silence. Latu, Sashi, Sarat, the younger Naren, Paltu, Bhupati,
Girish, and others were present. Ramtaran of the Star Theatre had come
with Girish to entertain Sri Ramakrishna with his singing. A few
minutes
later Dr. Sarkar arrived.

DOCTOR (to the Master): "I was much worried about
you last night at
three o'clock. It was raining. I said to myself, 'Who knows whether or
not
the doors and windows of his room are shut?'"

"Really?" said Sri Ramakrishna. He was much pleased at the doctor's
love
and thoughtfulness for him.

MASTER: "As long as there is the body, one should take care of it. But
I
find that the body is quite separate from the Self. When a man rids
himself
entirely of his love for 'woman and gold', then he clearly perceives
that the
body is one thing and the Self another. When the milk inside the
coconut
is all dried up, then the kernel becomes separated from the shell; you
feel
the kernel rattling inside when you snake the coconut. Or it is just
like a
sword and its sheath. The sword is one thing and the sheath is another.

"Therefore I cannot speak much to the Divine Mother about the illness
of the body."

GIRISH (to the devotees): "Pundit Shashadhar said to
him [meaning the
Master]: 'Please bring your mind to bear on the body during samadhi.
That
will cure your illness.' And he, the Master, saw in a vision that the
body was
nothing but a loose mass of flesh and bones."

MASTER: "Once, a long time ago, I was very ill. I was sitting in the
Kali
temple. I felt like praying to the Divine Mother to cure my illness,
but
couldn't do so directly in my own name. I said to Her, 'Mother, Hriday
asks
me to tell You about my illness.' I could not proceed any farther. At
once
there flashed into my mind the Museum of the Asiatic Society, and a
human
skeleton strung together with wire. I said to Her, 'Please tighten the
wire
of my body like that, so that I may go about singing Your name and
glories.'
It is impossible for me to ask for occult powers.

"At first Hriday asked me — I was then under his control — to pray to
the
Mother for powers. I went to the temple. In a vision I saw a widow
thirty
or thirty-five years old, covered with filth. It was revealed to me
that occult
powers are like that filth. I became angry with Hriday because he had
asked
me to pray for powers."

Ramtaran began to sing:

Behold my vina, my dearly beloved,

My lute of sweetest tone;

If tenderly you play on it,

The strings will waken, at your touch,

To rarest melodies.

Tune it neither low nor high,

And from it in a hundred streams

The sweetest sound will flow;

But over-slack the strings are mute,

And over-stretched they snap in twain.

DOCTOR (to Girish): "Is it an original
song?"

GIRISH: "No, it is an adaptation from Edwin Arnold."

Ramtaran sang from the play, The Life of Buddha:

We moan for rest, alas! hut rest can never find;

We know not whence we come, nor where we float away.

Time and again we tread this round of smiles and tears;

In vain we pine to know whither our pathway leads,

And why we play this empty play.

We sleep, although awake, as if by a spell bewitched;

Will darkness never break into the light of dawn?

As restless as the wind, life moves unceasingly:

We know not who we are, nor whence it is we come;

We know not why we come, nor where it is we drift;

Sharp woes dart forth on every side.

How many drift about, now gay, now drowned in tears!

One moment they exist; the next they are no more.

We know not why we come, nor what our deeds have been,

Nor, in our bygone lives, how well we played our parts;

Like water in a stream, we cannot stay at rest;

Onward we flow for evermore.

Burst Thou our slumber's bars, O Thou that art awake!

How long must we remain enmeshed in fruitless dreams?

Are you indeed awake? Then do not longer sleep!

Thick on you lies the gloom fraught with a million woes.

Rise, dreamer, from your dream, and slumber not again!

Shine forth, O Shining One, and with Thy shafts of light

Slay Thou the blinding dark! Our only Saviour Thou!

We seek deliverance at Thy feet.

As Sri Ramakrishna listened to the song he went into samadhi.
Ramtaran sang again:

Blow, storm! Rage and roar! . . .

When the song was over, Sri Ramakrishna said to the singer:
"What is
this? Why this decoction of bitter neem-leaves after the rice pudding?
The
moment you sang —

Shine forth, O Shining One, and with Thy shafts of light

Slay Thou the blinding dark!

I had a vision of the Sun. As He arose, the darkness vanished,
and all men
took refuge at His feet."

Ramtaran sang again:

O Mother, Saviour of the helpless. Thou the Slayer of sin!

In Thee do the three gunas dwell — sattva, rajas, and tamas.

Thou dost create the world; Thou dost sustain it and destroy it;

Binding Thyself with attributes, Thou yet trandescendest them;

For Thou, O Mother, art the All.

Kali Thou art, and Tara, and Thou the Ultimate Prakriti;

Thou art the Fish, the Turtle, the Boar, and all other Avatars;

Earth, water, air, and fire art Thou, and Thou the sky,

O Mother of the Absolute!

The Samkhya, Patanjala, Mimamsaka, and Nyaya

For ever seek to fathom Thee and know Thine inmost nature;

Vedanta and Vaiseshika are searching after Thee;

But none of them has found Thee out.

Though free of limitations, beginningless and without end,

Yet for Thy loving bhaktas' sake Thou wearest varying forms.

The terrors of this world Thou dost remove, and Thou dost dwell

Alike in present, past, and future.

Thou dost appear with form, to him who loves Thee as a Person;

Thou art the Absolute, to him who worships formless Truth.

Some there are who speak alone of the resplendent Brahman;

Even this, O Blissful Mother, is nothing else but Thee!

Each man, according to his measure, makes his image of the Truth,

Calling it the Highest Brahman.

Beyond this does Turiya shine, the Indescribable;

O Mother of all things, who dost pervade the universe,

Every one of these art Thou!

Then he sang:

Dear friend, my religion and piety have come to an end:

No more can I worship Mother Syama; my mind defies control.

Oh, shame upon me! Bitter shame!

I try to meditate on the Mother with sword in hand,

Wearing Her garland of human heads;

But it is always the Dark One,(Krishna) wearing His garland of wild
wood-flowers

And holding the flute to His tempting lips,

That shines before my eyes.

I think of the Mother with Her three eyes, but alas! I see

Him alone with the arching eyes, and I forget all else!

Oh, shame upon me! Bitter shame!

I try to offer fragrant flowers at the Mother's feet

But the ravishing thought of His graceful form unsettles my helpless
mind,

And all my meditations meant for the Naked One (Syama) are drawn away
By the sight of His yellow scarf.

Sri Ramakrishna was in an ecstatic mood as he listened to the
song.

The musician sang again:

O Mother, who has offered these red hibiscus flowers at Thy feet?

I beg of Thee, O Mother, place one or two upon my head.

Then I shall cry aloud to Thee, "Oh, Mother! Mother!"

And I shall dance around Thee and clap my hands for joy,

And Thou wilt look at me and laugh, and tie the flowers in my hair.

The singing was over. Many of the devotees were in a rapturous
mood.
There was a deep silence in the room. The younger Naren was absorbed in
meditation. He sat like a stump. Pointing him out to the doctor, Sri
Ramakrishna said, "A very pure soul, unstained by the slightest touch
of worldliness."

MANOMOHAN (to the doctor): "He (pointing to
the Master) says of your
son, 'I don't care for the father if I have the son.'"

DOCTOR: "Ah, you see! That is why I say that you forget everything else
when you have the 'Son'."1

MASTER (smiling): "I don't say that I do not want
the Father."

DOCTOR: "Yes, I understand you. How can you save your face unless you
say a few things like that?"

MASTER: "Your boy is quite guileless. One day Sambhu's face became red
as he said, 'God will surely listen to a man's prayer if he prays to
Him with sincerity.'

"Why am I so fond of the boys? They are like unadulterated milk: only
a little boiling is needed. Moreover it can be offered to the Deity.
But milk
adulterated with water needs much boiling. It consumes a large quantity
of fuel.

"The boys are like fresh earthen pots, good vessels in which one can
keep
milk without any worry. Spiritual instruction arouses their inner
consciousness
without delay. But it is not so with the worldly-minded. One is afraid
to
keep milk in a pot that has been used for curd. The milk may turn sour.

"Your boy is still free from worldliness, untouched by 'women and
gold'."

DOCTOR: "That is because he is living on his father's earnings. I
should
love to see how free he would keep himself from worldliness if he had
to earn his own livelihood."

MASTER: "Yes, yes. That is true. But God is far, far away from the
worldly-minded. For those who have renounced the world He is in the
palm of the hand.

(To Dr. Sarkar and Dr. Dukari) "But renunciation of
'woman and gold'
is not meant for you. You may renounce these mentally. That is why I
said
to the goswamis: 'Why do you speak of renunciation? That will not do
for
you. You have to attend the daily worship of Syamasundar.'

"Total renunciation is for sannyasis. They must not look even at the
picture of a woman. To them a woman is poison. They must keep
themselves
at least ten cubits away from her; and if that is not possible, at
least
one cubit. And they must not talk much with a woman, no matter how
devout she may be. Further, they should choose their dwelling at a
place
where they will never, or scarcely ever, see the face of a woman.

"Money, too, is like poison to a sannyasi. If he keeps money with him,
he
has worries, pride, anger, and the desire for physical comforts. Money
inflames his rajas, which brings tamas in its train. Therefore a
sannyasi must
not touch 'gold'. 'Woman and gold' makes him forget God.

"For householders money is a means of getting food, clothes, and a
dwelling-place, worshipping the Deity, and serving holy men and
devotees.

"It is useless to try to hoard money. With great labour the bees build
a
hive; but a man breaks it and takes the honey away."

DOCTOR: "Whom shall we hoard for? — For a wicked son, perhaps."

MASTER: "It is not a wicked son alone. Perhaps the wife is unchaste.
She
may have a secret lover. Perhaps she will give him your watch and chain!

"You should not renounce woman completely. It is not harmful for a
householder to live with his wife. But after the birth of one or two
children,
husband and wife should live as brother and sister.

"It is attachment to 'woman and gold' that begets pride of learning,
pride
of money, and pride of social position.

"One cannot attain divine knowledge till one gets rid of pride. Water
does
not stay on the top of a mound; but into low land it flows in torrents
from all sides."

DOCTOR: "But the water that flows into the low land from all sides
contains good water and bad water, muddy water and ditch-water. Again,
there
are hollows on mountain-tops as well, as at Nainital and Manasoravar.
These
contain only pure water from the sky."

MASTER: "Only pure water from the sky — that is good!"

DOCTOR: "Further, from an elevated place the water can be distributed
on all sides."

MASTER (smiling): "A certain man came to possess a
siddha mantra.2
He then went to the top of a hill and cried aloud. 'Repeat this mantra
and you will realize God.'"

DOCTOR: "Yes."

MASTER: "But you must remember one thing. When his soul feels restless
for God, a man forgets the difference between good water and
ditch-water.
In order to know God, he sometimes goes to good men, sometimes to
imperfect men. Dirty water cannot injure an aspirant if God's grace
descends
on him. When God grants him Knowledge, He reveals to the aspirant what
is good and what is bad.

"There may be hollows on the top of a hill, but they cannot exist on
the
hill of the 'wicked ego'. Only if it is an 'ego of Knowledge' or an
'ego of
bhakti', does the pure water from the sky collect there.

"It is true that the water from a hill-top may flow in all directions,
but that
is possible only from the hill of the 'ego of Knowledge'.

"One cannot teach men without the command of God. After attaining
Knowledge, Sankaracharya retained the ego of Knowledge' in order to
teach
mankind. But to lecture without realizing God! What good will that do?

"I went to the Nandanbagan Brahmo Samaj. After the worship the
preacher gave a lecture from the raised platform. He had written it at
home.
As he read from the manuscript he looked around. While meditating he
opened his eyes from time to time to look at people.

"The instruction of a man who has not seen God does not produce the
right effect. He may say one thing rightly, but he becomes confused
about the next.

"Samadhyayi delivered a lecture. He said: 'God is beyond words and
mind;
He is dry. Worship Him through the bliss of your love and devotion.'
Just
see, he thus described God, whose very nature is Joy and Bliss! What
will
such a lecture accomplish? Can it teach people anything? Such a
lecturer
is like the man who said, 'My uncle's cow-shed is full of horses.'
Horses in
the cow-shed! (All laugh.) From that you can
understand that there were
no horses at all."

DOCTOR (smiling): "Nor cows either!" (All
laugh.)

In the mean time the devotees who had been in a rapturous state had
regained their normal mood. The doctor was highly pleased with them and
asked M. about them. M. introduced to him Paltu, the younger; Naren,
Bhupati, Sarat, Sashi, and the other youngsters. About Sashi, M. said,
"He
is going to appear for the B. A. examination."

The doctor was a little inattentive.

MASTER (to the doctor): "Look here! Listen to what
he is saying."

The doctor heard from M. about Sashi.

MASTER (to the doctor, pointing to M.): "He
instructs the school-boys."

DOCTOR: "So I have heard."

MASTER: "I am unlettered and yet educated people come here. How
amazing! You must admit that it is the play of God."

It was nine o'clock in the evening. The doctor had been sitting there
since
six o'clock, watching all these things.

GIRISH (to the doctor): "Well, sir, does it ever
happen to you that, though
you do not intend to come here, you are drawn as if by a subtle force?
I
feel that way; that is why I am asking you."

DOCTOR: "I don't know whether I feel that. But the heart alone knows
the promptings of the heart. (To Sri Ramakrishna)
Besides, there isn't much use in speaking about it."

October 24, 1885

It was about one o'clock in the afternoon. Sri Ramakrishna was seated
on
the second floor of the house at Syampukur. Dr. Sarkar, Narendra,
Mahimacharan, M., and other devotees were in the room. Referring to the
homeopathic system of medicine, the Master said to Dr. Sarkar, "This
treatment
of yours is very good."

DOCTOR: "According to homeopathy the physician has to check up the
symptoms of the disease with the medical book. It is like Western
music.
The singer follows the score.

"Where is Girish Ghosh? Never mind. Don't trouble him. He didn't sleep
last night."

MASTER: "Well, when I am in samadhi I feel intoxicated as if I were
drunk with siddhi. What have you to say about that?"

DOCTOR (to M.): "In that state the nerve centres
cease to function. Hence
the limbs become numb. Again, the legs totter because all the energy
rushes
toward the brain. Life consists of the nervous system. There is a nerve
centre
in the nape of the neck called the medulla oblongata. If that is
injured, one may die."

Mahima Chakravarty began to describe the Kundalini. He said: "The
Sushumna nerve runs through the spinal cord in a subtle form. None can
see it. That is what Siva says."

DOCTOR: "Siva examined man only in his maturity. But the Europeans
have examined man in all stages of his life from the embryo to
maturity. It
is good to know comparative history. From the history of the Sonthals
one
learns that Kali was a Sonthal woman. She was a valiant fighter. (All
laugh.)

"Don't laugh, please. Let me tell you how greatly the study of
comparative
anatomy has benefited men. The difference between the actions of the
pancreatic juice and bile was at first unknown. But later Claude
Bernard
examined the stomach, liver, and other parts of the rabbit and
demonstrated
that the action of bile is different from the action of the pancreatic
juice.
Therefore it stands to reason that we should watch the lower animals as
well. The study of man alone is not enough.

"Similarly, the study of comparative religion is highly beneficial.

"Why do his [meaning the Master's] words go straight to our hearts? He
has experienced the truths of different religions. He himself has
practised
the disciplines of the Hindu, Christian, Mussalman, Sakta, and
Vaishnava
religions. The bees can make good honey only if they gather nectar from
different flowers."

M. (to Dr. Sarkar): "He (pointing to
Mahimacharan) has studied science a great deal."

DOCTOR (smiling): "What science? Do you mean Max
Muller's Science
of Religion?'

MAHIMA< (to the Master): "You are ill. But
what can the doctor do about
it? When I heard of your illness, I thought that you were only going to
pamper the doctor's pride."

MASTER (pointing to Dr. Sarkar): "But he is a very
good physician. He
is very learned too."

MAHIMA: "Yes, sir. He is a ship and we are only small boats."

Dr. Sarkar folded his hands in humility.

MAHIMA: "But here in the Master's presence all are equal."

Sri Ramakrishna asked Narendra to sing. Narendra sang:

I have made Thee, O Lord, the Pole-star of my life;

No more shall I lose my way on the world's trackless sea. ...

Then he sang:

Ever insane with pride am I, and many the cravings of my heart! . . .

He sang again:

This universe, wondrous and infinite,

O Lord, is Thy handiwork;

And the whole world is a treasure-house

Full of Thy beauty and grace. . . .

Narendra continued

O Father of the Universe, upon Thy lofty throne,

Thou dost enjoy the music of the worlds,

As Thy creation's praise they sweetly sing.

Behold, I too, though born of earth, have come with feeble voice

Before the portal of Thy House.

I seek alone Thy vision. Lord! I crave no other boon.

Here I have come to sing my song for Thee;

From a far corner of the mighty throng

Where sun and moon are hymning Thee, I too would sing Thy praise:

This is Thy lowly servant's prayer.

He sang another song:

O King of Kings, reveal Thyself to me!

I crave Thy mercy. Cast on me Thy glance!

At Thy dear feet I dedicate my life,

Seared in the fiery furnace of this world.

My heart, alas, is deeply stained with sin;

Ensnared in maya, I am all but dead.

Compassionate Lord! Revive my fainting soul

With the life-giving nectar of Thy grace.

Again:

Be drunk, O mind, be drunk with the Wine of Heavenly Bliss!

Roll on the ground and weep, chanting Hari's sweet name! . . .

MASTER: "And sing that one — 'All that exists art Thou.'"

DOCTOR: "Ah!"

Narendra sang:

I have joined my heart to Thee: all that
exists art Thou;

Thee only have I found, for Thou art all that exists. . . .

The singing was over. Dr. Sarkar sat there almost spellbound.
After a
time, with folded hands, he said very humbly to Sri Ramakrishna: "Allow
me to take my leave now. I shall come again tomorrow."

MASTER: "Oh, stay a little. Girish Ghosh has been sent for. (Pointing
to
Mahima) He is a scholar, yet he dances in the name of Hari.
He has no
pride. He went to Konnagar just because we were there. He is wealthy;
he
is free; he serves nobody. (Pointing to Narendra)
What do you think of him?"

DOCTOR: "Excellent!"

MASTER (pointing to a devotee): "And him?"

DOCTOR: "Splendid!"

MAHIMA: "It can by no means be said that one knows philosophy unless
one has read Hindu philosophy. The European philosophers do not know
the twenty-four cosmic principles of the Samkhya philosophy. They
cannot even grasp them."

MASTER (smiling): "What are the three paths you
speak of?"

MAHIMA: "The path of Sat, which is the path of knowledge. Next, the
path of Chit, of yoga, of karmayoga, which includes the duties and
functions
of the four stages of life. Last, the path of Ananda, the path of
devotion
and ecstatic love. You are an adept in all three paths; you can speak
of them all with authority."

Sri Ramakrishna laughed.

Dr. Sarkar took his leave. It was evening, the first night after the
full
moon. Sri Ramakrishna stood up, lost in samadhi. Nityagopal stood
beside
him in a reverent attitude.

Sri Ramakrishna took his seat. Nityagopal was stroking his feet.
Devendra, Kalipada, and many other devotees were seated by his side.

MASTER (to the devotees): "My mind tells me that
Nityagopal's present
state will undergo a change. His entire mind will be concentrated on me
— on Him who dwells in me. Don't you see how Narendra's whole mind is
being drawn toward me?"

Many of the devotees were taking their leave. Sri Ramakrishna stood up.
Referring to japa, he said to a devotee: "Japa means silently repeating
God's
name in solitude. When you chant His name with single-minded devotion
you can see God's form and realize Him. Suppose there is a piece of
timber
sunk in the water of the Ganges and fastened with a chain to the bank.
You proceed link by link, holding to the chain, and you dive into the
water
and follow the chain. Finally you are able to reach the timber. In the
same
way, by repeating God's name you become absorbed in Him and finally
realize Him."

KALIPADA (smiling, to the devotees): "Ours is a
grand teacher! We are
not asked to practise meditation, austerity, and other disciplines."

Suddenly Sri Ramakrishna said, "This is troubling me." The Master's
throat was hurting him. Devendra said, "Your words cannot fool us any
more." He thought that the Master feigned illness to hoodwink the
devotees.

Most of the devotees departed. It was arranged that a few of the
younger
men should stay to nurse the Master by turns. M. also was going to
spend
the night there.

Sunday, October 25, 1885

It was about half past six in the morning when M. arrived at
Syampukur
and asked Sri Ramakrishna about his health. He was on his way to Dr.
Sarkar to report the Master's condition. The Master said to M.: "Tell
the
doctor that during the early hours of the morning my mouth becomes
filled
with water and I cough. Also ask him if I may take a bath."

After seven o'clock M. came to Dr. Sarkar's house and told him about
the
Master's condition. The physician's old teacher and one or two friends
were
in the room. Dr. Sarkar said to his teacher, "Sir, I have been thinking
of
the Paramahamsa (Referring to Sri Ramakrishna.)
since three in the morning. I couldn't sleep at all. Even now he is in
my mind."

One of the doctor's friends said to him: "Sir, I hear that some speak
of
the Paramahamsa as an Incarnation of God. You see him every day. How
do you feel about it?"

DOCTOR: "I have the greatest regard for him as a man."

M. (to the doctor's friend): "It is very kind of Dr.
Sarkar to treat him."

DOCTOR. "Kindness? What do you mean?"

M: "Not toward him, but toward us."

DOCTOR: "You see, you don't know my actual loss on account of the
Paramahamsa. Every day I fail to see two or three patients. When the
next
day I go to their houses, of my own accord, I cannot accept any fee
since I
am seeing them without being called. How can I charge them for my
visit?"

The conversation turned to Mahima Chakravarty. He had been with the
Master when Dr. Sarkar had visited him the previous Saturday. Pointing
to
the doctor, Mahima had said to Sri Ramakrishna, "Sir, you yourself have
created this disease in order to pamper the doctor's pride."

M. (to the doctor's friend): "Mahima Chakravarty
used to come to your place to
attend your lectures on medical science."

DOCTOR: "Is that so? How full of tamas he is! Didn't you notice it? I
saluted him as 'God's Lower Third'. There exist in God sattva, rajas,
and
tamas. Tamas is the third and an inferior quality. Didn't you hear him
say
to the Paramahamsa, 'You yourself have created this disease in order to
pamper the doctor's pride'?"

M: "Mahima Chakravarty believes that the Paramahamsa can cure his
disease himself, if he wants to."

DOCTOR: "What? Cure that disease himself? Is that possible? We are
physicians; we know what cancer is. We ourselves cannot cure it. And he
to
cure himself! Why, he doesn't know anything about cancer. (To
his friends)
The illness is no doubt incurable, but these gentlemen have been
nursing
him with sincere devotion."

M. requested the doctor to visit Sri Ramakrishna and returned home.

In the afternoon, about three o'clock, M. came to the Master and
repeated the conversation he had had with Dr. Sarkar. He said to Sri
Ramakrishna, "Today the doctor embarrassed me."

MASTER: "What happened?"

M: "Yesterday he heard here that you yourself had created this illness
in
order to pamper the doctor's pride."

MASTER: "Who made that remark?"

M: "Mahima Chakravarty."

MASTER : "What did the doctor say to you?"

M: "He described Mahima Chakravarty as 'God's Lower Third'. Now
he admits that all the qualities — sattva, rajas, and tamas — exist in
God. (The
Master laughs.) Then he told me that he had waked at three in
the
morning and had been thinking of you ever since. When I saw him it was
eight
o'clock. He said to me, 'Even now the Paramahamsa is in my mind.'"

MASTER (laughing): "You see, he has studied English.
I cannot ask him
to meditate on me; but he is doing it all the same, of his own accord."

M: "He also said about you, 'I have the greatest regard for him as a
man.'"

MASTER: "Did you talk of anything else?"

M: "I asked him, 'What is your suggestion today about the patient?'He
said: 'Suggestion? Hang it! I shall have to go to him again myself.
What
else shall I suggest?' (Sri Ramakrishna laughs.)
Further he said: 'You don't
know how much money I am losing every day. Every day I miss two or
three calls.'"

There were many devotees, including Narendranath, in the room.
Vijaykrishna Goswami
arrived and respectfully took the dust of the Master's feet.
Several Brahmo devotees came with him. Vijay had cut off his connection
with the Brahmo Samaj and was practising spiritual discipline
independently. Sri Ramakrishna was very fond of him on account of his
piety and
devotion. Though not a disciple of the Master, Vijay held him in very
high
respect. He had lived in Dacca a long time. Recently he had visited
many
sacred places in upper India.

MAHIMA CHAKRAVARTY
(to Vijay): "Sir, you have visited many holy
places and new countries. Please tell us some of your experiences."

VIJAY: "What shall I say? I realize that everything is here where we
are
sitting now. This roaming about is useless. At other places I have seen
two,
five, ten, or twenty-five per cent of him [meaning the Master], at the
most.
Here alone I find the full one hundred per cent manifestation of God."

MAHIMA: "You are right, sir. Again, it is he [the Master] who makes us
roam about or remain in one place."

MASTER (to Narendra): "See what a change has come
over Vijay's mind.
He is an altogether different person. He is like thick milk from which
all
the water has been boiled off. You see, I can recognize a paramahamsa
by
his neck and forehead. Yes, I can recognize a paramahamsa."

MAHIMA (to Vijay): "Sir, you seem to eat less now.
Isn't that so?"

VIJAY; "Perhaps you are right. (To the Master) I
heard about your illness
and have come to see you. Again, in Dacca —"

MASTER: "What about Dacca?"

Vijay did not reply and was silent a few moments.

VIJAY: "It is difficult to understand him [meaning the Master] unless
he
reveals himself. Here alone is the one hundred per cent manifestation
of God."

MASTER: "Kedar said the other day, 'At other places we don't get
anything to eat, but here we get a stomachful!'"

MAHIMA: "Why a stomachful? It overflows the stomach."

VIJAY (to the Master, with folded hands): "I have
now realized who you
are. You don't have to tell me."

MASTER (in a state of ecstasy): "If so, then so be
it!"

Saying, "Yes, I have understood", Vijay tell prostrate before the
Master.
He held the Master's feet on his chest and clung to them. The Master
was
in deep samadhi, motionless as a picture. The devotees were overwhelmed
by this sight. Some burst into tears and some chanted sacred hymns. All
eyes were riveted on Sri Ramakrishna. They viewed him in different
ways,
according to their spiritual unfoldment: some as a great devotee, some
as a
holy man, some as God Incarnate.

Mahimacharan sang, with tears in his eyes: "Behold, behold the
embodiment of Love Divine!"

Now and then he chanted, as if enjoying a glimpse of Brahman:

The Transcendental, beyond the One and the many,
Existence-Knowledge-Bliss Absolute.

Navagopal was weeping. Bhupati sang:

Hallowed be Brahman, the Absolute, the Infinite, the Fathomless!

Higher than the highest, deeper than the deepest depths!

Thou art the Light of Truth, the Fount of Love, the Home of Bliss!

This universe with all its manifold and blessed modes

Is but the enchanting poem of Thine inexhaustible thought;

Its beauty overflows on every side.

O Thou Poet, great and primal, in the rhythm of Thy thought

The sun and moon arise and move toward their setting;

The stars, shining like bits of gems, are the fair characters

In which Thy song is written across the blue expanse of sky;

The year, with its six seasons, in tune with the happy earth,

Proclaims Thy glory to the end of time.

The colours of the flowers reveal Thy sovereign Beauty,

The waters in their stillness. Thy deep Serenity;

The thunder-clap unveils to us the terror of Thy Law.

Deep is Thine Essence, truly; how can a foolish mind perceive it?

Wondering, it meditates on Thee from yuga to yuga's end;

Millions upon millions of suns and moons and stars

Bow down to Thee, O Lord, in rapturous awe!

Beholding Thy creation, men and women weep for joy;

The gods and angels worship Thee, O All-pervading Presence!

O Thou, the Fount of Goodness, bestow on us Thy Knowledge;

Bestow on us devotion, bestow pure love and perfect peace;

And grant us shelter at Thy hallowed feet!

Bhupati sang again:

Upon the Sea of Blissful Awareness waves of ecstatic love arise:

Rapture divine! Play of God's Bliss!

Oh, how enthralling! . . .

He sang a third song:

Here vanish my fear and my delusion, my piety, rituals, and good works;

Here vanish my pride of race and caste! Where am I? Where art Thou, O
Hari?

Thou hast stolen my life and soul, and now, O Friend, Thou dost desert
me:

Ah, what a fool I was to come here to the shore of this Sea of Love!

Full to the brim with heavenly bliss is filled this little soul of mine;

Premdas says: Hearken, one and all! This in truth is the way of God!

After a long time Sri Ramakrishna regained consciousness of
the world.

MASTER (to M.): "Something happens to me in that
state of intoxication.
Now I feel ashamed of myself. In that state I feel as if I were
possessed by
a ghost. I cease to be my own self. While coming down from that state I
cannot count correctly. Trying to count, I say, 'One, seven, eight', or
some such thing."

NARENDRA: "It is because everything is one."

MASTER: "No, it is beyond one and two."

MAHIMA: "Yes, you are right. 'It is neither one nor two.'"

MASTER: "There reason withers away. God cannot be realized through
scholarship. He is beyond the scriptures — the Vedas, Puranas, and
Tantras.
If I see a man with even one book in his hand, I call him a rajarshi,3
though he is a jnani. But the brahmarshi4
has no outer sign whatsoever.

"Do you know the use of the scriptures? A man once wrote a letter to a
relative, asking him to send five seers of sweetmeats and a piece of
cloth.
The relative received the letter, read it, and remembered about the
sweet-meats and the cloth. Then he threw the letter away. Of what
further use was it?"

VIJAY: "I see that the sweetmeat has been sent."

MASTER: "God incarnates Himself on earth in a human body. He is, no
doubt, present everywhere and in all beings, but man's longing is not
satisfied unless he sees God in a human form. Man's need is not
satisfied without
the Divine Incarnation. Do you know what it is like? By touching any
part
of a cow you undoubtedly touch the cow herself. Even by touching her
horns you touch the cow. But the milk comes through the cow's udder."

MAHIMA: "If a man wants milk he must put his mouth to the ud8er.
What will he get by sucking the horns?" (All laugh.)

VIJAY: "But a calf at first licks other parts of the cow."

MASTER (smiling): "True. But seeing the calf doing
so, someone perhaps
puts its mouth to the udder." (All laugh.)

The conversation was thus going on, when Dr. Sarkar came into the
room and took a seat. He said to the Master: "I woke up at three this
morning, greatly worried that you might catch cold. Oh, I thought many
other
things about you."

MASTER: "I have been coughing and my throat is sore. In the small hours
of the morning my mouth was filled with water. My whole body is aching."

DOCTOR: "Yes, I heard all about it this morning.'

Mahimacharan told of his trip to various parts of the country and said
that in Ceylon no man laughed. Dr. Sarkar said, "It may be so; but I
shall
have to inquire about it." (All laugh.)

The conversation turned to the duties of life.

MASTER (to the doctor): "Many think that the duty of
a physician is a
very noble one. The physician is undoubtedly a noble man if he treats
his
patients free, out of compassion and moved by their suffering. Then his
work may be called very uplifting. But a physician becomes cruel and
callous
if he carries on his profession for money. It is very mean to do such
things as
examine urine and stool in order to earn money, like a business man
carrying on his trade."

DOCTOR: "You are right. It is undoubtedly wrong for a physician to
perform his duties in that spirit. But I don't like to brag before you
—"

MASTER: "But the medical profession is certainly very noble if the
physician devotes himself to the welfare of others in an unselfish
spirit.

"Whatever may be a householder's profession, it is necessary for him to
live in the company of holy men now and then. If a man loves God, he
will
himself seek the company of holy men. I give the illustration of the
hemp-smoker. One hemp-smoker loves the company of another hemp-smoker.
At
the sight of a person who does not smoke, he goes away with downcast
eyes
or hides himself in a corner; but his joy is unbounded if he meets a
hemp
addict. Perhaps they embrace each other. (All laugh.)
Again, a vulture loves
the company of another vulture."

DOCTOR: "It has also been noticed that a vulture runs away for fear of
a
crow. In my opinion one should serve all creatures, not men alone.
Often I
feed the sparrows with flour. I throw small pellets of flour to them
and they
come in swarms. They love to eat them."

MASTER: "Bravo! That's grand. Holy men should feed other creatures.
They feed ants with sugar."

DOCTOR: "Will there be no singing today?"

MASTER (to Narendra): "Why don't you sing a little?"

Narendra sang to the accompaniment of the tanpura and other instruments:

Sweet is Thy name, O Refuge of the humble!

It falls like sweetest nectar on our ears

And comforts us, Beloved of our souls!

The priceless treasure of Thy name alone

Is the abode of Immortality,

And he who chants Thy name becomes immortal.

Falling upon our ears, Thy holy name

Instantly slays the anguish of our hearts,

Thou Soul of our souls, and fills our hearts with bliss!

Narendra sang again:

O Mother, make me mad with Thy love!

What need have I of knowledge or reason?

Make me drunk with Thy love's Wine;

O Thou who stealest Thy bhaktas' hearts,

Drown me deep in the Sea of Thy love!

Here in this world, this madhouse of Thine,

Some laugh, some weep, some dance for joy:

Jesus, Buddha, Moses, Gauranga,

All are drunk with the Wine of Thy love.

O Mother, when shall I be blessed

By joining their blissful company?

A strange transformation came over the devotees. They all
became mad, as
it were, with divine ecstasy. The pundit stood up, forgetting the pride
of his
scholarship, and cried:

O Mother, make me mad with Thy love!

What need have I of knowledge or reason?

Vijay was the first on his feet, carried away by divine
intoxication. Then
Sri Ramakrishna stood up, forgetting all about his painful and fatal
illness.
The doctor, who had been sitting in front of him, also stood up. Both
patient
and physician forgot themselves in the spell created by Narendra's
music.
The younger Naren and Latu went into deep samadhi. The atmosphere of
the room became electric. Everyone felt the presence of God. Dr.
Sarkar,
eminent scientist that he was, stood breathless, watching this strange
scene.
He noticed that the devotees who had gone into samadhi were utterly
unconscious of the outer world. All were motionless and transfixed.
After a while,
as they came down a little to the plane of the relative world, some
laughed
and some wept. An outsider, entering the room, would have thought that
a
number of drunkards were assembled there.

A little later Sri Ramakrishna resumed his conversation, the devotees
taking their seats. It was about eight o'clock in the evening.

MASTER: "You have just noticed the effect of divine ecstasy. What does
your 'science' say about that? Do you think it is a mere hoax?"

DOCTOR (to the Master): "I must say that this is all
natural, when so
many people have experienced it. It cannot be a hoax. (To
Narendra) When you sang the lines:

O Mother, make me mad with Thy love!

What need have I of knowledge or reason?

I could hardly control myself. I was about to jump to my feet.
With great
difficulty I suppressed my emotion. I said to myself, 'No, I must not
display
my feelings.'"

MASTER (with a smile, to the doctor): "You are
unshakable and
motionless, like Mount Sumeru. You are a very deep soul. Nobody could
perceive
the deep emotion of Rupa and Sanatana. If an elephant enters a small
pool,
there is a splashing of water on all sides. But this does not happen
when it
plunges into a big lake; hardly anyone notices it. Radha once said to
her
companion: 'Friend, you are weeping so much at our separation from Sri
Krishna. But look at me. How stony my heart is! There is not a tear in
my
eyes.' Brinde, her friend, replied: 'Yes, your eyes are dry. But there
is a deep
meaning in it. A fire of grief is constantly raging in your heart
because of
your separation from Krishna. No sooner do the tears gather in your
eyes
than they are dried up in the heat of that fire.'"

DOCTOR: "Nobody can beat you in talk!" (Laughter.)

The conversation turned to other things. Sri Ramakrishna described to
the doctor his ecstasies at Dakshineswar. He also told him how to
control
anger, lust, and the other passions.

DOCTOR: "I have heard the story that you were once lying on the ground
unconscious in samadhi when a wicked man kicked you with his boots."

MASTER : "You must have heard it from M. The man was Chandra Haldar,
a priest of the Kali temple at Kalighat; he often came to Mathur Babu's
house. One day I was lying on the ground in an ecstatic mood. The room
was dark. Chandra Haldar thought I was feigning that state in order to
win
Mathur's favour. He entered the room and kicked me several times with
his
boots. It left black marks on my body. Everybody wanted to tell Mathur
Babu about it, but I forbade them."

DOCTOR; "This is also due to the will of God. Thus you have taught
people how to control anger and practise forgiveness."

In the mean time Vijay had become engaged in conversation with the
other devotees.

VIJAY: "I feel as if someone were always moving with me. He shows me
what is happening even at a distance."

NARENDRA: "Like a guardian angel."

VIJAY: "I have seen him [meaning the Master] in Dacca. I even touched
his body."

MASTER (with a smile): "It must have been someone
else."

NARENDRA: "I too have seen him many a time. (To Vijay)
How can I
say I do not believe your words?"

^A
man forgets God the Father, being engrossed in the Son, the Avatar or
Incarnation.

^A
sacred word by repeating which one attains perfection.

^A
rishi, or seer, who appears with outer splendour, like a king.

^A
seer who always dwells in Brahman-Consciousness.


=== 47_masters_training.htm ===

The Master's Training of His Disciples

←
Home
/ The Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna
/ Volume 2
/ →

THE MASTER'S TRAINING OF HIS DISCIPLES

Dr. Sarkar on ecstasy — Master's humility — M. and Dr. Sarkar —
Master's conception of Kali — Depth of Sri Ramakrishna's experiences
— Futility of mere scholarship — Master on Bankim — Divine
Knowledge is inexhaustible — Master's unique experience — The will of
God
— Dr. Sarkar and Girish — Free will and God's will — God alone is the
agent — Dr. Sarkar on duty — Pure love — Narendra's poverty —
Master in samadhi — Narendra's singing — On knowledge and ignorance
— Brahman cannot be described — Egotism condemned — Master
scolds Shyam Basu — Master's prayer — Pairs of opposites — Dr. Sarkar
on expressing feelings — Cause of Master's illness.

Monday, October 26, 1885

IT WAS ABOUT TEN O'CLOCK in the morning when M. arrived at the
Syampukur house on his way to Dr. Sarkar to report the Master's
condition.

Dr. Sarkar had declared the illness incurable. His words cast gloom
over the minds of the Master's devotees and disciples. With unflagging
devotion and zeal they nursed the patient — their teacher, guide,
philosopher, and
friend. A band of young disciples, led by Narendra, was preparing to
renounce the world and dedicate their lives to the realization of God
and the
service of humanity. People flocked to the Master day and night. In
spite
of the excruciating pain in his throat, he welcomed them all with a
cheerful
face. There seemed to be no limit to his solicitude for their welfare.
His
face beamed as he talked to them about God. Dr. Sarkar, seeing that
conversation aggravated the illness, forbade him to talk to people.
"You must
not talk to others," the physician had said to the Master, "but you may
make
an exception in my case." The doctor used to spend six or seven hours
in
Sri Ramakrishna's company, drinking in every word that fell from his
lips.

MASTER: "I am feeling much relieved. I am very well today. Is it
because
of the medicine? Then why shouldn't I continue it?"

M: "I am going to the doctor. I shall tell him everything. He will
advise
what is best."

MASTER: "I haven't seen Purna for two or three days. I am worried about
him."

M. (to Kali): "Why don't you see Purna and ask him
to come?"

KALI: "I shall go immediately."

MASTER (to M.): "The doctor's son is a nice boy.
Please ask him to come."

M. arrived at Dr. Sarkar's house and found him with two or three
friends.

DOCTOR (to M.): "I was talking about you just a
minute ago. You said
you would come at ten; I have been waiting for you an hour and a half.
Your delay has made me worry about him [meaning Sri Ramakrishna].

(To a friend) "Please sing that song."

The friend sang:

Proclaim the glory of God's name as long as life remains in you;

The dazzling splendour of His radiance Hoods the universe!

Like nectar streams His boundless love, filling the hearts of men with
joy:

The very thought of His compassion sends a thrill through every limb!

How can one fittingly describe Him? Through His abounding grace

The bitter sorrows of this life are all forgotten instantly.

On every side — on land below, in sky above, beneath the seas:

In every region of this earth — men seek Him tirelessly,

And as they seek Him, ever ask: Where is His limit, where His end?

True Wisdom's Dwelling-place is He, the Elixir of Eternal Life,

The Sleepless, Ever-wakeful Eye, the Pure and Stainless One:

The vision of His face removes all trace of sorrow from our hearts.

DOCTOR (to M.): "Isn't it a beautiful song? How do
you like that line,
'Where is His limit, where His end?'"

M: "Yes, that's a very fine line. It fills the mind with the idea of
the Infinite."

DOCTOR (tenderly, to M.): "It is already late in the
morning. Have you
taken your lunch? I finish mine before ten and then begin my
professional
calls; otherwise I don't feel well. Look here, I have been thinking of
giving
a feast to you all [meaning Sri Ramakrishna's devotees] one day."

M: "That will be fine, sir."

DOCTOR: "Where shall I arrange it? Here or at the Syampukur house?
Whatever you suggest."

M: "It doesn't matter, sir. Wherever you arrange it we shall be very
happy
to dine with you."

The conversation turned to Kali, the Divine Mother.

DOCTOR: "Kali is an old hag of the Sonthals."

M. burst into loud laughter and said, "Where did you get that?"

DOCTOR: "Oh, I have heard something like that." (M. laughs.)

They began to talk about the ecstasy that Vijay and the others had
experienced the previous day in the Master's room. The doctor also had
been
present on the occasion.

DOCTOR: "Yes, I witnessed that ecstasy. But is excessive ecstasy good
for
one?"

M: "The Master says that an excess of ecstasy harms no one, if it is
the
result of the contemplation of God. He further says that the lustre of
a gem
gives light and soothes the body; it does not burn."

DOCTOR: "Oh, the lustre of a gem! That's only a reflected light."

M: "He also says that a man does not die by sinking in the Lake of
Immortality. God is that Lake. A plunge in that Lake does not injure a
man;
on the contrary it makes him immortal. Of course, he will become
immortal
only if he has faith in God."

DOCTOR: "Yes, that is true."

The doctor took M. in his carriage. He had to see a few patients on the
way to Syampukur. They continued their conversation in the carriage.
Dr.
Sarkar referred to Mahima Chakravarty's pride.

M: "He visits the Master. Even if he has a little pride, it will not
last
long. If one only sits in the Master's presence awhile, one's pride
crumbles
to pieces. It is because the Master himself is totally free from
egotism. Pride
cannot exist in the presence of humility. A celebrated man like Pundit
Iswar
Chandra Vidyasagar showed great modesty and humility in the Master's
presence. The Paramahamsa visited his house; it was nine o'clock in the
evening when the Master took his leave. Vidyasagar came all the way
from
the library to the gate of his compound to see him off. He himself
carried
the light to show the way. As the Master's carriage started off,
Vidyasagar
stood there with folded hands."

DOCTOR: "Well, what does Vidyasagar think of him?"

M: "That day he showed the Master great respect. But when I talked
with him later, I found out that he didn't much care for what the
Vaishnavas
call emotion or ecstasy. He shares your views on such things."

DOCTOR: "Neither do I care very much for any such display of emotion
as folding one's hands or touching others' feet with one's head. To me
the
head is the same as the feet. But if a man thinks differently of the
feet, let
him do whatever he likes."

M: "We know that you do not care for a display of feelings. Perhaps you
remember that the Master now and then refers to you as a 'deep soul'.
He
said to you yesterday that when an elephant plunges into a small pool
it
makes a big splash, but when it goes into a big lake you see hardly a
ripple.
The elephant of emotion cannot produce any effect at all in a deep
soul.
The Master says that you are a 'deep soul'."

DOCTOR: "I don't deserve the compliment. After all, what is bhava? It
is
only a feeling. There are other aspects of feeling, such as bhakti.
When it
runs to excess, some can suppress it and some cannot."

M: "Divine ecstasy may or may not be explainable; but, sir, it cannot
be
denied that ecstasy, or love of God, is a unique thing. I have seen in
your
library Stebbing's book on Darwinism. According to Stebbing the human
mind is wonderful, whether it be the result of evolution or of special
creation. He gives a beautiful illustration from the theory of light.
Light is
wonderful, whether you know the wave theory of light or not."

DOCTOR: "Yes. Have you noticed further that Stebbing accepts both
Darwin and God?"

The conversation again turned to Sri Ramakrishna.

DOCTOR: "I find that he is a worshipper of the Goddess Kali."

M: "But with him the meaning of Kali is different. What the Vedas call
the Supreme Brahman, he calls Kali. What the Mussalmans call Allah and
the Christians call God, he calls Kali. He does not see many gods; he
sees
only one God. What the Brahmajnanis of olden times called Brahman, what
the yogis call Atman and the bhaktas call the Bhagavan, he calls Kali.

In Sri Ramakrishna one finds all the attitudes and ideals of religion.
That is why people of all sects and creeds enjoy peace and blessedness
in his
presence. Who can fathom his feeling and tell us the depth of his inner
experience?"

DOCTOR: " All things to all men.' I don't approve of it although St.
Paul
says it."

M: "Who can understand the state of his mind? We have heard from him
that unless one is engaged in the yarn trade, one cannot tell the
difference
between number forty and number forty-one yarn. Only a painter can
appreciate another painter. The mind of a saint is very deep. One
cannot
understand all the aspects of Christ unless one is Christlike. Perhaps
the deep
realization of the Master is what Christ meant when He said: 'Be ye
perfect
as your Father in Heaven is perfect.'"

DOCTOR: "What arrangements have you made about having him nursed?"

M: "At present one of the older devotees is assigned every day to look
after him. It may be Girish Babu or Ram Babu or Balaram or Suresh Babu
or Navagopal or Kali Babu. It is that way."

It was about one o'clock in the afternoon when the doctor and M.
entered
the Master's room on the second Boor. Sri Ramakrishna sat there,
smiling
as usual, completely forgetful of the fatal illness which was eating
his life
away. Among the many devotees in the room were Girish, the younger
Naren, and Sarat. Sometimes they were motionless, like the snake before
its charmer, and sometimes they displayed great joy, like the bridal
party with
the bridegroom. The doctor and M. bowed low before the Master and sat
on
the floor. At the sight of the doctor, the Master said, laughing,
"Today I
have been feeling very well."

Then the Master went on with his soul-enthralling conversation.

MASTER: "What will mere scholarship accomplish without discrimination
and renunciation? I go into a strange mood while thinking of the Lotus
Feet of God. The cloth on my body drops to the ground and I feel
something
creeping up from my feet to the top of my head. In that state I regard
all as
mere straw. If I see a pundit without discrimination and love of God, I
regard him as a bit of straw.

"One day Dr. Ramnarayan had been arguing with me, when suddenly I
went into that mood. I said to him: 'What are you saying? What can you
understand of God by reasoning? How little you can understand of His
creation! Shame! You have the pettifogging mind of a weaver!' Seeing
the
state of my mind he began to weep and gently stroked my feet."

DOCTOR: "Ramnarayan did that because he is a Hindu. Besides, he is a
believer in flowers, and sandal-paste. He is an orthodox Hindu."

M. (to himself): "Dr. Sarkar says that he has
nothing to do with gong
and conch-shells!"1

MASTER; "Bankim2
is one of your pundits. I met him once. I asked him,
What is the duty of man?' And he had the impudence to say, 'Eating,
keeping, and sex gratification.' These words created in me a feeling of
great
aversion. I said: 'What are you saying? You are very mean. What you
think
day and night and what you do all the time come out through your lips.
If
a man eats radish, he belches radish.' Then we talked about God a great
deal. There was also much devotional music in the room, and I danced.
Then Bankim said to me, 'Sir, please come to our house once.' 'That
depends
on the will of God', I replied. 'There also', he said, 'you will find
devotees of
God.' I laughed and said: 'What kind of devotees are they? Are they
like.
those who said, "Gopal! Gopal!"?'"

DOCTOR: "What is the story of 'Gopal! Gopal!'?"

MASTER (with a smile): "There was a goldsmith who
kept a jewelry shop.
He looked like a great devotee, a true Vaishnava, with beads around his
neck, rosary in his hand, and the holy marks on his forehead. Naturally
people trusted him and came to his shop on business. They thought that,
being such a pious man, he would never cheat them. Whenever a party of
customers entered the shop, they would hear one of his craftsmen say,
'Kesava! Kesava!' Another would say, after a while, 'Gopal! Gopal!'
Then a
third would mutter, 'Hari! Hari!' Finally someone would say, 'Hara!
Hara!'
Now these are, as you know, different names of God. Hearing so much
chanting of God's names, the customers naturally thought that this
gold-smith must be a very superior person. But can you guess the
goldsmith's true
intention? The man who said 'Kesava! Kesava!'3
meant to ask, 'Who are these? — who are these
customers?' The man who said 'Gopal! Gopal!'
conveyed the idea that the customers were merely a herd of cows. That
was the
estimate he formed of them after the exchange of a few words. The man
who said 'Hari! Hari!' asked, 'Since they are no better than a
herd of cows,
then may we rob them?' He who said 'Hara! Hara!'
gave his assent,
meaning by these words, 'Do rob by all means, since
they are mere cows!' (All laugh.)

"Once I went to a certain place with Mathur Babu. Many pundits came
forward to argue with me. And you all know that I am a tool. (All
laugh.)
The pundits saw that strange mood of mine. When the conversation was
over, they said to me: 'Sir, after hearing your words, all that we have
studied
before, our knowledge and scholarship, has proved to be mere spittle.
Now
we realize that a man does not lack wisdom if he has the grace of God.
The
fool becomes wise and the mute eloquent.' Therefore I say that a man
does
not become a scholar by the mere study of books.

"Yes, how true it is! How can a man who has the grace of God lack
knowledge? Look at me. I am a fool. I do not know anything. Then who is
it that utters these words? The reservoir of the Knowledge of God is
inexhaustible. There are grain-dealers at Kamarpukur. When selling
paddy, one
man weighs the grain on the scales and another man pushes it to him
from
a heap. It is the duty of the second man to keep a constant supply of
grain
on the scales by pushing it from the big heap. It is the same with my
words.
No sooner are they about to run short than the Divine Mother sends a
new
supply from Her inexhaustible storehouse of Knowledge.

"During my boyhood God manifested Himself in me. I was then eleven
years old. One day, while I was walking across a paddy-field, I saw
something. Later on I came to know from people that I had been
unconscious,
and my body totally motionless. Since that day I have been an
altogether
different man. I began to see another person within me. When I used to
conduct the worship in the temple, my hand, instead of going toward the
Deity, would very often come toward my head, and I would put flowers
there. A young man who was then staying with me did not dare approach
me. He would say: 'I see a light on your face. I am afraid to come very
near you.'

"You know I am a fool. I know nothing. Then who is it that says all
these things? I say to the Divine Mother: 'O Mother, I am the machine
and Thou art the Operator. I am the house and Thou art the Indweller. I
am
the chariot and Thou art the Charioteer. I do as Thou makest me do; I
speak as Thou makest me speak; I move as Thou makest me move. It is not
I! It is not I! It is all Thou! It is all Thou!' Hers is the glory; we
are only
Her instruments. Once Radha, to prove her chastity, carried on her head
a
pitcher filled with water. The pitcher had a thousand holes, but not a,
drop
of water spilled. People began to praise her, saying, 'Such a chaste
woman
tlie world will never see again!' Then Radha said to them: 'Why do you
praise me? Say: "Glory unto Krishna! Hail Krishna!'' I am only His
handmaid.'

"Once in that strange mood of mine I placed my foot on Vijay's chest.
You know how greatly I respect him — and I placed my foot on his body!
What do you say to that?"

DOCTOR: "But now you should be careful."

MASTER (with folded hands): 'What can I do? I become
completely
unconscious in that mood. Then I do not know at all what I am doing."

DOCTOR: "You should be careful. No use folding your hands now and
expressing regret!"

MASTER: "Can I do anything myself in that mood?
What do you think of
this state? If you think it is a hoax, then I should say that your
study of
'science' and all that is bosh!"

DOCTOR: "Now listen, sir! Would I come to see you so often if I thought
it all a hoax? You know that I neglect many other duties in order to
come
here. I cannot visit many patients, for I spend six or seven hours at a
stretch here."

MASTER: "Once I said to Mathur Babu: 'Don't think that I have achieved
my desired end because you, a rich man, show me respect. It matters
very
little to me whether you obey me or not.' Of course you must remember
that a mere man can do nothing. It is God alone who makes one person
obey another. Man is straw and dust before the power of God."

DOCTOR: "Do you think I shall obey you because a certain fisherman4
obeyed you? . . . Undoubtedly I show you respect; I show you respect as
a man."

MASTER: "Do I ask you to show me respect?"

GIRISH: "Does he ask you to show him respect?"

DOCTOR (to the Master): "What are you saying? Do you
explain it as the
will of God?"

MASTER: "What else can it be? What can a man do before the will of
God? Arjuna said to Sri Krishna on the battle-field of Kurukshetra: 'I
will
not fight. It is impossible for me to kill my own kinsmen.' Sri Krishna
replied: 'Arjuna, you will have to. fight. Your very nature will make
you
fight.' Then Sri Krishna revealed to Arjuna that all the men on the
battle-field were already dead.5

"Once some Sikhs came to the Kali temple at Dakshineswar. They said:
'You see, the leaves of the aswattha tree are moving. That too is due
to the
will of God.' Without His will not even a leaf can move."

DOCTOR: "If everything is done by the will of God, then why do you
chatter? Why do you talk so much to bring knowledge to others?"

MASTER: "He makes me talk; therefore I talk. 'I am the machine and He
is the Operator.'"

DOCTOR: "You say that you are the machine. That's all right. Or keep
quiet, knowing that everything is God."

GIRISH (to the doctor): "Whatever you may think,
sir, the truth is that
we act because He makes us act. Can anyone take a single step against
the Almighty Will?"

DOCTOR: "But God has also given us free will. I can think of God, or
not, as I like."

GIRISH: "You think of God or do some good work because you like to.
Really it is not you who do these things, but your liking of them that
makes you do so."

DOCTOR: "Why should that be so? I do these things as my duty."

GIRISH: "Even then it is because you like to do your duty."

DOCTOR: "Suppose a child is being burnt. From a sense of duty I rush
to save it."

GIRISH: "You feel happy to save the child; therefore you rush into the
fire. It is your happiness that drives you to the action. A man eats
opium
being tempted by such relishes as puffed rice or fried potatoes." (Laughter.)

MASTER: "A man must have some kind of faith before he undertakes a
work. Further, he feels joy when he thinks of it. Only then does he set
about performing the work. Suppose a jar of gold coins is hidden
underground.
First of all a man must have faith that the jar of gold coins is there.
He feels joy at the thought of the jar. Then he begins to dig. As he
removes
the earth he hears a metallic sound. That increases his joy. Next he
sees a
corner of the jar. That gives him more joy. Thus his joy is ever on the
increase. Standing on the porch of the Kali temple, I have watched the
ascetics preparing their smoke of hemp. I have seen their faces beaming
with joy in anticipation of the smoke."

DOCTOR: "But take the case of fire. It gives both heat and light. The
light
no doubt illumines objects, but the heat burns the body. Likewise, it
is not
an unadulterated joy that one reaps from the performance of duty. Duty
has its painful side too."

M. (to Girish): "As the proverb goes: 'If the
stomach gets food, then the
back can bear a few blows from the host.' There is joy in sorrow also."

GIRISH (to the doctor): "Duty is dry."

DOCTOR: "Why so?"

GIRISH: "Then it is pleasant." (All laugh.)

M: "Again we come to the point that one likes opium for the sake of
the relishes that are served with it."

GIRISH (to the doctor): "Duty must be pleasant; or
why do you perform it?"

DOCTOR: "The mind is inclined that way."

M. (to Girish): "That wretched inclination draws the
mind. If you speak
of the compelling power of inclination, then where is free will?"

DOCTOR: "I do not say that the will is absolutely free. Suppose a cow
is
tied with a rope. She is free within the length of that rope. But when
she
feels the pull of the rope —"

MASTER: "Jadu Mallick also gave that illustration. (To the
younger
Naren) Is it mentioned in some English book?

(To the doctor) "Look here. If a man truly believes
that God alone does
everything, that He is the Operator and man the machine, then such a
man
is verily liberated in life. 'Thou workest Thine own work; men only
call it
theirs.' Do you know what it is like? Vedanta philosophy gives an
illustration.
Suppose you are cooking rice in a pot, with potato, egg-plant, and
other
vegetables. After a while the potatoes, egg-plant, rice, and the rest
begin to
jump about in the pot. They seem to say with pride: 'We are moving! We
are jumping!' The children see it and think the potatoes, egg-plant,
and rice
are alive and so they jump that way. But the elders, who know, explain
to
the children that the vegetables and the rice are not alive; they jump
not of
themselves, but because of the fire under the pot; if you remove the
burning
wood from the hearth, then they will move no more. Likewise the pride
of
man, that he is the doer, springs from ignorance. Men are powerful
because
of the power of God. All becomes quiet when that burning wood is taken
away. The puppets dance well on the stage when pulled by a wire, but
they
cannot move when the wire snaps.

"A man will cherish the illusion that he is the doer as long as he has
not
seen God, as long as he has not touched the Philosopher's Stone. So
long will
he know the distinction between his good and bad actions. This
awareness
of distinction is due to God's maya; and it is necessary for the
purpose of
running His illusory world. But a man can realize God if he takes
shelter
under His vidyamaya and follows the path of righteousness. He who knows
God and realizes Him is able to go beyond maya. He who firmly believes
that God alone is the Doer and he himself a mere instrument is a
jivanmukta,
a free soul though living in a body. I said this to Keshab Chandra Sen."

GIRISH (to the doctor): "How do you know that free
will exists?"

DOCTOR: "Not by reasoning; I feel it."

GIRISH: "In that case I may say that I and others feel the reverse. We
feel that we are controlled by another." (All laugh.)

DOCTOR: "There are two elements in duty: first, the 'oughtness' of a
duty;
second, the happiness, which comes as an after-effect. But at the
initial stage
this happiness is not the impelling motive. I noticed in my childhood
the
great worry of the priest at the sight of ants in the sweets offered
before the
Deity. He did not, at the outset, feel joy at the thought of the
sweets. First
of all he worried about them."

M. (to himself): "It is difficult to say whether one
feels happiness while
performing the duty or afterwards. Where is the free will of a man if
he
performs an action, being impelled by a feeling of happiness?"

MASTER: "What the doctor is speaking of is called love without any
selfish
motive. I do not want anything from Dr. Mahendra Sarkar; I do not need
anything from him, but still I love to see him. This is love for love's
sake.
But suppose I get a little joy from it; how can I help it?

"Ahalya once said to Rama: 'O Rama, I have no objection to being born
even as a pig. But please grant that I may have pure love for Thy Lotus
Feet. I do not want anything else.'

"Narada went to Ayodhya to remind Rama that He was to kill Ravana. At
the sight of Rama and Sita, he began to sing their glories. Gratified
at
Narada's devotion, Rama said: 'Narada, I am pleased with your prayer.
Ask
a boon.' Narada replied, 'O Rama, if Thou must give me a boon, then
grant
that I may have pure love for Thy Lotus Feet and that I may not be
deluded
by Thy world-bewitching maya.' Rama said, 'Ask something more.' 'No,
Rama,' answered Narada, 'I do not want anything else. I want only pure
love for Thy Lotus Feet, a love that seeks no return.'

"That is Dr. Sarkar's attitude. It is like seeking God alone, and not
asking
Him for wealth, fame, bodily comforts, or anything else. This is called
pure love.

"There is an element of joy in it, no doubt; but it is not a worldly
joy; it
is the joy of bhakti and prema, devotion to God and ecstatic love of
Him.
I used to go to Sambhu Mallick's house. Once he said to me: 'You come
here frequently. Yes, you come because you feel happy talking with me.'
Yes, there is that element of happiness.

"But there is a state higher than this. When a man attains it, he moves
about aimlessly, like a child. As the child goes along, perhaps he sees
a
grass-hopper and catches it. The man of that exalted mood, too, has no
definite aim.

(To the devotees) "Don't you understand the doctor's
inner feeling? It is
the prayer of a devotee to God for right purpose, that he may have no
inclination for evil things.

"I too passed through that state. It is called dasya, the altitude of
the
servant toward his master. I used to weep so bitterly with the name of
the
Divine Mother on my lips that people would stand in a row watching me.
When I was passing through that state, someone, in order to test me and
also to cure my madness, brought a prostitute into my room. She was
beautiful to look at, with pretty eyes. I cried, 'O Mother! O Mother!'
and rushed
out of the room. I ran to Haladhari and said to him, 'Brother, come and
see
who has entered my room!' I told Haladhari and everyone else about this
woman. While in that state I used to weep with the name of the Mother
on
my lips. Weeping, I said to Her: 'O Mother, protect me! Please make me
stainless. Please see that my mind is not diverted from the Real to the
unreal.' (To the doctor) This attitude of yours is
also very good. It is the
attitude of a devotee, one who looks on God as his Master.

"When a man develops pure sattva, he thinks only of God. He does not
enjoy anything else. Some are born with pure sattva as a result of
their
prarabdha karma. Through unselfish action one finally acquires pure
sattva.
Sattva mixed with rajas diverts the mind to various objects. From it
springs
the conceit of doing good to the world. To do good to the world is
extremely
difficult for such an insignificant creature as man. But there is no
harm in
doing good to others in an unselfish spirit. This is called unselfish
action. It is
highly beneficial for a person to try to perform such action. But by no
means
all succeed, for it is very difficult. Everyone must work. Only one or
two can
renounce action. Rarely do you find a man who has developed pure
sattva.
Through disinterested action sattva mixed with rajas gradually turns
into pure sattva.

"No sooner does a man develop pure sattva than he realizes God, through
His grace.

"Ordinary people cannot understand pure sattva. Hem once said to me:
'Well, priest! The goal of a man's life is to acquire name and fame in
the
world. Isn't that true?'"

Tuesday, October 27, 1885

Sri Ramakrishna was seated in his room. Narendra and other devotees
were with him. The Master was conversing with them. It was about ten
o'clock in the morning.

NARENDRA: "How strangely the doctor behaved yesterday!"

A DEVOTEE: "Yes, the fish swallowed the hook but the line broke.'

MASTER (smiling): "But the hook is in its mouth. It
will die and float
on the water."

Narendra went out for a few minutes. Sri Ramakrishna was talking to M.
about Purna.

MASTER: "The devotee looking on himself as Prakriti likes to embrace
and kiss God, whom he regards as the Purusha. I am telling this just to
you.
Ordinary people should not hear these things."

M: "God sports in various ways. Even this illness of yours is one of
His
sports. Because you are ill new devotees are coming to you."

MASTER (smiling): "Bhupati says, 'What would people
have thought of
you if you had just rented a house to live in, without being ill?'
Well, what has happened to the doctor?"

M: "As regards God he accepts for himself the attitude of a servant. He
says, Thou art the Master and I am Thy servant.' But then he asks me,
Why do you apply the idea of God to a man?'"

MASTER: "Just see! Are you going to him today?"

M: "I shall see him if it is necessary to report your condition.'

MASTER: "How do you find this boy Bankim? If he cannot come here
you may give him instruction. That will awaken his spiritual
consciousness."

Narendra entered the room and sat near Sri Ramakrishna. Since the death
of his father he had been very much worried about the family's
financial
condition. He now had to support his mother and brothers. Besides, he
was
preparing himself for his law examination. Lately he had served as a
teacher
in the Vidyasagar School at Bowbazar. He wanted to make some
arrangement
for his family and thus get rid of all his worries. Sri Ramakrishna
knew
all this. He looked affectionately at Narendra.

MASTER (to M.): "Well, I said to Keshab, 'One should
be satisfied with
what comes unsought.' The son of an aristocrat does not worry about his
food and drink. He gets his monthly allowance. Narendra, too, belongs
to a
high plane. Then why is he in such straitened circumstances? God
certainly
provides everything for the man who totally surrenders himself to Him."

M: "Narendra, too, will be provided for. It is not yet too late for
him."

MASTER: "But a man who feels intense renunciation within doesn't
calculate that way. He doesn't say to himself, 'I shall first make an
arrangement
for the family and then practise sadhana.' No, he doesn't feel that way
if he
has developed intense dispassion. A goswami said in the course of his
preaching,
'If a man has ten thousand rupees he can maintain himself on the
income; then, free from worries, he can pray to God.'

"Keshab Sen also said something like that. He said to me: 'Sir, suppose
a man wants, first of all, to make a suitable arrangement of his
property and
estate and then think of God; will it be all right for him to do so? Is
there
anything wrong about it?' I said to him: 'When a man feels utter
dispassion,
he looks on the world as a deep well and' his relatives as venomous
cobras.
Then he cannot think of saving money or making arrangements about his
property.' God alone is real and all else illusory. To think of the
world instead of God!

"A woman was stricken with intense grief. She first tied her nose-ring
in
the corner of her cloth and then dropped to the ground, saying, 'Oh,
friends,
what a calamity has befallen me!' But she was very careful not to break
the nose-ring."

All laughed. At these words Narendra felt as if struck by an arrow, and
lay down on the floor. M. understood what was going through Narendra's
mind and said with a smile: "What's the matter? Why are you lying down?"

The Master said to M., with a smile: "You remind me of a woman who
felt ashamed of herself for sleeping with her brother-in-law and
couldn't
understand the conduct of those women who lived as mistresses of
strangers.
By way of excusing herself she said: 'After all, a brother-in-law is
one's own.
But even that kills me with shame. And how do these women dare to live
with strangers?'"

M. himself had been leading a worldly life. Instead of being ashamed of
his own conduct, he smiled at Narendra. That was why Sri Ramakrishna
referred to the woman who criticized the conduct of immoral women,
though
she herself had illicit love for her brother-in-law.

A Vaishnava minstrel was singing downstairs. Sri Ramakrishna was
pleased
with his song and said that someone should give him a little money. A
devotee went downstairs. The Master asked, "How much did he give the
singer?" When he was told that the devotee had given only two pice, he
said: "Just that much? This money is the fruit of his servitude. How
much
he had to flatter his master and suffer to earn it! I thought he would
give at least four annas."

The younger Naren had promised to show Sri Ramakrishna the nature
of electricity with an instrument. The instrument was exhibited.

It was about two o'clock. Sri Ramakrishna and the devotees were sitting
in the room. Atul brought with him a friend who was a munsiff. Bagchi,
the
famous painter from Shikdarpara, arrived. He presented the Master with
several paintings. Sri Ramakrishna examined the pictures with great
delight.

Bagchi had long hair like a woman's. Sri Ramakrishna said: "Many days
ago a sannyasi came to Dakshineswar who had hair nine cubits long. He
used to chant the name of Radha. He was genuine."

A few minutes later Narendra began to sing. The songs were full of the
spirit of renunciation. He sang:

O Lord, must all my days pass by so
utterly in vain?

Down the path of hope I gaze with longing, day and night. . . .

He sang again:

O Mother, Thou my inner Guide, ever awake within my heart;

Day and night Thou boldest me in Thy lap.

Why dost Thou show such tenderness to this unworthy child of Thine? . .
.

Then he sang:

O gracious Lord, if like a bee

My soul cannot imbed itself

Deep in the Lotus of Thy Feet,

What comfort can I find in life?

What can I gain with wealth untold,

Neglecting Thee, supremest Wealth?

I take no pleasure in the sight

Of the most lovely infant's face,

If all its loveliness reveals

No trace of Thy dear features there.

Moonlight is meaningless to me

As darkest night, if Thy love's moon

Rise not in my soul's firmament.

The purest wife's unspotted love

Is stained, if in it is not set

The priceless gem of love divine.

O Lord, whenever doubt of Thee,

Born of base error and neglect,

Assails my mind, I writhe in pain

As from a serpent's poisonous fangs!

What more, O Master, shall I say?

Thou art my heart's most precious Jewel,

The Home of Everlasting Joy.

It was halt past five in the afternoon when Dr. Sarkar came to
the
Master's room at Syampukur, felt his pulse, and prescribed the
necessary
medicine. Many devotees were present, including Narendra, Girish, Dr.
Dukari,
the younger Naren, Rakhal, M., Sarat, and Shyam Basu.

Dr. Sarkar talked a little about the Master's illness and watched him
take
the first dose of medicine. Then Sri Ramakrishna began to talk to Shyam
Basu. Dr. Sarkar started to leave, saying, "Now that you are talking to
Shyam Basu, I shall say good-bye to you."

The Master and a devotee asked the doctor if he would like to hear some
songs.

DR. SARKAR (to the Master):
"I should like it very much. But music
makes you frisk about like a kid and cut all sorts of capers. You must
suppress your emotion."

Dr. Sarkar took his seat once more, and Narendra began to sing in his
sweet voice, to the accompaniment of the tanpura and mridanga:

This universe, wondrous and infinite,

O Lord; is Thy handiwork;

And the whole world is a treasure-house

Full of Thy beauty and grace. . . .

He sang again:

In dense darkness, O Mother, Thy formless beauty sparkles;

Therefore the yogis meditate in a dark mountain cave.

In the lap of boundless dark, on Mahanirvana's waves upborne,

Peace flows serene and inexhaustible.

Taking the form of the Void, in the robe of darkness wrapped,

Who art Thou, Mother, seated alone in the shrine of samadhi?

From the Lotus of Thy fear-scattering Feet flash Thy love's lightnings;

Thy Spirit-Face shines forth with laughter terrible and loud!

Dr. Sarkar said to M., "This song is dangerous for him." Sri
Ramakrishna
asked M. what the doctor had said. M. replied, "The doctor is afraid
that
this song may throw your mind into samadhi."

In the mean time the Master had partially lost consciousness of the
outer
world. Looking at the physician, he said with folded hands: "No, no.
Why
should I go into samadhi?" Hardly had he spoken these words when he
went
into a deep ecstasy. His body became motionless, his eyes fixed, his
tongue
speechless. He sat there like a statue cut in stone, completely
unconscious
of the outer world. Turned inward were his mind, ego, and all the other
organs of perception. He seemed an altogether different person.

Narendra continued his songs, pouring his entire heart and soul into
them:

What matchless beauty! What a bewitching Face I behold!

The Sovereign of my soul has entered my lowly hut;

The springs of my love are welling forth on every side.

Tell me, my Beloved! O Thou, the Lord of my heart!

What treasure shall I lay before Thy Lotus Feet?

Take Thou my life, my soul; what more can I offer Thee?

Take everything that is mine. Deign to accept my all.

Narendra continued:

O gracious Lord, if like a bee

My soul cannot imbed itself

Deep in the Lotus of Thy Feet,

What comfort can I find in life? . . .

As the doctor heard the words, "The purest wife's unspotted
love", his eyes
were filled with tears. He cried out, "Ah me! Ah me!"

Narendra sang again:

Oh, when will dawn the blessed day

When Love will waken in my heart?

When will my tears flow uncontrolled

As I repeat Lord Hari's name,

And all my longing be fulfilled? . . .

In the midst of the singing Sri Ramakrishna had regained
consciousness
of the outer world. When Narendra finished the song, the Master
continued
his conversation, keeping them all spellbound. The devotees looked at
his
face in wonder. It did not show the slightest trace of the agonizing
pain of
his illness. The face shone with heavenly joy.

Addressing the doctor, the Master said: "Give up this false modesty.
Why
should you feel shy about singing the name of God? The proverb says
very
truly: 'One cannot realize God if one is a victim of shame, hatred, or
fear.'
Give up such foolish notions as: 'I am such a great man! Shall I dance
crying
the name of God? What will other great men think of me on hearing of
this?
They may say that the doctor, poor fellow, has been dancing uttering
the
name of Hari, and thus pity me.' Give up all these foolish notions."

DOCTOR: "I never bother about what people say. I don't care a straw
about
their opinions."

MASTER: "Yes, I know of your strong feeling about that. (All
laugh.)

"Go beyond knowledge and ignorance; only then can you realize God. To
know many things is ignorance. Pride of scholarship is also ignorance.
The
unwavering conviction that God alone dwells in all beings is jnana,
knowledge.
To know Him intimately is vijnana, a richer Knowledge. If a thorn
gets into your foot, a second thorn is needed to take it out. When it
is out
both thorns are thrown away. You have to procure the thorn of knowledge
to remove the thorn of ignorance; then you must set aside both
knowledge
and ignorance. God is beyond both knowledge and ignorance. Once
Lakshmana said to Rama, 'Brother, how amazing it is that such a wise
man
as Vasishtha wept bitterly at the death of his sons!' Rama said:
'Brother, he
who has knowledge must also have ignorance. He who has knowledge of
one thing must also have knowledge of many things. He who is aware of
light is also aware of darkness.' Brahman is beyond knowledge and
ignorance,
virtue and vice, merit and demerit, cleanliness and uncleanliness."

Sri Ramakrishna then recited the following song of Ramprasad:

Come, let us go for a walk, O mind, to Kali, the Wish-fulfilling Tree,

And there beneath It gather the four fruits of life. . . .

When will you learn to lie, O mind, in the abode of Blessedness,

With Cleanliness and Defilement on either side of you?

Only when you have found the way

To keep your wives contentedly under a single roof,

Will you behold the matchless form of Mother Syama. . . .

SHYAM BASU: "Sir, what remains after
one throws away both thorns?"

MASTER: "Nityasuddhabodharupam — the Eternal and
Ever-pure
Consciousness. How can I make it clear to you? Suppose a man who has
never
tasted ghee asks you, 'What does ghee taste like?' Now, how can you
explain
that to him? At the most you can say: 'What is ghee like? It is just
like
ghee!' A young girl asked her friend: 'Well, friend, your husband is
here.
What sort of pleasure do you enjoy with him?' The friend answered: 'My
dear, you will know it for yourself when you get a husband. How can I
explain it to you?'

"It is said in the Purana that Bhagavati, the Divine Mother, was once
born
as the daughter of King Himalaya. After Her birth She showed Her father
Her many forms. The Lord of the mountains, after enjoying all these
visions,
said to the Divine Mother, 'May I have the vision of Brahman as It is
described in the Vedas!' Then the Divine Mother answered, 'Father, if
you
want to have the vision of Brahman you must live in the company of holy
men.'

"What Brahman is cannot be described in words. Somebody once said
that everything in the world has been made impure, like food that has
touched the tongue, and that Brahman alone remains undefiled. The
meaning
is this: All scriptures and holy books — the Vedas, the Puranas, the
Tantras, and so forth — may be said to have been defiled because their
contents have been uttered by the tongues of men; but what Brahman is
no
tongue has yet been able to describe. Therefore Brahman is still
undefiled.
One cannot describe in words the joy of play and communion with
Satchidananda. He alone knows, who has realized it."

Addressing Dr. Sarkar, Sri Ramakrishna continued: "Look here. One
cannot attain Knowledge unless one is free from egotism. There is a
saying:

When shall I be free?

When 'I' shall cease to be.

'I' and 'mine' — that is ignorance. 'Thou' and 'Thine' — that
is Knowledge. A
true devotee says: 'O God, Thou alone art the Doer; Thou alone doest
all,
I am a mere instrument; I do as Thou makest me do. All these — wealth,
possessions, nay, the universe itself — belong to Thee. This house and
these
relatives are Thine alone, not mine. I am Thy servant; mine is only the
right
to serve Thee according to Thy bidding.'

"Those who have read a few books cannot get rid of conceit. Once I had
a talk with Kalikrishna Tagore about God. At once he said, 'I know all
about
that.' I said to him: 'Does a man who has visited Delhi brag about it?
Does
a gentleman go about telling everyone that he is a gentleman?'"

SHYAM: "But Kalikrishna Tagore has great respect for you."

MASTER: "Oh, how vanity turns a person's head! There was a scavenger
woman in the temple garden at Dakshineswar. And her pride! And all
because of a few ornaments. One day a few men were passing her on the
path
and she shouted to them, 'Hey! Get out of the way, you people!' If a
scavenger woman could talk that way, what can one say about the vanity
of others?"

SHYAM: "Sir, if God alone does everything, how is it that man is
punished
for his sins?"

MASTER: "How like a goldsmith you talk!"

NARENDRA: "In other words, Shyam Babu has a calculating mind, like
a goldsmith, who weighs things with his delicate balance."

MASTER: "I say: O my foolish boy, eat the mangoes and be happy. What
is the use of your calculating how many hundreds of trees, how many
thousands
of branches, and how many millions of leaves there are in the orchard?
You have come to the orchard to eat mangoes. Eat them and be contented.

(To Shyam) "You have been born in this world as a
human being to
worship God; therefore try to acquire love for His Lotus Feet. Why do
you
trouble yourself to know a hundred other things? What will you gain by
discussing philosophy'? Look here, one ounce of liquor is enough to
intoxicate
you. What is the use of your trying to find out how many gallons of
liquor there are in the tavern?"

DOCTOR: "Quite so. And what is more, the Wine in God's Tavern is beyond
all measure. There is no limit to It."

MASTER (to Shyam): "Why don't you give your power of
attorney to
God? Rest all your responsibilities on Him. If you entrust an honest
man
with your responsibilities, will he misuse his power over you? God
alone
knows whether or not He will punish you for your sins."

DOCTOR: "God alone knows what is in His mind. How can a man guess
it? God is beyond all our calculations."

MASTER (to Shyam): "That's the one theme of you
Calcutta people. You
all say, 'God is stained by the evil of inequality', because He has
made one
person happy and another miserable. What these rascals see in
themselves
they see in God, too.

"Hem used to come to the temple garden at Dakshineswar. Whenever he
chanced to meet me, he would say: 'Well, priest, there is only one
thing
worth having in this world, and that is honour. Isn't that so?' Very
few
indeed say that the goal of human life is the realization of God."

SHYAM: "We hear a great deal about the subtle body. Can anyone show
it to us? Can anyone demonstrate that the subtle body, when a man dies,
leaves the gross body and goes away?"

MASTER: "True devotees don't care a rap about showing you these things.
What do they care whether some fool of a big man respects them or not?
The desire to have a big man under their control never enters their
minds."

SHYAM: "What is the distinction between the gross body and the subtle
body?"

MASTER: "The body consisting of the five gross elements is called the
gross
body. The subtle body is made up of the mind, the ego, the
discriminating
faculty, and the mind-stuff. There is also a causal body, by means of
which
one enjoys the Bliss of God and holds communion with Him. The Tantra
calls it the Bhagavati Tanu, the Divine Body. Beyond all these is the
Mahakarana, the Great Cause. That cannot be expressed by words.

"What is the use of merely listening to words? Do something! What will
you achieve by merely repeating the word 'siddhi'? Will that intoxicate
you?
You will not be intoxicated even if you make a paste of siddhi and rub
it all
over your body. You must eat some of it. How can a man recognize yarns
of different counts, such as number forty and number forty-one, unless
he is
in the trade? Those who trade in yarn do not find it at all difficult
to
describe a thread of a particular count. Therefore I say, practise a
little spiritual
discipline; then you will know all these — the gross, the subtle, the
causal,
and the Great Cause. While praying to God, ask only for love for His
Lotus Feet.

"When Rama redeemed Ahalya6
from the curse. He said to her, 'Ask a
boon of Me.' Ahalya said, 'O Rama, if You deign to grant me a boon,
then
please fulfil my desire that I may always meditate on Your Lotus Feet,
even though I may be born in a pigs body.'

"I prayed to the Divine Mother only for love. I offered flowers at Her
Lotus Feet and said with folded hands: 'O Mother, here is Thy ignorance
and here is Thy knowledge; take them both and give me only pure love
for
Thee. Here is Thy holiness and here is Thy unholiness; take them both
and give me only pure love for Thee. Here is Thy virtue and here is Thy
sin; here is Thy good and here is Thy evil; take them all and give me
only
pure love for Thee. Here is Thy dharma and here is Thy adharma; take
them both and give me only pure love for Thee.'

"Dharma means good actions, like giving in charity. If you accept
dharma,
you have to accept adharma too. If you accept virtue, you have to
accept
sin. If you accept knowledge, you have to accept ignorance. If you
accept
holiness, you have to accept unholiness. It is like a man's being aware
of
light, in which case he is aware of darkness too. If a man is aware of
one,
he is aware of many too. If he is aware of good, he is aware of evil
too.

"Blessed is the man who retains his love for the Lotus Feet of God,
even
though he eats pork. But if a man is attached to the world, even though
he
lives only on boiled vegetables and cereals, then —"

DOCTOR: "He is a wretch. But let me interrupt you here and say
something. Buddha once ate pork and as a result had colic. To get rid
of the pain
he would take opium and thus become unconscious. Do you know the
meaning of Nirvana and such stuff? Buddha would become stupefied after
eating opium. He would have no consciousness of the outer world. This
is
what they call Nirvana!"

All laughed to hear this novel interpretation of Nirvana. The
conversation went on.

MASTER (to Shyam): "There is no harm in your leading
the life of a
householder. But do your duties in an unselfish spirit, fixing your
mind on
the Lotus Feet of God. You must have noticed that a man with a
carbuncle
on his back speaks to others in his usual way; perhaps he attends to
his daily
duties also; but his mind is always on the carbuncle. It is like that.

"Live in the world like an immoral woman. Though she performs her
household duties, her mind is fixed on her sweetheart. (To the
doctor) Do
you understand that?"

DOCTOR: "Never having had such an experience myself, how can I
understand?"

SHYAM: "Oh, yes! You understand a little." (All laugh.)

MASTER: "Moreover he has had long experience in that trade. Isn't that
so?" (All laugh.)

SHYAM: "Sir, what do you think of Theosophy?"

MASTER: "The long and short of the matter is that those who go about
making disciples belong to a very inferior level. So also do those who
want
occult powers to walk over the Ganges and to report what a person says
in
a far-off country and so on. It is very hard for such people to have
pure love for God.

SHYAM: "But the Theosophists have been trying to re-establish the Hindu
religion."

MASTER: "I don't know much about them."

SHYAM: "You can learn from Theosophy where the soul goes after death
—whether to the lunar sphere or the stellar sphere or some other
region."

MASTER: "That may be. But let me tell you my own attitude. Once a man
asked Hanuman, 'What day of the lunar fortnight is it?' Hanuman
replied:
'I know nothing about the day of the week, the day of the lunar
fortnight,
the position of the stars in the sky, or any such things. On Rama alone
I
meditate.' That is my attitude too."

SHYAM: "The Theosophists believe in the existence of mahatmas. Do you
believe in them, sir?"

MASTER: "If you believe in my words, I say yes. But now please leave
these matters alone. Come here again when I am a little better. Some
way
will be found for you to attain peace of mind, if you have faith in me.
You
must have noticed that I don't accept any gift of money or clothes. We
do
not take any collection here. That is why so many people come. (Laughter.)

(To the doctor) "If you won't take offense, I shall
tell you something. It
is this: You have had enough of such things as money, honour,
lecturing,
and so on. Now for a few days direct your mind to God. And come here
now and then. Your spiritual feeling will be kindled by hearing words
about God."

After a little while, as the doctor stood up to take his leave, Girish
Chandra
Ghosh entered the room and bowed low before the Master. Dr. Sarkar was
pleased to see him and took his seat again.

DOCTOR (pointing to Girish): "Of course he would not
come as long as
I was here. No sooner am I about to leave than he enters the room."

Girish and Dr. Sarkar began to talk about the Science Association
established by the latter.

MASTER: "Will you take me there one day?"

DOCTOR: "If you go there you will lose all consciousness at the sight
of
the wondrous works of God."

MASTER: "Oh, indeed!"

DOCTOR (to Girish): "Whatever you may do, please do
not worship him
as God. You are turning the head of this good man."

GIRISH: "What else can I do? Oh, how else shall I regard a person who
has taken me across this ocean of the world, and what is still more,
the
ocean of doubt? There is nothing in him that I do not hold sacred. Can
I
ever look on even his excreta as filthy?"

DOCTOR: "This question of excreta doesn't bother me. I too have no
feeling of repugnance. Once a grocer's child was brought to my office
for
treatment. His bowels moved there. All covered their noses with cloths;
but I
sat by his side for half an hour without putting a handkerchief to my
nose.
Besides, I cannot cover my nose when the scavenger passes by me with a
tub on his head. No, I cannot do that. I know very well that there is
no
difference between a scavenger and myself. Why should I look down on
him? Can't I take the dust of his [meaning Sri Ramakrishna's] feet?
Look here."

The doctor saluted Sri Ramakrishna and touched the Master's feet with
his forehead.

GIRISH: "Oh, the angels are saying, 'Blessed, blessed be this
auspicious
moment!'"

DOCTOR: "What is there to marvel at in taking the dust of a man's feet?
I can take the dust of everybody's feet. Give me, all of you, the dust
of your feet."

The doctor touched the feet of all the devotees.

NARENDRA (to the doctor): "We think of him [meaning
the Master] as
a person who is like God. Do you know, sir, what it is like? There is a
point between the vegetable creation and the animal creation where it
is
very difficult to determine whether a particular thing is a vegetable
or an
animal. Likewise, there is a stage between the man-world and the
God-world where it is extremely hard to say whether a person is a man
or God."

DOCTOR: "Well, my dear young friend, one cannot apply analogies to
things divine."

NARENDRA: "I do not say that he is God. What I am saying is that he is
a godlike man."

DOCTOR: "One should suppress one's feelings in such a matter. It is bad
to give vent to them. Alas! No one understands my own feelings. Even my
best friend thinks of me as a stern and cruel person. Even people like
you
will perhaps one day throw me out after beating me with your shoes."

MASTER: "Don't say such a thing! They love you so much! They await
your coming as eagerly as the bridesmaids in the bridal chamber await
the coming of the groom."

GIRISH: "Everyone has the greatest respect for you."

DOCTOR: "My son and even my wife think of me as a hard-hearted
person. My only crime is that I do not display my feelings."

GIRISH: "In that case, sir, it would be wise for you to open the door
of
your heart, at least out of pity for your friends; for you see that
your friends
cannot otherwise understand you."

DOCTOR: "Will you believe me when I say that my feelings get worked
up even more than yours? (To Narendra) I shed tears
in solitude.

(To Sri Ramakrishna) "Well, may I say something?
When you are in
ecstasy you place your foot on others' bodies. That is not good."

MASTER: "Do you think I know at that time that I am touching another
with my foot?"

DOCTOR: "You feel that it is not the right thing to do, don't you?"

MASTER: "How can I explain to you what I experience in samadhi? After
coming down from that state I think, sometimes, that my illness may be
due
to samadhi. The thing is, the thought of God makes me mad. All this is
the
result of my divine madness. How can I help it?"

DOCTOR: "Now he accepts my view. He expresses regret for what he does.
He is conscious that the act is sinful."

MASTER (to Narendra): "You are very clever. Why
don't you answer?
Explain it all to the doctor."

GIRISH (to the doctor): "Sir, you are mistaken. He
is not expressing regret
for touching the bodies of his devotees during samadhi. His own body is
pure, untouched by any sin. That he touches others in this way is for
their
good. Sometimes he thinks that he may have got this illness by taking
their
sins upon himself.

"Think of your own case. Once you suffered from colic. Didn't you have
regrets at that time for sitting up and reading till very late at
night? Does
that prove that reading till the late hours of the night is, in itself,
a bad
thing? He [meaning Sri Ramakrishna] too may be sorry that he is ill.
But
that does not make him feel that it is wrong on his part to touch
others for
their welfare."

Dr. Sarkar felt rather embarrassed and said to Girish: "I confess my
defeat at your hands. Give me the dust of your feet." He saluted Girish.

DOCTOR (to Narendra): "Whatever else one may say
about him
[meaning Girish], one must admit his intellectual powers."

NARENDRA (to the doctor): "You may look at the thing
from another
standpoint. You can devote your life to scientific research without
giving a
thought to your health or comfort. But the Science of God is the
grandest
of all sciences. Isn't it natural for him to risk his health to realize
Him?"

DOCTOR: "All religious reformers, including Jesus, Chaitanya, Buddha,
and Mohammed, were in the end filled with egotism. They all said,
'Whatever I say is alone true.' How shocking!"

GIRISH (to the doctor): "Now, sir, you are
committing the same mistake.
You are accusing them all of egotism. You are finding fault with them.
For
that very reason you too can be accused of egotism.

Dr. Sarkar remained silent.

NARENDRA (to the doctor): "We offer worship to him
bordering on divine worship."

At these words the Master laughed like a child.

^These
are used by the Hindus in the temple for worshipping the Deity.

^Bankim
Chandra Chatterji, the celebrated writer of Bengal.

^These
names of God have a double meaning in Bengali. The second meaning of
each word is given in italics.

^Alluding
to Mathur Babu, who belonged to the low caste of the fishermen.

^Reference
to the eleventh chapter of the Gita.

^The
beautiful and devoted wife of a great sage named Gautama. India, the
king of heaven, infatuated with her beauty, seduced her, impersonating
her husband.
The sage, coming to know of this, cursed her and turned her into a
stone; but he
said that the touch of Rama's feet would restore her human form. Indra,
too,
received his share of the curse, as a result of which he had a thousand
eruptions on
his body. Hence he is known as the "thousand-eyed god".


=== 48_company_of_devotees.htm ===

In the Company of Devotees at Syampukur

←
Home
/ The Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna
/ Volume 2
/ →

IN THE COMPANY OF DEVOTEES AT SYAMPUKUR

M. and Dr. Sarkar — The aim of human life — Dr. Bhaduri and Dr.
Sarkar — Is the world a delusion? — Master sharply reprimands Dr.
Sarkar — Paths of negation and affirmation — Three classes of devotees
— Absent-mindedness of worldly people — Different disciplines for
different temperaments — Jnana, ajnana, and vijnana — Master's advice
to Shyam Basu — Nature of the world — Master on Purna and Manindra
— Dr. Sarkar on bhakti and jnana — Dr. Sarkar on faith — Advice
to Dr. Sarkar — How a jnani should meditate — Losing consciousness
in the thought of God — Story of Vilwamangal — Stories of the
Bhagavata scholars — Uselessness of mere scholarship — Different
aspects of
Radha — Brahman is indescribable — Hariballav — M. explains
Master's conceptions of jnana and bhakti — Misra's visit — Master
blesses
Dr. Sarkar — About Hriday — Worship of Kali — Manifestation of
the Divine Mother through the Master — Master in deep ecstasy.

Thursday, October 29, 1885

IT WAS ABOUT TEN O'CLOCK in the morning when M. arrived at Dr.
Sarkar's
house in Sankharitola, Calcutta, to report Sri Ramakrishna's condition.
M. and Dr. Sarkar became engaged in conversation.

DOCTOR: "You see, Dr. Behari Bhaduri always harps on the same thing.
He says that Goethe's spirit came out of his body and that Goethe
himself
saw it. It must have been very amazing."

M: "As Sri Ramakrishna says, what shall we gain from these discussions?
We have been born in this world in order to cultivate devotion to the
Lotus
Feet of God. He tells us the story of a man who entered an orchard to
eat
mangoes. But instead of eating the fruit, he took out pencil and paper
and
began to jot down the number of trees, branches, and leaves in the
orchard.
A servant saw him and asked: 'What are you doing? Why have you come
here?' The man said: 'I have come here to eat mangoes. I am now
counting
the trees, branches, and leaves in the orchard.' Thereupon the servant
replied: 'If you have come here to eat mangoes, then enjoy them. What
will
you gain by counting the trees, branches, and leaves?'"

DOCTOR: "I see that the Paramahamsa has been able to extract the
essence."

Then Dr. Sarkar told M. many stories about his homeopathic hospital.
He showed M. the list of the patients who visited the hospital every
day.
He further remarked that at the beginning many medical practitioners
had
discouraged him about homeopathy and had even written against him in
magazines.

M. and Dr. Sarkar got into the doctor's carriage. The doctor visited
many
patients. He entered a house of the Tagore family at Pathuriaghata and
was detained there by the head of the family. Returning to the
carriage, he
began to talk to M.

DOCTOR: "I was talking to that gentleman about the Paramahamsa. We
also talked about Theosophy and Colonel Olcott. The Paramahamsa is
angry
with the gentleman. Do you know why? Because he says he knows
everything."

M: "No, why should the Master be angry? I heard that they once met
each other. Paramahamsadeva was talking about God. The gentleman said,
'Oh, yes! I know all that!'"

DOCTOR: "He has donated thirty-two thousand five hundred rupees to the
Science Association."

They drove on, talking about Sri Ramakrishna's illness and the care
that should be taken of him.

DOCTOR: "Do you intend to send him back to Dakshineswar?"

M: "No, sir. That would greatly inconvenience the devotees. They can
always visit him if he is in Calcutta."

DOCTOR: "But it is very expensive here."

M: "The devotees don't mind that. All they want is to be able to serve
him. As regards the expense, it must be borne whether he lives in
Calcutta
or at Dakshineswar. But if he goes back to Dakshineswar, the devotees
won't
always be able to visit him, and that will cause them great worry."

Dr. Sarkar and M. arrived at Syampukur and found the Master sitting
with the devotees in his room. Dr. Bhaduri also was there.

Dr. Sarkar examined the Master's pulse and inquired about his
condition.
The conversation turned to God.

DR. BHADURI: "Shall I tell you the truth?
All this is unreal, like a dream."

DR. SARKAR: "Is everything delusion? Then whose is this delusion? And
why this delusion? If all know it to be delusion, then why do they
talk? I
cannot believe that God is real and His creation unreal."

MASTER: "That is a good attitude. It is good to look on God as the
Master
and oneself as His servant. As long as a man feels the body to be real,
as
long as he is conscious of 'I' and 'you', it is good to keep the
relationship of
master and servant; it is not good to cherish the idea of 'I am He'.

"Let me tell you something else. You see the same room whether you look
at it from one side or from the middle of the room."

DR. BHADURI (to Dr. Sarkar): "What I have just said
you will find in
the Vedanta. You must study the scriptures. Then you will understand."

DR. SARKAR: "Why so? Has he [meaning the Master] acquired all this
wisdom by studying the scriptures? He too supports my view. Can't one
be
wise without reading the scriptures?"

MASTER: "But how many scriptures I have heard!"

DR. SARKAR: "A man may mistake the meaning if he only hears. In your
case it is not mere hearing."

MASTER (to Dr. Sarkar): "I understand that you spoke
of me as insane.
That is why they (pointing to M. and the others)
don't want to go to you."

DR. SARKAR (looking at M.): "Why should I call you
[meaning the
Master] insane? But I mentioned your egotism. Why do you allow people
to take the dust of your feet?"

M: "Otherwise they weep."

DR. SARKAR: "That is their mistake. They should be told about it."

M: "Why should you object to their taking the dust of his feet? Doesn't
God dwell in all beings?"

DR. SARKAR: "I don't object to that. Then you must take the dust of
everyone's feet."

M: "But there is a greater manifestation of God in some men than in
others. There is water everywhere; but you see more of it in a lake, a
river,
or an ocean. Will you show the same respect to a new Bachelor of
Science
as you do to Faraday?"

DR. SARKAR: "I agree with that. But why do you call him God?"

M: "Why do we salute each other? It is because God dwells in
everybody's heart. You haven't given much thought to this subject."

MASTER (to Dr. Sarkar): "I have already told you
that some people reveal
more of God than others. Earth reflects the sun's rays in one way, a
tree
in another way, and a mirror in still another way. You see a better
reflection
in a mirror than in other objects. Don't you see that these devotees
here
are not on the same level with Prahlada and others of his kind?
Prahlada's
whole heart and soul were dedicated to God."

Dr. Sarkar did not reply. All were silent.

MASTER (to Dr. Sarkar): "You see, you have love for
this [meaning
himself]. You told me that you loved me."

DR. SARKAR: "You are a child of nature. That is why I tell you all
this.
It hurts me to see people salute you by touching your feet. I say to
myself,
'They are spoiling such a good man.' Keshab Sen, too, was spoiled that
way
by his devotees. Listen to me —"

MASTER: "Listen to you? You are greedy, lustful, and egotistic."

DR. BHADURI (to Dr. Sarkar): "That is to say, you
have the traits of a
jiva, an embodied being. These are his traits: lust, egotism, greed for
wealth,
and a hankering after name and fame. All embodied beings have these
traits."

DR. SARKAR (to the Master): "If you talk that way, I
shall only examine
your throat and go away. Perhaps that is what you want. In that case we
should not talk about anything else. But if you want discussion, then I
shall say what I think to be right."

All remained silent.

After a while the Master became engaged in conversation with Dr.
Bhaduri.

MASTER: "Let me tell you the truth. He [meaning Dr. Sarkar] is now
following the path of negation. Therefore he discriminates, following
the
process of 'Neti, neti', and reasons in this way: God is not the living
beings;
He is not the universe; He is outside the creation. But later he will
follow
the path of affirmation and accept everything as the manifestation of
God.

"By taking off, one by one, the sheaths of a banana tree, one obtains
the
pith. The sheaths are one thing, and the pith is another. The sheaths
are
not the pith, and the pith is not the sheaths. But in the end
one-realizes
that the pith cannot exist apart from the sheaths, and the sheaths
cannot
exist apart from the pith; they are part and parcel of one and the same
banana tree. Likewise, it is God who has become the twenty-four cosmic
principles; it is He who has become man.

(To Dr. Sarkar) "There are three kinds of devotees:
superior, mediocre,
and inferior. The inferior devotee says, 'God is out there.' According
to him
God is different from His creation. The mediocre devotee says: 'God is
the
Antaryami, the Inner Guide. God dwells in everyone's heart.' The
mediocre
devotee sees God in the heart. But the superior devotee sees that God
alone
has become everything; He alone has become the twenty-four cosmic
principles. He finds that everything, above and below, is filled with
God.

"Read the Gita, the Bhagavata,
and the Vedanta, and you will understand
all this. Is not God in His creation?"

DR. SARKAR: "Not in any particular object. He is everywhere. And
because He is everywhere, He cannot be sought after."

The conversation turned to other things. Sri Ramakrishna was always
experiencing ecstatic moods, which the doctor said might aggravate his
illness. Dr. Sarkar said to him: "You must suppress your emotion. My
feelings, too, are greatly stirred up. I can dance much more than you."

THE YOUNGER NAREN (smiling): "What would you do if
your emotion
increased a little more?"

DR. SARKAR: "My power of control would also increase."

MASTER AND M: "You may say that now!"

M: "Can you tell us what you would do if you went into an ecstatic
mood?"

The conversation turned to money.

MASTER (to Dr. Sarkar): "I don't think about it at
all. You know that
very well, don't you? This is not a pretence."

DR. SARKAR: "Even I have no desire for money — not to speak of
yourself!
My cash-box lies open."

MASTER: "Jadu Mallick, too, is absent-minded. When he takes his meals
he sometimes becomes so absent-minded that he doesn't know whether the
food is good or bad. When someone says to him, 'Don't eat that; it
doesn't
taste good', Jadu says: 'Eh? Is this food bad? Why, that's so!'"

Was the Master hinting that there was an ocean of difference between
absent-mindedness due to the contemplation of God, and
absent-mindedness
due to preoccupation with worldly thoughts?

Pointing to Dr. Sarkar, Sri Ramakrishna said to the devotees, with a
smile:
"When a thing is boiled, it becomes soft. At first he was very hard.
Now he
is softening from inside."

DR. SARKAR: "When a thing is boiled, it begins to soften from the
outside.
I am afraid that won't happen to me in this birth." (All laugh.)

Dr. Sarkar was about to take his leave. He was talking to Sri
Ramakrishna.

DOCTOR: "Can't you forbid people to salute you by touching your feet?"

MASTER: "Can all comprehend the Indivisible Satchidananda?"

DR. SARKAR: "But shouldn't you tell people what is right?"

MASTER: "People have different tastes. Besides, all have not the same
fitness for spiritual life."

DR. SARKAR: "How is that?"

MASTER: "Don't you know what difference in taste is? Some enjoy fish
curry; some, fried fish; some, pickled fish; and again, some, the rich
dish
of fish pilau. Then too, there is difference in fitness. I ask people
to learn to
shoot at a banana tree first, then at the wick of a lamp, and then at a
flying bird."

It was dusk. Sri Ramakrishna became absorbed in contemplation of God.
For the time being he forgot all about his painful disease. Several
intimate
disciples sat near him and looked at him intently. After a long time he
became aware of the outer world and said to M. in a whisper: "You see,
my
mind was completely merged in the Indivisible Brahman. After that I saw
many things. I found that the doctor will have spiritual awakening. But
it
will take some time. I won't have to tell him much. I saw another
person
while in that mood. My mind said to me, 'Attract him too.' I shall tell
you
about him later."

Shyam Basu, Dr. Dukari, and a few other devotees arrived. Sri Rama-
krishna talked to them.

SHYAM: "Ah, what a fine thing you said to us the other day!"

MASTER (smiling): "What was that?"

SHYAM: "What remains with a man when he goes beyond jnana and
ajnana, knowledge and ignorance."

MASTER (smiling): "It is vijnana, special Knowledge
of God. To know
many things is ignorance. To know that God dwells in all beings is
knowledge. And what is vijnana? It is to know God in a special manner,
to
converse with Him and feel Him to be one's own relative.

"To know that there is fire in wood is knowledge. But to make a fire
with
that wood, cook food with that fire, and become healthy and strong from
that
food is vijnana."

SHYAM (smiling): "And about the thorn?"

MASTER (smiling): "Yes. When a thorn gets into the
sole of your foot,
you procure a second thorn. After taking out the first thorn with the
help
of the second, you throw both thorns away. Likewise, you should procure
the thorn of knowledge in order to remove the thom of ignorance. After
destroying ignorance, you should discard both knowledge and ignorance.
Then you attain vijnana."

Sri Ramakrishna was pleased with Shyam Basu. He was quite an elderly
person and wanted to devote his time to contemplation. This was his
second
visit to the Master.

MASTER (to Shyam Basu): "Give up worldly talk
altogether. Don't talk
about anything whatever but God. If you see a worldly person coming
near
you, leave the place before he arrives. You have spent your whole life
in the
world. You have seen that it is all hollow. Isn't that so? God alone is
Substance, and all else is illusory. God alone is real, and all else
has only a
two-days existence. What is there in the world? The world is like a
pickled
hog plum: one craves for it. But what is there in a hog plum? Only skin
and
pit. And if you eat it you will have colic."

SHYAM: "Yes, sir. Everything you have said is true."

MASTER: "For many years you have devoted yourself to various worldly
things. You will not be able to think of God and meditate on Him in
this
confusion of the world. A little solitude is necessary for you;
otherwise your
mind will not be steady. Therefore you must fix a place for meditation
at
least half a mile away from your house."

Shyam Basu remained silent a few moments. He appeared absorbed in
thought.

MASTER (smiling): "Besides, all your teeth are gone.
Why should you
bother so much about the Durga Puja? (All laugh.) A
man used to celebrate
the worship of Durga with the sacrifice of goats and with other
ceremonies.
He continued the worship many years and then stopped it. A friend asked
him, 'Why don't you perform the Durga Puja any more?' 'Brother,'
replied
the man, 'my teeth are all gone. I have lost the power to chew
goat-meat.'"

SHYAM: "Ah! How sweet these words are!"

MASTER (smiling): "This world is a mixture of sand
and sugar. Like the
ant, one should discard the sand and eat the sugar. He who can eat the
sugar is clever indeed. Build a quiet place for thinking of God — a
place for
your meditation. Have it ready. I shall visit it."

SHYAM: "Sir, is there such a thing as reincarnation? Shall we be born
again?"

MASTER: "Ask God about it. Pray to Him sincerely. He-will tell you
everything. Speak to Jadu Mallick, and he himself will tell you how
many
houses he has, and how many government bonds. It is not right to try to
know these things at the beginning. First of all realize God; then He
Himself
will let you know whatever you desire."

SHYAM: "Sir, how much wrong, how many sinful things a man does in
this world! Can he ever realize God?"

MASTER: "If a man practises spiritual discipline before his death and
if he
gives up his body praying to God and meditating on Him, when will sin
touch him? It is no doubt the elephant's nature to smear his body with
dust
and mud, even after his bath. But he cannot do so if the mahut takes
him
into the stable immediately after his bath."

In spite of his serious illness the Master keenly felt the sorrow and
suffering of men. Day and night he thought about their welfare. The
devotees
wondered at his compassion. The assurance of Sri Ramakrishna that no
sin
can touch a man if he gives up his body while praying to God was deeply
impressed on their minds.

Friday, October 30, 1885

It was nine o'clock in the morning. Sri Ramakrishna was
talking with M.
in his room. No one else was present. M. was going to Dr. Sarkar to
report
his condition and bring him to examine the Master.

MASTER (to M., smiling): "Purna came this morning.
He has such a nice
nature! Manindra has an element of Prakriti, of womanliness. He has
read
the life of Chaitanya and understood the attitude of the gopis. He has
also
realized that God is Purusha and man is Prakriti, and that man should
worship God as His handmaid. How remarkable!"

M: "It is true, sir."

Purna was then fifteen or sixteen years old. Sri Ramakrishna always
longed
to see him. But his relatives did not allow him to visit the Master.
One
night, before his illness, Sri Ramakrishna had been so eager to see
Purna
that he had suddenly left Dakshineswar and arrived at M.'s house in
Calcutta. M. had brought Purna from his home to see Sri Ramakrishna.
The
Master had given the boy many instructions about prayer and had
afterwards returned to Dakshineswar. Manindra was about the same age as
Purna. The devotees addressed him as "khoka". (Baby.) He used to dance
in ecstasy
when he heard the chanting of God's name.

About half past ten M. arrived at Dr. Sarkar's house. He went up to the
second floor and sat in a chair on the porch adjacent to the
drawing-room.
In front of Dr. Sarkar was a glass bowl in which some goldfish were
kept.
Now and then Dr. Sarkar threw some cardamom shells into the bowl.
Again,
he threw pellets of flour to the sparrows. M. watched him.

DOCTOR (smiling, to M.): "You see, these goldfish
are staring at me like
devotees staring at God. They haven't noticed the food I have thrown
into
the water. Therefore I say, what will you gain by mere bhakti? You need
knowledge too. (M. smiles.) Look there at the
sparrows! They flew away
when I threw flour pellets to them. They were frightened. They have no
bhakti because they are without knowledge. They don't know that flour
is
their food."

Dr. Sarkar and M. entered the drawing-room. There were shelves all
around filled with books. The doctor rested a little. M. looked at the
books.
He picked up Canon Farrar's Life of Jesus and read
a few pages. Dr. Sarkar
told M. how the first homeopathic hospital was started in the teeth of
great
opposition. He asked M. to read the letters relating to it, which had
been
published in the "Calcutta Journal of Medicine" in 1876. Dr. Sarkar was
much devoted to homeopathy.

M. picked up another book, Munger's New Theology.
Dr. Sarkar noticed it.

DOCTOR: "Munger has based his conclusions on nice argument and
reasoning. It is not like your believing a thing simply because a
Chaitanya or a
Buddha or a Jesus Christ has said so."

M. (smiling): "Yes, we should not believe Chaitanya
or Buddha; but we
must believe Munger!"

DOCTOR: "Whatever you say."

M: "We must quote someone as our authority; so it is Munger." (The
doctor smiles.)

Dr. Sarkar got into his carriage accompanied by M. The carriage
proceeded
toward Syampukur. It was midday. They gossiped together. The
conversation turned to Dr. Bhaduri, who had also been visiting the
Master now and then.

M. (smiling): "Bhaduri said about you that you must
begin all over again
from the stone and brick-bat."

DR. SARKAR: "How is that?"

M: "Because you don't believe in the mahatmas, astral bodies, and so
forth. Perhaps Bhaduri is a Theosophist. Further, you don't believe in
the
Incarnation of God. That is why he teased you, saying that when you
died
this time you would certainly not be reborn as a human being. That
would
be far off. You wouldn't be born even as an animal or bird, or even as
a tree
or a plant. You would have to begin all over again, from stone and
brick-bat.
Then, after many, many births, you might assume a human body."

DR. SARKAR: "Goodness gracious!"

M: "Bhaduri further said that the knowledge of your physical science
was
a false knowledge. Such knowledge is momentary. He gave an analogy.
Suppose there are two wells. The one gets its water from an underground
spring. The other has no such spring and is filled with rain-water. But
the
water of the second well does not last a long time. The knowledge of
your
science is like the rain-water. It dries up."

DR. SARKAR (with a smile): "I see!"

The carriage arrived at Cornwallis Street. Dr. Sarkar picked up Dr.
Pratap
Mazumdar. Pratap had visited Sri Ramakrishna the previous day. They
soon
arrived at Syampukur.

Sri Ramakrishna was sitting in his room, on the second floor, with
several devotees.

DR. SARKAR (to the Master):
"I see you are coughing.1
(Smiling) But it is good to go to Kasi." (All
laugh..)

MASTER (smiling): "But that will give me liberation.
I don't want
liberation; I want love of God!" (All laugh.)

Pratap was Dr. Bhaduri's son-in-law. Sri Ramakrishna was speaking to
Pratap in praise of his father-in-law.

MASTER (to Pratap): "Ah, what a grand person he has
become! He
contemplates God and observes purity in his conduct. Further, he
accepts both
aspects of God — personal and impersonal."

M. was very eager to mention Dr. Bhaduri's remarks about Dr. Sarkar's
being born again as a stone or brick-bat. He asked the younger Naren
very
softly whether he remembered those remarks of Dr. Bhaduri. Sri
Ramakrishna overheard this.

MASTER (to Dr. Sarkar): "Do you know what Dr.
Bhaduri said about
you? He said that, because you didn't believe these things, in the next
cycle
you would have to begin your earthly life from a stone or brick-bat." (All
laugh.)

DR. SARKAR (smiling): "Suppose I begin from a stone
or brick-bat, and
after many births obtain a human body; but as soon as I come back to
this
place I shall have to begin over again from a stone or brick-bat." (The
doctor and all laugh.)

The conversation turned to the Master's ecstasy in spite of his illness.

PRATAP: "Yesterday I saw you in an ecstatic mood."

MASTER: "It happened of itself; but it was not intense."

DR. SARKAR: "Ecstasy and talking are not good for you now."

MASTER (to Dr. Sarkar): "I saw you yesterday in my
samadhi. I found
that you are a mine of knowledge; but it is all dry knowledge. You have
not tasted divine bliss. (To Pratap, referring to Dr. Sarkar)
If he ever tastes
divine bliss, he will see everything, above and below, filled with it.
Then he
will not say that whatever he says is right and what others say is
wrong.
Then he will not utter sharp, strong, pointed words."

The devotees remained silent.

Suddenly Sri Ramakrishna went into a spiritual mood and said to Dr.
Sarkar: "Mahindra Babu, what is this madness of yours about money? Why
such attachment to wife? Why such longing for name and fame? Give up
all these, now, and direct your mind to God with whole-souled devotion.
Enjoy the Bliss of God."

Dr. Sarkar sat still without uttering a word. The devotees also
remained silent.

MASTER: "Nangta used to tell me how a jnani meditates: Everywhere is
water; all the regions above and below are filled with water; man, like
a fish,
is swimming joyously in that water. In real meditation you will
actually see all this.

"Take the case of the infinite ocean. There is no limit to its water.
Suppose
a pot is immersed in it: there is water both inside and outside the
pot. The
jnani sees that both inside and outside there is nothing but
Paramatman.
Then what is this pot? It is 'I-consciousness'. Because of the pot the
water
appears to be divided into two parts; because of the pot you seem to
perceive
an inside and an outside. One feels that way as long as this pot of 'I'
exists.
When the 'I' disappears, what is remains. That
cannot be described in words.

"Do you know another way a jnani meditates? Think of infinite akasa
and a bird flying there, joyfully spreading its wings. There is the
Chidakasa,
and Atman is the bird. The bird is not imprisoned in a cage; it flies
in the
Chidakasa. Its joy is limitless."

The devotees listened with great attention to these words about
meditation.
After a time Pratap resumed the conversation.

PRATAP (to Dr. Sarkar): "When one thinks seriously,
one undoubtedly
sees everything as a mere shadow."

DR. SARKAR: "If you speak of a shadow, then you need three things: the
sun, the object, and the shadow. How can there be any shadow without an
object? And you say that God is real and the creation unreal. I say
that the creation is real too."

PRATAP: "Very well. As you see a reflection in a mirror, so you see
this
universe in the mirror of your mind."

DR. SARKAR: "But how can there be a reflection without an object?"

NARENDRA: "Why, God is the object."

Dr. Sarkar remained silent.

MASTER (to Dr. Sarkar): "You said a very fine thing.
No one else has said
before that samadhi is the result of the union of the mind with God.
You alone have said that.

"Shivanath said that one lost one's head by too much thinking of God.
In other words, one becomes unconscious • by meditating on the
Universal
Consciousness. Think of it! Becoming unconscious by contemplating Him
who is of the very nature of Consciousness, and whose Consciousness
endows
the world with consciousness!

"And what does your 'science' say? This combined with this produces
that; that combined with that produces this. One is more likely to lose
consciousness by contemplating those things — by handling material
things too much."

DR. SARKAR: "One can see God in those things."

M: "If so, one sees God more clearly in man, and still better in a
great
soul. In a great soul there is a greater manifestation of God."

DR. SARKAR: "Yes, in man, no doubt."

MASTER: "Losing consciousness by contemplating God — through whose
Consciousness even inert matter appears to be conscious, and hands,
feet,
and body move! People say that the body moves of itself; but they do
not
know that it is God who moves it. They say that water scalds the hand.
But
water can by no means scald the hand; it is the heat in the water, the
fire
in the water, that scalds.

"Rice is boiling in a pot. Potatoes and egg-plant are also jumping
about
in the pot. The children say that the potatoes and egg-plant jump of
themselves; they do not know that there is fire underneath. Man says
that the
sense-organs do their work of themselves; but he does not know that
inside
dwells He whose very nature is Consciousness."

Dr. Sarkar stood up. He was about to take his leave. Sri Ramakrishna
also stood up.

DR. SARKAR: "People call on God when they are faced with a crisis. Is
it
for the mere fun of it that they say, 'O Lord! Thou, Thou!'? You speak
of
God because of that trouble in your throat. You have now fallen into
the
clutches of the cotton-carder. You had better speak to the carder. I am
just
quoting your own words."

MASTER: "There is nothing for me to say."

DR. SARKAR: "Why not? We lie in the lap of God. We feel free with
Him. To whom should we speak about our illness if not to Him?"

MASTER: "Right you are. Once in a while I try to speak to Him about it,
but I do-not succeed."

DR. SARKAR: "Why should you even speak to Him? Does He not know
of it?"

MASTER (smiling): "A Mussalman, while saying his
prayers, shouted:
'O Allah! O Allah!' Another person said to him: 'You are calling on
Allah.
That's all right. But why are you shouting like that? Don't you know
that
He hears the sound of the anklets on the feet of an ant?'

"When the mind is united with God, one sees Him very near, in one's
own heart. But you must remember one thing. The more you realize this
unity, the farther your mind is withdrawn from worldly things. There is
the story of Vilwamangal in the Bhaktamala. He used
to visit a prostitute.
One night he was very late in going to her house. He had been detained
at
home by the sraddha ceremony of his father and mother. In his hands he
was carrying the food offered in the ceremony, to feed his mistress.
His whole
soul was so set upon the woman that he was not at all conscious of his
movements. He didn't even know how he was walking. There was a yogi
seated on the path, meditating on God with eyes closed. Vilwamangal
stepped on him. The yogi became angry, and cried out: 'What? Are you
blind? I have been thinking of God, and you step on my body!' 'I beg
your
pardon,' said Vilwamangal, 'but may I ask you something? I have been
unconscious, thinking of a prostitute, and you are conscious of the
outer
world though thinking of God. What kind of meditation is that?' In the
end
Vilwamangal renounced the world and went away in order to worship God.
He said to the prostitute: 'You are my guru. You have taught me how one
should yearn for God.' He addressed the prostitute as his mother and
gave her up."

DR. SARKAR: "To address a woman as mother is the Tantrik form of
worship."

MASTER: "Listen to a story. There was a king who used daily to hear the
Bhagavata recited by a pundit. Every day, after
explaining the sacred book,
the pundit would say to the king, 'O King, have you understood what I
have
said?' And every day the king would reply, 'You had better understand
it
first yourself.' The pundit would return home and think: 'Why does the
king talk to me that way day after day? I explain the texts to him so
clearly,
and he says to me, "You had better understand it first yourself." What
does
he mean?' The pundit used to practise spiritual discipline. A few days
later
he came to realize that God alone is real and everything else — house,
family,
wealth, friends, name, and fame — illusory. Convinced of the unreality
of
the world, he renounced it. As he left home he asked a man to take this
message to the king: 'O King, I now understand.'

"Here is another story. A man needed a scholar of the Bhagavata
to
expound the sacred text to him every day. But it was very difficult to
procure
such a scholar. After he had searched a great deal, another man came to
him and said, 'Sir, I have found an excellent scholar of the Bhagavata.'
'Very
well,' said the man, 'bring him here.' The other man replied: 'But
there is a
little hitch. The scholar has a few ploughs and bullocks; he is busy
with
them all day. He must look after the cultivation of his land. He hasn't
a
moment's leisure.' Thereupon the man who required the scholar said: 'I
don't want a Bhagavata scholar who is burdened with
ploughs and bullocks.
I want a man who has leisure and can tell me about God.' (To
Dr. Sarkar)
Do you understand?"

Dr. Sarkar remained silent.

MASTER: "Shall I tell you the truth? What will you gain by mere
scholarship? The pundits hear many things and know many things — the
Vedas,
the Puranas, the Tantras. But of what avail is mere scholarship?
Discrimination and renunciation are necessary. If a man has
discrimination and
renunciation, then one can listen to him. But of what use are the words
of a
man who looks on the world as the essential thing?

"What is the lesson of the Gita? It is what you get
by repeating the word
ten times. As you repeat 'Gita', 'Gita', the word becomes reversed into
'tagi',
'tagi' — which implies renunciation. He alone has understood the secret
of the
Gita who has renounced his attachment to 'woman and gold' and has
directed
his entire love to God. It isn't necessary to read the whole of the Gita.
The
purpose of reading the book is served if one practises renunciation."

DR. SARKAR: "A man once explained the meaning of Radha to me. He
said to me: 'Do you know the meaning of Radha? Reverse the word and it
becomes "dhara."2
That's the meaning.' (All laugh.) Well, let us stop
here for today."

Dr. Sarkar left. M. sat near Sri Ramakrishna and repeated the
conversation he had had at Dr. Sarkar's house.

M: "Dr. Sarkar was feeding the goldfish with cardamom shells and the
sparrows with flour pellets. He said to me: 'Did you notice? The fish
didn't
see the cardamom shells and therefore went away. First of all we want
knowledge, and then bhakti. Did you notice those sparrows? They too
flew away
when I threw the pellets of flour. They have no jnana; therefore they
have
no bhakti.'"

MASTER (smiling): "That knowledge means the
knowledge of the physical
world, the knowledge of 'science'."

M: "He said further: 'Must I believe a thing simply because a Chaitanya
or a Buddha or a Christ has said it? That would not be proper.' A
grandson
has been born to him. He praised his daughter-in-law highly. He said,
'I
don't notice her at all in the house; she is so quiet and bashful.'"

MASTER: "He has been thinking of this place [meaning himself]. His
faith is growing. Is it possible to get rid of egotism altogether? Such
scholarship! Such fame! And he has so much money! But he doesn't show
disrespect
for what I say."

It was about five o'clock in the afternoon. The devotees were sitting
quietly
in the room. Many outsiders also were present. All sat in silence.

M. was seated very near Sri Ramakrishna. Now and then they exchanged
a word or two in a low voice. The Master wanted to put on his coat. M.
helped him.

MASTER (to M.): "You see, nowadays it is not
necessary for me to
meditate much. All at once I become aware of the Indivisible Brahman.
Nowadays
the vision of the Absolute is continuous with me."

M. did not reply. The room was full of men, all silent.

Presently Sri Ramakrishna spoke.

MASTER: "Well, all these people are sitting here without uttering a
word.
Their eyes are fixed on me. They are neither talking nor singing. What
do they see in me?"

M. said to the Master: "Sir, they have already heard many things you
have said. Now they are seeing what they can never see anywhere else —
a
man always blissful, of childlike nature, free from egotism, and
intoxicated
with divine love. The other day you were pacing the outer room of
Ishan's
house. We too were with you. A man came to me and said that he had
never
before seen such a happy person as you."

M. became silent. The room was still. A few minutes later Sri
Ramakrishna
spoke to M. in a whisper.

MASTER: "Well, how is the doctor coming along? Does he now receive
well the ideas of this place?"

M: "How can an effective seed fail to sprout? It must germinate
somehow or other. I feel like laughing when I remember what you said
the other day."

MASTER: "What was that?"

M: "You said that Jadu Mallick was so absent-minded that while taking
his meals he didn't know whether a particular dish was seasoned with
salt
or not. If anyone pointed out to him that a dish was not salted, he
would say,
in a surprised voice: 'Yes? Yes? I see it is not salted.' You told this
to the
doctor because he had said to you that he was always absent-minded. You
meant that he became absent-minded thinking of worldly things and not
because of contemplation of God."

MASTER: "Will he not pay attention to what I say?"

M: "Of course he will. But he forgets many of your instructions because
of his numerous duties. Today, too, he made a nice remark when he said,
'To look on a woman as mother is a spiritual discipline of the Tantra.'"

MASTER: "What did I say to that?"

M: "You told him about that Bhagavata scholar who
owned bullocks and
ploughs. (The Master smiles.) Further, you told him
about the king who
said to the pundit of the Bhagavata, 'You had
better understand it yourself
first.' (The Master smiles.)

"Then you told him about the Gita, whose essence is the renunciation
of 'woman and gold', renunciation of the attachment to 'woman and
gold'.
You said to him, 'How can a worldly man who has not renounced "woman
and gold" teach others?' Perhaps he didn't understand the drift of your
words. He changed the subject."

Sri Ramakrishna was thinking about the welfare of his devotees. Purna
and Manindra were two of his young devotees. He sent Manindra to talk
to Purna.

It was evening. A lamp was burning in Sri Ramakrishna's room. The
devotees and visitors were sitting at a distance. The Master was
introspective.
Those in the room were also thinking of God and sat in silence.

A few minutes afterwards Narendra entered the room with a friend,
whom he introduced to the Master as an author. Sri Ramakrishna talked
with
him about the metaphysical significance of Radha and Krishna. The
author
said that Radha and Krishna were the Supreme Brahman. Vishnu, Siva,
Durga, and the other deities had sprung from them.

MASTER: "That is good. There are different aspects of Radha. In Her
seductive aspect She was Chandravali. In Her aspect of love She
participated
in Sri Krishna's lila at Vrindavan. Nandaghosh, Krishna's
foster-father, had
the vision of the Eternal Radha.

"First is the seductive Radha, then the Radha of love. If you go
farther,
you will see the Eternal Radha. It is like taking off the layers of an
onion
one by one. First the red layers, then the pink, then the white.
Afterwards
you don't find any more layers. Such is the nature of the Eternal
Radha,
Radha the Absolute. There the discrimination following the process of
'Not
this, not this' comes to an end.

"There are two aspects of Radha-Krishna: the Absolute and the Relative.

They are like the sun and its rays. The Absolute may be likened to the
sun,
and the Relative to the rays.

"A genuine bhakta dwells sometimes on the Absolute and sometimes on
the Relative. Both the Absolute and the Relative belong to one and the
same
Reality. It is all one — neither two nor many."

AUTHOR: "Sir, why do they speak of the 'Krishna of Vrindavan' and the
'Krishna of Mathura'?"3

MASTER: "That is the view of the goswamis. But the scholars of upper
India think differently. According to these scholars there is only
Krishna, and
no Radha. The Krishna of Dwaraka is not associated with Radha."

AUTHOR: "Sir, Radha and Krishna are themselves the Supreme Brahman."

MASTER: "That is good. But you must remember that everything is
possible for God. He is formless, and again He assumes forms. He is the
individual and He is the universe. He is Brahman and He is Sakti. There
is no
end to Him, no limit. Nothing is impossible for Him. No matter how high
the kites and vultures soar, they can never strike against the ceiling
of the
sky. If you ask me what Brahman is like, all I can say is that It
cannot be
described in words. Even when one has realized Brahman, one cannot
describe It. If someone asks you what ghee is like, your answer will
be,
'Ghee is like ghee.' The only analogy for Brahman is Brahman. Nothing
exists besides It."

Saturday, October 31, 1885

Hariballav Bose, a cousin of Balaram, came to see Sri Ramakrishna. He
saluted the Master respectfully.

Hariballav was the government pleader at Cuttack. He did not approve
of Balaram's visiting the Master, especially with the ladies of the
family;
Balaram had said to his cousin: "You had better meet him first. Then
you
can say whatever you like."

Presently the Master and Hariballav became engaged in conversation.

MASTER: "Can you tell me how I shall get well? Do you think this is a
serious illness?"

HARIBALLAV: "Sir, the doctors can tell you better than I about that."

MASTER: "When the women take the dust of my feet, I say to myself that
they are saluting God, who dwells inside me. I look at it in that way."

HARIBALLAV: "You are a holy man. All should take the dust of your feet.
What harm is there in that?"

MASTER: "You may speak that way about sages like Dhruva, Prahlada,
Narada, or Kapila; but who am I? Please come again."

HARIBALLAV: "I shall certainly come, because you attract me. You don't
have to urge me."

Hariballav was about to depart. He saluted Sri Ramakrishna and was
going to take the dust of the Master's feet, when Sri Ramakrishna moved
his feet away. But Hariballav persisted; he took the dust of Sri
Ramakrishna's
feet against the latter's wish.

When he stood up, the Master stood up too, to show him courtesy. The
Master said to him: "Balaram feels unhappy because I don't go to his
house.
I thought of visiting you all there one day, but then I was afraid you
might
say to Balaram, 'Who asked him to come here?'"

HARIBALLAV: "Who has been telling you things? Please don't let such a
thought enter your mind."

Hariballav departed.

MASTER (to M.): "He is a devotee of God; why else
would he have
forcibly taken the dust of my feet? I told you the other day that in
samadhi
I had seen Dr. Sarkar and another person. He is the other person. So he
has come."

M: "Yes, sir. Undoubtedly he is a bhakta."

MASTER: "How guileless he is!"

M. went to Dr. Sarkar's house to report Sri Ramakrishna's condition.
The
doctor talked to M. about Sri Ramakrishna, Mahimacharan, and the other
devotees.

DOCTOR: "Mahimacharan didn't bring the book he promised to show me.
He said he had forgotten all about it. It is quite possible. I am
forgetful too."

M: "He has read a great deal."

DOCTOR: "Then why is he in such a plight?"

Referring to the Master, the doctor said: "What will a man accomplish
with mere bhakti? He needs jnana too."

M: "Why, the Master says that bhakti comes after jnana. But his
conception of jnana and bhakti is quite different from yours. When he
says
that one obtains bhakti after jnana, he means that first comes the
Knowledge
of Reality and then bhakti; first the Knowledge of Brahman and then
bhakti; first the Knowledge of God and then love for Him. When you
speak
of jnana you mean the knowledge obtained through the senses. The jnana
Sri Ramakrishna speaks of cannot be verified by our standards. The
Knowledge of Reality cannot be tested by the knowledge obtained through
the
senses. But your jnana, the knowledge through the senses, can be
verified."

The doctor remained silent. Then he referred to the subject of Divine
Incarnation.

DOCTOR: "What is this idea of Divine Incarnation? What is this taking
the dust of a man's feet?"

M: "Why, you say that during your experiments in the laboratory you
go into ecstasy when you think of God's creation. Further, you feel the
same emotion when you think of man. If that is so, why shouldn't we bow
our heads before God? God dwells in the heart of man.

"According to Hinduism God dwells in all beings. You have not studied
this subject much. Since God dwells in all beings, what is wrong in
saluting
a man?

"Sri Ramakrishna says that there is a greater manifestation of God in
certain things than in others, as the sun is reflected better by water
and by
a mirror than by other objects. Water exists everywhere, but is most
apparent
in a river or lake. We bow down to God and not to man. God is God — not
man is God.

"God cannot be known through reasoning. All depends on faith. Of
course, I am repeating to you what Sri Ramakrishna says."

Dr. Sarkar presented M. with one of his books, The
Physiological Basis of
Psychology. He wrote on the first page "As a token of
brotherly regards."

It was about eleven o'clock in the morning. Sri Ramakrishna was sitting
in his room with the devotees. He was talking to a Christian devotee
named
Misra. Misra was born of a Christian family in northwestern India and
belonged to the Quaker sect. He was thirty-five years old. Though clad
in
European dress he wore the ochre cloth of a sannyasi under his foreign
clothes. Two of his brothers had died on the day fixed for the marriage
of
one of them, and on that very day Misra had renounced the world.

MISRA: "'It is Rama alone who dwells in all beings.'"

Sri Ramakrishna said to the younger Naren, within Misra's hearing:
"Rama is one, but He has a thousand names. He who is called 'God' by
the
Christians is addressed by the Hindus as Rama, Krishna, Isvara, and by
other
names. A lake has many ghats. The Hindus drink water at one ghat and
call
it 'jal'; the Christians at another, and call it 'water'; the
Mussalmans at a
third, and call it 'pani'. Likewise, He who is God to the Christians is
Allah
to the Mussalmans."
MISRA: "Jesus is not the son of Mary. He is God Himself. (To
the
devotees) Now he (pointing to Sri Ramakrishna)
is as you see him — again,
he is God Himself. You are not able to recognize him. I have seen him
before, in visions, though I see him now directly with my eyes. I saw a
garden where he was seated on a raised seat. Another person was seated
on
the ground, but he was not so far advanced.

"There are four door-keepers of God in this country: Tukaram in Bombay,
Robert Michael in Kashmir, himself [meaning Sri Ramakrishna] in this
part
of the country, and another person in eastern Bengal."

MASTER: "Do you see visions?"

MISRA: "Sir, even when I lived at home I used to see light. Then I had
a
vision of Jesus. How can I describe that beauty? How insignificant is
the
beauty of a woman compared with that beauty!"

After a while Misra took off his trousers and showed the devotees the
gerrua loin-cloth that he wore underneath.

Presently Sri Ramakrishna went out on the porch. Returning to the room,
he said to the devotees, "I saw him [meaning Misra] standing in a
heroic
posture." As he uttered these words he went into samadhi. He stood
facing the west.

Regaining partial consciousness, he fixed his gaze on Misra and began
to
laugh. Still in an ecstatic mood, he shook hands with him and laughed
again. Taking him by the hands, he said, "You will get what you are
seeking."

MISRA (with folded hands): "Since that day I have
surrendered to you
my mind, soul, and body."

Sri Ramakrishna was laughing, still in an ecstatic mood.

The Master resumed his seat. Misra was describing his worldly life to
the
devotees. He told them how his two brothers were killed when the canopy
came down at the time of the marriage.

Sri Ramakrishna asked the devotees to take care of Misra.

Dr. Sarkar arrived. At the sight of him Sri Ramakrishna went into
samadhi. When his ecstasy abated a little, he said, "First the bliss of
divine
inebriation and then the Bliss of Satchidananda, the Cause of the
cause."

DOCTOR: "Yes."

MASTER: "I am not unconscious."

The doctor realized that the Master was inebriated with divine bliss.
Therefore he said, "No, no! You are quite conscious."

Sri Ramakrishna smiled and said:

I drink no ordinary wine, but Wine of
Everlasting Bliss,

As I repeat my Mother Kali's name;

It so intoxicates my mind that people take me to be drunk!

First my guru gives molasses for the making of the Wine;

My longing is the ferment to transform it.

Knowledge, the maker of the Wine, prepares it for me then;

And when it is done, my mind imbibes it from the bottle of the mantra,

Taking the Mother's name to make it pure.

Drink of this Wine, says Ramprasad, and the four fruits of life are
yours.

As the doctor listened to the words, he too became almost
ecstatic. Sri
Ramakrishna again went into a deep spiritual mood and placed his foot
on
the doctor's lap. A few minutes later he became conscious of the outer
world
and withdrew his foot. He said to the doctor: "Ah, what a splendid
thing
you said the other day! 'We lie in the lap of God. To whom shall we
speak
about our illness if not to Him?' If I must pray, I shall certainly
pray to
Him." As Sri Ramakrishna said these words, his eyes filled with tears.
Again
he went into ecstasy and said to the doctor, "You are very pure;
otherwise
I could not have put my foot on your lap." Continuing, he said: " 'He
alone
has peace who has tasted the Bliss of Rama.' What is this world? What
is
there in it? What is there in money, wealth, honour, or creature
comforts?
'O mind, know Rama! Whom else should you know?'"

The devotees were worried to see the Master's repeated ecstasies in
this
state of ill health. He said, "I shall be quiet if someone sings that
song —
The Wine of Heavenly Bliss'."

Narendra was sent for from another room. He sang in his sweet voice:

Be drunk, O mind, be drunk with the Wine of Heavenly Bliss!

Roll on the ground and weep, chanting Hari's sweet name!

Fill the arching heavens with your deep lion roar,

Singing Hari's sweet name! With both your arms upraised,

Dance in the name of Hari and give His name to all!

Swim day and night in the sea of the bliss of Hari's love;

Slay desire with His name, and blessed be your life!

MASTER: "And that one — 'Upon the Sea of Blissful Awareness'."

Narendra sang:

Upon the Sea of Blissful Awareness waves of ecstatic love arise:

Rapture divine! Play of God's Bliss!

Oh, how enthralling! . . .

Narendra sang again:

Meditate, O my mind, on the Lord Hari,

The Stainless One, Pure Spirit through and through.

How peerless is the light that in Him shines!

How soul-bewitching is His wondrous form!

How dear is He to all His devotees!

Ever more beauteous in fresh-blossoming love

That shames the splendour of a million moons,

Like lightning gleams the glory of His form,

Raising erect the hair for very joy.

Worship His feet in the lotus of your heart;

With mind serene and eves made radiant

With heavenly love, behold that matchless sight.

Caught in the spell of His love's ecstasy,

Immerse yourself for evermore, O mind,

In Him who is Pure Knowledge and Pure Bliss.

Dr. Sarkar listened to the songs attentively. When the singing
was over,
he said. "That's a nice one — 'Upon the Sea of Blissful Awareness'."

At the sight of the doctor's joy, Sri Ramakrishna said: "The son said
to
the father, 'Father, you taste a little wine, and after that, if you
ask me to
give up drinking, I shall do so.' After drinking the wine, the father
said: 'Son,
you may give it up. I have no objection. But I am certainly not going
to
give it up myself (The doctor and the others laugh.)

"The other day the Divine Mother showed me two men in a vision. He
[meaning the doctor] is one. She also revealed to me that he will have
much
knowledge; but it is dry knowledge. (Smiling, to the doctor)
But you will soften."

Dr. Sarkar remained-silent.

Friday, November 6, 1885

It was the day of the Kali Puja. the worship of the Divine
Mother, Sri
Ramakrishna's Chosen Ideal. At about nine o'clock in the morning the
Master, clad in a new cloth, stood in the south room on the second
floor of
his temporary residence at Syampukur. He had asked M. to offer worship
to
Siddhesvari at Thanthania, in the central part of Calcutta, with
flowers,
green coconut, sugar, and other sweets. After bathing in the Ganges, M.
had
offered the worship and come barefoot to Syampukur. He had brought the
prasad with him. Sri Ramakrishna took off his shoes and with great
reverence
ate a little of the prasad and placed a little on his head.

At the Master's request M. had purchased two books of songs by
Ramprasad and Kamalakanta for Dr. Sarkar.

M: "Here are the books of songs by Ramprasad and Kamalakanta."

MASTER: "Force songs like these on the doctor:

How are you trying, O my mind, to know the nature of God? . . .

Who is there that can understand what Mother Kali is? . . .

O mind, you do not know how to farm!

Fallow lies the field of your life. . . .

Come, let us go for a walk, O mind, to Kali, the Wish-fulfilling Tree.
. . ."

M: "Yes, sir."

Sri Ramakrishna was pacing the room with M. He had put on his slippers.
In spite of his painful illness his face beamed with joy.

MASTER: "And this song is also very good: This world is a framework
of illusion.'"

M: "Yes, sir."

Suddenly Sri Ramakrishna gave a start. He put aside his slippers and
stood still. He was in deep samadhi. It was the day of the Divine
Mother's
worship. Was that why he frequently went into samadhi? After a long
while
he sighed and restrained his emotion as if with great difficulty.

It was about ten o'clock. Sri Ramakrishna was seated on his bed,
leaning
against the pillow. The devotees sat around him. Ram, Rakhal, Niranjan,
Kalipada, M., and many others were present. Sri Ramakrishna was talking
about his nephew Hriday.

MASTER: "Hriday is even now clamouring for land. He said to me one
day while he was living with me at Dakshineswar, 'Give me a shawl, or I
will sue you.' The Divine Mother removed him from Dakshineswar. He
pestered the visitors for money. If he had stayed with me all these
people
could not have come. That is why the Mother removed him. R— also
began to act that way. He became querulous. When he was asked to
accompany me in a carriage he would hold back. He would be annoyed if
the
other youngsters came to me. If I went to Calcutta to see them, he
would
say: 'Why should you bother about them? Will they renounce the world?'
If I wanted to offer refreshments to the other young boys, I would be
afraid
of R— and say to him, 'Take some yourself and then give it to them.' I
came to know that he would not stay with me. Thereupon I said to the
Divine Mother, 'Mother, don't remove him altogether, like Hriday.' Then
I came to know that he was going to Vrindavan. If R— had stayed with me
at that time, all these youngsters could not have mixed with me. He
left
for Vrindavan and these young boys began to visit me frequently."

R— (humbly): "Sir, that wasn't really in my mind."

RAM (to R—): "Do you think you understand your mind
as well as he
understands it?"

R— remained silent.

MASTER (to R—): "Why should you feel that way? I
love you more
than a father loves his son. . . . Now please keep quiet. . . . You no
longer have that attitude."

After a time the devotees went to another room. Sri Ramakrishna sent
for
R— and said to him, "Did you mind what I said?"

R—: "No, sir."

Sri Ramakrishna said to M.: "It is the day of the Kali Puja. It is good
to
make some arrangements for the worship. Please speak to the devotees
about it."

M. went to the drawing-room and told the devotees what the Master had
said. Kalipada and others busied themselves with the arrangements.

About two o'clock in the afternoon Dr. Sarkar arrived, accompanied by
Professor Nilmani. The doctor listened to the report of the illness and
prescribed medicine. Sri Ramakrishna said to him, "These two books have
been
purchased for you." M. handed him the books.

The doctor wanted to hear some songs. At the Master's bidding, M. and
another devotee sang:

How are you trying, O my mind, to know the nature of God?

You are groping like a madman locked in a dark room. . . .

Then they sang:

Who is there that can understand what Mother Kali is?

Even the six darsanas are powerless to reveal Her.

It is She, the scriptures say, that is the Inner Self

Of the yogi, who in Self discovers all his joy;

She that, of Her own sweet will, inhabits every living thing.

The macrocosm and microcosm rest in the Mother's womb;

Now do you see how vast it is? In the Muladhara

The yogi meditates on Her, and in the Sahasrara:

Who but Siva has beheld Her as She really is?

Within the lotus wilderness She sports beside Her Mate, the Swan.

When man aspires to understand Her, Ramprasad must smile;

To think of knowing Her, he says, is quite as laughable

As to imagine one can swim across the boundless sea.

But while my mind has understood, alas! my heart has not;

Though but a dwarf, it still would strive to make a captive of the moon.

Again they sang:

O mind, you do not know how to farm!

Fallow lies the field of your life.

If you had only worked it well,

How rich a harvest you might reap! . . .

Then:

Come, let us go for a walk, O mind, to Kali, the Wish-fulfilling Tree,

And there beneath It gather the four fruits of life. . . .

Dr. Sarkar said to Girish, "That song of yours is very nice —
the one about
the vina, in the Life of Buddha."

At a hint from the Master, Girish and Kalipada sang together:

Behold my vina, my dearly beloved,

My lute of sweetest tone;

If tenderly you play on it,

The strings will waken, at your touch,

To rarest melodies. . . .

They continued:

We moan for rest, alas! but rest can never find;

We know not whence we come, nor where we float away.

Time and again we tread this round of smiles and tears;

In vain we pine to know whither our pathway leads,

And why we play this empty play. . . .

They sang again:

Hold me fast, O Nitai! I feel as if I shall pass away!

Bestowing Hari's name on men,

I raised high waves in the river of my love,

And now upon its raging stream I am carried helplessly.

With grief my heart is laden down;

Alas! Nitai, to whom shall I speak of it?

Behold, I am swiftly borne away by the current of man's deep woe.

Then they sang:

Jagai! Madhai! Oh, come and dance,

Chanting Hari's name with fervour! . . .

And finally:

Come one and all! Take Radha's love!

The high tide of her love flows by;

It will not last for very long.

Oh. come then! Come ye, one and all! . . .

Listening to these songs, two or three of the devotees — among
them,
Manindra and Latu — went into a spiritual mood. Latu was seated by
Niranjan's side. When the singing was over, the Master spoke with the
doctor.
The previous day Dr. Pratap Mazumdar had prescribed nux vomica for the
Master. Dr. Sarkar was annoyed to hear of it.

DOCTOR: "To give him nux vomica! Why, I am not dead yet!"

MASTER (smiling) : "Why should you die? God forbid!
May your avidya die."

DOCTOR: "I never have any avidya!"

Dr. Sarkar understood avidya to mean "mistress".

MASTER (smiling): "Oh, no! I don't mean that! In the
case of a sannyasi,
his mother, Avidya, Ignorance, dies giving birth to a child, Viveka,
Discrimination."

Hariballav arrived. Sri Ramakrishna said, "I feel very happy when I see
you." Hariballav was a man of very humble nature; he sat on the bare
floor
and not on the mat. He began to fan the Master. He was the government
lawyer at Cuttack. Professor Nilmani sat near them. Sri Ramakrishna did
not want to offend him; casting his glance on the professor, he said,
"Oh,
what a grand day it is for me!"

A few minutes later Dr. Sarkar and Professor Nilmani took their leave.
Hariballav also departed, saying that he would come again.

It is the dark night of the new moon. At seven o'clock the devotees
make
arrangements for the worship of Kali in Sri Ramakrishna's room on the
second floor. Flowers, sandal-paste, vilwa-leaves, red hibiscus, rice
pudding, and
various sweets and other articles of worship are placed in front of the
Master.
The devotees are sitting around him. There are present, among
others,
Sarat, Sashi, Ram, Girish, Chunilal, M., Rakhal, Niranjan, and the
younger
Naren.

Sri Ramakrishna asks a devotee to bring some incense. A few minutes
later
he offers all the articles to the Divine Mother. M. is seated close to
him.
Looking at M., he says to the devotees, "Meditate a little." The
devotees
close their eyes.

Presently Girish offers a garland of flowers at Sri Ramakrishna's feet.
M.
offers flowers and sandal paste. Rakhal, Ram, and the other devotees
follow
hint.

Niranjan offers a flower at Sri Ramakrishna's feet, crying:
"Brahmamayi!
Brahmamayi!" and prostrates himself before him, touching the Master's
feet
with his head. The devotees cry out, "Jai Ma!", "Hail to the Mother!"

In the twinkling of an eye So Ramakrishna goes into deep samadhi. An
amazing transformation takes place in the Master before the very eyes
of
the devotees.. His face shines with a heavenly light. His two hands are
raised
in the posture of granting boons and giving assurance to the devotees;
it
is the posture one sees in images or the Divine Mother. His body is
motionless; he has no consciousness of the outer world. He sits facing
the north. Is
the Divine Mother of the Universe manifesting Herself through his
person?
Speechless with wonder, the devotees look intently at Sri Ramakrishna,
who
appears to them to be the embodiment of the Divine Mother Herself.

The devotees begin to sing hymns, one of them leading and the rest
following in chorus.

Girish sings:

Who is this Woman with the thick black hair,

Shining amidst the assembly of the gods?

Who is She, whose feet are like crimson lotuses

Planted on Siva's chest?

Who is She, whose toe-nails shine like the full moon,

Whose legs burn with the brightness of the sun?

Who is She, who now speaks soft and smiles on us,

And now fills all the quarters of the sky

With shouts of terrible laughter?

Again

O Mother, Saviour of the helpless. Thou the Slayer of sin!

In Thee do the three gunas dwell — sattva, rajas, and tamas.

Thou dost create the world; Thou dost sustain it and destroy it;

Binding Thyself with attributes. Thou yet transcendest them;

For Thou, 0 Mother, art the All. . . .

Behari sings:

O Syama, Thou who dost sit upon a corpse!

I beg Thee, hear my heart's most fervent prayer:

As my last breath forsakes this mortal flesh,

Reveal Thyself within my heart!

Then, in my mind, from forest and from grove

I shall gather Thee red hibiscus flowers,

And, scenting them with the sandal-paste of Love,

Shall lay them at Thy Lotus Feet.

M. sings with the other devotees:

O Mother, all is done after Thine own sweet will;

Thou art in truth self-willed. Redeemer of mankind!

Thou workest Thine own work; men only call it theirs. . . .

They sing again:

All things are possible, O Mother, through Thy grace;

Obstacles mountain high Thou makest to melt away.

Thou Home of Bliss! To all Thou givest peace and joy;

Why then should I be made to suffer fruitlessly,

Brooding on the success or failure of my deeds?

And again:

O Mother, ever blissful as Thou art,

Do not deprive Thy worthless child of bliss!

My mind knows nothing but Thy Lotus Feet.

The King of Death scowls at me terribly;

Tell me, Mother, what shall I say to him? . . .

They conclude:

In dense darkness, O Mother, Thy formless beauty sparkles;

Therefore the yogis meditate in a dark mountain cave. . . .

Gradually Sri Ramakrishna came back to the consciousness of
the outer
world. He asked the devotees to sing "O Mother Syama, full of the waves
of
drunkenness divine". They sang:

O Mother Syama, full of the waves of
drunkenness divine!

Who knows how Thou dost sport in the world?

Thy fun and frolic and Thy glances put to shame the god of love. . . .

When this song was over, Sri Ramakrishna asked the devotees to
sing
"Behold my Mother playing with Siva". The devotees sang:

Behold my Mother playing with Siva, lost in an ecstasy of joy!

Drunk with a draught of celestial wine. She reels, and yet She does not
fall. . . .

Sri Ramakrishna tasted a little pudding to make the devotees
happy, but
immediately went into deep ecstasy.

A few minutes later the devotees prostrated themselves before the
Master
and went into the drawing-room. There they enjoyed the prasad.

It was nine o'clock in the evening. Sri Ramakrishna sent word to the
devotees, asking them to go to Surendra's house to participate in the
worship of Kali.

They arrived at Surendra's house on Simla Street and were received very
cordially. Surendra conducted them to the drawing-room on the second
floor. The house was filled with a festive atmosphere and a veritable
mart
of joy was created with the songs and music of the devotees. It was
very late
at night when they returned to their homes after enjoying the sumptuous
feast given by Surendra, the Master's beloved disciple.

^The
Bengali word for "coughing" is "kasi". Kasi is also a name for Benares.

^The
word "dhara" does not mean anything in particular. The doctor made the
statement to change the conversation.

^The
Krishna of Vrindavan, where He was a cowherd boy, is always associated
with Radha and the gopis; but the Krishna of Mathura and Dwaraka, where
He was
the king, is not associated with them.


=== 49_master_at_cossipore.htm ===

The Master at Cossipore

←
Home
/ The Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna
/ Volume 2
/ →

THE MASTER AT COSSIPORE

Master moved to Cossipore — Predicting his passing away — The coming
of devotees — Master's love for devotees — Significance of the
Master's illness — Different classes of devotees — The great visions —
Five
suppliers of the Master's needs — Master's foreseeing of the coming of
devotees — Master and Narendra — Narendra's yearning for God — His
intense dispassion — Devotees' detachment from the world — Brahman
is beyond the gunas — Brahman and maya — Wicked ego and spiritualized
ego — No liberation for Divine Incarnations — Master's great
suffering — His vision of unity — Master about himself — Master
teaches Narendra Brahmajnana — "Ego of Knowledge" — Narendra and M.

Wednesday December 23, 1885

ON FRIDAY, DECEMBER 11, Sri Ramakrishna was moved to a
beautiful
house at Cossipore, a suburb of Calcutta. The house was situated in
a garden covering about five acres of land and abounding in fruit-trees
and flowering plants. Here the final curtain fell on the Master's life.

At Cossipore he set himself with redoubled energy to the completion of
the work of spiritual ministration he had begun long before at
Dakshineswar.
Realizing that the end of his physical life was approaching, he gave
away
his spiritual treasures without stint to one and all. He was like one
of those
fruit-sellers who bring their fruit to the market-place, bargain at
first about
the prices, but then toward sunset, when the market is about to close,
give
away the fruit indiscriminately. Here his disciples saw the greatest
manifestation
of his spiritual powers. Here they saw the fulfilment of his prophecies
about his own end: "I shall make the whole thing public before I go."
"When people in large numbers come to know and whisper about the
greatness
of this body, then the Mother will take it back." "The devotees will be
sifted into inner and outer circles toward the end." And so on. Here he
predicted that a band of young disciples, with Narendranath as their
leader,
would in due course renounce the world and devote themselves to the
realization of God and the service of humanity.

The main building at Cossipore had two storeys, with three rooms below
and two above. The Master occupied the central hall of the upper
storey; a
small room to the left was used at night by his attendants. To the
right of
the hall was an open balcony where Sri Ramakrishna sometimes sat or
walked. On the ground floor, a hall just below the Master's and a small
room
to the right of it were used by the devotees, and a small room to the
extreme
left was occupied by the Holy Mother. In the garden compound were some
outbuildings, two reservoirs, and pleasant walks. Sri Ramakrishna
breathed
more freely in the open air of the new place.

Almost all the devotees had gathered by this time. They had started
coming to him in 1881. By the end of 1884 Sarat and Sashi had become
known
to the Master, and since their college examinations in the middle, of
1885
they had been visiting him almost daily. Girish Ghosh had first met the
Master in September 1884 at the Star Theatre. Since the beginning of
the
following December he had been a constant visitor. And it was during
the
latter part of December 1884 that Sarada Prasanna first visited the
Master
at the Dakshineswar temple. Subodh and Kshirode first visited him in
August 1885.

The young devotees had taken up their quarters at the garden house to
tend Sri Ramakrishna, although many of them visited their own homes
every now and then. The householders came to see the Master almost
every
day, and some of them occasionally spent the night.

On the morning of December 23 Sri Ramakrishna gave unrestrained
expression to his love for the devotees. He said to Niranjan, "You are
my father:
I shall sit on your lap." Touching Kalipada's chest, he said, "May your
inner
spirit be awakened!" He stroked Kalipada's chin affectionately and
said,
"Whoever has sincerely called on God or performed his daily religious
devotions will certainly come here." In the morning two ladies received
his
special blessing. In a state of samadhi he touched their hearts with
his feet.
They shed tears of joy. One of them said to him, weeping, "You are so
kind!" His love this day really broke all bounds. He wanted to bless
Gopal
of Sinthi and said to a devotee, "Bring Gopal here."

It was evening. Sri Ramakrishna was absorbed in contemplation of the
Mother of the Universe. After a while he began to talk very softly with
some
of the devotees. Kali, Chunilal, M., Navagopal, Sashi, Niranjan, and a
few
others were present.

MASTER (to M.): "Buy a stool for me. What will it
cost?"

M: "Between two and three rupees."

MASTER: "If a small wooden seat costs only twelve annas, why should you
have to pay so much for a stool?"

M: "Perhaps it won't cost so much."

MASTER: "Tomorrow is Thursday. The latter part of the afternoon is
inauspicious. Can't you come before three o'clock?"

M: "Yes, sir. I shall."

MASTER: "Well, can you tell how long it will take me to recover from
this illness?"

M: "It has been aggravated a little and will take some days."

MASTER: "How long?"

M: "Perhaps five to six months."

Hearing this, Sri Ramakrishna became impatient, like a child, and said:
"So long? What do you mean?"

M: "I mean, sir, for complete recovery."

MASTER: "Oh, that! I am relieved. Can you explain one thing? How is it
that in spite of all these visions, all this ecstasy and samadhi, I am
so ill?"

M: "Your suffering is no doubt great; but it has a deep meaning."

MASTER: "What is it?"

M: "A change is coming over your mind. It is being directed toward the
formless aspect of God. Even your 'ego of Knowledge' is vanishing."

MASTER: "That is true. My teaching of others is coming to an end. I
cannot give any more instruction. I see that everything is Rama
Himself. And
sometimes I say to myself, 'Whom shall I teach?' You see, because I am
living in a rented house many kinds of devotees are coming here. I hope
I shall not have to put up a 'signboard', like Shashadhar or
Krishnaprasanna
Sen,1
announcing my lectures." (The Master and M. laugh.)

M: "There is yet another purpose in this illness. It is the final
sifting of
disciples. The devotees have achieved in these few days what they could
not
have realized by five years' tapasya. Their love and devotion are
growing by
leaps and bounds."

MASTER: "That may be true; but Niranjan went back home. (To
Niranjan) Please tell me how you feel."

NIRANJAN: "Formerly I loved you, no doubt, but now it is impossible for
me to live without you."

M: "One day I found out how great these young men were."

MASTER: "Where?"

M: "Sir, one day I stood in a corner of the house at Syampukur and
watched the devotees. I clearly saw that every one of them had made his
way here through almost insurmountable obstacles and given himself over
to your service."

As Sri Ramakrishna listened to these words he became abstracted. He was
silent a few moments. Presently he went into samadhi.

Regaining consciousness of the outer world, he said to M.: "I saw
everything passing from form to formlessness. I want to tell you all
the things I
saw, but I cannot. Well, this tendency of mine toward the formless is
only a
sign of my nearing dissolution. Isn't that so?"

M. (wonderingly): "It may be."

MASTER: "Even now I am seeing the Formless Indivisible Satchidananda —
just like that. . . . But I have suppressed my feelings with great
difficulty.

"What you said about the sifting of disciples was right: this illness
is
showing who belong to the inner circle and who to the outer. Those who
are
living here, renouncing the world, belong to the inner circle; and
those who
pay occasional visits and ask, 'How are you, sir?' belong to the outer
circle.

"Didn't you notice Bhavanath? The other day he came to Syampukur
dressed as a bridegroom and asked me, 'How are you?' I haven't seen him
since. I show him love for Narendra's sake, but he is not in my thought
any more.

(To M.) "When God assumes a human body for the sake
of His devotees,
many of His devotees accompany Him to this earth. Some of them belong
to the inner circle, some to the outer circle, and some become the
suppliers
of His physical needs.

"I experienced one of my first ecstasies when I was ten or eleven years
old,
as I was going through a meadow to the shrine of Visalakshi. What a
vision!
I became completely unconscious of the outer world.

"I was twenty-two or twenty-three when the Divine Mother one day
asked me in the Kali temple, 'Do you want to be Akshara?'
I didn't know
what the word meant. I asked Haladhari about it. He said, 'Kshara
means
jiva, living being; Akshara means Paramatman,
the Supreme Soul.'

"At the hour of the evening worship in the Kali temple I would climb to
the roof of the kuthi and cry out: 'O devotees, where are you all? Come
to
me soon! I shall die of the company of worldly people!' I told all this
to the
'Englishmen'. They said it was all an illusion of my mind. 'Perhaps it
is', I
said to myself, and became calm. But now it is all coming true; the
devotees
are coming.

"The Divine Mother also showed me in a vision the five suppliers of my
needs; first, Mathur Babu, and second, Sambhu Mallick, whom I had not
then met. I had a vision of a fair-skinned man with a cap on his head.
Many
days later, when I first met Sambhu, I recalled that vision; I realized
that it
was he whom I had seen in that ecstatic state. I haven't yet found out
the
three other suppliers of my wants. But they were all of a fair
complexion.
Surendra looks like one of them.

"When I attained this state of God-Consciousness, a person exactly
resembling myself thoroughly shook my Ida, Pingala, and Sushumna
nerves.
He licked with his tongue each of the lotuses of the six centres, and
those
drooping lotuses at once turned their faces upward. And at last the
Sahasrara
lotus became full-blown.

"The Divine Mother used to reveal to me the nature of the devotees
before their coming. I saw with these two eyes — not in a trance — the
kirtan
party of Chaitanya going from the banyan-tree to the bakul-tree in the
Panchavati. I saw Balaram in the procession and also, I think, yourself
[meaning M.]. Chuni's spiritual consciousness and yours, too, have been
awakened by frequent visits to me. In a vision I saw that Sashi and
Sarat
had been among the followers of Christ.

"Under the banyan-tree in the Panchavati I had a vision of a child.
Hriday said to me, 'Then a son will soon be born to you.' I said to
him:
'But I regard all women as mother. How can I have a son?' That child is
Rakhal.

"I said to the Divine Mother, 'O Mother, since You have placed me in
this condition, provide me with a rich man.' That is why Mathur served
me
for fourteen years.(From 1858 to 1871.) And in how many different ways!
At my request he
arranged a special store-room for the sadhus. He provided me with
carriage
and palanquin. And whatever I asked him to give to anyone, he gave. The
Brahmani2
identified him with Prataprudra.3

"Vijay had a vision of this form [meaning himself]. How do you account
for it? Vijay said to me, 'I touched it exactly as I am touching you
now.'

"Latu counted thirty-one devotees in all. That's not many. But a few
more are becoming devotees through Vijay and Kedar.

"It was revealed to me in a vision that during my last days I should
have
to live on pudding. During my present illness my wife was one day
feeding
me with pudding. I burst into tears and said, 'Is this my living on
pudding
near the end, and so painfully?'"

Monday, January 4, 1886

It was the fourteenth day of the dark fortnight of the moon.
At four
o'clock in the afternoon Sri Ramakrishna was sitting in his room. He
told M.
that Ram Chatterji had come from the Kali temple at Dakshineswar to
inquire about his health. He asked M. whether it was now very cold at
the
temple garden.

Narendra arrived. Now and then the Master looked at him and smiled.
It appeared to M. that that day the Master's love for his beloved
disciple
was boundless. He indicated to M. by a sign that Narendra had wept.
Then
he remained quiet. Again he indicated that Narendra had cried all the
way from home.

No one spoke. Narendra broke the silence.

NARENDRA: "I have been thinking of going there today."

MASTER: "Where?"

NARENDRA: "To Dakshineswar. I intend to light a fire under the bel-tree
and meditate."

MASTER: "No, the authorities of the powder-magazine will not allow it.
The, Panchavati is a nice place. Many sadhus have practised japa and
meditation there. But it is very cold there. The place is dark, too."

Again for a few moments all sat in silence.

MASTER (to Narendra, smiling): "Won't you continue
your studies?"

NARENDRA (looking at the Master and M.): "I shall
feel greatly relieved
if I find a medicine that will make me forget all I have studied."

The elder Copal, who was also in the room, said, "I shall accompany
Narendra."

Kalipada Ghosh had brought a box of grapes for Sri Ramakrishna; it
lay beside the Master. The Master gave Narendra a few and poured the
rest
on the floor for the devotees to pick up.

It was evening. Narendra was sitting in a room downstairs. He was
smoking and describing to M. the yearning of his soul. No one else was
with them.

NARENDRA: "I was meditating here last Saturday when suddenly I felt a
peculiar sensation in my heart."

M: "It was the awakening of the Kundalini."

NARENDRA: "Probably it was. I clearly perceived the Ida and the Pingala
nerves. I asked Hazra to feel my chest. Yesterday I saw him [meaning
the
Master] upstairs and told him about it. I said to him: 'All the others
have
had their realization; please give me some. All have succeeded; shall I
alone remain unsatisfied?'"

M: "What did he say to you?"

NARENDRA: "He said: 'Why don't you settle your family affairs first and
then come to me? You will get everything. What do you want?' I replied,
'It is my desire to remain absorbed in samadhi continually for three or
four
days, only once in a while coming down to the sense plane to eat a
little
food,' Thereupon he said to me: 'You are a very small-minded person.
There
is a State higher even than that. "All that exists art Thou" — it is
you who
sing that song.'"

M: "Yes, he always says that after coming down from samadhi one sees
that it is God Himself who has become the universe, the living beings,
and
all that exists. The Isvarakotis alone can attain that state. An
ordinary man
can at the most attain samadhi; but he cannot come down from that
state."

NARENDRA: "He [the Master] said: 'Settle your family affairs and then
come to me. You will attain a state higher than samadhi.' I went home
this
morning. My people scolded me, saying: 'Why do you wander about like a
vagabond? Your law examination is near at hand and you are not paying
any attention to your studies. You wander about aimlessly.'"

M: "Did your mother say anything?"

NARENDRA: "No. She was very eager to feed me. She gave me venison. I
ate a little, though I didn't feel like eating meat."

M: "And then?"

NARENDRA: "I went to my study at my grandmother's. As I tried to read
I was seized with a great fear, as if studying were a terrible thing.
My heart
struggled within me. I burst into tears: I never wept so bitterly in my
life.
I left my books and ran away. I ran along the streets. My shoes slipped
from
my feet — I didn't know where. I ran past a haystack and got hay all
over
me. I kept on running along the road to Cossipore."

Narendra remained silent a few minutes and then resumed.

NARENDRA: "Since reading the Vivekachudamani I have
felt very much
depressed. In it Sankaracharya says that only through great tapasya and
good fortune does one acquire these three things: a human birth, the
desire
for liberation, and refuge with a great soul. I said to myself: 'I have
surely
gained all these three. As a result of great tapasya I have been born a
human
being; through great tapasya, again, I have the desire for liberation;
and
through great tapasya I have secured the companionship of such a great
soul.'"

M: "Ah!"

NARENDRA: "I have no more taste for the world. I do not relish the
company of those who live in the world — of course, with the exception
of one or two devotees."

Narendra became silent again. A fire of intense renunciation was
burning
within him. His soul was restless tor the vision of God. He resumed the
conversation.

NARENDRA (to M.): "You have found peace, but my soul
is restless. You
are blessed indeed."

M. did not reply, but sat in silence. He said to himself, "Sri
Ramakrishna
said that one must pant and pine for God; only then may one have the
vision of Him."

Immediately after dusk M. went upstairs. He found Sri Ramakrishna
asleep.

It was about nine o'clock in the evening. Niranjan and Sashi were
sitting
near the Master. He was awake. Every now and then he talked of Narendra.

MASTER: "How wonderful Narendra's state of mind is! You see, this very
Narendra did not believe in the forms of God. And now you see how his
soul is panting for God! You know that story of the man who asked his
guru how God could be realized. The guru said to him: 'Come with me. I
shall show you how one can realize God.' Saying this, he took the
disciple
to a lake and held his head under the water. After a short time he
released
the disciple and asked him, 'How did you feel?' 'I was dying for a
breath of
air!' said the disciple.

"When the soul longs and yearns for God like that, then you will know
that you do not have long to wait for His vision. The rosy colour on
the
eastern horizon shows that the sun will soon rise."

This day Sri Ramakrishna's illness was worse. In spite of much
suffering
he said many things about Narendra — though mostly by means of signs.

At night Narendra left for Dakshineswar. It was very dark, being the
night of the new moon. He was accompanied by one or two devotees. M.
spent the night at the Cossipore garden. He dreamt that he was seated
in an
assembly of sannyasis.

Tuesday, January 5, 1886

Sri Ramakrishna was sitting on his bed and talking to M. No one else
was in the room. It was about four o'clock in the afternoon.

MASTER: "If Kshirode makes a pilgrimage to Gangasagar, then please buy
a blanket for him."

M: "Yes, sir."

Sri Ramakrishna was silent a few minutes. Then he continued.

MASTER: "Well, can you tell me what is happening to these youngsters?
Some are running off to Puri and some to Gangasagar. All have renounced
their homes. Look at Narendra! When a man is seized with the spirit of
intense renunciation, he regards the world as a deep well and his
relatives
as venomous cobras."

M: "Yes, sir. Life in the world is full of suffering."

MASTER: "Yes, it is the suffering of hell — and that from the very
moment
of birth! Don't you see what a trouble one's wife and children are?"

M: "Yes, sir. You yourself said: 'These youngsters (The Master had
meant his young disciples.)
have no relationship whatsoever with the world. They owe nothing to the
world, nor do they
expect anything from it. It is the sense of obligation that entangles a
man in the world.'"

MASTER: "Don't you see how Niranjan is? His attitude toward the world
is this: 'Here, take what is thine, and give me what is mine.' That is
all. He
has no further relationship with the world. There is nothing to pull
him from behind.

"'Woman and gold' alone is the world. Don't you see that if you have
money you want to lay it by?"

M. burst out laughing. Sri Ramakrishna also laughed.

M: "One thinks a great deal before taking the money out. (Both
laugh.)

But once you said at Dakshineswar that it is quite different if one is
able
to live in the world free from the three gunas."

MASTER: "Yes — like a child!"

M: "Yes, sir. But it is exceedingly difficult; it requires tremendous
power."

Sri Ramakrishna remained silent.

M: "Yesterday they went to Dakshineswar to meditate. I had a dream."

MASTER: "What did you dream?"

M: "I dreamt that Narendra and some others had become sannyasis. They
were sitting around a lighted fire. I too was there. They were smoking
tobacco
and blowing out puffs of smoke. I told them that I could smell hemp."4

MASTER: "Mental renunciation is the essential thing. That, too, makes
one a sannyasi."

Sri Ramakrishna kept silent a few minutes and then went on.

MASTER: "But one must set fire to one's desires. Then alone can one
succeed."

M: "You said to the pundit of the Marwaris from Burrabazar that you
had the desire for bhakti. Isn't the desire for bhakti to be counted as
a desire?"

MASTER: "No, just as hinche greens are not to be counted as greens.
Hinche restrains the secretion of bile.

"Well, all my joy, all my ecstasy — where are they now?"

M: "Perhaps you are now in the state of mind that the Gita
describes as
beyond the three gunas. Sattva, rajas, and tamas are performing their
own
functions, and you yourself are unattached — unattached even to sattva."

MASTER: "Yes, the Divine Mother has put me into the state of a child.
Tell me, won't the body live through this illness?"

The Master and M. became silent. Narendra entered the room. He was
going home to settle his family affairs.

Since his father's death Narendra had been in great distress about his
mother and brothers. Now and then they had been threatened with
starvation.
Narendra was the family's only hope: they expected him to earn money
and feed them. But Narendra could not appear for his law examination;
he
was passing through a state of intense renunciation. He was going to
Calcutta that day to make some provision for the family.
A friend had agreed to lend him one hundred rupees. That would take
care of the family for three months.

NARENDRA: "I am going home. (To M.) I shall visit
Mahimacharan on
the way. Will you come with me?"

M. did not want to go. Looking at M., Sri Ramakrishna asked Narendra,
"Why?"

NARENDRA: "I am going that way; so I shall stop at Mahima's place and
have a chat with him."

Sri Ramakrishna looked at Narendra intently.

NARENDRA: "A friend who comes here said he would lend me a hundred
rupees. That will take care of the family for three months. I am going
home
to make that arrangement."

Sri Ramakrishna remained silent and looked at M.

M. (to Narendra): "No, you go ahead. I shall go
later."

Thursday, March 11, 1886

It was eight o'clock in the evening. Sri Ramakrishna was in
the big hall
on the second floor. Narendra, Sashi, M., Sarat, and the elder Gopal
were
in the room. Sri Ramakrishna was lying down. Sarat stood by his bed and
fanned him. The Master was speaking about his illness.

MASTER: "If some of you go to Dakshineswar and see Bholanath, he will
give you a medicinal oil and also tell you how to apply it."

THE ELDER GOPAL: "Then we shall
go for the oil tomorrow morning."

M: "If someone goes this evening he can bring the oil."

SASHI: "I can go."

MASTER (pointing to Sarat): "He may go."

After a time Sarat set out for Dakshineswar to get the oil from
Bholanath.

The devotees, sitting around Sri Ramakrishna's bed, were silent.
Suddenly the Master sat up. He spoke to Narendranath.

MASTER: "Brahman is without taint. The three gunas are in Brahman,
but It is Itself untainted by them.

"You may find both good and bad smells in the air; but the air itself
is unaffected.

"Sankaracharya was going along a street in Benares. An outcaste
carrying
a load of meat suddenly touched him. 'What!' said Sankara. 'You have
touched me!' 'Revered sir,' said the outcaste, 'I have not touched you
nor
have you touched me. The Atman is above all contamination, and you are
that Pure Atman.'

"Of Brahman and maya, the jnani rejects maya.

"Maya is like a veil. You see, I hold this towel between you and the
lamp.
You no longer see the light of the lamp."

Sri Ramakrishna put the towel between himself and the devotees.

MASTER: "Now you cannot see my face any more. As Ramprasad said,
'Raise the curtain, and behold!'

"The bhakta, however, does not ignore maya. He worships Mahamaya.
Taking refuge in Her, he says: 'O Mother, please stand aside from my
path. Only if You step out of my way shall I have the Knowledge of
Brahman.' The jnanis explain away all three states — waking, dream, and
deep
sleep. But the bhaktas accept them all. As long as there is the ego,
everything else exists. So long as the 'I' exists, the bhakta sees that
it is God who
has become maya, the universe, the living beings, and the twenty-four
cosmic principles."

Narendra and the other devotees sat silently listening.

MASTER: "But the theory of maya is dry. (To Narendra)
Repeat what
I said."

NARENDRA: "Maya is dry."

Sri Ramakrishna affectionately stroked Narendra's face and hands, and
said: "Your face and hands show that you are a bhakta. But the jnani
has
different features; they are dry.

"Even after attaining jnana, the jnani can live in the world, retaining
vidyamaya, that is to say, bhakti, compassion, renunciation, and such
virtues.
This serves him two purposes: first, the teaching of men, and second,
the
enjoyment of divine bliss. If a jnani remains silent, merged in
samadhi,
then men's hearts will not be illumined. Therefore Sankaracharya kept
the
'ego of Knowledge'. And further, a jnani lives as a devotee, in the
company
of bhaktas, in order to enjoy and drink deep of the Bliss of God.

"The 'ego of Knowledge' and the 'ego of Devotion' can do no harm; it is
the 'wicked I' that is harmful. After realizing God a man becomes like
a
child. There is no harm in the 'ego of a child'. It is like the
reflection of a
face in a mirror: the reflection cannot call names. Or it is like a
burnt rope,
which appears to be a rope but disappears at the slightest puff. The
ego
that has been burnt in the fire of Knowledge cannot injure anybody. It
is an
ego only in name.

"Returning to the relative plane after reaching the Absolute is like
coming back to this shore of a river after going to the other side.
Such a return
to the relative plane is for the teaching of men and for enjoyment —
participation in the divine sport in the world."

Sri Ramakrishna was talking in a very low voice. Addressing the
devotees,
he said: "The body is so ill, but the mind is free from avidyamaya. Let
me
tell you, there is no thought in my mind of Ramlal or home or wife. But
I
have been worrying about Purna, that kayastha boy. I am not in the
least
anxious about the others.

"It is God alone who has kept this vidyamaya in me, for the good of
men,
for the welfare of the devotees.

"But if one retains vidyamaya one comes back to this world. The Avatars
keep this vidyamaya. So long as a man has even the slightest desire, he
must
be born again and again. When he gets rid of all desires, then he is
liberated. But the bhaktas do not seek liberation.

"If a person dies in Benares he attains liberation; he is not born
again.
Liberation is the goal of the jnanis."

NARENDRA: "The other day we went to visit Mahimacharan."

MASTER (smiling): "Well?"

NARENDRA: "I have never before met such a dry jnani."

MASTER (smiling): "What was the matter?"

NARENDRA: "He asked us to sing. Gangadhar sang:

Radha is restored to life by hearing her Krishna's name.

She looks about; in front of her she sees a tamala tree.

"On hearing this song, Mahimacharan said: 'Why such songs
here? I
don't care for love and all that nonsense. Besides, I live here with my
wife
and children. Why all these songs here?'"

MASTER (to M.): "Do you see how afraid he is?"

Sunday, March 14, 1886

Sri Ramakrishna sat facing the north in the large room upstairs. It was
evening. He was very ill. Narendra and Rakhal were gently massaging his
feet. M; sat near by. The Master, by a sign, asked him, too, to stroke
his
feet. M. obeyed.

The previous Sunday the devotees had observed Sri Ramakrishna's
birthday with worship and prayer. His birthday the year before had been
observed at Dakshineswar with great pomp; but this year, on account of
his
illness, the devotees were very sad and there was no festivity at all.

The Holy Mother busied herself day and night in the Master's service.
Among the young disciples, Narendra, Rakhal, Niranjan, Sarat, Sashi,
Baburam, Jogin, Latu, and Kali had been staying with him at the garden
house.
The older devotees visited him daily, and some of them occasionally
spent
the night there.

That day Sri Ramakrishna was feeling very ill. At midnight the
moonlight
flooded the garden, but it could wake no response in the devotees'
hearts.
They were drowned in a sea of grief. They felt that they were living in
a
beautiful city besieged by a hostile army. Perfect silence reigned
everywhere.
Nature was still, except for the gentle rustling of the leaves at the
touch of
the south wind. Sri Ramakrishna lay awake. One or two devotees sat near
him in silence. At times he seemed to doze.

M. was seated by his side. Sri Ramakrishna asked him by a sign to come
nearer. The sight of his suffering was unbearable. In a very soft voice
and
with, great difficulty he said to M.:

"I have gone on suffering so much for fear of making you all weep. But
if you all say: 'Oh, there is so much suffering! Let the body die',
then I may
give up the body."

These words pierced the devotees' hearts. And he who was their father,
mother, and protector had uttered these words! What could they say? All
sat
in silence. Some thought, "Is this another crucifixion — the sacrifice
of the
body for the sake of the devotees?"

It was the dead of night. Sri Ramakrishna's illness was taking a turn
for
the worse. The devotees wondered what was to be done. One of them left
for Calcutta. That very night Girish came to the garden house with two
physicians, Upendra and Navagopal.

The devotees sat near the Master. He felt a little better and said to
them:
"The illness is of the body. That is as it should be; I see that the
body is
made of the five elements."

Turning to Girish, he said: "I am seeing many forms of God. Among them
I find this one also [meaning his own form]."

Monday, March 15, 1886

About seven o'clock in the morning Sri Ramakrishna felt a
little better.
He talked to the devotees, sometimes in a whisper, sometimes by signs.
Narendra, Rakhal, Latu, M., Gopal of Sinthi, and others were in the
room.
They sat speechless and looked grave, thinking of the Master's
suffering of
the previous night.

MASTER (to the devotees): "Do you know what I see
right now? I see
that it is God Himself who has become all this. It seems to me that men
and other living beings are made of leather, and that it is God Himself
who,
dwelling inside these leather cases, moves the hands, the feet, the
heads. I
had a similar vision once before, when I saw houses, gardens, roads,
men,
cattle — all made of One Substance; it was as if they were all made of
wax.

"I see that it is God Himself who has become the block, the
executioner,
and the victim for the sacrifice."

As he describes this staggering experience, in which he realizes in
full the
identity of all within the One Being, he is overwhelmed with emotion
and
exclaims, "Ah! What a vision!"

Immediately Sri Ramakrishna goes into samadhi. He completely forgets
his body and the outer world. The devotees are bewildered. Not knowing
what to do, they sit still.

Presently the Master regains partial consciousness of the world and
says:
"Now I have no pain at all. I am my old self again."

The devotees are amazed to watch this state of the Master, beyond
pleasure and pain, weal and woe.

He casts his glance on Latu and says: "There is Loto. He bends his
head,
resting it on the palm of his hand. I see that it is God Himself who
rests
His head on His hand."

Sri Ramakrishna looks at the devotees and his love for them wells up in
a thousand streams. Like a mother showing her tenderness to her
children
he touches the faces and chins of Rakhal and Narendra.

A few minutes later he says to M., "If the body were to be preserved a
few days more, many people would have their spirituality awakened."

He pauses a few minutes.

"But this is not to be. This time the body will not be preserved."

The devotees eagerly await the Master's next words.

"Such is not the will of God. This time the body will not be preserved,
lest, finding me guileless and foolish, people should take advantage of
me,
and lest I, guileless and foolish as I am, should give away everything
to
everybody. In this Kaliyuga, you see, people are averse to meditation
and
japa."

RAKHAL (tenderly): "Please speak to God that He may
preserve your
body some time more."

MASTER: "That depends on God's will."

NARENDRA: "Your will and God's will have become one."

Sri Ramakrishna remains silent. He appears to be thinking about
something.

MASTER (to Narendra, Rakhal, and the others): "And
nothing will
happen if I speak to God. Now I see that I and the Mother have become
one. For fear of her sister-in-law, Radha said to Krishna, 'Please
dwell in my
heart.' But when, later on; she became very eager for a vision of
Krishna —
so eager that her heart pined and panted for her Beloved — He would not
come out."

RAKHAL (in a low voice, to the devotees): "He is
referring to God's
Incarnation as Gauranga."5

The devotees sit silently in the room. Sri Ramakrishna looks at them
tenderly. Then he places his hand on his heart. He is about to speak.

MASTER (to Narendra and the others): "There are two
persons in this.
One, the Divine Mother—"

He pauses. The devotees eagerly look at him to hear what he will say
next.

MASTER: "Yes, one is She. And the other is Her devotee. It is the
devotee
who broke his arm, and it is the devotee who is now ill. Do you
understand?"

The devotees sit without uttering a word.

MASTER: "Alas! To whom shall I say all this? Who will understand me?"

Pausing a few moments, He says:

"God becomes man, an Avatar, and comes to earth with His devotees. And
the devotees leave the world with Him."

RAKHAL: "Therefore we pray that you may not go away and leave us
behind."

Sri Ramakrishna smiles and says:

"A band of minstrels suddenly appears, dances, and sings, and it
departs
in the same sudden manner. They come and they return, but none
recognizes them."

The Master and the devotees smile.

After a few minutes he says:

"Suffering is inevitable when one assumes a human body.

"Every now and then I say to myself, 'May I not have to come back to
earth again!' But there is something else. After enjoying sumptuous
feasts
outside, one does not relish cheap home cooking.

"Besides, this assuming of a human body is for the sake of the
devotees."

Sri Ramakrishna looks at Narendra very tenderly.

MASTER (to Narendra): "An outcaste was carrying a
load of meat.
Sankaracharya, after bathing in the Ganges, was passing by. Suddenly
the
outcaste touched him. Sankara said sharply: 'What! You touched me!'
'Revered sir,' he replied, 'I have not touched you nor have you touched
me.
Reason with me: Are you the body, the mind, or the buddhi? Analyse what
you are. You are the Pure Atman, unattached and free, unaffected by the
three gunas — sattva, rajas, and tamas.'

"Do you know what Brahman is like? It is like air. Good and bad smells
are carried by the air, but the air itself is unaffected."

NARENDRA: "Yes, sir."

MASTER: "He is beyond the gunas and maya — beyond both the 'maya
of knowledge' and the 'maya of ignorance'. 'Woman and gold' is the
'maya
of ignorance'. Knowledge, renunciation, devotion, and other spiritual
qualities are the splendours of the 'maya of knowledge'. Sankaracharya
kept this
'maya of knowledge'; and that you and these others feel concerned about
me is also due to this 'maya of knowledge'.

"Following the 'maya of knowledge' step by step, one attains the
Knowledge of Brahman. This 'maya of knowledge' may be likened to the
last few
steps of the stairs. Next is the roof. Some, even after reaching the
roof, go
up and down the stairs; that is to say, some, even after realizing God,
retain
the 'ego of Knowledge'. They retain this in order to teach others,
taste divine
bliss, and sport with the devotees of God."

NARENDRA: "Some people get angry with me when I speak of renunciation."

MASTER (in a whisper): "Renunciation is necessary.

(Pointing to his different limbs) "If one thing is
placed upon another,
you must remove the one to get the other. Can you get the second thing
without removing the first?"

NARENDRA: "True, sir."

MASTER (in a whisper, to Narendra): "When one sees
everything filled
with God alone, does one see anything else?"

NARENDRA: "Must one renounce the world?"

MASTER: "Didn't I say just now: 'When one sees everything filled with
God alone, does one see anything else?' Does one then see any such
thing
as the world?

"I mean mental renunciation. Not one of those who have come here is a
worldly person. Some of them had a slight desire — for instance, a
fancy
for woman. (Rakhal and M. smile.) And that desire
has been fulfilled."

The Master looks at Narendra tenderly and becomes filled with love.
Looking, at the devotees, he says, "Grand!"

With a smile Narendra asks the Master, "What is grand?"

MASTER (smiling): "I see that preparations are going on for a
grand
renunciation."

Narendra and the devotees look silently at the Master. Rakhal resumes
the conversation.

RAKHAL (smiling, to the Master): "Narendra is now beginning
to
understand you rather well."

Sri Ramakrishna laughs and says: "Yes, that is so. I see that many
others,
too, are beginning to understand. (To M.) Isn't that
so?"

M: "Yes, sir."

Sri Ramakrishna turns his eyes to Narendra and M. and by a sign of his
finger draws the attention of the devotees to them. He first points out
Narendra and then M. Rakhal understands the Master's hint and says to
him with a smile, "Don't you mean that Narendra has the attitude of a
hero, and he [meaning M.] that of a handmaid of God?"

Sri Ramakrishna laughs.

NARENDRA (smiling, to Rakhal): "He [meaning M.]
doesn't talk much
and is bashful. Is that why you say he is a handmaid of God?"

MASTER (smiling, to Narendra): "Well, what do you
think of me?"

NARENDRA: "You are a hero, a handmaid of God, and everything else."

These words fill Sri Ramakrishna with divine emotion. He places his
hand
on his heart and is about to say something.

He says to Narendra and the other devotees:

"I see that all things — everything that exists — have come from this."

He asks Narendra by a sign, "What did you understand?"

NARENDRA: "All created objects have come from you."

The Master's face beams with joy. He says to Rakhal, "Did you hear
what" he said?"

Sri Ramakrishna asks Narendra to sing. Narendra intones a hymn. His
mind is full of renunciation. He sings:

Unsteady is water on the lotus petal;

Just as unsteady is the life of man.

One moment with a sadhu is the boat

That takes one across the ocean of this world. . . .

Narendra has hardly finished one or two lines, when Sri
Ramakrishna
says to him by a sign: "What are you singing? That is a very
insignificant
attitude, a very commonplace thing."

Now Narendra sings about the love of Krishna, impersonating one of
His handmaids:

How strange, O friend, are the rules of life and death!

The Youth of Braja has fled away,

And this poor maid of Braja soon will die.

Madhava is in love with other maids

More beautiful than I.

Alas! He has forgotten the milkman's artless daughter.

Who would ever have guessed, dear friend, that He,

A Lover so tender, so divine,

Could be a beggar simply for outward charm!

I was a fool not to have seen it before;

But carried away by His beauty,

I yearned alone to hold His two feet to my breast.

Now I shall drown myself in the Jamuna's stream,

Or take a draught of poison, friend!

Or I shall bind a creeper round my neck,

Or hang myself from a young tamala tree;

Or, failing all of these,

Destroy my wretched self by chanting Krishna's name.

Sri Ramakrishna and the devotees are greatly moved by the
song. The
Master and Rakhal shed tears of love. Narendra is intoxicated with the
love
of the gopis of Braja for their Sweetheart, Sri Krishna, and sings:

O Krishna! Beloved! You are mine.

What shall I say to You, O Lord?

What shall I ever say to You?

Only a woman am I,

And never fortune's favourite;

I do not know what to say.

You are the mirror for the hand,

And You are the flower for the hair.

O Friend, I shall make a flower of You

And wear You in my hair;

Under my braids I shall hide You, Friend!

No one will see You there.

You are the betel-leaf for the lips,

The sweet collyrium for the eyes;

O Friend, with You I shall stain my lips,

With You I shall paint my eyes.

You are the sandal-paste for the body;

You are the necklace for the neck.

I shall anoint myself with You,

My fragrant Sandal-paste,

And soothe my body and my soul.

I shall wear You, my lovely Necklace,

Here about my neck,

And You will lie upon my bosom,

Close to my throbbing heart.

You are the Treasure in my body;

You are the Dweller in my house.

You are to me, O Lord,

What wings are to the flying bird,

What water is to the fish.

^Shashadhar
and Krishnaprasanna were two well-known Hindu preachers,
contemporaries of Sri Ramakrishna.

^The
brahmin woman who was one of the Master's spiritual teachers.

^A
king of Orissa and a devoted follower of Chaitanyadeva, whom he served
with the utmost love and faithfulness.

^Many
wandering sannyasis smoke Indian hemp.

^According
to the Bengal school of Vaishnavism Sri Krishna wanted to taste and
enjoy His own sweetness as Radha did. But this could not be done to the
fullest
extent unless Krishna were infatuated with Himself, as Radha had been.
Accordingly
He assumed a form in which all the aspects of the Krishna of Vrindavan
and those
of Radha coexisted; and in this aspect Krishna enjoyed His own charm
and
sweetness. This form is known as Sri Gauranga, who was a blending of
Radha and
Krishna.


=== 50_master_and_buddha.htm ===

The Master and Buddha

←
Home
/ The Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna
/ Volume 2
/ →

THE MASTER AND BUDDHA

Narendra's visit to Bodh-Gaya — Buddha's doctrines — The meaning
of Buddha — Narendra's enthusiasm about Buddha — Master about
himself — Master's vision of God — Different kinds of samadhi — Power
of God's name — Surendra's faith — Master's love for Girish — Nature
of the mind — Monks and householders — About Rakhal — Radha's
love for Krishna — The crazy woman — Good use of money —
Master's anxiety about M.'s wife.

Friday, April 9, 1886

IT WAS FIVE O'CLOCK in the afternoon. Narendra, Kali,
Niranjan, and M.
were talking downstairs in the Cossipore garden house.

NIRANJAN (to M.): "Is it true that Vidyasagar is
going to open a new
school? Why don't you try to secure employment there for Naren?"

NARENDRA: "I have had enough of service under Vidyasagar."

Narendra had just returned from a visit to Bodh-Gaya, where he had
gone with Kali and Tarak. In that sacred place he had been absorbed in
deep meditation before the image of Buddha. He had paid his respects to
the Bodhi-tree, which is an offshoot of the original tree under which
Buddha
attained Nirvana.

Kali said, "One day at Gaya, at Umesh Babu's house, Narendra sang
many classical songs to the accompaniment of the mridanga."

Sri Ramakrishna sat on his bed in the big hall upstairs. It was
evening.
M. was alone in the room, fanning the Master. Latu came in a little
later.

MASTER (to M.): "Please bring a chaddar for me and a
pair of slippers."

M: "Yes, sir."

MASTER (to Latu): "The chaddar will cost ten annas,
and then the
slippers — what will be the total cost?"

LATU: "One rupee and ten annas."

Sri Ramakrishna asked M., by a sign, to note the price.

Narendra entered the room and took a seat. Sashi, Rakhal, and one or
two other devotees came in. The Master asked Narendra to stroke his
feet.
He also asked him whether he had taken his meal.

MASTER (smiling, to M.): "He went there [referring
to Bodh-Gaya]."

M. (to Narendra): "What are the doctrines of Buddha?"

NARENDRA: "He could not express in words what he had realized by his
tapasya. So people say he was an atheist."

MASTER (by signs): "Why atheist? He was not an
atheist. He simply
could not express his inner experiences in words. Do you know what
'Buddha' means? It is to become one with Bodha, Pure Intelligence, by
meditating on That which is of the nature of Pure Intelligence; it is
to
become Pure Intelligence Itself."

NARENDRA: "Yes, sir. There are three classes of Buddhas: Buddha, Arhat,
and Bodhisattva."

MASTER: "This too is a sport of God Himself, a new lila of God.

"Why should Buddha be called an atheist? When one realizes Svarupa,
the true nature of one's Self, one attains a state that is something
between
asti, is, and nasti, is-not."

NARENDRA (to M.): "It is a state in which
contradictions meet. A
combination of hydrogen and oxygen produces cool water; and the same
hydrogen
and oxygen are used in the oxy-hydrogen blowpipe.

"In that state both activity and non-activity are possible; that is to
say,
one then performs unselfish action.

"Worldly people, who are engrossed in sense-objects, say that
everything
exists — asti. But the mayavadis, the illusionists,
say that nothing exists —
nasti. The experience of a Buddha is beyond both
'existence' and 'non-existence'."

MASTER: "This 'existence' and 'non-existence' are attributes of
Prakriti.
The Reality is beyond both."

The devotees remained silent a few moments.

MASTER (to Narendra): "What did Buddha preach?"

NARENDRA: "He did not discuss the existence or non-existence of God.
But he showed compassion for others all his life.

"A hawk pounced upon a bird and was about to devour it. In order to
save the bird, Buddha gave the hawk his own flesh."

Sri Ramakrishna remained silent. Narendra became more and more
enthusiastic about Buddha.

NARENDRA: "How great his renunciation was! Born a prince, he renounced
everything! If a man has nothing, no wealth at all, what does his
renunciation amount to? After attaining Buddhahood and experiencing
Nirvana,
Buddha once visited his home and exhorted his wife, his son, and many
others of the royal household to embrace the life of renunciation. How
intense his renunciation was! But look at Vyasa's conduct! He forbade
his
son Sukadeva to give up the world, saying, 'My son, practise religion
as a householder.'"

Sri Ramakrishna was silent. As yet he had not uttered a word.

NARENDRA: "Buddha did not care for Sakti or any such thing. He sought
only Nirvana. Ah, how intense his dispassion was! When he sat down
under
the Bodhi-tree to meditate, he took this vow: 'Let my body wither away
here if I do not attain Nirvana.' Such a firm resolve!

"This body, indeed, is the great enemy. Can anything be achieved
without
chastising it?"

SASHI: "But it is you who say that one develops sattva by eating meat.
You insist that one should eat meat."

NARENDRA: "I eat meat, no doubt, but I can also live on rice, mere
rice,
even without salt."

After a few minutes Sri Ramakrishna broke his silence. He asked
Narendra, by a sign, whether he had seen a tuft of hair on Buddha's
head.

NARENDRA: "No, sir. He seems to have a sort of crown; his head seems
to be covered by strings of rudraksha beads placed on top of one
another."

MASTER: "And his eyes?"

NARENDRA: "They show that he is in samadhi."

Sri Ramakrishna again became silent. Narendra and the other devotees
looked at him intently. Suddenly a smile lighted his face and he began
to
talk with Narendra. M. was fanning him.

MASTER (to Narendra): "Well, here you find
everything — even ordinary
red lentils and tamarind. Isn't that so?"

NARENDRA: "After experiencing all those states, you are now dwelling on
a lower plane."

M. (to himself): "Yes, after realizing all those
ideals, he is now living as a
bhakta, a devotee of God."

MASTER: "Someone seems to be holding me to a lower plane."

Saying this, Sri Ramakrishna took the fan from M.'s hand and said: "As
I
see this fan, directly before me, in exactly the
same manner have I seen
God. And I have seen —"

With these words he placed his hand on his heart and asked Narendra,
by a sign, "Can you tell me what I said?"

NARENDRA: "I have understood."

MASTER: "Tell me."

NARENDRA: "I didn't hear you well."

Sri Ramakrishna said again, by a sign, "I have seen that He and the one
who dwells in my heart are one and the same Person."

NARENDRA: "Yes, yes! Soham — I am He."

MASTER: "But only a line divides the two — that I may enjoy divine
bliss."

NARENDRA (to M.): "Great souls, even after their own
liberation, retain
the ego and experience the pleasure and pain of the body that they may
help
others to attain liberation.

"It is like coolie work. We perform coolie work under compulsion, but
great souls do so of their own sweet pleasure."

Again all fell into silence. After a time Sri Ramakrishna resumed the
conversation.

MASTER (to Narendra and the others): "The roof is
clearly visible; but
it is extremely hard to reach it."

NARENDRA: "Yes, sir."

MASTER: "But if someone who has already reached it drops down a rope,
he can pull another person up.

"Once a sadhu from Hrishikesh came to Dakshineswar. He said to me:
'How amazing! I find five kinds of samadhi manifested in you.'

"Just as a monkey climbs a tree, jumping from one branch to another, so
also does the Mahavayu, the Great Energy, rise in the body, jumping
from
one centre to another, and one goes into samadhi. One feels the rising
of the
Great Energy, as though it were the movement of a monkey.

"Just as a fish darts about in the water and roams in great happiness,
so
also does the Mahavayu move upward in the body, and one goes into
samadhi. One feels the rising of the Great Energy, as though it were
the
movement of a fish.

"Like a bird hopping from one branch to another, the Mahavayu goes
up in the tree of the body, now to this branch and now to that. One
feels
the rising of the Great Energy, as though it were the movement of a
bird.

"Like the slow creeping of an ant, the Mahavayu rises from centre to
centre. When it reaches the Sahasrara one goes into samadhi. One feels
the
rising of the Great Energy, as though it were the movement of an ant.

"Like the wriggling of a snake, the Mahavayu rises in a zigzag way
along
the spinal column till it reaches the Sahasrara, and one goes into
samadhi.
One feels the rising of the Great Energy, as though it were the
movement
of a snake."

RAKHAL (to the other devotees): "Let us stop here.
He has already talked
a great deal. It will aggravate his illness."

Monday, April 12, 1886

About five o'clock in the afternoon Sri Ramakrishna was
sitting on the
bed in his room in the Cossipore garden house. Sashi and M. were with
him. He asked M., by a sign, to fan him. There was a fair in the
neighbourhood in celebration of the last day of the Bengali year. A
devotee, whom
Sri Ramakrishna had sent to the fair to buy a few articles, returned.

"What have you bought?" the Master asked him.

DEVOTEE: "Candy for five pice, a spoon for two pice, and a
vegetable-knife
for two pice."

MASTER: "What about the penknife?"

DEVOTEE: "I couldn't get one for two pice."

MASTER (eagerly): "Go quickly and get one!'

M. was pacing the garden. Narendra and Tarak returned from Calcutta.
They had visited Girish Ghosh's house and other places.

TARAK: "We have eaten a great deal of meat and other heavy stuff today."

NARENDRA: "Yes, our minds have come down a great deal. Let us practise
tapasya. (To M.) What slavery to body and mind! We
are just like coolies —
as if this body and mind were not ours but belonged to someone else."

In the evening lamps were lighted in the house. Sri Ramakrishna sat on
his bed, facing the north. He was absorbed in contemplation of the
Mother
of the Universe. A few minutes later Fakir, who belonged to the
priestly
family of Balaram, recited the Hymn of Forgiveness addressed to the
Divine
Mother. Sash;, M., and two or three other devotees were in the room.
After
the recital Sri Ramakrishna, with folded hands, very respectfully bowed
to the Deity.

M. was fanning Sri Ramakrishna. The Master said to him by signs, "Get
a stone cup for me that will hold a quarter of a seer of milk — white
stone."
He drew the shape of the cup with his finger.

M: "Yes, sir."

MASTER: "When eating from other cups I get the smell of fish."

Tuesday, April 13, 1886

It was about eight o'clock in the morning. M. had spent the
night at the
garden house. After taking his bath in the Ganges he prostrated himself
before Sri Ramakrishna. Ram had just come. He saluted the Master and
took a seat. He had brought a garland of flowers, which he offered to
the
Master. Most of the devotees were downstairs; only one or two were in
the
Master's room.

Sri Ramakrishna was talking to Ram.

MASTER: "How do you find me?"

RAM: "In you one finds everything.

"Presently there will be a discussion about your illness."

The Master smiled and asked Ram by a sign, "Will there really be a
discussion about my illness?"

Sri Ramakrishna's slippers were not comfortable. Dr. Rajendra Dutta
intended to buy a new pair1
and had asked for the measurement of his feet. The measurement was
taken.

Sri Ramakrishna asked M., by a sign, about the stone cup. M. at once
stood up. He wanted to go to Calcutta for the cup.

MASTER: "Don't bother about it now."

M: "Sir, these devotees are going to Calcutta. I will go with them."

M. bought the cup in Calcutta and returned to Cossipore at noon. He
saluted the Master and placed the cup near him. Sri Ramakrishna took
the
cup in his hands and looked at it. Dr. Rajendra Dutta, Dr. Sreenath,
Rakhal
Haldar, and several others came in. Rakhal, Sashi, and the younger
Naren
were in the room. The physicians heard the report of the Master's
illness.
Dr. Sreenath had a copy of the Gita in his hand.

DR. SREENATH (to his friends): "Everything
is under the control of Prakriti. Nobody can escape the fruit of past
action. This is called prarabdha."

MASTER: "Why, if one chants the name of God, meditates on Him, and
takes refuge in Him —"

DR. SREENATH (to his friends): "But, sir, how
can one escape prarabdha, the effect of action performed in previous
births?"

MASTER: "No doubt a man experiences a little of the effect; but much of
it is cancelled by the power of God's name. A man was born blind of an
eye.
This was his punishment for a certain misdeed he had committed in his
past birth, and the punishment was to remain with him for six more
births.
He, however, took a bath in the Ganges, which gives one liberation.
This
meritorious action could not cure his blindness, but it saved him from
his
future births."

DR. SREENATH (to his friends): "But, sir, the
scriptures say that nobody can escape the fruit of karma."

Dr. Sreenath was ready to argue with the Master.

MASTER (to M.): "Why don't you tell him that there
is a great difference
between the Isvarakoti and an ordinary man? An Isvarakoti cannot commit
sin. Why don't you tell him that?"

M. remained silent and then said to Rakhal, "You tell him."

After a few minutes the physicians left the room. Sri Ramakrishna was
talking to Rakhal Haldar.

HALDAR: "Dr. Sreenath studies Vedanta. He is a student of the Yoga-vasishtha."

MASTER: "A householder should not hold the view that everything is
illusory, like a dream."

Referring to a man named Kalidas, a devotee said, "He too discusses
Vedanta, hut he has lost all his money in lawsuits."

MASTER (smiling): "Yes, one proclaims everything to
be maya, and still
one goes to court! (To Rakhal) Mukherji of Janai,
too, talked big. But at
last he came to his senses. If I were well I should have talked a
little more
with Dr. Sreenath. Can one obtain jnana just by talking about it?"

HALDAR: "You are right, sir. I have seen enough of jnana. Now all I
need
in order to live in the world is a little bhakti. The other day I came
to you
with a problem on my mind, and you solved it."

MASTER (eagerly): "What was it?"

HALDAR: "Sir, when that boy (pointing to the younger Naren)
came in,
you said he had controlled his passions."

MASTER: "Yes, it is true. He is totally unaffected by worldliness. He
says
he doesn't know what lust is. (To M.) Just feel my
body. All the hair is standing on end."

The Master's hair actually stood on end at the thought of a pure mind
totally devoid of lust. He always said that God manifests Himself where
there is no lust.

Rakhal Haldar took his leave.

Sri Ramakrishna was seated with the devotees. A crazy woman had been
troubling everybody in order to see the Master. She had assumed toward
him the attitude of a lover and often ran into the garden house and
burst
into the Master's room. She had even been beaten by the devotees; but
that did not stop her.

SASHI: "If she comes again I shall shove her out of the place!"

MASTER (tenderly): "No, no! Let her come and go
away."

RAKHAL: "At the beginning I too used to feel jealous of others when
they
visited the Master. But he graciously revealed to me that my guru is
also
the Guru of the Universe. Has he taken this birth only for a few of us?"

SASHI: "I don't mean that. But why should she trouble him when he is
ill? And she is such a nuisance!"

RAKHAL: "We all give him trouble. Did we all come to him after
attaining
perfection? Haven't we caused him suffering? How Narendra and some of
the others behaved in the beginning! How they argued with him!"

SASHI: 'Whatever Narendra expressed in words he carried out in his
actions."
RAKHAL: "How rude Dr. Sarkar has been to him! No one is guiltless, if
it
comes to that."

MASTER (to Rakhal, tenderly): "Will you eat
something?"

RAKHAL: "Not now. Later on."

Sri Ramakrishna asked M., by a sign, whether he was going to have his
meal there.

RAKHAL (to M.): "Please take your meal here. He is
asking you to."

Sri Ramakrishna was seated completely naked. He looked like a
five-year-old
boy. Just then the crazy woman climbed the stairs and stood near the
door.

M. (in a low voice, to Sashi); "Ask her to salute
him and go away. Don't make any fuss."

Sashi took her downstairs.

It was the first day of the Bengali year. Many woman devotees arrived.
They saluted Sri Ramakrishna and the Holy Mother. Among them were
the wives of Balaram and Manomohan, and the brahmani of Baghbazar.
Several of them had brought their children along.

Some of the women offered flowers at the Master's feet. Two young
girls,
nine or ten years of age, sang a few songs.

First they sang:

We moan for rest, alas! but rest can never find;

We know not whence we come, nor where we float away.

Time and again we tread this round of smiles and tears;

In vain we pine to know whither our pathway leads,

And why we play this empty play. . . .

Then:

There comes Radha, and there see your Krishna,

With arching eyes and the flute at His lips. . . .

And finally:

O tongue, always repeat the name of Mother Durga!

Who but your Mother Durga will save you in distress? . . .

Sri Ramakrishna said by a sign: "That's good! They are singing
of the Divine Mother."

The brahmani of Baghbazar had the nature of a child. Sri Ramakrishna
told Rakhal, by a sign, to ask her to sing. The devotees smiled as the
brahmani sang:

O Hari, I shall sport with You today;

For I have found You alone in the nidhu wood. . . .

The woman devotees went downstairs.

It was afternoon. M. and a few other devotees were seated near the
Master. Narendra came in. He looked, as the Master used to say, like an
unsheathed sword.

Narendra sat down near the Master and within his hearing expressed his
utter annoyance with women. He told the devotees what an obstacle women
were in the path of God-realization.

Sri Ramakrishna made no response. He listened to Narendra.

Narendra said again: "I want peace. I do not care even for God."

Sri Ramakrishna looked at him intently without uttering a word. Now
and then Narendra chanted, "Brahman is Truth, Knowledge, the Infinite."

It was eight o'clock in the evening. Sri Ramakrishna sat on his bed. A
few devotees sat on the floor in front of him. Surendra arrived from
his
office. He carried in his hands four oranges and two garlands of
flowers.
Now he looked at the Master and now at the devotees. He unburdened his
heart to Sri Ramakrishna.

SURENDRA (looking at M. and the others): "I have
come after finishing
my office work. I thought, 'What is the good of standing on two boats
at
the same time?' So I finished my duties first and then came here. Today
is
the first day of the year; it is also Tuesday, an auspicious day to
worship
the Divine Mother. But I didn't go to Kalighat. I said to myself, 'It
will be
enough if I see him who is Kali Herself, and who has rightly understood
Kali.'"

Sri Ramakrishna smiled.

SURENDRA: "It is said that a man should bring fruit and flowers when
visiting his guru or a holy man. So I have brought these. . . . (To
the
Master) I am spending all this money for you. God alone knows
my heart.
Some people feel grieved to give away a penny; and there are people who
spend a thousand rupees without feeling any hesitation. God sees the
inner
love of a devotee and accepts his offering."

Sri Ramakrishna said to Surendra, by a nod, that he was right.

SURENDRA: "I couldn't come here yesterday. It was the last day of the
year. But I decorated your picture with flowers."

Sri Ramakrishna said to M., by a sign, "Ah, what devotion!"

SURENDRA: "As I was coming here I bought these two garlands for four
annas."

Almost all the devotees took their leave. The Master asked M. to stroke
his legs and fan him.

Friday, April 16, 1886

The moon was shining brilliantly, flooding the garden paths, the trees,
and the water of the lake with its white rays. Girish, M., Latu, and a
few
other devotees were seated on the steps leading to the lake. The house
stood to
the west of the lake. A lamp burnt in the Master's room on the second
floor.
Sri Ramakrishna was sitting on his bed. There were several devotees in
the room.

A few minutes later Girish and M. were strolling along a garden path
lined with flowering plants and fruit-trees.

M: "'How beautiful this moonlight is! Perhaps nature has had the same
laws from time out of mind."

GIRISH: "How do you know that?"

M: "There is no change in the uniformity of nature. European scientists
have been discovering new stars through the telescope. There are
mountains on the moon; they have seen them."

GIRISH: "It is difficult to be sure of that. It is hard for me to
believe it."

M: "Why? The mountains have been observed through the telescope."

GIRISH: "How can you be sure that they have been rightly observed?
Suppose there are other things between the moon and the earth. Light
passing through them may conjure up such visions."

Narendra, Rakhal, Niranjan, Sarat, Sashi, Baburam, Kali, Jogin, Latu,
and a few other young devotees had been living at the Cossipore garden
house in order to nurse Sri Ramakrishna. That evening Narendra, Kali,
and
Tarak had gone to Dakshineswar. They were going to spend the night in
the Panchavati, meditating on God.

Girish, Latu, and M. went to Sri Ramakrishna's room and found him
sitting on the bed. Sashi and one or two devotees had been tending the
Master. Baburam, Niranjan, and Rakhal also entered the room. It was a
large room. Some medicines and a few other accessories were kept near
the
bed. One entered the room by a door at the north end.

Since Sri Ramakrishna had to be tended all night, the devotees stayed
awake by turns. The devotee who tended him fixed Sri Ramakrishna's
mosquito net and then either lay on a mat on the floor or spent the
night
sitting up. Since Sri Ramakrishna got very little sleep on account of
his
illness, his attendant, too, slept very little.

That evening Sri Ramakrishna was somewhat better. The devotees saluted
the Master and sat down on the floor. The Master asked M. to bring the
lamp near him. He greeted Girish cordially.

MASTER (to Girish): "Are you quite well? (To
Latu) Prepare a smoke
for him and give him a betel-leaf."

A few minutes afterwards he asked Latu to give Girish some
refreshments.
Latu said that they had been sent for.

Sri Ramakrishna was sitting up. A devotee offered him some garlands of
flowers. Sri Ramakrishna put them around his neck one by one. Was he
thus worshipping God who dwelt in his heart? The devotees looked at him
wonderingly. He took two garlands from his neck and gave them to Girish.

Every now and then Sri Ramakrishna asked whether the refreshments had
been brought.

M. was fanning the Master. On the bed was a sandal-wood fan, the
offering of a devotee. The Master gave it to M., who continued to fan
him
with it. He also gave M. two garlands.

M. had lost a son aged seven or eight about a year and a half before.
The
child had seen the Master many a time. Latu was telling Sri Ramakrishna
about M.

LATU: "M. wept bitterly last night at the sight of some books that had
belonged to his dead child. His wife is almost mad with grief. She
sometimes
treats her other children violently. She creates a scene at home
because he
spends the night here now and then."

Sri Ramakrishna seemed worried to hear of this.

GIRISH: "It is nothing to be wondered at. Even after receiving the
instruction of the Bhagavad Gita, Arjuna fainted
from grief at the death of his son Abhimanyu."

Girish was given the refreshments on a tray. Sri Ramakrishna took a
grain and Girish accepted the rest as prasad. He sat in front of the
Master
and began to eat. He needed water to drink. There was an earthen jug in
the southeast corner of the room. It was the month of April, and the
day
was hot. Sri Ramakrishna said, "There is some nice water here."

The Master was so ill that he had not enough strength even to stand up.
And what did the disciples see to their utter amazement? They saw him
leave the bed, completely naked, and move toward the jug! He himself
was
going to pour the water into a tumbler. The devotees were almost frozen
with fear. The Master poured the water into a glass. He poured a drop
or
two into his hand to see whether it was cool. He found that it was not
very
cool; but since nothing better could be found, he reluctantly gave it
to Girish.

Girish was eating the sweets. The devotees were sitting about, and M.
was fanning Sri Ramakrishna.

GIRISH (to the Master): "Deben Babu has decided to
renounce the world."

On account of his illness Sri Ramakrishna could hardly talk. Touching
his lips with his finger, he asked Girish, by signs, "Who will feed his
wife
and children?"

GIRISH: "I don't know."

The other devotees remained silent. Girish began talking again while he
ate the refreshments.

GIRISH: "Sir, which is wiser — to renounce the world regretfully, or to
call on God, leading a householder's life?"

MASTER (to M.): "Haven't you read the Gita?
One truly realizes God if
one performs one's worldly duties in a detached spirit, if one lives in
the
world after realizing that everything is illusory.

"Those who regretfully renounce the world belong to an inferior class.

"Do you know what a householder jnani is like? He is like a person
living in a glass house. He can see both inside and outside."

Again there was silence in the room.

MASTER (to M.): "The refreshments are hot and good."

M. (to Girish): "Yes, they were bought from Fagu's
shop. The place is famous."

MASTER (smiling): "Yes, famous."

GIRISH: "They are really nice.

(To the Master) "Sir, my mind is now on a very lofty
plane. Why does it come down again?"

MASTER: "That always happens when one leads a worldly life. Sometimes
the householder's mind goes up; sometimes it goes down. Sometimes he
feels
a great deal of devotion; sometimes he feels less. This happens because
he
lives in the midst of 'woman and gold'. Sometimes a householder
contemplates God or chants His name, and sometimes he diverts his mind
to 'woman
and gold'. He is like an ordinary fly, which now sits on a sweetmeat
and
now on filth or rotting sores.

"But it is quite different with sannyasis. They are able to fix their
minds
on God alone, completely withdrawing them from 'woman and gold'. They
can enjoy the Bliss of God alone. A man of true renunciation cannot
enjoy
anything but God. He leaves any place where people talk of worldly
things; he listens only to spiritual talk. A man of true renunciation
never
speaks about anything but God. The bees light only on flowers, in order
to sip honey; they do not enjoy anything else."

Girish went to the small terrace to rinse his hands.

MASTER (to M.): "A man needs the grace of God to fix
his whole mind
on Him. Well, Girish has eaten a great many sweets. Tell him not to eat
anything else tonight."

Girish returned to the room and sat in front of the Master. He was
chewing a betel-leaf.

MASTER (to Girish): "Rakhal has now understood what
is good and what
is bad, what is real and what is unreal. He lives with his family, no
doubt,
but he knows what it means. He has a wife. And a son has been born to
him. But he has realized that all these are illusory and impermanent.
Rakhal will never be attached to the world.

"He is like a mudfish. The fish lives in the mud, but there is not the
slightest trace of mud on its body."

GIRISH: "Sir, I don't understand all this. You can make everyone pure
and unattached if you want to. You can make everyone good, whether he
is
a worldly man or a sannyasi. The Malaya breeze, I believe, turns all
trees
into sandal-wood."

MASTER: "Not unless there is substance in them. There are a few trees,
the cotton-tree for instance, which are not turned into sandal-wood."

GIRISH: "I don't care."

MASTER: "But this is the law."

GIRISH: "But everything about you is illegal."

The devotees were listening to this conversation in great amazement.
Every now and then the fan in M.'s hand stopped moving.

MASTER: "Yes, that may be true. When the river of bhakti overflows,
the land all around is flooded with water to the depth of a pole.

"When a man is inebriated with divine love, he doesn't abide by the
injunctions of the Vedas. He picks durva grass for the worship of the
Deity,
but he doesn't clean it. He picks whatever he lays his hands on. While
gathering tulsi-leaves he even breaks the branches. Ah! What a state of
mind I passed through!

(To M.) "When one develops love of God, one needs
nothing else."

M: "Yes, sir."

MASTER: "But a devotee must assume toward God a particular attitude.
God in His Incarnation as Rama demonstrated santa, dasya, vatsalya, and
sakhya. But Krishna demonstrated madhur, besides all these.

"Radha cherished the attitude of madhur toward Krishna. Her love was
romantic. But in the case of Sita it was the pure love of a chaste wife
for
her husband. There was no romance in her love.

"But all this is the lila of God. He demonstrates different ideals to
suit different times."

A crazy woman used to accompany Vijay Goswami to the Kali temple at
Dakshineswar and sing for Sri Ramakrishna. Her songs were about Kali.
She also used to sing the songs of the Brahmo Samaj. The devotees
called
her "Pagli" (The Bengali word for "crazy woman".) and tried to keep her
away from the Master.

MASTER (to Girish and the others): "Pagli cherishes
the attitude of
madhur toward me. One day she came to Dakshineswar. Suddenly she burst
out crying. 'Why are you crying?' I asked her. And she said, 'Oh, my
head
is aching!' (All laugh.) Another day I was eating
when she came to
Dakshineswar. She suddenly said, 'Won't you be kind to me?' I had no
idea
of what was passing through her mind, and went on eating. Then she
said,
'Why did you push me away mentally?' I asked her, 'What is your
attitude?'
She said, 'Madhur.' 'Ah!' I said. 'But I look on all women as
manifestations
of the Divine Mother. All women are mothers to me.' Thereupon she said,
'I don't know all that.' Then I called Ramlal and said to him: 'Ramlal,
listen to her! What is she talking about — this "pushing away
mentally"?'
Even now she keeps up that attitude."

GIRISH: "Blessed indeed is Pagli! Maybe she is crazy. Maybe she is
beaten
by the devotees. But she meditates on you twenty-four hours a day. No
matter how she meditates on you, no harm can ever befall her.

"Sir, how can I express my own feelings about it? Think what I was
before, and what I have become now by meditating on you! Formerly I was
indolent; now that indolence has turned into resignation to God.
Formerly
I was a sinner; now I have become humble. What else can I say?"

The devotees remained silent. Rakhal expressed his sympathy for Pagli.
He said: "We all feel sorry for her. She causes so much annoyance, and
for
that she suffers, too."

NIRANJAN (to Rakhal): "You feel that way for her
because you have a
wise at home. But we could kill her."

RAKHAL (sharply): "Such bragging! How dare you utter
such words
before him [meaning Sri Ramakrishna]?"

MASTER (to Girish): "'Woman and gold' alone is the
world. Many people
regard money as their very life-blood. But however you may show love
for
money, one day, perhaps, every bit of it will slip from your hand.

"In our part of the country the farmers make narrow ridges around their
paddy-fields. You know what those ridges are. Some farmers make ridges
with
great care all the way around their fields. Such ridges are destroyed
by the
rush of the rain-water. But some farmers leave a part of the ridge open
and
put sod there. The water flows through the sod, leaving the field
covered
with silt after the rain. They reap a rich harvest.

"They alone make good use of their money who spend it for the worship
of God or the service of holy men and devotees. Their money bears fruit.

"I cannot cat anything offered by physicians. I mean those who traffic
in
human suffering. Their money is blood and pus."

Sri Ramakrishna mentioned two physicians in this connection.

GIRISH: "Dr. Rajendra Dutta is a generous person. He doesn't accept
a penny from anybody. He gives away money in charity."

Saturday, April 17, 1886

It was the night of the full moon. For some time Narendra had
been
going to Dakshineswar daily. He spent a great deal of time in the
Panchavati
in meditation and contemplation. This day he returned from Dakshineswar
in the evening. Tarak and Kali were with him.

It was eight o'clock in the evening. Moonlight and the south wind added
to the charm of the garden house. Many of the devotees were meditating
in
the room downstairs. Referring to them, Narendra said to M., "They are
shedding their upadhis one by one."

A few minutes later M. came into Sri Ramakrishna's room and sat down
on the floor. The Master asked him to wash his towel and the spittoon.
M.
washed them in the reservoir.

Next morning Sri Ramakrishna sent for M. After taking his hath in the
Ganges and saluting the Master, he had gone to the roof. Sri
Ramakrishna
asked M. to bring his grief-stricken wife to the garden house, where
she
could have her meal.

The Master said to M., by a sign: "Ask her to come. Let her stay here a
couple of days. She may bring the baby."

M: "Yes, sir. It would be fine if she developed intense love of God."
Sri Ramakrishna again answered by signs: "Oh, grief pushes out
devotion. And he was such a big boy!

"Krishnakishore had two sons. They were of the same age as Bhavanath,
and each had two university degrees. They both died. And
Krishnakishore,
jnani that he was, could not at first control himself. How lucky I am
that I have none!

"Arjuna was a great jnani; and Krishna was his constant companion.
Nevertheless he was completely overwhelmed with grief at the death of
his
son Abhimanyu.

"Why doesn't Kishori come?"

A DEVOTEE: "He comes to the Ganges every day for his bath."

MASTER: "But why doesn't he come here?"

DEVOTEE: "I shall ask him to come, sir."

MASTER: "Why doesn't Harish come?"

Two young girls aged nine and ten, who belonged to M.'s family; sang
several songs about the Divine Mother for the Master. They had sung for
him when he had visited M.'s house at Syampukur. The Master was very
much pleased with their songs. After they had finished, they were sent
for
by the devotees to sing for them downstairs.

MASTER (to M.): "Don't teach the girls any more
songs. It is different if
they sing spontaneously. But they will lose-their modesty by singing
before
anyone and everyone. It is very necessary for women to be modest."

Flowers and sandal-paste were placed before the Master in a
flower-basket.
He sat on his bed and worshipped himself with these offerings.
Sometimes
he placed flowers and sandal-paste on his head, sometimes on his
throat,
sometimes on his heart, and sometimes on his navel.

Manomohan of Konnagar came in and took a seat after saluting the
Master. Sri Ramakrishna was still busy with the worship of his inner
Self.
He put a garland of flowers on his own neck. After a while he seemed to
be
pleased with Manomohan and gave him some flowers. M., too, received a
flower.

It was about nine o'clock in the morning. The Master and M. were
talking. Sashi was also in the room.

MASTER (to M.): "What were Narendra and Sashi
talking about? What
did they discuss?"

M. (to Sashi): "What were you talking about?"

SASHI: "Was it Niranjan that told you about it?"

MASTER: "What were you discussing? I heard 'God', 'Being', 'Non-being',
and so forth."

SASHI (smiling): "Shall I call Narendra?"

MASTER: "Yes."

Narendra came in and took a seat.

MASTER (to M.): "Ask him something. (To
Narendra) Tell us what
you were talking about."

NARENDRA: "I have indigestion. What's there to tell you about?"

MASTER: "You will get over your indigestion."

M. (smiling): "Tell, us about the experience of
Buddha."

NARENDRA: "Have I become a Buddha, that you want me to talk about him?"

M: "What does Buddha say about the existence of God?"

NARENDRA: "How can you say that God exists? It is you who have created
this universe. Don't you know what Berkeley says about it?"

M: "Yes, I do. According to him, esse is percipi.
(The existence of external objects depends
on their perception.) The world exists as long as the sense-organs
perceive it."

MASTER: "Nangta used to say, 'The world exists in mind alone and
disappears in mind alone.' But as long as 'I-consciousness' exists, one
should
assume the servant-and-master relationship with God."

NARENDRA (to M.): "How can you prove by reasoning
that God exists?
But if you depend on faith, then you must accept the relationship of
servant
and Master. And if you accept that — and you can't help it — then you
must
also say that God is kind.

"You think only of the suffering in the world — why do you forget that
God has also given you so much happiness? How kind He is to us! He has
granted us three very great things: human birth, the yearning to know
God, and the companionship of a great soul."

All were silent.

MASTER (to Narendra): "I feel very clearly that
there is Someone within me.

Dr. Rajendralal arrived and took a seat. He had been treating the
Master
with homeopathic medicine. When the talk about medicine was over, Sri
Ramakrishna pointed out Manomohan to the doctor.

RAJENDRA: "He is a distant relative of mine."

Narendra went downstairs. He was singing to himself:

Lord, Thou hast lifted all my sorrow with the vision of Thy face,

And the magic of Thy beauty has bewitched my mind;

Beholding Thee, the seven worlds forget their never-ending woe;

What shall I say, then, of myself, a poor and lowly soul? . . .

Narendra had a little indigestion. He said to M.: "If one
follows the path
of bhakti, then the mind comes down a little to the body. Otherwise,
who
am I? Neither man nor God. I have neither pleasure nor pain."

It was about nine o'clock in the evening. Surendra and a few other
devotees entered Sri Ramakrishna's room and offered him garlands of
flowers. Baburam, Latu, and M. were also in the room.

Sri Ramakrishna put Surendra's garland on his own neck. All sat
quietly.
Suddenly the Master made a sign to Surendra to come near him. When
the disciple came near the bed, Sri Ramakrishna took the garland from
his
neck and put it around Surendra's. Surendra saluted the Master. Sri
Ramakrishna asked him, by a sign, to rub his feet. Surendra gave them a
gentle massage.

Several devotees were sitting on the bank of the reservoir in the
garden,
singing to the accompaniment of drum and cymbals. Sri Ramakrishna sent
them word through Latu to sing the name of Hari.

M., Baburam, and several others were still sitting in the Master's
room.
They heard the devotees singing:

There dances my Gora, chanting Hari's name! . . .

When the Master heard the song he made a sign to Baburam and
M. to
join them. He also asked them to dance,

A few minutes later Sri Ramakrishna sent another devotee to the singers
to ask them to sing the following improvised lines: "Ah, my Gora even
knows how to dance!" "How can I describe my Gora's moods?" "My Gora
dances with both his hands upraised."

The music was over. Surendra was almost in an ecstatic mood. He sang:

Crazy is my Father, (Siva.) crazy is my Mother,

And I, their son, am crazy too!

Syama is my Mother's name.

My Father strikes His cheeks and makes a hollow sound:

Ba-ba-bom! Ba-ba-bom!

And my Mother, drunk and reeling,

Falls across my Father's body!

Syama's streaming tresses hang in vast disorder;

Bees are swarming numberless

About Her crimson Lotus Feet..

Listen, as She dances, how Her anklets ring!

^These
slippers given by Dr. Rajendra are now worshipped at Belur Math, the
Headquarters of the Ramakrishna Math and Mission.


=== 51_masters_love.htm ===

The Master's Love for His Devotees

←
Home
/ The Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna
/ Volume 2
/ →

THE MASTER'S LOVE FOR HIS DEVOTEES

Narendra's scepticism — Narendra and M. — Devotees about the
Master — Bliss of Brahman and bliss of the world — Master on Buddha —
On "woman and gold" — Sri Ramakrishna and woman —
Encouraging Bhavanath — Hirananda — Narendra argues with Hirananda —
Narendra's spirit of renunciation — Master's exalted vision — Master
and
Hirananda — Girish and M. — Master's kindness to M. and his wife.

Wednesday, April 21, 1886

M AND NARENDRA were strolling in the garden of the house at
Cossipore. Narendra was very much worried because he had not yet
been able to solve the financial difficulties of his family.

NARENDRA: "I don't care for the job at the Vidyasagar School. I have
been thinking of going to Gaya. I have been told that a zemindar there
needs the services of a manager for his estate. There is no such thing
as God."

M. (smiling): "You may say that now, but later on
you will talk
differently. Scepticism is a stage in the path of God-realization. One
must pass
through stages like this and go much farther; only thus can one realize
God.
That is what the Master says."

NARENDRA: "Has anybody seen God as I see that tree?"

M: "Yes, our Master has seen God that way."

NARENDRA: "It may be his hallucination."

M: "Whatever a person experiences in a particular state is real for him
in that state. Suppose you are dreaming that you have gone to a garden.
As long as the dream lasts, the garden is real for you. But you think
of it as
unreal when your mind undergoes a change, as, for instance, when you
awake. When your mind attains the state in which one sees God, you will
know God to be real."

NARENDRA: "I want truth. The other day I had a great argument with
Sri Ramakrishna himself."

M. (smiling): "What happened?"

NARENDRA: "He said to me, 'Some people call me God.' I replied, 'Let a
thousand people call you God, but I shall certainly not call you God as
long
as I do not know it to be true.' He said, 'Whatever many people say is
indeed truth; that is dharma.' Thereupon I replied, 'Let others
proclaim a
thing as truth, but I shall certainly not listen to them unless I
myself realize it as truth.'"

M. (smiling): "Your attitude is like that of Western
savants — Copernicus
and Berkeley, for instance. The whole world said it was the sun that
moved,
but Copernicus did not listen. Everybody said the external world was
real,
but Berkeley paid no heed. Therefore Lewis says, 'Why was Berkeley not
a
philosophical Copernicus?'"

NARENDRA: "Can you give me a History of Philosophy?"

M: "By whom? Lewis?"

NARENDRA: "No, Überweg. I must read a German author."

M: "You just said, 'Has anybody seen God as I see that tree?' Suppose
God comes to you as a man and says, 'I am God.' Will you believe it
then?
You certainly remember the story of Lazarus. After his death, Lazarus
said
to Abraham, 'Let me go back to the earth and tell my friends and
relatives
that hell and the after-life exist.' Abraham replied: 'Do you think
they will
believe you? They will say it is a charlatan who is telling them such
things.'
The Master says that God cannot be known by reasoning. By faith alone
one attains everything — knowledge and super-knowledge. By faith alone
one
sees God and becomes intimate with Him."

It was about three o'clock in the afternoon. Sri Ramakrishna was in
bed.
Ramlal, who had come from Dakshineswar, was massaging his feet. Gopal
of Sinthi and M. were in the room.

Sri Ramakrishna asked M. to shut the windows and massage his feet. At
the Master's request Purna had come to the Cossipore garden in a hired
carriage. M. was to pay the carriage hire. Sri Ramakrishna made a sign
to
Gopal, asking whether he had obtained the money from M. Gopal answered
in the affirmative.

At nine o'clock in the evening Surendra, Ram, and the others were about
to return to Calcutta. It was the sultry month of April and Sri
Ramakrishna's
room became very hot during the day; so Surendra had brought some straw
screens to keep the room cool.

SURENDRA: "Why, nobody has hung up these straw screens. Nobody here
pays attention to anything."

A DEVOTEE (smiling): "The devotees here are now in
the state of
Brahmajnana. They feel, 'I am He.' The world is unreal to them. When
they come
down to a lower plane and regard God as the Master and themselves as
His
servants, they will pay attention to the service of Sri Ramakrishna." (All
laugh.)

Thursday, April 22, 1886

In the evening Rakhal, Sashi, and M. were strolling in the
garden at Cossipore.

M: "The Master is like a child — beyond the three gunas."

SASHI AND RAKHAL: "He himself has said that."

RAKHAL: "He sits in a tower, as it were, from which he gets all
information and sees everything; but others cannot go there and reach
him."

M: "He said, 'In such a state of mind one sees God constantly.' In him
there is not the slightest trace of worldliness. His mind is like dry
fuel, which catches fire quickly."

SASHI: "He described the different kinds of intelligence to Charu. The
right intelligence is that through which one attains God: but the
intelligence
that enables one to become a deputy magistrate or a lawyer, or to
acquire a
house, is a mean intelligence. It is like thin and watery curd, which
merely
soaks flattened rice but does not add any flavour to it. It is not like
thick,
superior curd. But the intelligence through which one attains God is
like thick curd."

M: "Ah, what wonderful words!"

SASHI: "Kali1
said to the Master: 'What's the good of having joy? The
Bhils are joyous. Savages are always singing and dancing in a frenzy of
delight.'"

RAKHAL: "He [meaning the Master] replied to Kali: 'What do you mean?
Can the Bliss of Brahman be the same as worldly pleasure? Ordinary men
are satisfied with worldly pleasure. One cannot enjoy the Bliss of
Brahman
unless one completely rids oneself of attachment to worldly things.
There is
the joy of money and sense experience, and there is the Bliss of
God-realization.
Can the two ever be the same? The rishis enjoyed the Bliss of Brahman.'"

M: "You see, Kali nowadays meditates on Buddha; that is why he speaks
of a state beyond Bliss."

RAKHAL: "Yes, Kali told the Master about Buddha. Sri Ramakrishna said
to him: 'Buddha is an Incarnation of God. How can you compare him to
anybody else? As he is great, so too is his teaching great.' Kali said
to him:
'Everything, indeed, is the manifestation of God's Power. Both worldly
pleasure and the Bliss of God are the manifestation of that Power.'"

M: "What did the Master say to that?"

RAKHAL: "He said: 'How can that be? Is the power to beget a child the
same as the power through which one realizes God?'"

Sri Ramakrishna was sitting in his room on the second floor. Narendra,
Rakhal, Sashi, Surendra, M., Bhavanath, and other devotees were
present.
Dr. Mahendra Sarkar and Dr. Rajendra Dutta were also there to examine
him. His condition was growing worse.

The house-rent was between sixty and sixty-five rupees. Surendra bore
most of the expenses and had rented the house in his name. The other
householder devotees contributed financial help according to their
power. A
cook and a maid had been engaged to look after the members of the
house-hold.

MASTER (to Dr. Sarkar and the others): "The expenses
are mounting."

DR. SARKAR (pointing to
the devotees) "But they are ready to bear them.
They do not hesitate to spend money. (To Sri Ramakrishna)
Now, you see,
gold is necessary."

MASTER (to Narendra): "Why don't you answer?"

Narendra remained silent. Dr. Sarkar resumed the conversation.

DR. SARKAR: "Gold is necessary, and also woman."

RAJENDRA: "Yes, his [meaning Sri Ramakrishna's] wife has been cooking
his meals."

DR. SARKAR (to the Master): "Do you see?"

MASTER (smiling): "Yes — but very troublesome!"

DR. SARKAR: "If there were no troubles,
then all would become paramahamsas."

MASTER: "If a woman touches me I fall ill. That part of my body aches
as if stung by a horned fish."

DR. SARKAR: "I believe that.
But how can you get along without woman?"

MASTER: "My hand gets all twisted up if I hold money in it; my
breathing
stops. But there is no harm in spending money to lead a spiritual life
in the
world — if one spends it, for instance, in the worship of God and the
service
of holy men and devotees.

"A man forgets God if he is entangled in the world of maya through a
woman. It is the Mother of the Universe who has assumed the form of
maya, the form of woman. One who knows this rightly does not feel like
leading the life of maya in the world. But he who truly realizes that
all
women are manifestations of the Divine Mother may lead a spiritual life
in
the world. Without realizing God one cannot truly know what a woman is."

Sri Ramakrishna had felt a slight improvement as a result of the
homeopathic treatment.

RAJENDRA (to the Master): "After getting rid of this
illness you must
begin to practise medicine as a homeopath. Otherwise, what's the use of
this
human life?" (All laugh.)

NARENDRA: "Nothing like leather!"2
(All laugh.)

A few minutes later the physicians took their leave. Sri Ramakrishna
and
M. were engaged in conversation. The Master was telling M. how he felt
about woman.

MASTER (to M.): "They say I cannot get along without
'woman and
gold'. They don't understand the state of my mind.

"If I touch a woman my hand becomes numb; it aches. If in a friendly
spirit I approach a woman and begin to talk to her, I feel as if a
barrier had
been placed between us. It is impossible for me to cross that barrier.

"If a woman enters my room when I am alone, at once I become like a
child and regard her as my mother."

As M. listened to these words, he became speechless with wonder at Sri
Ramakrishna's exalted state of mind. Bhavanath and Narendra were
sitting
at a distance, talking together. Bhavanath had married and was trying
to find
a job; so he could not visit Sri Ramakrishna frequently at Cossipore.
He
had said to M.: "I understand that Vidyasagar wants to start a new
school.
I have to earn my livelihood. Will it be possible for me to secure a
job in
that school?'' The Master was much worried about Bhavanath's being
entangled in worldly life. Bhavanath was twenty-three or twenty-four
years old.

MASTER (to Narendra): "Give him a lot of courage."

Narendra and Bhavanath smiled. Sri Ramakrishna said to Bhavanath, by
signs: "Be a great hero. Don't forget yourself when you see her weeping
behind her veil. Oh, women cry so much — even when they blow their
noses!
(Narendra, Bhavanath, and M. laugh.)

"Keep your mind firm on God. He who is a hero lives with a woman but
does not indulge in physical pleasures. Talk to your wife only about
God."

A few minutes later Sri Ramakrishna said to Bhavanath, by a sign, "Take
your meal here today."

BHAVANATH: "Yes, sir. I am quite all right. Don't worry about me."

Surendra came in and took a seat. The devotees offered garlands of
flowers
to the Master every evening. Sri Ramakrishna put these garlands around
his
neck. Surendra sat quietly in the room. Sri Ramakrishna was in a very
happy
mood and gave him two garlands. Surendra saluted the Master and put
them
around his neck.

All sat in silence and looked at Sri Ramakrishna. Surendra saluted the
Master again and stood up. He was about to leave. He asked Bhavanath to
hang the straw screens over the windows.

Hirananda came in with two of his friends. He was a native of Sindh,
about twenty-two hundred miles from Calcutta. After finishing his
college
education in Calcutta in 1883, he had returned to Sindh and taken
charge
of editing two papers, the Sindh Times and the Sind Sudhar. While
studying
in Calcutta he had often visited Keshab Chandra Sen and had come to
know him intimately. He had met Sri Ramakrishna at the Kali temple at
Dakshineswar and had spent an occasional night there with the Master.
Hearing of Sri Ramakrishna's illness, he now came to Calcutta from
Sindh
to see him. The Master himself had been very eager to see Hirananda.

Sri Ramakrishna pointed to Hirananda and said to M., by signs: "A very
fine boy. Do you know him?"

M: "Yes, sir."

MASTER (to Hirananda and M.): "Please talk a little.
I want to hear you
both."

When M. remained silent, Sri Ramakrishna asked him: "Is Narendra here?
Call him."

Narendra entered the room and sat near the Master.

MASTER (to Narendra and Hirananda): "I want to hear
you two talk."

Hirananda was silent a few moments and then after great hesitation
began the conversation.

HIRANANDA (to Narendra): "Why does a devotee of God
suffer?"

His words were sweet as nectar. Everyone in the room could feel that
his
heart was filled with love.

NARENDRA: "The plan of the universe is devilish. I could have created a
better world."

HIRANANDA: "Can one feel happiness without misery?"

NARENDRA: "I am not making a plan for a universe, but simply giving my
opinion of the present plan.

"But all these problems are solved if we have faith only in one thing,
and
that is pantheism. All doubts disappear if one believes that everything
is God.
God alone is responsible for all that happens."

HIRANANDA: "Very easy to say that."

Narendra sang Sankara's Six Stanzas on Nirvana:

Om. I am neither mind, intelligence, ego, nor chitta,

Neither ears nor tongue nor the senses of smell and sight;

Nor am I ether, earth, fire, water, or air:

I am Pure Knowledge and Bliss: I am Siva! I am Siva!

I am neither the prana nor the five vital breaths,

Neither the seven elements of the body nor its five sheaths,

Nor hands nor feet nor tongue, nor the organs of sex and voiding:

I am Pure Knowledge and Bliss: I am Siva! I am Siva!

Neither loathing nor liking have I, neither greed nor delusion;

No sense have I of ego or pride, neither dharma nor moksha;

Neither desire of the mind nor object for its desiring:

I am Pure Knowledge and Bliss: I am Siva! I am Siva!

Neither right nor wrongdoing am I, neither pleasure nor pain,

Nor the mantra, the sacred place, the Vedas, the sacrifice;

Neither the act of eating, the eater, nor the food:

I am Pure Knowledge and Bliss: I am Siva! I am Siva!

Death or fear I have none, nor any distinction of caste;

Neither father nor mother nor even a birth have I;

Neither friend nor comrade, neither disciple nor guru:

I am Pure Knowledge and Bliss: I am Siva! I am Siva!

I have no form or fancy; the All-pervading am I;

Everywhere I exist, yet I am beyond the senses;

Neither salvation am I, nor anything that may be known:

I am Pure Knowledge and Bliss: I am Siva! I am Siva!

HIRANANDA: "Good!"

SRI RAMAKRISHNA
(to Hirananda, by a sign): "Give him an answer."

HIRANANDA: "It is all the same, whether you look at a room from a
corner
or look at it from the middle. It is the same God-Consciousness that
one feels,
whether one says. 'O God, I am Thy servant', or, 'I am He.' One may
enter a
room by several doors."

All sat in silence. Hirananda said to Narendra, "Please sing some
more."
Narendra sang the Five Stanzas on the Kaupin:3

Roaming ever in the grove of Vedanta,

Ever pleased with his beggar's morsel,

Ever walking with heart free from sorrow,

Blest indeed is the wearer of the loin-cloth.

Sitting at the foot of a tree for shelter,

Using the palms of his hands for eating,

Wrapped in a garment fine or ugly,

Blest indeed is the wearer of the loin-cloth.

Satisfied fully by the Bliss within him,

Curbing wholly the cravings of his senses,

Contemplating day and night the Absolute Brahman,

Blest indeed is the wearer of the loin-cloth.

The loin-cloth of the sannyasi; it is an emblem of
renunciation.

As Sri Ramakrishna heard the line, "Contemplating day and night the
Absolute Brahman", he said in a very low voice, "Ah!" Then, by a sign,
he
said to the devotees, "This is the characteristic of the yogi."

Narendra finished the hymn:

Witnessing the changes of mind and body,

Naught but the Self within him beholding,

Thinking not of outer, of inner, or of middle,

Blest indeed is the wearer of the loin-cloth.

Chanting "Brahman", the Word of redemption,

Meditating only on "I am Brahman",

Living on alms and wandering freely,

Blest indeed is the wearer of the loin-cloth.

Again Narendra sang:

Meditate on Him, the Perfect, the Embodiment of Bliss;

Meditate on Him, the Formless, the Root of the Universe,

The Hearer behind the ear, the Thinker behind the mind,

The Speaker behind the tongue, Himself beyond all words:

He is the Life of life, the Ultimate, the Adorable!

MASTER (to Narendra): "And that one — 'All that
exists art Thou.'"

Narendra sang:

I have joined my heart to Thee: all that
exists art Thou;

Thee only have I found, for Thou art all that exists.

O Lord, Beloved of my heart! Thou art the Home of all;

Where indeed is the heart in which Thou dost not dwell?

Thou hast entered every heart: all that exists art Thou

.
Whether sage or fool, whether Hindu or Mussalman,

Thou makest them as Thou wilt: all that exists art Thou.

Thy presence is everywhere, whether in heaven or in Kaaba;

Before Thee all must bow, for Thou art all that exists.

From earth below to the highest heaven, from heaven to deepest earth,

I see Thee wherever I look: all that exists art Thou.

Pondering, I have understood; I have seen it beyond a doubt;

I find not a single thing that may be compared to Thee.

To Jafar it has been revealed that Thou art all that exists.

As the Master listened to the line, "Thou hast entered every
heart", he
said by a sign: "God dwells in everybody's heart. He is the Inner
Guide."

As Narendra sang the line, "I see Thee wherever I look: all that exists
art
Thou", Hirananda said to-him: "Yes, 'All that exists art Thou.' Now you
say: 'Thou! Thou! Not I, but Thou!'"

NARENDRA: "Give me a one and I'll give you a million. Thou art I; I am
Thou. Nothing exists but I."

Narendra recited a few verses from the Ashtavakra Samhita.
The room
again became silent.

MASTER (to Hirananda, pointing to Narendra): "He
seems to be walking
with an unsheathed sword in his hand. (To M., pointing to
Hirananda)
How quiet! Like a cobra, quiet before charmer, with its hood spread."

Sri Ramakrishna fell into an inward mood. Hirananda and M. were seated
near him There was complete silence in the room. The Master's body was
being racked with indescribable pain. The devotees could not bear the
sight
of this illness; but somehow the Master made them forget his suffering.
He
sat there, his face beaming as if there were no trace of illness in his
throat.

The devotees had placed flowers and garlands before him as their loving
offerings. He picked up a flower and touched with it first his head,
then his
throat, heart, and navel. To the devotees he seemed a child playing
with flowers.

Sri Ramakrishna used to tell the devotees that his divine visions and
moods
were accompanied by the rising of a spiritual current inside his body.

Now he talked to M.

MASTER: "I don't remember when the current went up. Now I am in the
mood of a child. That is why I am playing with the flowers this way. Do
you know what I see now? I see my body as a frame made of bamboo
strips and covered with a cloth. The frame moves. And it moves because
someone dwells inside it.

"Again, I see the body to be like a pumpkin with the seeds scooped out.
Inside this body there is no trace of passion or worldly attachment. It
is all
very clean inside, and —"
It became very painful for Sri Ramakrishna to talk further. He felt
very
weak. M. quickly guessed what the Master wanted to tell the devotees,
and
said, "And you are seeing God inside yourself "

MASTER: "Both inside and outside. The Indivisible Satchidananda — I see
It both inside and outside. It has merely assumed this sheath [meaning
his
body] for a support and exists both inside and outside. I clearly
perceive this.

M. and Hirananda listened intently to these words about his exalted
state
of God-Consciousness. A few moments later Sri Ramakrishna looked at
them
and resumed the conversation.

MASTER: "You all seem to me to be my kinsmen. I do not look on any of
you as a stranger.

"I see you all as so many sheaths, (Referring to their bodies.) and the
heads are moving.
I notice that when my mind is united with God the suffering of the body
is left aside.

"Now I perceive only this: this: indivisible Satchidananda is covered
with
skin, and this sore in the throat is on one side of it."

The Master again fell silent. A few minutes later he said: "The
attributes
of matter are superimposed on Spirit, and the attributes of Spirit are
superimposed on matter. Therefore when the body is ill a man says, 'I
am ill.'"

Hirananda wanted to understand what the Master had just said; so M.
told him, "When hot water scalds the hand, people say that the water
scalds;
but the truth is that it is the heat that scalds."

HIRANANDA (to the Master): "Please tell us why a
devotee of God suffers."
MASTER: "It is the body that suffers."

Sri Ramakrishna seemed about to say something more. Hirananda and M.
eagerly awaited his words.

Sri Ramakrishna said, "Do you understand?"

M. said to Hirananda, in a whisper: "The body suffers for the purpose
of teaching men. His life is like a book of reference. In spite of so
much
physical suffering, his mind is one hundred per cent united with God."

HIRANANDA: "Yes, it is like Christ's crucifixion. But still the mystery
remains — why should he, of all people, suffer like this?"

M: "The Master says it is the will of the Divine Mother. This is how
She
is sporting through his body."

The two devotees were talking in whispers. Sri Ramakrishna asked
Hirananda, by a sign, what M. was talking about. Since Hirananda could
not
understand the sign, Sri Ramakrishna repeated it.

HIRANANDA: "He says that your illness is for the teaching of men."

MASTER: "But that's only his guess.

(To M. and Hirananda) "My mood is changing. I think
that I should
not say to everyone, 'May your spiritual consciousness be awakened.'
People
are so sinful in the Kaliyuga; if I awaken their spiritual
consciousness I shall
have to accept the burden of their sins."

M. (to Hirananda): "He will not awaken people's
spiritual consciousness
except at the right time. When a person is ready, he will awaken his
spiritual consciousness."

Friday, April 23, 1886

It was-Good Friday. Hirananda had taken his midday meal at the
Cossipore garden house. About one o'clock in the afternoon he was
stroking Sri
Ramakrishna's feet. M. sat near by. Latu and one or two other devotees
were
going in and out of the room. It was the Master's earnest desire that
Hirananda should stay for some time at the Cossipore garden house.

While massaging the Master's feet, Hirananda conversed with him. He
spoke in a very sweet voice, as if trying to console a child.

HIRANANDA: "Why should you worry so much? You can enjoy peace of
mind if you have faith in the physician. You are a child."

MASTER (to M.): "How can I have faith in the doctor?
Dr. Sarkar said
that I would not recover."

HIRANANDA: "But why should you worry so much about that? What is to
happen must happen."

M. (to Hirananda, aside): "He is not worrying about
himself.
The preservation of his body is for the welfare of the devotees."

It was a sultry day and the room became very hot at noontime. The straw
screens had been hung over the windows. Hirananda adjusted them. The
Master looked at him.

MASTER (to Hirananda): "Please don't forget to send
the pajamas."

Hirananda had told Sri Ramakrishna that he would feel more
comfortable if he wore the pajamas used in Sindh. Sri Ramakrishna was
reminding him of them.

Hirananda had not eaten well. The rice had not been well cooked. The
Master felt very sorry about it and asked him again and again whether
he
would have some refreshments. On account of his illness he could hardly
talk; but still he repeated the question. He said to Latu, "Did you too
eat
that rice?"

Sri Ramakrishna could hardly keep the cloth on his body. He was almost
always naked, like a child. Hirananda had brought with him one or two
of
his Brahmo friends. Therefore every now and then the Master pulled the
cloth to his waist.

MASTER (to Hirananda): "Will you take me for an
uncivilized person if
I don't cover my body with my cloth?"

HIRANANDA: "What difference does that make with you? You are but a
child."

MASTER (pointing to a Brahmo devotee): "But he feels
that way "

Hirananda was about to take his leave. In a very few days he was going
to start for Sindh.

MASTER (to Hirananda): "Suppose you don't go to
Sindh."

HIRANANDA (smiling): "But there is nobody there to
do my work. I have
my duties."

MASTER: "How much do you earn?"

HIRANANDA (smiling): "My work doesn't bring me a
large salary."

MASTER: "Still, how much?"

Hirananda laughed.

MASTER: "Why don't you live here?"

Hirananda did not reply.

MASTER: "Suppose you give up the job."

Hirananda said nothing. He was ready to take his leave.

MASTER: "When will you see me again?"

HIRANANDA: "I shall leave for Sindh on Monday, the day after
tomorrow. I shall see you that morning."

Hirananda left.

M. was seated by the Master's side.

MASTER (to M.): "He is a fine young man, isn't he?"

M: "Yes, sir. He has a very sweet nature."

MASTER: "He said that Sindh is twenty-two hundred miles from Calcutta;
and he has come all that way to see me."

M: "True, sir. That would be impossible without real love."

MASTER: "He wants very much to take me to Sindh."

M: "The journey is very painful. It takes four or five days by train."

MASTER: "He has three university degrees."

M: "Yes, sir."

Sri Ramakrishna was tired. He wanted to take a little rest. He asked M.
to open the shutters of the windows and spread the straw mat over his
bed. M. was fanning him. Sri Ramakrishna became drowsy.

After a short nap Sri Ramakrishna said to M., "Did I sleep?"

M: "A little."

Narendra, Sarat, and M. were talking downstairs.

NARENDRA: "How amazing it is! One learns hardly anything though one
reads books for many years. How can a man realize God by practising
sadhana for two or three days? Is it so easy to realize God? (To
Sarat) You
have obtained peace. M., too, has obtained it. But I have no peace."

It was afternoon. Many devotees were sitting in the Master's room.
Narendra, Sarat, Sashi, Latu, Nityagopal, Girish, Ram, M., and Suresh
were present.

Kedar came in. This was his first visit to the Master for some time.
While
staying in Dacca, in connection with his official duties, he had heard
of Sri
Ramakrishna's illness. On entering Sri Ramakrishna's room he took the
dust
of the Master's feet on his head and then joyously gave it to the
others. The
devotees accepted it with bowed heads. As he offered it to Sarat, the
latter
himself took the dust of Sri Ramakrishna's feet. M. smiled. The Master
also
smiled, looking at M. The devotees sat without uttering a word. Sri
Ramakrishna seemed about to go into an ecstatic mood. Now and then he
breathed
heavily as if trying to suppress his emotion. He said to Kedar, by a
sign,
"Argue with Girish."

Girish said to Kedar: "Sir, I beg your pardon. At first I did not know
who
you were. That is why I argued with you. But now it is quite different."

Sri Ramakrishna smiled.

The Master drew Kedar's attention to Narendra and said: "He has
renounced everything. (To the devotees) Kedar once
said to Narendra, 'You
may reason and argue now, but in the end you will roll on the ground,
chanting Hari's name.' (To Narendra) Take the dust
of Kedar's feet."

KEDAR (to Narendra): "Take the dust of his [meaning
the Master's] feet.
That will do."

Surendra was seated behind the other devotees. The Master looked at
him with a smile and said to Kedar, "Ah, how sweet his nature is!"
Kedar
understood the Master's hint and went toward Surendra.

Surendra was very sensitive. Some of the devotees had been collecting
funds from the householder devotees to meet the expenses of the
Cossipore
garden house. Surendra felt piqued at this. He was bearing most of the
expenses himself.

SURENDRA (to Kedar): "How can I sit near all these
holy people? A few
days ago some of them [referring to Narendra] put on the ochre robe of
the
sannyasi and went on a pilgrimage to Buddha-Gaya. They wanted to see
bigger sadhus there."

Sri Ramakrishna was trying to console Surendra. He said: "You are
right.
They are mere children. They don't know what is good."

SURENDRA (to Kedar): "Doesn't our gurudeva
(Referring to Sri Ramakrishna)
know our inner feelings? He does not care for money. It is our inner
attitude that pleases him."

Sri Ramakrishna with a nod of his head approved Surendra's words.

The devotees had brought various food offerings for the Master and
placed
them in front of him. Sri Ramakrishna put a grain on his tongue and
gave
the plate to Surendra. He asked Surendra to distribute the prasad to
the
devotees. Surendra went downstairs with the offerings.

MASTER (to Kedar): "You had better go downstairs and
explain it all to
Surendra. See that they don't get into any hot arguments."

M. was fanning Sri Ramakrishna. The Master said to him, "Won't you
eat anything?" He sent M. downstairs.

It was about dusk. Girish and M. were strolling near the small
reservoir in the garden.

GIRISH: "I understand that you are writing something about the Master.4
Is it true?"

M: "Who told you that?"

GIRISH: "I have heard about it. Will you give it to me?"

M: "No, I won't part with it unless I feel it is right to do so. I am
writing
it for myself, not for others."

GIRISH: "What do you mean?"

M: "You may get it when I die."

It was evening. A lamp was lighted in the Master's room. Amrita Basu,
a Brahmo devotee, came in. Sri Ramakrishna had expressed his eagerness
to
see him. M. and a few other devotees were there. A garland of jasmine
lay
in front of the Master on a plantain-leaf. There was perfect silence in
the
room. A great yogi seemed to be silently communing with God. Every now
and then the Master lifted the garland a little, as if he wanted to put
it
around his neck.

AMRITA (tenderly): "Shall I put it around your neck?"

Sri Ramakrishna accepted the garland. He had a long conversation with
Amrita. When the latter was about to take his leave, the Master said,
"Come again."

AMRITA: "Yes, sir. I like to come very much. But I live at a great
distance;
so I cannot always come."

MASTER: "Do come, and take the carriage hire from here."

The devotees were amazed at the Master's tender love for Amrita.

The next day M. came to the garden house accompanied by his wife and
a son. The boy was seven years old. It was at the Master's request that
he
brought his wife, who was almost mad with grief owing to the death of
one
of her sons.

That day the Master several times allowed M.'s wife the privilege of
waiting on him. Her welfare seemed to occupy his attention a great
deal. In the
evening the Holy Mother came to the Master's room to feed him. M.'s
wife
accompanied her with a lamp. The Master tenderly asked her many
questions about her household. He requested her to come again to the
garden
house and spend a few days with the Holy Mother, not forgetting to ask
her to bring her baby daughter. When the Master had finished his meal
M.'s wife removed the plates. He chatted with her a few minutes.

About nine o'clock in the evening Sri Ramakrishna was seated in his
room
with the devotees. He had a garland of flowers around his neck. He told
M.
that he had requested his wife to spend a few days at the garden house
with
the Holy Mother. His kindness touched M.'s heart.

M. was fanning him. The Master took the garland from his neck and said
something to himself. Then in a very benign mood he gave the garland to
M.

^One
of the disciples of the Master, later known as Swami Abhedananda.

^To
a cobbler nothing in this world is as important as leather.

^The
loin-cloth of the sannyasi; it is an emblem of renunciation.

^After
Sri Ramakrishna's death M. published his notes of conversations with
the
Master in five volumes. The Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna is an English
translation
of these books from the original Bengali.


=== 52_after_the_passing_away.htm ===

After the Passing Away

←
Home
/ The Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna
/ Volume 2
/ →

AFTER THE PASSING AWAY

Baranagore Monastery — First members — Surendra's magnanimity —
Ascetic zeal of the young sannyasis — Renunciation of "woman and
gold" — Siva festival at the math — Narendra's reminiscences of the
Master — Narendra's foreknowledge of things — Narendra's ego —
About Nityagopal — Rakhal's reminiscences of the Master — The
Master and Narendra — Master's love for Narendra — Prasanna's austere
sadhana — Vidyasagar's reluctance about preaching — About Sashi —
Rakhal's yearning for God — Tarak and Prasanna — Narendra asks
Prasanna to practise self-surrender — Narendra's longing for God-vision
— About Rabindra.

SRI RAMAKRISHNA passed away on Sunday, August 15, 1886,
plunging
his devotees and disciples into a sea of grief. They were like men in
a shipwreck. But a strong bond of love held them together, and they
found assurance and courage in each other's company. They could not
enjoy
the friendship of worldly people and would talk only of their Master.
"Shall we not behold him again?" — this was the one theme of their
thought
and the one dream of their sleep. Alone, they wept for him; walking in
the
streets of Calcutta, they were engrossed in the thought of him. The
Master
had once said to M., "It becomes difficult for me to give up the body,
when
I realize that after my death you will wander about weeping for me."
Some
of them thought: "He is no longer in this world. How surprising that we
still enjoy living! We could give up our bodies if we liked, but still
we do
not." Time and again Sri Ramakrishna had told them that God reveals
Himself to His devotees if they yearn for Him and call on Him with
whole-souled devotion. He had assured them that God listens to the
prayer of a sincere heart.

The young unmarried disciples of the Master, who belonged to his inner
circle, had attended on him day and night at the Cossipore garden
house.
After his passing away most of them returned to their families against
their
own wills. They had not yet formally renounced the world. For a short
while they kept their family names. But Sri Ramakrishna had made them
renounce the world mentally. He himself had initiated, several of them
into
the monastic life, giving them the ochre cloths of sannyasis.

Two or three of the Master's attendants had no place to go. To them the
large-hearted Surendra said: "Brothers, where will you go? Let us rent
a
house. You will live there and make it our Master's shrine; and we
householders shall come there for consolation. How can we pass all our
days and
nights with our wives and children in the world? I used to spend a sum
of
money for the Master at Cossipore. I shall gladly give it now for your
expenses." Accordingly he rented a house for them at Baranagore, in the
suburbs of Calcutta, and this place became gradually transformed into a
math, or monastery.

For the first few months Surendra contributed thirty rupees a month.
As the other members joined the monastery one by one, he doubled his
contribution, which he later increased to a hundred rupees. The monthly
rent for the house was eleven rupees. The cook received six rupees a
month.
The rest was spent for food.

The younger Gopal brought the Master's bed and other articles of daily
use from the garden house at Cossipore. The brahmin who had been cook
at Cossipore was engaged for the new monastery. The first permanent
member was the elder Gopal. Sarat spent the nights there. In the
beginning
Sarat, Sashi, Baburam, Niranjan, and Kali used to visit the monastery
every
now and then, according to their convenience, Tarak, who had gone to
Vrindavan following the Master's death, returned to Calcutta after a
few
months and soon became a permanent member of the monastery. Rakhal,
Jogin, Latu, and Kali were living at Vrindavan with the Holy Mother
when
the monastery was started. Kali returned to Calcutta within a month,
Rakhal
after a few months, and Jogin and Latu after a year. The householder
devotees frequently visited the monastic brothers and spent hours with
them
in meditation and study.

After a short time Narendra, Rakhal, Niranjan, Sarat, Sashi, Baburam,
Jogin, Tarak, Kali, and Latu renounced the world for good. Sarada
Prasanna
and Subodh joined them some time later. Gangadhar, who was very much
attached to Narendra, visited the math regularly. It was he who taught
the brothers the hymn sung at the evening service in the Siva temple at
Benares. He had gone to Tibet to practise austerity; now, having
returned,
he lived at the monastery. Hari and Tulasi, at first only visitors at
the
monastery, soon embraced the monastic life and thus completed the list
of
the Master's sannyasi disciples.1

Surendra was indeed a blessed soul. It was he who laid the foundation
of
the great Order later associated with Sri Ramakrishna's name. His
devotion
and sacrifice made it possible for those earnest souls to renounce the
world
for the realization of God. Through him Sri Ramakrishna made it
possible
for them to live in the world as embodiments of his teaching, the
renunciation of "woman and gold" and the realization of God.

The brothers lived at the math like orphan boys. Sometimes they would
not have the money to pay their house-rent; sometimes they would have
no
food in the monastery. Surendra would come and settle all these things.
He
was the big brother of the monks. Later on, when they thought of his
genuine love, the members of this first math shed tears of gratitude.

The new monastery became known among the Master's devotees as the
Baranagore Math. Narendra, Rakhal, and the other young disciples were
filled with intense renunciation. One day Rakhal's father came to the
math
and asked Rakhal to return home. "Why do you take the trouble to come
here?" Rakhal said to him. "I am very happy here. Please pray to God
that
you may forget me and that I may forget you too." The young disciples
said to each other: "We shall never return to the worldly life. The
Master
enjoined upon us the renunciation of 'woman and gold'. How can we go
back to our families?"

Sashi had taken charge of the daily worship in the math. The Master's
relics had been brought from Balaram's house and Sri Ramakrishna was
worshipped daily in the worship hall. Narendra supervised the
household.
He was the leader of the monastery. He would often tell his brother
disciples, "The selfless actions enjoined in the Gita
are worship, japa, meditation,
and so on, and not worldly duties." The brothers at the math depended
on
him tor their spiritual inspiration. He said to them, "We must practise
sadhana; otherwise we shall not be able to realize God."

He and his brother disciples, filled with an ascetic spirit, devoted
themselves day and night to the practice of spiritual discipline. Their
one goal in
life was the realization of God. They followed to their hearts' content
the
injunctions prescribed in the Vedas, Puranas, and Tantras for an
ascetic life.
They spent their time in japa and meditation and study of the
scriptures.
Whenever they would fail to experience the Divine Presence, they would
feel as if they were on the rack. They would practise austerity,
sometimes
alone under trees, sometimes in a cremation ground, sometimes on the
bank
of the Ganges. Again, sometimes they would spend the entire day in the
meditation room of the monastery in japa and contemplation; sometimes
they would gather to sing and dance in a rapture of delight. All of
them,
and Narendra particularly, were consumed with the desire to see God.
Now
and then they would say to each other, "Shall we not starve ourselves
to
death to see God?"

Monday, February 21, 1887

Narendra, Rakhal, Niranjan, Sarat, Sashi, Kali, Baburam, Tarak, and
Sarada Prasanna were living in the monastery. All day the members had
been fasting in observance of the Sivaratri.2
Sarat, Kali, Niranjan, and Sarada were planning to go to Puri, the
following Saturday, on a pilgrimage
to the sacred Jagannath. Jogin and Latu were at Vrindavan and had not
yet seen the new place.

Narendra had gone to Calcutta that morning to look after a lawsuit in
which his family had been involved since the death of his father. At
nine
o'clock in the morning M. arrived at the math. Tarak saw him and began
to sing in praise of Siva, Rakhal joining him:

There Siva dances, striking both His
cheeks; and they resound, Ba-ba-bom!

Dimi-dimi-dimi! sounds His drum; a garland of skulls from His
neck is hanging!

In His matted locks the Ganges hisses; fire shoots from His mighty
trident!

Round His waist a serpent glitters, and on His brow the moon is shining!

Rakhal and Tarak danced as they sang. Narendra had recently
composed the song.

Sashi finished the morning worship in the shrine. Sarat then sang about
Siva to the accompaniment of the tanpura.

Narendra had just arrived from Calcutta. He had not yet taken his bath.
Kali asked him, "What about the lawsuit?" "Why should you bother about
it?" Narendra replied sharply.

Narendra was smoking and talking to M. and the others. He said;
"Nothing can be achieved in spiritual life without the renunciation of
'woman and gold'. 'Woman' is the doorway to hell. All people are under
the
control of women. The cases of Siva and Krishna are quite different.
Siva
turned His Consort into His servant. Sri Krishna, no doubt, led a
householder's life. But how unattached He was! How quickly He renounced
Vrindavan and the gopis!"

RAKHAL: "And how He renounced Dwaraka, too, where He was king!"

Narendra took his bath in the Ganges and returned to the monastery. He
carried his wet cloth and towel in his hand. Sarada prostrated himself
before
Narendra. He too had been fasting on account of the Sivaratri. He was
going to the Ganges for his bath. Narendra entered the worship room and
prostrated himself before the picture of Sri Ramakrishna, who was daily
worshipped there as the Deity. For a few minutes he was absorbed in
meditation.

The devotees assembled in a room and began to converse. The talk
turned to Bhavanath. Narendra said, "People like him live like worms in
the world."

It was afternoon. Arrangements were being made to worship Siva in the
evening. Leaves of the bel-tree were gathered for the worship. Bel-wood
was chopped for the homa.

In the evening Sashi, who was in charge of the worship at the
monastery,
burnt incense before the pictures of the various gods and goddesses.

The worship of Siva was to take place under the bel-tree in the
monastery
compound. The Deity was to be worshipped four times, during the four
watches of the night. The brothers assembled under the bel-tree.
Bhupati
and M. were present also. One of the young members of the math was in
charge of the worship. Kali was reading from the Gita.
Now and then he
argued with Narendra.

KALI: "I alone am everything. I create, preserve, and destroy."
NARENDRA: "How is it possible for me to create? Another power creates
through me. Our various actions — even our thoughts — are caused by
that power."

M. (to himself): "The Master used to say: 'As long
as a man feels that it
is he who meditates, he is under the jurisdiction of the Adyasakti.
Sakti
must be acknowledged.'"

Kali reflected in silence a few moments and then said: "The actions you
are talking about are illusory. There is not even any such thing as
thought.
The very idea of these things makes me laugh."
NARENDRA: "The 'I' that is implied in 'I am He' is not this ego. It is
that
which remains after one eliminates mind, body, and so on."

After completing the recital of the Gita, Kali
chanted: "Santih! Santih! Santih!"

Narendra and the other devotees stood up and circled round and round
the tree, singing and dancing. Now and then they chanted in chorus:
"Siva Guru! Siva Guru!"

It was midnight, the fourteenth day of the dark fortnight of the moon.
Pitch darkness filled all the quarters. Men, birds, and animals were
all
hushed into silence. The young sannyasis were clad in gerrua robes. The
words "Siva Guru", chanted in their full-throated voices, rose into the
infinite
sky like the rumblings of rain-clouds and disappeared in the
Indivisible Satchidananda.

The worship was over. The sun, about to rise, was painting the eastern
horizon crimson. In this sacred twilight, the conjunction of night and
day,
the holy Brahmamuhurta, the young worshippers finished their baths in
the Ganges.

It was morning. The devotees went to the shrine room, prostrated
themselves before the Deity, and gradually assembled in the big hall.
Narendra
was clad in a new ochre cloth. The bright orange colour of his apparel
blended with the celestial lustre of his face and body, every pore of
which
radiated a divine light. His countenance was filled with fiery
brilliance and
yet touched with the tenderness of love. He appeared to all as a bubble
that
had risen up in the Ocean of Absolute Existence and Bliss and assumed a
human body to help in the propagation of his Master's message. All eyes
were fixed on him. Narendra was then just twenty-four years old, the
very
age at which the great Chaitanya had renounced the world.

Balaram had sent fruit and sweets to the monastery for the devotees'
breakfast. Rakhal, Narendra, and a few others partook of the
refreshments.
After eating one or two morsels some of them cried out, "Blessed indeed
is
Balaram!" All laughed.

Narendra now began to joke like a child. He was imitating Sri
Ramakrishna. He put a sweet into his mouth and stood still, as if in
samadhi. His
eyes remained unwinking. A devotee stepped forward and pretended to
hold
him up by the hand lest he should drop to the ground. Narendra closed
his eyes. A few minutes later, with the sweetmeat still in his mouth,
he
opened his eyes and drawled out, "I — am — all — right." All laughed
loudly.

Refreshments were now given to everyone. M. looked on at this wonderful
mart of happiness. The devotees shouted joyfully, "Jai Gurumaharaj!"
(Victory to the Guru.)

Monday, March 25, 1887

M. arrived at the Baranagore Math to visit his brother disciples.
Devendra
accompanied him. M. had been coming to the monastery very frequently
and now and then had spent a day or two. The previous week he had spent
three days at the math. He was very eager to observe the spirit of
intense
renunciation of these young men.

It was evening. M. intended to spend the night in the monastery. Sashi
lighted the lamp in the worship room and chanted the name of God. Next
he burnt incense before all the pictures of gods and goddesses in the
various
rooms. The evening service began. Sashi conducted the worship. The
members of the math, with M. and Devendra, stood with folded hands and
sang
the hymn of the arati.

When the worship was over, Narendra and M. became engaged in
conversation. Narendra was recalling his various meetings with Sri
Ramakrishna.

NARENDRA: "One day, during one of my early visits, the Master in an
ecstatic mood said to me, 'You have come!' 'How amazing!' I said to
myself.
'It is as if he had known me a long time.' Then he said to me, 'Do you
ever
see light?' I replied: 'Yes, sir. Before I fall asleep I feel something
like a light
revolving near my forehead.'"

M: "Do you see it even now?"

NARENDRA: "I used to see it frequently. In Jadu Mallick's garden house
the Master one day touched me and muttered something to himself. I
became
unconscious. The effect of the touch lingered with me a month, like an
intoxication.

"When he heard that a proposal had been made about my marriage, he
wept, holding the feet of the image of Kali. With tears in his eyes he
prayed
to the Divine Mother: 'O Mother, please upset the whole thing! Don't
let
Narendra be drowned.'

"After my father's death my mother and my brothers were starving. When
the Master met Annada Guha one day, he said to him: 'Narendra's father
has died. His family is in a state of great privation. It would be good
if his
friends helped him now with money.'

"After Annada had left I scolded him. I said, 'Why did you say all
those
things to him?' Thus rebuked, he wept and said, 'Alas! for your sake I
could
beg from door to door.'

"He tamed us by his love. Don't you think so?"

M; "There is not the slightest doubt about it. His love was utterly
unselfish."

NARENDRA: "One day when I was alone with him he said something to
me. Nobody else was present. Please don't repeat it to anyone here."

M: "No, I shall not. What did he say?"

NARENDRA: "He said: 'It is not possible for me to exercise occult
powers;
but I shall do so through you. What do you say?' 'No,' I replied, you
can't do that.'

"I used to laugh at his words. You must have heard all these things
from
him. I told him that his visions of God were all hallucinations of his
mind.

"He said to me: 'I used to climb to the roof of the kuthi and cry: "O
devotees, where are you all? Come to me, O devotees! I am about to die.
I
shall certainly die if I do not see you." And the Divine Mother told
me,
"The devotees will come." You see, everything is turning out to be
true.'

"What else could I say? I kept quiet.

"One day he closed the door of his room and said to Devendra Babu and
Girish Babu, referring to me, 'He will not keep his body if he is told
who he is.'"

M: "Yes, we have heard that. Many a time he repeated the same thing
to us, too. Once you came to know about your true Self in nirvikalpa
samadhi at the Cossipore garden house. Isn't that true?"

NARENDRA: "Yes. In that experience I felt that I had no body. I could
see only my face. The Master was in the upstairs room. I had that
experience
downstairs. I was weeping. I said, 'What has happened to me?' The elder
Gopal went to the Master's room and said, 'Narendra is crying.'

"When I saw the Master he said to me: 'Now you have known. But I am
going to keep the key with me.'

"I said to him, 'What is it that happened to me?'

"Turning to the devotees, he said: 'He will not keep his body if he
knows
who he is. But I have put a veil over his eyes.'

"One day he said to me, 'You can see Krishna in your heart if you
want.'
I replied, 'I don't believe in Krishna or any such nonsense!' (Both
M. and
Narendra laugh.)

"I have noticed a peculiar thing. Some men, objects, or places make me
feel as if I had seen them before, in a previous birth. They appear
familiar
to me. One day I went to Sarat's house in Calcutta, on Amherst Street.
Immediately I said to Sarat: This house seems familiar to me. It seems
to
me that I have known the rooms, the passages, and the rest of the house
for
many, many days.

"I used to follow my own whims in everything I did. The Master never
interfered. You know that I became a member of the Sadharan Brahmo
Samaj."

M: "Yes, I know that."

NARENDRA: "The Master knew that women attended the meetings of the
Brahmo Samaj. A man cannot meditate with women sitting in front of him;
therefore he criticized the meditation of the Brahmo Samaj. But he
didn't
object to my going there. But one day he said to me, 'Don't tell Rakhal
about your being a member of the Brahmo Samaj, or he too will feel like
becoming one.'"

M: "You have greater strength of mind. That is why the Master didn't
prevent your going to the Samaj."

NARENDRA : "I have attained my present state of mind as a result of
much
suffering and pain. You have not passed through any such suffering. I
now
realize that without trials and tribulations one cannot resign oneself
to God
and depend on Him absolutely.

"Well, X— is so modest and humble! He is totally self-effacing. Can you
tell me how I can develop humility?"

M: "Speaking about your ego, the Master said, 'Whose ego is it?'"

NARENDRA: "What did he mean?"

M: "A friend one day said to Radhika: 'You are egotistic. That is why
you insulted Krishna.' Whereupon another friend said to the first:
'Yes,
Radhika is egotistic, no doubt. But whose ego is it?' What she meant
was
that Radha was egotistic because she regarded Krishna as her Lord. It
was
Krishna Himself who kept that ego in Radha.

"What the Master meant was that it is God alone who has kept this ego
in you, so that He may accomplish many things through you."

NARENDRA: "But my ego loudly proclaims to all that I have no suffering."

M. (smiling): "You may loudly proclaim it, if that
be your sweet will."

The conversation turned to other devotees.

NARENDRA: "The Master said about Vijay Goswami, 'He is knocking at
the door.'"

M: "That is to say, he has not yet entered the room. At Syampukur
Vijay said to the Master, 'I saw you at Dacca in this tangible form, in
this
very body.' You were there too."

NARENDRA: "Devendra Babu and Ram Babu want to renounce the world.
They are trying hard. Ram Babu told me privately that he would give up
the world after two years."

M: "After two years? After making provision for his children?"

NARENDRA: "Besides, he will rent his present house and buy a small
house. Other relatives will arrange his daughter's marriage."

M: "Gopal (Referring to Nityagopal.) is in an exalted state of mind,
isn't he?"

NARENDRA: "What do you mean?"

M: "So much emotion, so much weeping and such exaltation in the name of
God!"

NARENDRA: "Does mere emotion make a man spiritually great? Youngsters
like Kali, Sarat, Sashi, and Sarada are more spiritual than Gopal. How
great
their renunciation is! Gopal does not accept the Master, does he?"

M: "That is true. The Master remarked that Gopal did not belong to
the circle of his devotees. But I saw him show great reverence for Sri
Ramakrishna."

NARENDRA: "What did you see?"

M: "At that time I was just becoming acquainted with Sri Ramakrishna.
One day, after the meeting of the devotees in his room had broken up, I
came out and saw Gopal on the foot-path, kneeling with folded hands
before the Master. The moon was shining brightly overhead. It was the
red
path sprinkled with brick-dust, just outside the long verandah north of
the
Master's room. Nobody else was there. It appeared to me that Gopal had
taken shelter at Sri Ramakrishna's feet and the Master was encouraging
him."

NARENDRA: "I didn't see it."

M; "Further, the Master used to say, 'Gopal is in the state of a
paramahamsa.' But I also distinctly remember his forbidding Gopal to be
intimate
with woman devotees. Many a time he warned him about it."

NARENDRA: "Speaking to me about Gopal, the Master asked why, if
Gopal was a real paramahamsa, he should hanker after money. 'He doesn't
belong to this place', the Master said. 'Those who are my own will
always
come here.' He used to be angry with T— because he was Gopal's constant
companion and didn't come to the Master more often. 'Gopal has
spiritual
realizations, no doubt,' the Master said to me, 'but he has attained
them all
of a sudden, without the necessary preparations. He is not one of my
own.
If he is, why haven't I wept for him?'

"Some are proclaiming Gopal as the reincarnation of Nityananda. But
times without number the Master said to me: 'In me alone are embodied
Advaita, Chaitanya, and Nityananda.3
I am all these three.'"

Friday, April 8, 1887

About eight o'clock in the morning two devotees, one a
householder and
the other a monk, were conversing in a room in the Baranagore
monastery,
when M. came in. The devotees were of the same age — twenty-four or
twenty-five years old. M. intended to spend three days at the
monastery. He
went to the shrine and saluted the Deity. After visiting Narendra,
Rakhal,
and the other brothers, he at last came into the room where the two
devotees
were engaged in conversation. The householder devotee wanted to
renounce
the world. The monk was trying to persuade him not to do so.

MONK: "Why don't you finish the few duties you have in the world?
Very soon they will be left behind.

"A man was told that he would go to hell. He asked a friend, 'What is
hell like?' Thereupon the friend began to draw a picture of hell on the
ground with a piece of chalk. No sooner was the picture drawn than the
man rolled over it and said, 'Now I have gone through hell!'"

HOUSEHOLDER: "I don't relish worldly life. Ah, how happy you are here!"

MONK: "Why don't you renounce the world, if you want to? Why do you
talk about it so much? But I repeat, why don't you enjoy the fun once
for all?"

Sashi finished the regular worship in the worship hall. About eleven
the
brothers of the math returned from the Ganges after taking their baths.
They put on clean cloths, went to the shrine, prostrated themselves
before
the Deity, and meditated there a little while.

After the food was offered to the Deity they had their meal. M. ate
with them.

It was evening. Incense was burnt before the pictures of gods and
goddesses
and the evening service was performed. Rakhal, Sashi, the elder Gopal,
and
Harish were seated in the big hall. M. also was there. Rakhal warned
one of
the brothers to be careful about the food to be offered to the Master
in the shrine.

RAKHAL (to Sashi and the others): "One day I ate
part of his [meaning
the Master's] refreshments before he took them. At this he said: 'I
cannot
look at you. How could you do such a thing?' I burst into tears."

THE ELDER GOPAL: "One day at Cossipore I breathed hard on his food.
At this he said, 'Take that food away.'"

M. and Narendra were pacing the verandah and recalling old times.

NARENDRA: "I did not believe in anything."

M: "You mean the forms of God?"

NARENDRA: "At first I did not accept most of what the Master said. One
day he asked me. Then why do you come here?' I replied, 'I come here to
see you, not to listen to you.'"

M: "What did he say to that?"

NARENDRA: "He was very much pleased."

Saturday, April 9, 1887

The members of the math were resting a little after their meal.
Narendra
and M. sat under a tree in the garden to the west of the monastery. It
was a
solitary place and no one else was present. Narendra was recounting to
M.
his various experiences with Sri Ramakrishna. Narendra was about
twenty-four years old, and M. thirty-two.

M: "You must remember vividly your first visit to him."

NARENDRA: "Yes. It was at the temple garden at Dakshineswar, in his own
room. That day I sang two songs."

Narendra sang them for M.:

Let us go back once more, O mind. to our
own abode!

Here in this foreign land of earth

Why should we wander aimlessly in stranger's guise?

These living beings round about, and the five elements,

Are strangers to you, all of them; none is your own.

Why do you thus forget yourself,

In love with strangers, O my mind?

Why do you thus forget your own?

Ascend the path of Truth, O mind! Unflaggingly climb,

With Love as the lamp to light your way.

As your provision for the journey, bring with you

The virtues, carefully concealed; for, like two highwaymen,

Greed and delusion wait to rob you of your wealth.

And keep beside you constantly,

As guards to shelter you from harm,

Calmness of mind and self-control.

Companionship with holy men will be for you

A welcome rest-house by the road;

There rest your weary limbs awhile, asking your way,

If ever you should be in doubt, of him who watches there.

If anything along the path should frighten you,

Then loudly shout the name of the Lord;

For He is Ruler of that road,

And even Death must bow to Him.

*   *   *

O Lord, must all my days pass by so utterly in vain?

Down the path of hope I gaze with longing, day and night.

Thou art the Lord of all the worlds, and I but a beggar here;

How can I ask of Thee to come and dwell within my heart?

My poor heart's humble cottage door is standing open wide;

Be gracious, Lord, and enter there but once, and quench its thirst!

M: "What did he say after listening to your songs?"

NARENDRA: "He went into samadhi. He said to Ram Babu: "Who is this
boy? How well he sings!' He asked me to come again."

M: "Where did you see him next?"

NARENDRA: "At Rajmohan's house. The third visit was at Dakshineswar
again. During that visit he went into samadhi and began to praise me as
if I
were God. He said to me, 'O Narayana, you have assumed this body for my
sake.' But please don't tell this to anybody else."

M: "What else did he say?"

NARENDRA: "He said: 'You have assumed this body for my sake. I asked
the Divine Mother, "Mother, unless I enjoy the company of some genuine
devotees completely free from 'woman and gold', how shall I live on
earth?"'
Then he said to me, 'You came to me at night, woke me up, and said,
"Here
I am!"' But I did not know anything of this. I was sound asleep in our
Calcutta house."

M: "In other words, you may be both present and absent at the same
time. It is like God, who is both formless and endowed with form."

NARENDRA: "But you must not tell this to anyone else. At Cossipore he
transmitted his power to me."

M: "Didn't it happen when you used to meditate before a lighted fire
under a tree at the Cossipore garden house?"

NARENDRA: "Yes. One day, while meditating, I asked Kali to hold my
hand.
Kali said to me, 'When I touched your body I felt something like an
electric
shock coming to my body.'

"But you must not tell this to anybody here. Give me your promise."

M: "There is a special purpose in his transmission of power to you. He
will accomplish much work through you. One day the Master wrote on a
piece of paper, 'Naren will teach people.'"

NARENDRA: "But I said to him, 'I won't do any such thing.' Thereupon
he said, 'Your very bones will do it.' He has given me charge of Sarat.
Sarat
is now yearning for God"; the Kundalini is awakened in him."

M: "He must be careful that dead leaves do not accumulate there.
Perhaps you remember what the Master used to say: 'In a lake the fish
make
holes so that they may rest there. But if dead leaves accumulate in the
holes
the fish do not go there.'"

NARENDRA: "The Master used to call me Narayana."

M: "Yes, I know he did."

NARENDRA: "When he was ill he would not allow me to pour water to
wash his hands. At Cossipore he said: 'Now the key is in my hands. He
will give up his body when he knows who he is.'"

M: "Didn't he say it when you were in nirvikalpa samadhi?"

NARENDRA: "Yes. At the time it seemed to me I had no body. I felt only
my face.

"I was studying law at home to prepare for the examinations. Suddenly I
said to myself, 'What am I doing?'"

M: "Didn't it happen when the Master was at Cossipore?"

NARENDRA : "Yes. Like an insane person I ran out of our house. He asked
me, 'What do you want?' I replied, 'I want to remain immersed in
samadhi.'
He said: 'What a small mind you have! Go beyond samadhi! Samadhi is a
very trifling thing.'"

M: "Yes, he used to say that vijnana is the stage after jnana. It is
like
going up and down the stairs after reaching the roof."

NARENDRA: "Kali has a craving for knowledge. I scold him for that. Is
knowledge so easy to get? Let his bhakti first mature. The Master told
Tarak at Dakshineswar that emotion and bhakti are by no means the last
word."

M: "What other things did he say about you?"

NARENDRA: "Once I said to him, The forms of God and things like that,
which you see in your visions, are all figments of your imagination.'
He had
so much faith in my words that he went to the Divine Mother in the
temple
and told Her what I had said to him. He asked Her, 'Are these
hallucinations, then?' Afterwards he said to me, 'Mother told me that
all these are real.'

"Perhaps you remember that he said to me, 'When you sing, He who
dwells here (touching his heart), like a snake,
hisses as it were, and then,
spreading His hood, quietly holds Himself steady and listens to your
music.'

"He has no doubt said many things about me; but what have I realized?"

M: "Now you have put on the garb of Siva; you cannot touch money.
Do you remember the Master's story?"

NARENDRA: "Please tell it to me."

M: "A vahurupi (A professional impersonator.) disguised himself as Siva
and visited a house. The
master of the house wanted to give him a rupee, but he did not accept
it.
Then the mendicant went home, removed his disguise, came back to the
gentleman, and asked for the rupee. 'Why didn't you accept it before?'
he
was asked. He said: 'I was impersonating Siva, a sannyasi. I couldn't
touch
money at that time.'"

When Narendra heard the story he laughed a long while.

M: "You have now put on the garb of a physician, as it were. You have
become the guardian of these young men. Yours is the entire
responsibility.
You have to bring up the brothers of the monastery."

NARENDRA: "Whatever spiritual disciplines we are practising here are in
obedience to the Master's command. But it is strange that Ram Babu
criticizes us for our spiritual practices. He says: 'We have seen him.
(Sri
Ramakrishna) What need have we of any such practice?'"

M: "Let people act according to their faith."

NARENDRA: "But the Master asked us to practise sadhana."

Narendra was again telling M. about the Master's love for him.

NARENDRA: "How many times he prayed to the Divine Mother for my
sake! After my father's death, when I had no food at home and my mother
and sisters and brothers were starving too, the Master prayed to the
Divine
Mother to give me money."

M: "Yes, I know that. You once told me."

NARENDRA: "But I didn't get any money. The Master told me what the
Divine Mother had said to him: 'He will get simple food and clothing.
He
will eat rice and dal.'

"He loved me so much! But whenever an impure idea crept into my
mind he at once knew about it. While going around with, Annada,
sometimes I found myself in the company of evil people. On those
occasions the
Master could not eat any food from my hands. He could raise his hand
only
a little, and could not bring it to his mouth. On one such occasion,
while
he was ill, he brought his hand very close to his mouth, but it did not
go in.
He said to me, 'You are not yet ready.'

"Now and then I feel great scepticism. At Baburam's house it seemed to
me that nothing existed — as if there were no such thing as God."

M: "The Master used to say that he too had passed through that mood."

Both M. and Narendra remained silent. Then M. said: "You are all
indeed blessed! You think of the Master day and night."

NARENDRA: "But how little it is! We don't yet feel like giving up the
body
because we haven't realized God."

It was night. Niranjan had just returned from Puri. The members of the
math, and M., greeted him with great joy. Niranjan was telling them his
experiences. He was then about twenty-five years old.

The evening worship was over. Some of the brothers were meditating.
But many of them assembled in the big hall around Niranjan. They were
talking. After nine o'clock Sashi offered food to the Deity.

The members of the math finished their supper, which consisted of
homemade bread, a little vegetable, and a little hard molasses.

Saturday, May 7, 1887

It was the full-moon day of the month of Vaisakh. Narendra and M were
seated on a couch in M.'s study in Calcutta. They were talking. Just
before
Narendra's arrival M. had been studying The Merchant of Venice,
Comus,
and Blackie's Self-culture, which he taught at
school.

Narendra and the other brothers of the monastery were full of yearning
for God-realization. A fire of intense renunciation raged in their
hearts.

NARENDRA: "I don't care for anything. You see, I am now talking with
you, but I feel like getting up this minute and running away."

Narendra sat in silence a few minutes. Then he said, "I shall fast to
death
for the realization of God."

M: "That is good. One can do anything for God."

NARENDRA: "But suppose I cannot control my hunger."

M: "Then eat something and begin over again."

Narendra remained silent a few minutes.

NARENDRA: "It seems there is no God. I pray so much, but there is no
reply — none whatsoever.

"How many visions I have seen! How many mantras shining in letters of
gold! How many visions of the Goddess Kali! How many other divine
forms! But still I have no peace.

"Will you kindly give me six pice?"

Narendra asked for the money to pay his carriage hire to the Baranagore
Math. Just then Satkari arrived in a carriage. Of the same age as
Narendra,
he dearly loved the members of the monastery. He lived near the math
and
worked in Calcutta. The carriage was his own. Narendra returned the
money to M. and said that he would go with Satkari in his carriage. He
asked M. to give them some refreshments.

M. accompanied the two friends to the Baranagore Math. He wanted to
see how the brothers spent their time and practised sadhana. He wanted
to
see how Sri Ramakrishna, the Master, was reflected in the hearts of the
disciples. Niranjan was not at the math. He had gone home to visit his
mother, the only relative he had in the world. Baburam, Sarat, and Kali
had
gone to Puri. They intended to spend a few days there.

Narendra was in charge of the members of the monastery. Prasanna4
had been practising austere sadhana for the past few days. Once
Narendra had
told him of his desire to fast to death for the realization of God.
During
Narendra's absence in Calcutta, Prasanna had left the monastery for an
unknown destination. When Narendra heard about it, he said to the
brothers, "Why did Raja5
allow him to go?" But Rakhal had not been in
the monastery at the time, having gone to the Dakshineswar temple for a
stroll.

NARENDRA: "Just let Raja come back to the monastery! I shall scold him.
Why did he allow Prasanna to go away? (To Harish) I
am sure you were
lecturing him then, standing with your feet apart. Couldn't you prevent
his
going away?"

Harish replied in a very low voice, "Brother Tarak asked him not to go,
but still he went away."

NARENDRA (to M.): "You see what a lot of trouble I
am in! Here, too, I
am involved in a world of maya. Who knows where this boy has gone?"

Rakhal returned from Dakshineswar. Bhavanath had accompanied him.

Narendra told Rakhal about Prasanna's going away from the monastery.
Prasanna had left a letter for Narendra. This was the substance of the
letter: "I am going to Vrindavan on foot. It is very risky for me to
live
here. Here my mind is undergoing a change. Formerly I used to dream
about my parents and other relatives. Then I dreamt of woman, the
embodiment of maya. I have suffered twice; I had to go back to my
relatives at
home. Therefore I am going far away from them. The Master once told
me, "Your people at home are apt to do anything; never trust them.'"

Rakhal said: "These are the reasons for his going away. Once he
remarked:
'Narendra often goes home to look after his mother, brothers, and
sisters.
And he supervises the family's lawsuit. I am afraid that I too may feel
like
going home, following his example.'"

Narendra remained silent.

Rakhal was talking to them about making pilgrimages. He said: "We
have achieved nothing by staying here. The Master always exhorted us to
realize God. Have we succeeded?"

Rakhal lay down. The other devotees were either lying down or sitting.

RAKHAL: "Let us go to the Narmada."

NARENDRA: "What will you achieve by wandering about? Can one ever
attain jnana, that you are talking about it so much?"

A DEVOTEE: "Then why have you renounced the world?"

NARENDRA: "Must we live with Shyam because we have not seen Ram?
Must we go on begetting children because we have not realized God? What
are you talking about?"

Narendra went out, returning after a few minutes. Rakhal was still
lying down.

A member of the monastery who was also lying down said teasingly,
feigning great suffering on account of his separation from God: "Ah!
Please
get me a knife. I have no more use for this life. I can't stand this
pain any more!"

NARENDRA (feigning seriousness): "It is there.
Stretch out your hand
and take it."

Everybody laughed.

The conversation again turned to Prasanna.

NARENDRA: "Even here we are involved in maya. Why have we become
sannyasis, I wonder?"

RAKHAL: "I have read in a book that sannyasis should not live together.
The author has described a city of sannyasis."

SASHI: "I don't care about sannyas or any such thing. There is no place
where I cannot live."

They were talking of Bhavanath, whose wife had been seriously ill.
Narendra said to Rakhal: "I understand that his wife has been snatched
from the jaws of death. Is that why he went to Dakshineswar to enjoy
the
fresh air?"

Ram Babu intended to build a temple in the garden at Kankurgachi, where
some of Sri Ramakrishna's ashes were buried.

NARENDRA (to Rakhal): "Ram Babu has made M. one of
the trustees of
the garden."

M. (to Rakhal): "But I don't know anything about it."

It was dusk. Sashi burnt incense before the picture of Sri Ramakrishna
in the worship room and then before the pictures of gods and goddesses
in
the other rooms.

The evening worship began. The members of the math and the other
devotees stood with folded hands near the door of the shrine and
witnessed
the arati. Then they all sang in chorus the following hymn to Siva, to
the
accompaniment of bell and gong:

Jaya Siva Omkara, Bhaja Siva Omkara,

Brahma Vishnu Sadasiva.

Hara Hara Hara Mahadeva!

Narendra had introduced this song for the evening worship. It
is sung in
the temple of Siva in Benares.

It was eleven o'clock at night when their supper was over. The brothers
prepared a bed for M., and all went to sleep.

It was midnight. M. was wide awake. He said to himself: "Everything is
as it was before. The same Ayodhya — only Rama is not there." M.
silently
left his bed. It was the full-moon night of Vaisakh, the thrice-blessed
day of
the Buddhists, associated with Buddha's birth, realization, and passing
away.
M. was walking alone on the bank of the Ganges, contemplating the
Master.

It was Sunday. M. had arrived the day before and was planning to stay
till Wednesday. The householder devotees generally visited the
monastery on Sundays.

The Yogavasishtha was being studied and explained.
M. had heard a
little about the teachings of this book from Sri Ramakrishna. It taught
the
absolute identity of Brahman and the soul, and the unreality of the
world.
The Master had forbidden him and the other householder devotees to
practise spiritual discipline following the method of the Advaita
Vedanta, since
the attitude of the oneness of the soul and God is harmful for one
still
identified with the body. For such a devotee, the Master used to say,
it was better
to look on God as the Lord and oneself as His servant.

The conversation turned to the Yogavasishtha.
M: "Well, how is Brahmajnana described in the Yogavasishtha?"

RAKHAL: "Hunger, thirst, pain, pleasure, and so on, are all maya. The
annihilation of the mind is the only means to the realization of
Brahman."

M: "What remains after the annihilation of the mind is Brahman. Is that
not true?"

RAKHAL: "Yes."

M: "Sri Ramakrishna used to say that. Nangta taught him that way.
Have you found in the book that Vasishtha asked Rama to lead a
householder's life?"

RAKHAL: "I haven't yet found anything like that in the book. Rama is
not even admitted by the author to be an Incarnation of God."

Presently Narendra, Tarak, and another devotee returned from the bank
of the Ganges. They had intended to go to Konnagar, on the other side
of
the river, but had been unable to find a ferry-boat. They sat down. The
conversation about the Yogavasishtha went on.

NARENDRA (to M.): "There are many nice stories in
the book. Do you
know the incident of Lila?"

M: "Yes, I have read the book here and there. Lila had attained
Brahmajnana."

NARENDRA: "Yes. Do you remember the story of Indra and Ahalya, and
the story of how King Viduratha became a chandala?"

M: "Yes, I remember."

NARENDRA: "What a wonderful description of the forest!"

Narendra and the other devotees were going to the Ganges to bathe. M.
accompanied them. The sun was very hot; so M. took his umbrella. Sarat,
a
devotee from Baranagore, was going with them to take his bath. He often
visited the monastery.

M. (to Sarat): "It is very hot."

NARENDRA: "Is that your excuse for taking the umbrella?"

M. laughed.

The members of the monastery were clad in gerrua.

M. (to Narendra): "It is really very hot. One is
liable to get a sunstroke."

NARENDRA: "I see that your body is the obstacle in your path of
renunciation. Isn't that so? I mean you, Devendra Babu—"

M. laughed and said to himself, "Is it merely the body?"

After bathing, the devotees returned to the monastery. They washed
their
feet and entered the worship room. Saluting the Deity, they offered
flowers.

Narendra was a little late in coming to the worship room. He found that
there was no flower on the tray. There were only a few bel-leaves. He
sprinkled the leaves with sandal-paste and offered them to Sri
Ramakrishna.
He rang the bell, saluted the Deity again, and joined the other
brothers in
the big hall, which was known as the room of the "danas".

The members of the math called themselves the "danas" and the
"daityas",
which mean the "ghosts" and the "demons", the companions of Siva. They
took these names because of their utter indifference to worldly
pleasures and
relationships.

The southernmost room of the second floor was used for meditation,
contemplation, and study, and was known as Kali Tapasvi's room, since
Kali
used to shut himself in there most of the day. North of this room was
the
worship room, and north of that, again, was the room where the
offerings
for the worship were prepared. From this room the devotees used to
watch
the evening worship. North of the "offering room" was the room of the
"danas", a very long hall where the members of the math used to
assemble.
Here the householder devotees and visitors were received. North of this
hall was a small room where the devotees took their meals. East of the
worship room and of Kali Tapasvi's room ran a long verandah, at the
south-west corner of which was the library of a society of Baranagore.
Between
Kali Tapasvi's room and this library was a staircase; and north of the
dining-room was another staircase, leading to the roof.

Narendra and the other members of the math often spent their evenings
on this roof. There they devoted a great deal of lime to discussion of
the
teachings of Sri Ramakrishna, Sankaracharya, Ramanuja, and Jesus
Christ,
and of Hindu philosophy, European philosophy, the Vedas, the Puranas,
and the Tantras.

Narendra, who had a beautiful voice, used to sing in the room o£ the
"danas" and teach music to Sarat and a few others. Kali used to take
lessons
on the instruments. Many, many happy hours they spent together in that
hall, dancing and singing.

Narendra was sitting with the devotees in the room of the "danas". The
conversation turned to religious preaching.

M. (to Narendra): "Vidyasagar says that he does not
speak about God to
anyone for fear of being caned."
NARENDRA: "For fear of being caned? What does he mean?"

M: "This is what Vidyasagar says: 'Suppose that after death we all go
to
God. The emissaries of Death will have sent Keshab Sen there too.
Keshab
Sen, no doubt, committed sins while he lived on earth. When that is
proved,
perhaps God will say, "Give him twenty-five stripes." Then suppose I am
taken to God. I used to go to Keshab Sen's Brahmo Samaj in my earthly
life. I too have committed many sins; so I too am ordered to be caned.
Then
suppose I say to God that I acted in that sinful way because I listened
to
Keshab's preaching. Thereupon God will ask His emissaries to bring
Keshab back. When he is brought, the Almighty Lord will say to him:
"Did you really preach that way? You yourself knew nothing about
spiritual
matters and yet you had the hardihood to teach others about God!
Emissaries! Give him twenty five stripes more."'"

Everybody laughed.

M: "Therefore Vidyasagar says: 'I cannot take care of my own self;
should
I be foolish enough to get an additional caning for misleading others?
I myself
do not understand God. How shall I lecture to others about Him?'"

NARENDRA: "How has he — who could not understand God — understood
other things?"

M: "What other things?"

NARENDRA: "He says that he has not understood God. But how, then, can
he understand charity and doing good to others? How can he understand
about the school? How can he understand about educating boys by
establishing schools? How can he understand that it is right to enter
the world,
marry, and beget children?

"He who rightly understands one thing understands everything else."

M. (to himself). "Yes, Sri Ramakrishna, too, said
that he who knows God
knows everything else. Further, he said to Vidyasagar that leading a
worldly
life, establishing schools, and so on are the outcome of rajas. The
Master
also said that Vidyasagar's philanthropy was due to the influence of
sattva
on rajas. Such rajas is not harmful."

After their meal the brothers of the monastery rested. M. and Chunilal
were conversing. Chunilal told M. of his first visit to Sri Ramakrishna
at
Dakshineswar. He also told him how at one time he had felt disgusted
with
the world, had renounced it, and had wandered about in holy places. A
few
minutes later Narendra came and sat by them. He asked the younger Gopal
to prepare a smoke for him. The latter had been meditating. Narendra
said
to him: "I say! Prepare a smoke. What do you mean by this meditation?
First of all prepare yourself for spiritual life by serving God and
holy men;
then you will be able to meditate. First of all karma, and then
meditation."
Everybody laughed.

There was a big plot of wooded land to the west of the monastery
compound. M. was seated alone under a tree, when suddenly Prasanna
appeared.
It was about three o'clock in the afternoon.

M: "Where have you been all these days? Everyone has been so worried
about you. Have you seen the brothers? When did you arrive?"

PRASANNA: "Just now. Yes, I have seen them."

M: "You left a note saying that you were going to Vrindavan. We were
terribly worried about you. How far did you go?"

PRASANNA: "Only as far as Konnagar."6

Both of them laughed.

M: "Sit down. Tell me all about it. Where did you stop first?"

PRASANNA: "At the Dakshineswar temple garden. I spent one night there."

M. (smiling): "What is Hazra's present mood?"

PRASANNA: "Hazra asked me, 'What do you think of me?'"

Both laughed.

M. (smiling): "What did you say?"

PRASANNA: "I said nothing."

M: "Then?"

PRASANNA: "Then he asked me whether I had brought tobacco for him."

Both laughed.

PRASANNA: "He wanted me to wait on him." (Laughter.)

M: "Where did you go next?"

PRASANNA: "By degrees I got to Konnagar. I spent the night in the open.
I intended to proceed farther and asked some gentlemen whether I could
procure enough money there for a railway ticket to the up-country."

M: "What did they say?"

PRASANNA: "They said, 'You may get a rupee or so; but who will give
you the whole fare?'"

Both laughed.

M: "What did you take with you?"

PRASANNA: "Oh, one or two pieces of cloth and a picture of the Master.
I didn't show the picture to anybody."

Sashi's father came to the math. He wanted to take his son home. During
Sri Ramakrishna's illness Sashi had nursed the Master for nine months
with
unswerving zeal. He had won a scholarship in the Entrance Examination
for his academic ability and had studied up to the B.A., but he had not
appeared at the examination. His father, a poor brahmin, was a devout
Hindu
and spent much of his time in spiritual practice. Sashi was his eldest
son.
His parents had hoped that, after completing his education, he would
earn
money and remove the family's financial difficulties. But Sashi had
renounced the world for the realization of God. Whenever he thought of
his
father and mother he felt great anguish of heart. Many a time he said
to
his friends, with tears in his eyes: "I am at a loss as to my duty.
Alas, I could
not serve my parents; I could not be of any use to them. What great
hope
they placed in me! On account of our poverty my mother did not have any
jewelry. I cherished the desire to buy some for her. But now all my
hopes
are frustrated; it is impossible for me to return home. My Master asked
me
to renounce 'woman and gold'. I simply cannot return home."

After Sri Ramakrishna's passing away Sashi's father had hoped that his
son would come back to his family. The boy had spent a few days at
home,
but immediately after the establishment of the new monastery he had
begun
to frequent it and, after a few days, had decided to remain there as
one of
the members. Every now and then his father came to the monastery to
persuade him to come home; but he had not succeeded.

This day, on learning that his father had come, Sashi fled the
monastery
by another door. He did not want to meet him.

Sashi's father knew M. They paced the upper verandah together and
talked.

SASHI'S FATHER: "Who is in charge of this place? Narendra alone is the
cause of all the mischief. For a while all these young men returned
home and
devoted themselves to their studies."

M: "There is no master here. They are all equals.. What can Narendra
do? Can a man renounce home against his own will? Have we householders,
for instance, been able to give up our homes altogether?"

SASHI'S FATHER: "You are doing the right thing. You are serving both
the world and God. Can't one practise religion after your method? That
is
exactly what we want Sashi to do. Let him live at home and come here
too.
You have no idea how much his mother weeps for him."

M. became sad and said nothing.

SASHI'S FATHER: "And if you speak of searching for holy men, I know
where to find a good one. Let Sashi go to him."

Rakhal and M. were walking on the verandah to the east of Kali
Tapasvi's room.

RAKHAL (earnestly): "M., let us practise sadhana! We
have renounced
home for good. When someone says, 'You have not realized God by
renouncing
home; then why all this fuss?', Narendra gives a good retort. He says,
'Because we could not attain Ram, must we live with Shyam and beget
children?' Ah! Every now and then Narendra says nice things. You had
better ask him."

M: "What you say is right. I see that you too have become restless for
God."

RAKHAL: "M., how can I describe the state of my mind? Today at
noon-time I felt great yearning for the Narmada. M., please practise
sadhana;
otherwise you will not succeed. Even Sukadeva was afraid of this world.
That is why immediately after his birth he fled the world. His father
asked
him to wait, but he ran straight away."

M: "Yes, the Yogopanishad describes how Sukadeva
fled this world of
maya. It also describes Vyasa's conversation with Suka. Vyasa asked his
son
to practise religion in the world. But Suka said that the one essential
thing
is the Lotus Feet of God. He also expressed his disgust with worldly
men
for getting married and living with women."

RAKHAL: "Many people think that it is enough not to look at the face of
a
woman. But what will you gain merely by turning your eyes to the ground
at the sight of a woman? Narendra put it very well last night, when he
said: 'Woman exists for a man as long as he has lust. Free from lust,
one
sees no difference between man and woman.'"

M: "How true it is! Children do not see the difference between man and
woman."

RAKHAL: "Therefore I say that we must practise spiritual discipline.
How
can one attain Knowledge without going beyond maya?

"Let's go to the big hall. Some gentlemen have come from Baranagore.
Narendra is talking with them. Let's go and listen to him."

M. did not enter the room. As he was pacing outside he overheard some
of the conversation.

NARENDRA: "There is no fixed time or place for the sandhya and other
devotions."

GENTLEMAN: "Sir, can one realize God through spiritual practice alone?"

NARENDRA: "Realization depends on God's grace. Sri Krishna says in the Gita:

The Lord, O Arjuna, dwells in the hearts of all beings, causing them,
by His maya, to revolve as if mounted on a machine. Take refuge in
Him with all thy heart, O Bharata. By His grace wilt thou attain
Supreme Peace and the Eternal Abode.

"Without the grace of God mere worship and prayer do not help
at all.
Therefore one should take refuge in Him."

GENTLEMAN: "May we come now and then and disturb you?"

NARENDRA: "Please come whenever you like. We take our baths in the
Ganges at your ghat."

GENTLEMAN: "I don't mind that. But please see that others don't use it."

NARENDRA: "We shall not use your ghat, if that is what you mean."

NARENDRA: "No, I don't mean exactly that. But if you see other people
using it, then you had better not go."

It was dusk. The evening worship was over. The devotees, as usual, sang
in chorus, "Jaya Siva Omkara". Afterwards they assembled in the room of
the "danas". M., too, was seated there. Prasanna was reading from the Guru
Gita.

Narendra sang:

I salute the Eternal Teacher, who is the Embodiment of the Bliss of
Brahman,

The Essence of knowledge and liberation, the Giver of Supreme Joy;

Who is all-pervading, like the akasa, and is the goal of the Vedanta's
teachings;

Who is One, eternal, stainless, pure, and is the constant Witness of
all things;

Who dwells beyond all moods, transcending the three gunas.

Narendra sang again:

There is none higher than the Guru, none better than the Guru;

This is what Siva has declared.

I shall sing of the blessed Guru, the Supreme Brahman;

I shall worship the blessed Guru, the Supreme Brahman;

I shall meditate on the blessed Guru, the Supreme Brahman;

I shall bow down to the blessed Guru, the Supreme Brahman.

As Narendra sang these verses from the Guru Gita
in his melodious voice,
the minds of the devotees became steady, like a candle-name in a
windless place.

Rakhal was seated in Kali Tapasvi's room. Prasanna sat near him. M.,
too, was there.

Rakhal had renounced the world, leaving behind his wife and child. A
fire of intense renunciation burnt day and night in his heart. He was
thinking
seriously of going away, by himself, to the bank of the Narmada or
some other holy place. Still, he was trying to persuade Prasanna not to
run
away from the monastery.

RAKHAL (to Prasanna): "Where do you want to go,
running away from
here? Here you are in the company of holy men. Wouldn't it be foolish
to
run away from this? Where will you find another like Narendra?"

PRASANNA: "My parents live in Calcutta. I am afraid of being drawn by
their love. That is why I want to flee to a distant place."

RAKHAL: "Can our parents love us as intensely as Gurumaharaj [mean-
ing Sri Ramakrishna] did? What have we done for him, to deserve all
this
love? Why was he so eager for our welfare in body, mind, and soul? What
have we done for him, to deserve all this?"

M. (to himself): "Ah! Rakhal is right. Therefore a
person like Sri
Ramakrishna is described as the 'Ocean of Mercy without any reason'."

PRASANNA(to Rakhal): "Don't you yourself feel like
running away from
here?"

RAKHAL: "Yes, now and then I have a fancy to spend a few days on the
bank of the Narmada. I say to myself, 'Let me go to a place like that
and
practise sadhana in a garden.' Again, I feel a strong desire to
practise the
panchatapa for three days. But I hesitate to live in a garden that
belongs to worldly people."

Tarak and Prasanna were talking in the room of the "danas". Tarak had
lost his mother. His father, like Rakhal's father, had married a second
time.
Tarak himself had married but had lost his wife. Now the monastery was
his home. He too was trying to persuade Prasanna to live there.

PRASANNA: "I have neither jnana nor prema. What have I in the world
for a support?"

TARAK: "It is no doubt difficult to attain jnana; but how can you say
you
have no prema?"

PRASANNA: "I have not yet wept for God. How can I say I have prema?
What have I realized in all these days?"

TARAK: "But you have seen the Master. And why do you say that you
have no jnana?"

PRASANNA: "What sort of jnana are you talking about? Jnana means
Knowledge. Knowledge of what? Certainly of God. But I am not even sure
of the existence of God."

TARAK: "Yes, that's true. According to the jnani, there is no God."

M. (to himself): "Ah! The Master used to say that
those who seek God
pass through the state that Prasanna is now experiencing. In that state
sometimes one doubts the very existence of God. I understand that Tarak
is now reading Buddhistic philosophy. That is why he says that
according
to the jnani God does not exist. But Sri Ramakrishna used to say that
the
jnani and the bhakta will ultimately arrive at the same destination."

Narendra and Prasanna were talking in the meditation room. Rakhal,
Harish, and the younger Gopal were seated in another part of the room.
After a while the elder Gopal came in.

Narendra was reading from the Gita and explaining the verses to
Prasanna:

The Lord, O Arjuna, dwells in the hearts of all beings, causing them,
by His maya, to revolve as if mounted on a machine. Take refuge in
Him with all thy heart, O Bharata. By His grace wilt thou attain
Supreme Peace and the Eternal Abode. Relinquishing all dharmas, take
refuge in Me alone. I shall liberate thee from all sins. Grieve not.

NARENDRA: "Did you notice what Krishna said? 'Mounted on a
machine.'
The Lord, by His maya, causes all beings to revolve as if mounted on a
machine. To seek to know God? You are but a worm among worms — and
you to know God? Just reflect a moment: what is a man? It is said that
each one of the myriads of stars that shine overhead represents a solar
system.
This earth of ours is a part of only one solar system, and even that is
too
big for us. Like an insect man walks about on this earth, which,
compared
to the sun, is only a tiny ball."

Narendra sang:

We are born, O Lord, in the dust of earth,

And our eyes are blinded by the dust;

With dust we toy like children at play:

O give us assurance. Thou Help of the weak!

Wilt Thou cast us out of Thy lap, O Lord,

For a single mistake? Wilt Thou turn away

And abandon us to our helplessness?

Oh, then we shall never be able to rise,

But shall lie for ever dazed and undone.

Mere babes are we, Father, with baby minds;

At every step we stumble and fall.

Why, then, must Thou show us Thy terrible face?

Why, Lord, must we ever behold Thy frown?

Small are we — oh, do not be angry with us,

But tenderly speak to us when we do wrong;

For though Thou dost raise us a hundred times,

A hundred times we shall fall again!

What else can one do with a helpless mind?

Then he said to Prasanna: "Surrender yourself at His feet.
Resign
yourself completely to His will."

Narendra sang again in an ecstatic mood:

O Lord, I am Thy servant, I am Thy servant! Thy servant am I!

O Lord, Thou art my Master, Thou art my Master! My Master art Thou!

From Thee I have received two pieces of bread and a kaupin;7

When I sing Thy name, devotion wells up in my heart and shields me from
harm.

Thou art the Master, the All-compassionate; this I repeat, O Lord!

Thy servant Kabir has taken refuge at Thy feet.

Narendra said to Prasanna: "Don't you remember Sri
Ramakrishna's
words? God is the hill of sugar and you are but an ant. One grain is
enough
to fill your stomach, and you think of bringing home the entire hill!
Don't
you remember what the Master said about Sukadeva? Even Sukadeva was a
big ant at the most. That is why I scolded Kali, saying: 'You fool! Do
you
want to measure God with your tape and foot-rule?'

"God is the Ocean of Mercy. Be His slave and take refuge in Him. He
will show compassion. Pray to Him: 'Protect me always with Thy
compassionate face. Lead me from the unreal to the Real, from darkness
to Light,
from death to Immortality. Reveal Thyself to me and protect me always
with
Thy compassionate face.'"

PRASANNA: "What kind of spiritual discipline should one practise?"

NARENDRA: "Repeat His name. That's enough. Don't you remember Sri
Ramakrishna's song?"

Narendra sang:

O Syama, my only hope is in Thy hallowed name!

What need have I of kosa and kusi?8
What need of smiles and conventions?

Thy name dissolves death's bonds, as Siva has proclaimed,

And I myself am Siva's servant; whom else should I obey?

O Mother, come what may, I shall repeat Thy name;

Why should I fret myself to death? To Siva's words I cling.

He sang again:

Mere babes are we. Father, with baby minds;

At every step we stumble and fall.

Why, then, must Thou show us Thy terrible face?

Why, Lord, must we ever behold Thy frown?

PRASANNA: "Now you are saying that there is a God. Again, it is you who
say that according to Charvaka and many other thinkers the world was
self-created."

NARENDRA: "Haven't you studied chemistry? Who combines the different
elements? It is a human hand that combines hydrogen, oxygen, and
electricity to prepare water. Everybody admits the existence of an
Intelligent
Force — a Force that is the essence of Knowledge and that guides all
these phenomena."

PRASANNA: "How are we to know that God is kind?"

NARENDRA: "The Vedas say, 'That which is Thy compassionate face.'
John Stuart Mill said the same thing. He said, 'How much kindness must
He have, who has implanted kindness in the hearts of men.' The Master
used to say: 'Faith is the one essential thing. God exists. He is very
near us.
Through faith alone one sees Him.'"

Narendra sang:

Where are you seeking Me, My servant? I am
very close to you.

Far away you still are seeking, though I am so very near.

I am not in skin or hair, I am not in bones or flesh,

Not in mosque and not in temple, not in Kasi or Kailas.

Never will you come on Me in Ayodhya or Dwaraka;

But you will be sure to find Me if you search where faith abides.

Not in pleasant tasks or yoga, not in vairagya or sannyas,

Yet I come without delaying if you only search for Me.

PRASANNA: "Sometimes you say that God does not exist, and now
you are
saying all these things! You are not consistent. You keep changing your
opinions."

All laughed.

NARENDRA: "All right! I shall never change what I have just said. As
long
as one has desires and cravings, so long one doubts the existence of
God. A
man cherishes some desire or other. Perhaps he has the desire to study
or
pass the university examination or become a scholar, and so forth and
so on.'

Narendra sang again, in a voice choked with emotion:

Hail to Thee, our God and Lord! Hail, Giver of every blessing!

Hail, Thou Giver of good!

O Redeemer from fear, from danger and suffering!

Upholder of the worlds!

Hail, Lord! Victory to Thee!

Unfathomable and infinite, immeasurable, beyond compare,

O God, none equals Thee!

Lord of the Universe! O All-pervading Truth!

Thou the Atman Supreme!

Hail, Lord! Victory to Thee!

O Thou, the All-compassionate One, adored by the whole universe,

I bow before Thy feet!

Thou art the only Refuge in life and death, O Lord;

Before Thy feet I bow!

Hail, Lord! Victory to Thee!

This is our only prayer, O Lord! What other boon can we implore?

Thus do we pray to Thee:

Grant us true wisdom here, and in the life hereafter

Reveal Thyself to us.

Hail, Lord! Victory to Thee!

Again Narendra sang, describing how very near God is to us —
as near as
the musk to the deer — and exhorting his brother disciples to drink
deep
from the cup of Divine Bliss:

Drinking the Bliss of Hari from the cup of prema,

Sadhu, be intoxicated!

Childhood you spent in crying, and youth in women's control;

Now, in your old age, full of phlegm and wind,

You wait for the funeral couch to bear you to the cremation ground.

Within the musk-deer's navel the fragrant musk is found;

But how can you make it understand?

Without the proper teacher to guide him on his way,

Man, too, is blindly roaming through the world,

Deluded as the foolish deer that wanders round and round the woods.

M. heard all this from the verandah.

Narendra got up. As he left the room he remarked, "My brain is heated
by talking to these youngsters."

He met M. on the verandah and said, "Please, let us have a drink of
water."

One of the members of the math said to Narendra, "Why, then, do you
say that God does not exist?"

Narendra laughed.

Monday, May 9, 1887

The next morning M. was sitting alone under a tree in the
garden. He
said to himself: "Sri Ramakrishna has made the brothers of the
monastery
renounce 'woman and gold'. Ah, how eager they are to realize God! This
place has become a veritable Vaikuntha, and the brothers living here
are
embodiments of Narayana. It is not many days since the Master passed
away; that is why all the ideas and ideals he stood for are there,
almost
intact. The same Ayodhya — only Rama is not there.' The Master has made
these brothers renounce their homes. Why has he kept a few in the
world?
Is there no way of liberation for them?"

From a room upstairs Narendra saw M. sitting alone under the tree. He
came down and said with a smile, "Hello, M.! What are you doing?"

After a little conversation M. said to him: "Ah, you have such a sweet
voice. Please sing a hymn."

Narendra sang the following hymn to Siva, in which the devotee prays
for forgiveness for his sins:

Even before I saw the light of this world, my sins from previous births,

Through which I passed because of desire for the fruit of my deeds,

Punished me as I lay in my mother's womb.

There I was boiled in the midst of filthy things:

Who can describe the pain that afflicts the child in its mother's womb?

Therefore, O Siva! O Mahadeva! O Sambhu! forgive me, I pray, for my
transgressions.

In childhood my suffering never came to an end;

My body was covered with filth and I craved for my mother's breasts.

Over my body and limbs I had no control;

I was pursued by troublesome flies and mosquitoes;

Day and night I cried with the pain of many an ailment, forgetting
Thee, O Sankara!

Therefore, O Siva! O Mahadeva! O Sambhu! forgive me, I pray, for my
transgressions.

In youth the venomous snakes of sound, sight, taste, touch, and smell,

Bit into my vitals and slew my discrimination;

I was engrossed in the pleasures of wealth, sons, and a youthful wife.

Alas! my heart, bereft of the thought of Siva,

Was filled with arrogance and pride.

Therefore, O Siva! O Mahadeva! O Sambhu! forgive me, I pray, for my
transgressions.

Now in old age my senses have lost the power of proper judging and
acting;

My body, though still not wholly bereft of life,

Is weak and senile from many afflictions, from sins and illnesses and
bereavements;

But even now my mind, instead of meditating on Siva,

Runs after vain desires and hollow delusions.

Therefore, O Siva! O Mahadeva! O Sambhu! forgive me, I pray, for my
transgressions.

The duties laid down in the smriti — perilous and abstruse — are now
beyond me;

How can I speak of the Vedic injunctions for brahmins, as means for
attaining Brahman?

Never yet have I rightly grasped, through discrimination,

The meaning of hearing the scriptures from the guru and reasoning on
his instruction;

How then can I speak of reflecting on Truth without interruption?
Therefore, O Siva! O Mahadeva! O Sambhu! forgive me, I pray, for my
transgressions.

Not even once have I finished my bath before sunrise and brought from
the Ganges

Water to bathe Thy holy image;

Never, from the deep woods, have I brought the sacred vilwa-leaves for
Thy worship;

Nor have I gathered full-blown lotuses from the lakes,

Nor ever arranged the lights and the incense for worshipping Thee.

Therefore, O Siva! O Mahadeva! O Sambhu! forgive me, I pray, for my
transgressions.

I have not bathed Thine image with milk and honey, with butter and
other oblations;

I have not decked it with fragrant sandal-paste;

I have not worshipped Thee with golden flowers, with incense, with
camphor-flame and savoury offerings.

Therefore, O Siva! O Mahadeva! O Sambhu! forgive me, I pray, for my
transgressions.

I have not made rich gifts to the brahmins, cherishing in my heart,

O Mahadeva, Thy sacred form;

I have not made in the sacred fire the million oblations of butter,

Repeating the holy 'mantra given to me by my guru;

Never have I done penance along the Ganges with japa and study of the
Vedas.

Therefore, O Siva! O Mahadeva! O Sambhu! forgive me, I pray, for my
transgressions.

I have not sat in the lotus posture, nor have I ever controlled

The prana along the Sushumna, repeating the syllable Om;

Never have I suppressed the turbulent waves of my mind, nor merged the
self-effulgent Om;

In the ever shining Witness-Consciousness, whose nature is that of the
highest Brahman;

Nor have I, in samadhi, meditated on Sankara, who dwells in every form
as the Inner Guide.

Therefore, O Siva! O Mahadeva! O Sambhu! forgive me, I pray, for my
transgressions.

Never, O Siva! have I seen Thee, the Pure, the Unattached, the Naked
One,

Beyond the three gunas, free from delusion and darkness, absorbed in
meditation,

And ever aware of the true nature of the world;

Nor, with a longing heart, have I meditated on Thine auspicious and
sin-destroying form.

Therefore, O Siva! O Mahadeva! O Sambhu! forgive me, I pray, for my
transgressions.

O mind, to gain liberation, concentrate wholly on Siva,

The sole Reality underlying the worlds, the Giver of good;

Whose head is illumined by the crescent moon and in whose hair the
Ganges is hidden;

Whose fire-darting eyes consumed the god of earthly love; whose throat
and ears are decked with snakes;

Whose upper garment is a comely elephant-skin.

Of what avail are all the other rituals?

O mind, of what avail are wealth or horses, elephants or a kingdom?

Of what avail the body or a house?

Know all these to be but momentary and quickly shun them;

Worship Siva, as your guru instructs you, for the attaining of
Self-Knowledge.

Day by day does man come nearer to death;

His youth wears away; the day that is gone never returns.

Almighty Time devours everything;

Fickle as lightning is the goddess of fortune.

O Siva! O Giver of shelter to those that come to Thee for refuge!

Protect me, who have taken refuge at Thy feet.

I salute the ever auspicious Siva, the Home of Peace,

Who sits in the lotus posture; who has five mouths and three eyes;

Who holds in both His hands weapons and gong and drum;

Who is bedecked with many an ornament;

Whose skin is clear as crystal; who is Parvati's Lord.

I salute the self-effulgent Guru of the gods, the Lord of Uma;

I salute the Cause of the Universe;

I salute the Lord of beasts, adorned with snakes;

I salute Siva, whose three eyes shine like the sun, the moon, and fire;

I salute the Beloved of Krishna; I salute Sankara, who bestows boons on
His devotees and gives them shelter;

I salute the auspicious Siva.

O Siva! White is Thy body, covered with ashes; white shine Thy teeth
when Thou smilest!

White is the skull Thou boldest in Thy hand; white is Thy club, which
threatens the wicked!

White is the bull on which Thou ridest; white are the rings that hang
from Thine ears!

White appear Thy matted locks, covered with the foam of the Ganges;

White shines the moon on Thy forehead!

May He who is all white, all pure, bestow on me the treasure of
forgiveness for my transgressions!

O Siva, forgive all the sins that I have committed

With hands or feet, with words or body, with ears or eyes, with mind or
heart;

Forgive my sins, those past and those that are yet to come!

Victory unto Siva, the Ocean of Compassion, the Great God, the Abode of
Blessedness!

After the hymn Narendra and M. talked again.

NARENDRA: "You may speak of leading a detached life in the world, and
all that, but you will not attain anything unless you renounce 'woman
and
gold'. Don't you feel disgusted with your wife's body?

Fools enjoy the contact of the body, filled with filth, peopled with
worms, foul of smell by nature, made of flesh, blood, bone, and marrow;
but the wise shun it.

"Vain is the life of a person who does not take delight in the
teachings of
Vedanta and drink the Nectar of Divine Bliss. Listen to a song."

Narendra sang:

O man, abandon your delusion! Cast aside your wicked counsels!

Know the Lord and free yourself from earthly suffering!

For a few days' pleasure only, you have quite forgotten Him

Who is the Comrade of your soul. Alas, what mockery!

"No liberation is possible for a man unless he puts on the
loin-cloth of a
sannyasi. The world must be renounced."

Narendra sang from the Five Stanzas on the glory of the monk's
loin-cloth:

Roaming ever in the grove of Vedanta,

Ever pleased with his beggar's morsel

Ever walking with heart free from sorrow,

Blest indeed is the wearer of the loin-cloth. . . .

Continuing, Narendra said: "Why should a man be entangled in
worldliness? Why should he be ensnared by maya? What is man's real
nature? He
is the blessed Siva, the Embodiment of Bliss and Spirit."

He sang Sankaracharya's Six Stanzas on Nirvana:

Om. I am neither mind, intelligence, ego, nor chitta,

Neither ears nor tongue nor the senses of smell and sight.

Nor am I ether, earth, fire, water, or air:

I am Pure Knowledge and Bliss: I am Siva! I am Siva! . . .

Narendra recited another hymn, the Eight Stanzas on the glory
of Krishna:

I am consumed with false desires and wrapped in the sleep of lust:

Save me, O Madhusudana!

Thou art my only Refuge, Lord! I have no other salvation.

I am entrapped in the mire of sin:

O Madhusudana, redeem me!

I am ensnared in the net of love for children, wife, and home:

Save me, O Madhusudana!

I am without devotion, helpless, smitten by wrong desire,

Afflicted with grief and misery:

O Madhusudana, redeem me!

Lord, I have neither master nor place of shelter to call my own:

Save me, O Madhusudana!

Utterly wearied out am I by all this going and coming

Along the endless road of life:

O Madhusudana, redeem me!

From this hard and unavailing journey through life and death,

Save me, O Madhusudana!

Many the births that I have seen in many a bodily form,

And painful it is in the mother's womb:

O Madhusudana, redeem me!

To Thee I come for salvation out of the cycle of existence:

Save me, O Madhusudana!

For I am terrified alike of old age and of death:

I come to Thee for shelter, Lord!

O Madhusudana, redeem me!

Never a good deed have I done, but many have been my sins:

Save me, O Madhusudana!

Headlong have I fallen into the mire of worldliness;

Countless the births I have endured:

O Madhusudana, redeem me!

I have lorded it over men, but happiness is not there:

Save me, O Madhusudana!

What my words have promised, my deeds have never carried out;

Lord, I am full of wretchedness:

O Madhusudana, redeem me!

If as a man or a woman I must be born again and again —

Save me, O Madhusudana! —

May my devotion be unswerving to Thy feet, O Lord!

From the delusion of this world,

O Madhusudana, redeem me!

M. remained spellbound as he listened to these hymns sung by
Narendra.
He said to himself: "How intense Narendra's dispassion is! This is how
he
has infused the spirit of dispassion into the hearts of the other
brothers of
the monastery. The very contact with them awakens in the hearts of the
Master's householder devotees the desire for renunciation of 'woman and
gold'. Ah, how blessed are these all-renouncing brothers! Why has the
Master kept us few in the world? Will he show us a way? Will he give us
the spirit of renunciation, or will he delude us with worldliness?"

After the meal all were resting. The elder Gopal was copying some
songs.
Niranjan was on a visit to his mother. Sarat, Baburam, and Kali were in
Puri.

Narendra, with one or two brothers, left for Calcutta. He had to see to
his lawsuit. He was going to return in the evening; the brothers could
not bear his absence.

In the afternoon Rabindra arrived, looking like a mad person. He was
barefoot and had only half of his black-bordered cloth round his waist.
His
eyeballs were rolling like a madman's. All asked him anxiously what was
the matter.

"Let me recover my breath!" he said. "I shall tell you everything
presently.
I am certainly not going back home; I shall stay at this very place
with you
all. She is certainly a traitor! Let me tell you something, friends.
For her
sake I gave up my habit of drinking, which I had indulged for five
years. I
have not taken a drop for the last eight months. And she is a traitor!"

The brothers of the math said: "Be calm, please! How did you come?"

RABINDRA: "I have come barefoot all the way from Calcutta."

The brothers asked him where he had lost the other half of his cloth.

RABINDRA: "When I was leaving her place she began to pull at my cloth.
That is how half of it was torn off."

The brothers told him to bathe in the Ganges and cool off; then they
would hear his story.

Rabindra belonged to a respectable kayastha family of Calcutta. He was
twenty or twenty-two years old. He had first met Sri Ramakrishna at the
Dakshineswar temple and had received his special blessing. On one
occasion
he had spent three nights with the Master. His disposition was very
sweet
and tender, and the Master had loved him dearly. Once he had said to
Rabindra: "You will have to wait some time; you have to go through a
few
more experiences. Nothing can be done now. You see, the police can't do
much just when the robbers attack a house. When the plundering is
almost
over, the police make their arrests."

Rabindra had many virtues. He was devoted to God and to service of the
poor. He had many spiritual qualities. But he had walked into the snare
of
a prostitute. Now, suddenly, he had discovered that the woman was being
unfaithful to him. Therefore he had come to the math in this
dishevelled
state, resolved not to go back to the world.

A devotee accompanied Rabindra to the Ganges. It was his inmost desire
that Rabindra's spiritual consciousness should be awakened in the
company
of these holy men. When Rabindra finished his bath, the devotee took
him
to the adjacent cremation ground, showed him the corpses lying about,
and
said: "The brothers of the math come here every now and then to
meditate
on God. It is a good place for meditation. Here one sees clearly that
the
world is impermanent."

Rabindra sat down in the cremation ground to meditate. But he could not
meditate long; his mind was restless.

Rabindra and the devotee returned to the math. They went to the
worship room to salute the Deity. The devotee said to him, "The
brothers
of the math meditate in this room."

Rabindra sat there to meditate, but could not meditate long there
either.

DEVOTEE: "How do you feel? Is your mind very restless? Is that why you
have got up from your seat? Perhaps you could not concentrate well."

RABINDRA: "I am sure I shall not go back to the world. But the mind is
restless."

M. and Rabindra were talking. No one else was present. M. was telling
him stories from the life of Buddha. At that time the members of the
math
regularly read the lives of Buddha and Chaitanya. M. said to Rabindra
that Buddha's spiritual consciousness was first awakened by hearing a
song
of some heavenly maidens.

M. sang the song:

We moan for rest, alas! but rest can never find;

We know not whence we come, nor where we float away.

Time and again we tread this round of smiles and tears;

In vain we pine to know whither our pathway leads,

And why we play this empty play. . . .

That night Narendra, Tarak, and Harish returned from Calcutta.
They
said, "Oh, what a big meal we had!" They had been entertained by a
devotee in Calcutta.

The members of the monastery assembled in the room of the "danas".
Narendra heard Rabindra's story. He sang by way of giving instruction
to him:

O man, abandon your delusion! Cast aside
your wicked counsels!

Know the Lord and free yourself from earthly suffering!

For a few days' pleasure only, you have quite forgotten Him

Who is the Comrade of your soul. Alas, what mockery!

Narendra sang again:

Drinking the Bliss of Hari from the cup of prema,

Sadhu, be intoxicated! . . .

A few minutes later the brothers went to Kali Tapasvi's room.
Girish
Ghosh had just sent two of his new books to the monastery: the Life
of
Buddha and the Life of Chaitanya.

Since the founding of the new math Sashi had devoted himself heart and
soul to the worship and service of the Master. All were amazed at his
devotion. Just as he had tended Sri Ramakrishna's physical body during
his
illness, so now, with the same unswerving zeal, he worshipped the
Master
in the shrine room.

A member of the monastery was reading aloud from the lives of Buddha
and Chaitanya. He was a little sarcastic while reading Chaitanya's
life.
Narendra snatched the book from his hand and said, "That is how you
spoil
a good thing!"

Narendra read the chapter describing how Chaitanya gave his love to
all,
from the brahmin to the pariah.

A BROTHER: "I say that one person cannot give love to another person."

NARENDRA: "But the Master gave it to me."

BROTHER: "Well, are you sure you have it?"

NARENDRA: "What can you understand about love? You belong to the
servant class. All of you must serve me and massage my feet. Don't
flatter
yourselves by thinking you have understood everything. Now go and
prepare a smoke for me."

All laughed.

THE BROTHER: "I surely will not."

M. (to himself): "Sri Ramakrishna has transmitted
mettle to all the
brothers of the math. It is no monopoly of Narendra's. Is it possible
to
renounce "woman and gold' without this inner fire?"

May 10, 1887

It was Tuesday, a very auspicious day for the worship of the Divine
Mother. Arrangements were being made for Her special worship at the
monastery.

M. was going to the Ganges to take his bath. Rabindra was walking alone
on the roof. He heard Narendra singing the Six Stanzas on Nirvana:

Death or fear I have none, nor any
distinction of caste;

Neither father nor mother nor even a birth have I;

Neither friend nor comrade, neither disciple nor guru:

I am Pure Knowledge and Bliss: I am Siva! I am Siva!

I have no form or fancy; the All-pervading am I;

Everywhere I exist, yet I am beyond the senses;

Neither salvation am I, nor anything that may be known:

I am Pure Knowledge and Bliss: I am Siva! I am Siva!

Rabindra went to the Ganges to take his bath. Presently he
returned to
the monastery clad in his wet cloth.

Narendra said to M. in a whisper: "He has bathed in the Ganges. It
would be good to initiate him now into sannyas."

Both Narendra and M. smiled.

Prasanna asked Rabindra to change his wet cloth and gave him a dry
gerrua cloth. Narendra said to M., "Now he is going to put on the cloth
of
renunciation."

M. (with a smile): "What kind of renunciation?"

NARENDRA: "Why, the renunciation of 'woman and gold'."

Rabindra put on the ochre cloth and entered Kali Tapasvi's room to
meditate.

^The
monastic names of the Master's intimate disciples who renounced the
world soon after his death were as follows:
Narendra — Swami Vivekananda,
Rakhal — Swami Brahmananda,
Jogin — Swami Jogananda,
Niranjan — Swami Niranjanananda,
Latu — Swami Adbhutananda,
Baburam — Swami Premananda,
Tarak — Swami Shivananda,
Hari — Swami Turiyananda,
Sarat — Swami Saradananda,
Sashi — Swami Ramakrishnananda,
Kali — Swami Abhedananda,
Gangadhar — Swami Akhandananda,
Gopal (elder) —Swami Advaitananda,
Sarada Prasanna — Swami Trigunatitananda,
Subodh — Swami Subodhananda,
Tulasi — Swami Nirmalananda

^The
night of Siva. On this day the devotees observe fast and spend the
whole
night in meditation, prayer., and other spiritual exercises.

^Advaita
and Nityananda were intimate companions of Chaitanya.

^Sarada
Prasanna, one of the Master's young disciples, was addressed as
Prasanna
by Sri Ramakrishna and his disciples.

^Rakhal
was addressed as "Raja" by all the brothers. "Rakhal-Raj", the "King of
the cowherd boys", is one of the names of Sri Krishna, and Sri
Ramakrishna often
spoke of Rakhal as one of the intimate companions of Krishna.

^A
small town only a few miles from Baranagore, on the other side of the
Ganges.

^Loin-cloth
of a monk.

^Metal
articles used in the temple worship.